Niddah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two 
[A woman] may attribute [a bloodstain] to any [external] cause to which she can possibly attribute it.  
If [for instance] she had slaughtered a beast, a wild animal or a bird, 
Or if she was handling bloodstains or if she sat beside those who handled them. 
Or if she killed a louse, she may attribute the bloodstain to it. 
How large a stain may be attributed to a louse?  
Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonus says: one up to the size  of a split bean; 
And even if she did not kill it.   
She may also attribute it to her son or to her husband.
If she herself had a wound that could open again and bleed she may attribute it to it.

Explanation
Section one: If a woman sees a bloodstain on her body or on her cloak in a place where she must suspect that it could be menstrual blood but there is some external circumstance to which she could attribute it, she may attribute it to this source and remain pure. It is interesting that along with all of the stringencies the rabbis initiated when it comes to menstrual blood, they also instituted many leniencies, including those we see in this mishnah.
Sections 2-3:  The mishnah now gives some examples of possible things she may have been doing that would allow her to attribute her bloodstain to another source.
Section four: Here we can see just to what extent the rabbis ruled leniently. Even if all a woman is doing is killing lice, which probably don't usually bleed that much, she may attribute a stain up to the size of a split bean to a louse. Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonus disagrees with the first opinion and holds that even if she is not the one killing them, she may attribute the bloodstain to the blood of the louse.
Section five: She can also attribute the stain to her husband or son—for instance if they slaughtered an animal or did something else connected to blood.
Section six: Finally, she can also attribute the blood to her own wound, even if it was already scabbed over. As long as it is possible for the wound to open and bleed she can attribute her bloodstain to a wound. Note that this is so even if it doesn't look like the blood came from that wound.  

