Mishnayot Notes

Seder Zeraim

Mesechet Berakhot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Discusses the time of ma’ariv.  Rabi Eliezer – shkiyah – four at night.  Chachamim – until chatzot (6 at night).  Raban Gamliel says whenever the Chachamim say all night it’s until a lot hashachar, it’s just a siyag.

Bet: Discusses zman kriyat shma.  Tana Kama – light enough to differentiate between white and tchelet.  Rabi Eliezer – between tchelet and green.  Until netz.  Rabi Yehoshua says until three during the day, because kings get up then.  If you read after that, you’re yotze, just as if you read it in the torah.

Gimmel: Beit Shamay: beshochbecha uvkumecha denotes position.  Beit Hillel: u’velechtecha baderech means you say it any way, that only dictates the times.  Rav Tarfon followed Beit Shamay and put himself in danger.  They said you deserved it, you didn’t follow Beit Hillel.

Daled: Shacharit has two brachot before and one after kriyat shma, ma’ariv has two and two – one long and one short.  You can’t change the formulation of brachot, i.e. long/ short, chatima/ no,

Hay: You mention yetziat mitzrayim at night.  Rav Elazar Ben Azariah  says, I never got this until Ben Zoma explained it means day and night.  Chachamim say it means for this world and for when mashiach comes.

Perek Bet

Aleph: You’re reading in the torah and come upon kriyat shma. You’re yotze if you have kavana.  Rav Meir and Rabi Yehuda discuss when you can greet people during shma.

Bet: Discusses the breaks in kriyat shma.  Why are the paragraphs of shma in the order they are?  Shma first because ol malchut shamayim before ol mitzvot.  Vehaya before vayomer because vehaya is day and night, and vayomer is only during the day.

Gimmel: If you don’t hear what you say, you’re yotze on kriyat shma.  Rav Yossi disagrees.  Rav Yossi – if you slur letters, yotze.  Rabi Yehuda disagrees.  Read sentences out of order, not yotze.  Made a mistake, go back to that place.

Daled: Artisans can read kriyat shma in high places, even though shmone esrey isn’t allowed.

Hay: A chatan is patur on kriyat shma until motzey Shabbat, until he consummates. Raban Gamliel read the first night of his marriage.  His student’s said, he’s patur, and he said, he didn’t want to miss a mitzvah even for an hour.

Vav: Raban Gamliel bathed the night his wife died.  His students said, avelim can’t bathe.  He said, I’m different, I’m sensitive (in my cleanliness).

Zayin: Raban Gamliel sat shiva for his slave.  His students said, don’t you not?  He said, he’s different, he was worthy.

Chet: A chatan can read kriyat shma the first night.  Raban Gamliel said only righteous people.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: A person who lost someone is exempt from kriyat shma, shmone esrey, and tfillin.  Those who carry the coffin are also.  Those who won’t carry are chayav, but they all have an exemption from kriyat shma.

Bet: If they have time to say it before they have to make the line of menachim, they should start.  The inner are patur but the outer are chayav.

Gimmel: Women, slaves, and minors are patur in kriyat shma and tfillin, but chayav in shmone esrey, mezuzah, and birkat hamazon.

Daled: A bal keri reads birkot kriyat shma to himself, not aloud.  He says bracha achrona, but not rishona (on food).  Rabi Yehuda says you do both.

Hay. One remembers he’s a bal keri during kriyat shma, cut short.  If you have time for mikva, do.  If not, cover yourself in water – but not gross or laundry water.  One should be four amot from poop.

Vav: A zav who became bal keri, a nida who discharged semen, and an active woman who becomes nida need mikva and Rabi Yehuda says it’s not chayav.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Shacharit until 6 during the day.  Rabi Yehuda says until four during the day.  Mincha until night.  Rabi Yehuda says until 9:30 during the day.  Ma’ariv is all night.  Musaf all day.  Rabi Yehuda – until 7 during the day.

Bet: Rabi Nechunya Ben Hakana davened on his way into and out of the beit midrash.  They asked what it was.  Into – I won’t make others stumble, out of – for my lot.

Gimmel: Raban Gamliel says you say shmone esrey.  Rabi Yehoshua says a short one.  Rabi Akiva says it depends if you can say the full one easily or not.

Daled: Rabi Eliezer says no shmone esrey can be keva.  Rabi Yehoshua says, in danger you say a short one, and lays it out.

Hay: Don’t say shmone esrey on a donkey.  If you can’t get down, turn.  If you can’t turn, have kavana to the Beit Hamikdash.

Vav: On a boat, wagon, or raft, have the above kavana.

Zayin: Rav Elazar Ben Azariah says musaf is only in a city, with a kehila.  Chachamim say anywhere.  Rabi Yehuda says if there is a minyan, the yachid is patur.

Perek Hay

Aleph: When saying shmone esrey, be in the right mindset.  Chasidim would prepare an hour.  Even if a king said hello or a snake was on him, he shouldn’t stop.

Bet: Geshem is in tchiyat hameitim, ask for it in mevarech hashanim, and ata chonantanu is in chonen hada’at.  Rabi Akiva makes it its own bracha.  Rabi Eliezer says in modim.

Gimmel: Certain tfilot aren’t ok.  If the shatz made a mistake, one takes his place and doesn’t refuse.  You start with the bracha where he faltered.

Daled: The shatz doesn’t say amen after duchening, so he doesn’t get confused.  If he’s the only kohen, he doesn’t raise his hands unless he knows he won’t get confused.

Hay: It’s a bad sign to make a mistake in tfilah.  If it’s the shatz, it’s bad for the tzibur.  Rabi Chanina ben Dosa would pray for the sick and knew who would live based on whether the tfilah went smoothly or not.

Perek Vav

Aleph: What brachot are there on fruits?  On trees ha’etz, except for on grapes, which are hagafen.  On ground fruit ha’adama, except for bread which is hamotzi.  Vegetables are ha’adama.  Rabi Yehuda says they’re boreh minei desha’im.

Bet: An adama on etz is ok, but not vice versa.  Shehakol is ok on everything.

Gimmel: If it’s not grown – shehakol.  Vinegar, unripe fruits, and locusts, shehakol.  Milk, cheese, and eggs, shehakol.  Rabi Yehuda says, all curses aren’t blessed on.

Daled: If you have multiple fruits, Rabi Yehuda says bless on one of the shivat haminim.  Chachamim say bless on what you like best.

Hay: If you blessed on wine before eating, you don’t have to bless on wine after eating.  So too with an appetizer.  If you blessed on bread, you don’t need to on the appetizer, but not vice versa.  Beit Shamay says it also doesn’t exempt porridge.

Vav: If you sit and eat, you bench alone.  If you made it a group meal, you bench together. If wine comes to them during the meal, they bless separately.  After the meal, one blesses for all of them, and he blessed for besamim, for besamim is only brought after the se’uda.

Zayin: If you have a salted fish with bread, you don’t bless on the bread – it’s tafel.  In general, the ikar is poter hatafel.

Chet: If you have from shivat haminim, you bench according to Raban Gamliel.  Chachamim say to say al hamichiya.  Rabi Akiva said even if you eat cooked vegetable, if it’s your staple, you bench.  One who drinks water to quench thirst says shehakol.  Rabi Tarfon said, bore nefashot.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: If three eat together, they have to make a zimun.  If you eat dmai, truma from a ma’aser, redeemed ma’aser sheni or hekdesh, or a servant who ate a kzayit, or a kuti, you make a zimun with them. But if you ate tevel, ma’aser that didn’t have truma taken, unredeemed ma’aser sheni or hekdesh, or a servant who ate less than a kzayit, or a non-Jew, you don’t do a zimun with them.

Bet: Women, slaves, and minors aren’t included in a zimun.  How much do you need to have to be in a zimun?  A kzayit.  Rabi Yehuda says a kbeitza.

Gimmel: How do you do a zimun?  With three you say, nevarech, four (or any number mentioned plus him), barchu. 10, nevarech elokeynu. One opinion is 1one or 110,000 it’s all the same.  The other lists things for 100, 1,000, and 10,000 and a response.  The second opinion is of Rabi Yossi Haglili, who says you do different things for different numbers according to a pasuk.  The first opinion is Rabi Akiva who says in a big or small shul, you still say barchu.  Raban Gamliel agrees with Rabi Akiva.

Daled: If three eat together, they can’t separate to bench until they reach 6.  And 10 don’t separate until they reach 20.

Hay: Two groups eating in one house.  If they can see each other, they bench together, if not, not.  Rabi Eliezer says you don’t bless on wine until you mix it, and Chachamim say you do.

Perek Chet

Aleph: .Here are things where Beit Shamay and Beit Hillel disagree during a meal (Beit Shamay first, through hay) – bless Kiddush first versus bless hagafen first.

Bet: Washing hands first versus mixing wine first.

Gimmel: Wiping your hands on the tablecloth and putting it on the table versus on the seat cushion.
Daled: Cleaning the table first versus doing mayim achronim first.

Hay: Havdala should be ner, hagafen, besamim, havdala, versus ner, besamim, hagafen, havdala.  Also ner should be, shebara me’or ha’esh, versus, bore me’orei ha’esh.

Vav: You don’t bless on the ner or besamim of goyim, the deceased, or avoda zara.  You don’t bless on a ner until it’s lit.

Zayin: If you forgot to bench, Beit Shamay says, go back to where you ate, Beit Hillel says, bench where you remembered.  Until when can he still bench?  Until he digests the food which he ate.

Chet: If wine was brought after the meal, and there is no other wine.  Beit Shamay says drink first, benching doesn’t need wine, and Beit Hillel says bench first and then bless on the wine.  You say amen after a Jew benches, but for a kuti only after you hear the whole bracha.

Perek Tet

Aleph: If you see a place where a miracle was done for am yisrael, you say, she’asa nissim lavoteinu bamakom haze.  A place where avoda zara was uprooted, you say, she’akar avoda zara me’artzeinu.

Bet: On weather phenomena you say, shekocho ugvurato male olam.  On land structures you say, ose ma’ase bereshit.  Rabi Yehuda says if you see the ocean, you say, she’asa et hayam hagadol, when you see if anew.  On rain and good news, hatov vehametiv.  On bad news, baruch dayan emet.

Gimmel: If you buy new things, shehechiyanu.  You bless for the state of things now.  One who asked for something that is done, it is a meaningless prayer.  Like what? Praying for the gender of a baby, or if you hear a scream praying it’s not your relations.

Daled: One who enters a city blesses twice – on the way in and out.  Ben Azay said 4, two each way.  And you give thanks for what has happened and you ask for the future.

Hay: You bless on the good and bad, as we see in shma.  Bechol levavecha means yetzer tov and ra, bechol nafshecha is even if you die, bechol me’odecha is your money.  Or, bechol me’odecha is everything hashem measures out for you.  One should not act lightly about the Beit Hamikdash.  You don’t go on har habayit with your everyday items, you don’t use it as a shortcut, and you don’t spit while on it.  In the mikdash, they would add min ha’olam to the end of every bracha.  When the heretics used this to say there is only one world, they replaced it with min ha’olam ve’ad ha’olam.  And they established that people would greet each other with shem hashem, as seen in various psukim.  There’s a pasuk, et la’asot l’hashem heferu toratecha.  Rabi Natan says, when the torah is being suspended, it is a time to do for hashem.

Mesechet Peah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: These things have no maximum limit – pe’ah, bikurim, the korban for a regel, acts of kindness, and learning torah.  These things a man gets benefit in this world, and the principal lasts until the next world – honoring one’s parents, chessed, making peace between people, and torah learning is matched to all of them.

Bet: Pe’ah is no lest than a sixtieth, even though it has no shiur.  It’s all based on the size of the field, the number of poor, and on humbleness.

Gimmel: You can leave pe’ah at the beginning of the field or in the middle.  Rabbi Shimon says give from wherever, as long as you give the proper amount.  Rabi Yehuda says, if you leave even one stalk, you’re yotze.  And if not, he only gives by making some of his produce hefker.

Daled: There’s a general rule about pe’ah – all food, that isn’t made hefker, is grown from the ground, is harvested at once, and can be stored is chayav on pe’ah.  And grains and legumes are included in this.

Hay: Lists several species of trees that are chayav in pe’ah.

Vav: One is always chayav in pe’ah and patur from ma’asrot until you neaten the pile.  And you can make it hefker and are patur from ma’asrot until you neaten the pile.  Animal feed is patur from ma’asrot until you neaten the pile.  Reusing seeds are patur from ma’asrot until you neaten the pile according to Rabi Akiva.  A kohen or levi who buy grain can keep the truma and ma’aser unless it was evened.  Something you make hekdesh and then redeem is chayav truma and ma’aser if the treasurer neatened it.

Perek Bet

Aleph: These things cause a break, making a need for a new pe’ah: a river, a large puddle, a private road, a public road, a private path, and a public path, only if they are in both seasons, a pit, a fallow area, and a change in seed.  Harvesting for fodder breaks it according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say this is only good if he plowed that area.

Bet: A water system which makes it unable to be plowed as one, Rabi Yehuda says it stops it.  And hills in the field that have to be plowed by tool, even though cattle can’t pass over it, it doesn’t break it.

Gimmel: Those are for seeded plants, but only a fence works for trees.  And if the branches are linked, like a wall, it doesn’t stop the pe’ah.

Daled: For carob trees, if you can see from one to the next.  Raban Gamliel says, my father used to give one pe’ah on the olive trees which were all over, and one for the carobs which were in sight of each other.  Rabi Eliezer B’Rabi Tzadok said in the name of Raban Gamliel that they even gave for the carobs they had in the whole town.

Hay: If your entire field is one crop, even if you harvest at separate times, you give one pe’ah.  If it’s two crops, even if you harvest them at the same time you give two pe’ot.  If you use two types of the same crop, you leave one pe’ah for each harvest.

Vav: Once Rabi Shimon of Mitzpeh asked Raban Gamliel (about planting two types of wheat) and they went to the Sanhedrin. Nachum the scribe said, I learned from Rabi Myasha who learned through various sources who learned a halacha leMoshe miSinai like the previous mishna.

Zayin: A field that non-Jews cut, bandits cut, ants ate it, or the wind or an animal destroyed it is patur.  If it’s half and half, it’s patur, because pe’ah is on a whole field.

Chet: If it’s half and half, but the bandits were first, you give pe’ah on what you cut.  If you sell the second half, the buyer gives pe’ah. If you make the second half hefker, if you redeem it, you give pe’ah on everything.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Squares of crop between olive trees, Beit Shamay says you give pe’ah on each, and Beit Hillel says you give one pe’ah for all.  Beit Shamay Admits that if the head of the row is connected, you give one pe’ah for all.

Bet: If one harvests his field in separate patches, Rabi Akiva says you give pe’ah on each one.  Chachamim say one for all.  Dill and mustard, if you harvest separately, which is normal, the Chachamim admit you give a pe’ah on each one.

Gimmel: If one takes fresh onions to the shuk and stores dry ones for winter, you take separate pe’ot, and so too with peas and grapes.  One who thins a garden that is too dense gives pe’ah on what he left in the garden.  A person who plucks by had to take gives pe’ah on everything.

Daled: Onion seeds need pe’ah, but Rabi Yossi disagrees.  Squares in between onions, Rabi Yossi says a pe’ah on each, and Chachamim say one on all.

Hay: Brothers who split a field take separate pe’ot.  If they work together, they leave one.  Same with dividing a tree.  One who buys only trees to transplant to his field gives pe’ah on each tree’s existing fruit separately.  Rabi Yehuda asks, when do you just give one pe’ah?  When the owner sold all the trees he had.
Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, a rova of land is chayav pe’ah.  Rabi Yehoshua says two se’ah.  Rabi Tarfon says, 6 by 6 tfachim.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says enough to harvest by fist twice, and the halacha is like him.  Rabi Akiva says any and is chayav and in bikurim, needing a prozbul, and to acquire things with money, a bill of sale, or an act of ownership.

Zayin: The will of someone on their deathbed, if he included any land, it’s a valid gift.  If not, it isn’t.  If his wife accepts any possible land instead of a ktuba, she loses her ktuba.

Chet: If the above person gave his slave property, the slave is free.  But if he gave land, he’s not free.  Rabi Shimon says he’s always free, unless he writes that the slave gets all of this property except for one ten thousandth (which refers to his freedom).

Perek Daled

Aleph: Pe’ah is left attached to the ground.  For things off the ground, the owner gets it down and distributes it.  Rabi Shimon says, also with walnuts.  But if anyone thinks you should leave something connected you do, he speaks according to halacha.

Bet: But for suspended things, if anyone says to distribute you do.

Gimmel: He took a bit of pe’ah and threw it on the pe’ah still attached to the ground, it isn’t his.  If he fell on it or spread a talit on it, we take it back from him.  And this also applies to leket and shichicha.

Daled: Pe’ah can’t be taken with a scythe or spade, so that people won’t injure others.

Hay: There are three times when the owners let the poor in to take pe’ah, shachar, chatzot, and mincha.  Raban Gamliel said they gave times as a minimum.  Rabi Akiva said as a maximum.  In beit namer they would harvest in rows, and give from pe’ah from each row.

Vav: A non-Jew who harvested and then converted is patur from the gifts to the poor.  Rabi Yehuda says he’s chayav in shichicha, because that’s only in the time of bundling.

Zayin: If he made it hekdesh and redeemed it while still attached to the ground, he’s chayav.  If this happened with bundles, he’s chayav.  If he made it hekdesh while grounded and redeemed while a bundle, he’s patur, because when it would have been chayav, it was patur.

Chet: Similarly with fruits that he does before the time of ma’asrot, he’s chayav.  If it was during the time of ma’asrot, he’s chayav.  But if he made it hekdesh before it ripened and then redeemed after it ripened, he’s patur because in the time it would have been chayav, it was patur.

Tet: One who harvested pe’ah and designated it for a certain poor person, Rabi Eliezer says it’s for that person.  Chachamim say he has to give it to the first person to come.  The gifts from a non-Jew are chayav in ma’asrot, unless the person got them because the non-Jew made them hefker.

Yud: What is leket? Something that falls when he’s harvesting.  One was harvesting, he cut and handful, picked a fistful, he got pricked by a thorn, and it fell from his hand, that belongs to the field’s owner.  If something falls from inside the hand, it’s for the poor.  If it’s behind the hand, i.e. outside the worker’s grasp, is for the owner.  If it’s in his fingertips, Rabi Yishma’el says for the poor, and Rabi Akiva says for the owner.

Yud Aleph: Ant holes (where the ants have gathered grain) in the standing grain belong to the owner.  Ones the harvesters have overlooked, the upper ones are for the poor, and the lower ones are for the owner.   Rabi Meir says that they are all for the poor, because it might be leket, so it’s considered leket.

Perek Hay

Aleph: A heap that is on top of potential leket, whatever touches the ground is considered leket.  Wind that scattered the bundles, we evaluate how much leket there would normally be in that field and give that to the poor.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says he gives how much that amount would normally produce in leket.

Bet: A stalk still attached to the ground that is surrounded by harvested space, if it’s close enough to other unharvested stalks, it is the owners, if not, it is for the poor.  If some leket gets mixed in with harvested grain, he takes a stalk for ma’aser and gives it to the poor.  Rabi Eliezer said, how can this poor person exchange something which wasn’t yet his?  He temporarily gives the heap as a gift to the poor person, so he can take ma’aser from it.

Gimmel: One can not irrigate his field (before leket has been collected, as it will get ruined) according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say you can, because you can (preserve the leket).

Daled: An owner who was traveling and needed to take the gifts for the poor may take, and when he gets home, he’ll pay according to Rabi Eliezer.  Chachamim say, no, he was poor when he took it.

Hay: One who switches with poor people, what he gets is patur from ma’aser, but he has to take ma’aser on what he gives.  Two people who sharecrop can give each other ma’aser ani.  A surf may not take the gifts for the poor.  Rabi Yehuda said, when is this?  When he gets a portion of the crop.  But if he gets a portion of the produce (and has no ownership in the field) he may take.

Vav: One who sells his field may take the gifts, but the buyer may not.  One may not hire workers and have their children collect after them (and therefore give them a lower salary).  One may not prevent the poor from gathering, or prevent one and allow another, or help one of them, for this is stealing from the poor, which we have a pasuk against.
Zayin: A bundle that either the owner or the workers, but not both, forgot, or the poor hid it, is not shichicha.

Chet: If a person collects stalks to put into special shaped bundles, and forgot a stalk, this is not shichicha (because it is not the final product).  But if it goes straight to the threshing floor, there is shichicha. If it’s just for a heap, he can have shichicha, but moving the heap to the threshing floor, there is no shichicha.  This is the general rule: when you collect for the place that is the final product, there is shichicha, and from there to the threshing floor, there is no shichicha.  When it’s to a place where it’s not the final product, there is no shichicha, and from the there to the threshing floor, there is shichicha.

Perek Vav

Aleph: Beit Shamay says if you make something hefker for the poor, it’s hefker.  Beit Hillel says it’s only hefker if you make it even for rich people, like shmitta.  If all of the bundles are a kav and one is four kabin and you forget it, Beit Shamay says it’s not shichicha, and Beit Hillel says it is.

Bet: A heap close to an uncemented wall, a pile of grain, cattle, vessels, and he forgot it, Beit Shamay says it isn’t shichicha and Beit Hillel says it is.

Gimmel: Beit Hillel admit that a bundle at the beginning of a row that he will find when collecting in the opposite direction, which he left when he went to town, is not shichicha.

Daled: These are ‘the beginning of a row’: two starting from the middle of the row and collecting in opposite directions, anything they face can be shichicha, but anything they don’t isn’t, the other will collect it.  One person goes through a row himself, what is in from of him isn’t shichicha, and what is behind him is.  This is the general rule, everything that ‘bal tashuv’ applies to is shichicha, and what it doesn’t apply to isn’t.

Hay: Two bundles are shichicha, but not three.  Same with heaps of olives or carobs, stalks of flax, grapes (which are technically peret), and stalks of grain (leket).  This is according to Beit Hillel.  And on all of the Beit Shamay says three s for the poor, but four is for the owner.

Vav: A bundle that is two se’ah isn’t shichicha. Two such bundles, Raban Gamliel says for the owner, Chachamim say for the poor.  Raban Gamliel said, how can more bundles give the owner less right?  They said this isn’t a kal vechomer, one bundle can be like a heap, which isn’t shichicha, but two bundles are bundles, so they’re shichicha.

Zayin: Standing grain which was two se’ah and forgotten isn’t shichicha.  If it’s not two se’ah, but it’s enough crop that it could have produces two se’ah, even if it is shriveled and not close, it is considered like proper, plump barley.

Chet: Standing grain saves other standing grain and bundles next to it (from becoming shichicha).  A bundle saves neither.  What standing grain saves a bundle?  Whatever isn’t shichicha, even one stalk.

Tet: A se’ah each of plucked and unplucked grain, and likewise with trees, garlic, and onions, do not come together to make two se’ah, and are for the poor.  Rabi Yossi says, if any other things of the poor separate them, they do not combine, but if nothing else does, they do combine.

Yud: Grain used to feed animals or tie bundles, and similarly for garlic greens used to tie garlic or onions are not shichicha.  And all tubers, Rabi Yehuda says they can’t become shichicha, and Chachamim say they can.

Yud Aleph: One who harvests at night, or bundles at night, or is blind has shichicha.  But if he intended only to take the large bundles, the small ones aren’t shichicha.  If he says that he is harvesting and will come back for what he forgets, he still has shichicha.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: An olive tree with a name or renown is never shichicha.  What is this talking about?  It has a name, or a certain act, or a certain place.  Its name, given because it has superior fruit, its acts, that it produces a lot of fruit, its location, that it’s close to a press or a hole in a wall (where he will remember it).  And for all other olive trees, two is shichicha, and three is not.  Rabi Yossi says there is no shichicha by olive trees.

Bet: An olive tree that is in the middle of three rows of trees which between them have two rectangular beds, is not shichicha.  What is this talking about?  When he didn’t start harvesting it.  But if he began it, even if it’s a famed tree, it’s shichicha.  If he left olives under the tree, the olives in the tree aren’t shichicha.  Rabi Meir says, it’s shichicha if the people who check over the trees have passed.

Gimmel: What is peret?  Grapes which fell from the vine in the time of harvest.  He was harvesting and he cut off the bunch, but it got caught in the leaves and fell to the ground, it is for the owner.  One who puts a basket under what he is harvesting is stealing from the poor, as we see in a pasuk.

Daled: What is olelet?  Grapes which are on sprigs which are scattered on the spine (no kateph, on each other’s shoulders), and grapes that aren’t closely clustered (no nateph, grapes which seem to drip off the bunch).  If either the sprigs or the grapes are closely clustered, it counts for the owner.  If it’s not easy to tell the characteristics, it goes to the poor.  Olelet near where the spine meets the shoot, if it gets cut off with the rest of the spine, it’s for the owner, and if not, it’s for the poor.  A cluster with only spine and no sprigs, Rabi Yehuda says it’s a cluster, Chachamim say it’s olelet.

Hay: One who thins in the grapes, Rabi Yehuda says he can thin his and those for the poor.  Rabi Meir says he can thin only those which are his.

Vav: A vineyard in its fourth year, Beit Shamay says you don’t need to pay chomesh if you redeem it, and you don’t have to remove it from you house for Pesach (unlike ma’aser sheni).  And Beit Hillel says you do need (like ma’aser sheni).  Beit Shamay says there is peret and olelet, and the poor have to redeem it themselves.  Beit Hillel says all of it is for the owner.

Zayin: A vineyard that is all olelet, Rabi Eliezer says is for the owner.  Rabi Akiva says it’s for the poor.  Rabi Eliezer said, the pasuk says olelet is when you harvest, if it’s all for the poor, there’s no harvest.  Rabi Akiva said, a pasuk says olelet is by a vineyard, even if it’s all olelet.  If like Rabi Akiva, why is Rabi Eliezer’s pasuk given?  To show that the poor can’t take before the harvest.

Chet: One who makes his vineyard hekdesh before it could be known if there was olelet, the olelet isn’t for the poor.  If it could be determined, the olelet is for the poor.  Rabi Yossi says they have to give the increase of the value of the olelet from the time it became hekdesh to the Beit Hamikdash.  When is a bunch on a trained vine that forms a booth shichicha?  When it is no longer within the harvester’s reach.  What about on a trained vine that is at foot level?  When he passes from it.

Perek Chet

Aleph: When is everyone allowed to take leket, i.e. when is it hefker?  When the slow, old, poor people leave (they are the last people to finish taking).  When can anyone take peret and olelet?  When the poor have come and gone twice.  What about olives?  After the second rain.  Rabi Yehuda said, aren’t there people who only harvest their olives after the second rain?  Rather, after the poor wouldn’t return with more than four issarot (a monetary amount).

Bet: We trust sellers when they say their produce is of the gifts (and therefore don’t need ma’aser) when it is in their time.  Levi’im are always trusted.  But they are only trusted by things people would usually give to them.

Gimmel: We believe them by wheat, but not by flour or bread.   By rice on the stalk, but not threshed, whether raw or cooked.  We trust them by beans, but not pounded beans, whether raw or cooked.  We trust them by oil that they say was given to them, but not by oil which they say they made from olives which were nikuf (odd and a gift for the poor).

Daled: we believe them by raw vegetables, but not by cooked, unless it’s only a little, because that an owner would give from his pot as a gift.

Hay: You don’t give from the threshing floor less than half a kav of wheat and a kav of barley.  Rabi Meir says half a kav.  A kav and a half of spelt, and a kav of dried figs, or a portion of pressed, dried figs (the way they are sold in the market).  Rabi Akiva says half a portion of figs. Half a lug of wine, Rabi Akiva says a quarter.  A revi’it of oil.  Rabi Akiva says, half of that.  And all other produce, Abba Shmu’el said, enough that he can sell it and buy two meals’ worth.

Vav: Those measurements apply to everyone.  If he wants to save some for poor relatives, he saves half and gives half to the poor who are here.  If he doesn’t have enough to fill the shiur, he gives the poor who are there what he has and they divide it equally.

Zayin: For a poor person who travels around, you do not give a loaf worth less than pundyon, which can be calculated at half a kav.  If he stays overnight, you give him sheets too.  If he stays over Shabbat, you give him food for the three meals.  A person who has food for two meals may not take from the tamchuy, the plate of communal donations.  One who has for fourteen meals can not take from the kupa, money given out erev Shabbat.  The kupa is collected by two and distributed by three.

Chet: One who has 200 zuz cannot take gifts for the poor.  If he had 200 less a dinar, even if 1,000 people give him the gifts at once, he may take.  If some of the money was a collateral on a mortgage or his ktuba, he may take.  We don’t force him to sell his home or his fine utensils.

Tet: One who has fifty zuz and he uses them for trade may not take.  And one who takes even though they aren’t supposed to will die dependant on others.  And one who can take but does not will only die once he is supporting others, as we see in a pasuk, and the same goes for a judge who is true and righteous.  And all who aren’t lame in their legs or blind but makes himself out to be like one of them will die like one of them.  And likewise a judge who is corrupt will die in blindness, as we see a pasuk that says bribery blinds the sighted.

Mesechet Demai

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Lists some species we are lenient about dmai with, including wild figs, jujube fruit, and sycamore fruit, and there are some others in Judea.  Rabi Yehuda says all wild figs are exempt except for a type of fig that bears fruit semiannually, all jujube fruits except those from Shikmona, and all young sycamore fruit except those which burst.

Bet: Dmai isn’t subject to chomesh or biur on Pesach, an onen, one who has not yet buried his dead, can eat it, can enter and leave Yerushalayim, you can leave a bit of it on the road, you can feed it to an am ha’aretz, but you have to eat an equivalent amount of your ma’aser sheni, you can de-sanctify redeemed dmai by exchanging silver for silver, copper for copper, silver for copper, or copper for fruit, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say you have to take the fruit to Yerushalayim.

Gimmel: One who takes to seed of as feed, flour for hides, oil for a candle, or oil to grease tools, is patur if it’s dmai.  Kziv or north, it’s not considered Israel, so it’s patur on dmai.  Challa from an am ha’aretz, mixed truma and non-truma, food bought with ma’aser sheni money, and leftovers from a korban mincha are patur from dmai.  Perfumed oil, Beit Shamay says it’s chayav dmai, and Beit Hillel says it’s patur.

Daled: Dmai can be used for an eruv, to join courtyards (such that things may be carried between them), to bench, to make a zimun, can be separated in the nude (since taking ma’aser from it doesn’t need a bracha), and can be separated at dusk.  If you take ma’aser sheni before ma’aser rishon, it doesn’t matter.  Oil which a weaver rubs between his fingers is chayav in dmai, but what the wool-comber puts on the wool is patur in dmai.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Lists some things which when dmai have to have ma’aser taken, including rice.  But rice outside of Israel, whoever uses it is patur from ma’aser.

Bet: One who takes it upon himself to be ne’eman takes ma’aser on what he eats, what he sells, what he buys, and doesn’t stay by an am ha’aretz.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one who stays by an am ha’aretz is a ne’eman.  They said to him, if the person (the host) isn’t ne’eman for himself, why do you think they will be ne’eman for others?

Gimmel: One who takes it upon himself to be a chaver doesn’t sell to an am ha’aretz dry or moist, and doesn’t buy from him moist, and doesn’t stay by an am ha’aretz, and doesn’t have amei ha’aretz over in his own clothes.  Rabi Yehuda says, he doesn’t breed small cattle, take vows often, joke often, does net get tumat met, and becomes a shamash in the beit midrash.  They said to him, yours are not required.

Daled: The Chachamim didn’t require bakers to separate anything other than challa and trumat ma’aser.  Storekeepers may not sell dmai.  Wholesalers can sell dmai.  Who is considered a wholesaler?  Recognized wholesalers and grain sellers.

Hay: Rabi Meir says, one who normally wholesales but sold in small quantity, it goes under his wholesaler status, an ordinary salesman who sold wholesale, it goes under his salesman status.  How big is wholesale?  Dry things is three kav, and moist things worth a dinar.  Rabi Yossi says, baskets of figs, baskets of dates, and boxes of vegetables, as long as they are sold as a lot, they are patur.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One may feed the poor and quartered troops dmai.  Raban Gamliel would feed his workers dmai.  People who collect tzedaka, Beit Shamay said you would give me’usar food to those who don’t take ma’aser, and non-me’usar food to those who take ma’aser, therefore everyone will eat ma’aser-ed food.  Chachamim say you collect anything and distribute anything, those who want to take ma’aser will.

Bet: One who wants to cut off the undesirable tops of a tuber vegetable to lighten his load cannot throw it out until it’s me’usar.  One who buys vegetables at the shuk and wants to return it cannot return it until he takes ma’aser, for the only thing he didn’t do was count his bundles, i.e. they were his and he needed to take ma’aser.  If one was about to buy, but saw some better produce, you can return without ma’aser, since you didn’t acquire it.

Gimmel: If one finds fruit on the road and he takes it to eat it, but decides to save it, he may not save it until he takes ma’aser.  But if he took it so it wouldn’t get lost (not to eat) he’s patur from ma’aser.  Anything which one can’t sell as dmai, one can’t give to his friend if it’s dmai.  Rabi Yossi allows it when it is certainly not me’usar, as long as he knows that it’s not.

Daled: If one brings wheat to a kuti or an am ha’aretz miller, its status of ma’asrot and shmitot is assumed unchanged.  If one brings to a non-Jewish miller, it’s dmai.  Same with depositing fruit by someone, except the non-Jew’s is considered tevel.  Rabi Shimon says it’s only dmai.

Hay: One who gives an innkeeper, takes ma’aser from what he gives and what he gets, because we suspect she might exchange produce.  Rabi Yossi says, we are not accountable for deceivers, you only take ma’aser on what you get from her.

Vav: One who gives his mother-in-law, he takes ma’aser from what he gives and gets, because we suspect she will switch it if it burns.  Rabi Yehuda says, she wants her daughter to be favorable and is embarrassed in front of her son-in-law.  Rabi Yehuda admits that if he gives food which is shvi’it she is not suspected of switching, because she would not feed her daughter any inappropriate shvi’it.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who bought from a person who isn’t ne’eman, forgot to take ma’aser, and asked the seller on Shabbat may trust the seller.  Once it’s motzei Shabbat, he can’t eat until he takes ma’aser.  If he can’t find the seller, any non-ne’eman can tell him they are me’usar and he can eat them, but only on Shabbat.  Trumat ma’aser that became mixed in, Rabi Shimon Shezuri says, even during the week we will believe the seller if he says he had already taken trumat ma’aser.

Bet: If one makes a vow that his friend will be barred from his things if the friend doesn’t eat a meal with him, and the friend doesn’t trust him by ma’asrot, the friend may eat with him the first Shabbat if he says it’s me’usar, even if the friend doesn’t trust him.  But on the second Shabbat, even though there’s an issur hanaya, the friend can only eat if he takes ma’aser.

Gimmel: Rabi Eliezer says, one does not need to take ma’aser ani from dmai.  Chachamim say, he designates some as ma’aser ani, but he doesn’t need to separate it.

Daled: One who designated trumat ma’aser of dmai or ma’aser ani of tevel will not separate it no Shabbat.  And if a kohen or a poor person would normally come to him, he can give them that, as long as he informs them that it’s actually their food.

Hay: One who says to a non-ne’eman to buy for him from a ne’eman, the non-ne’eman isn’t trusted.  If he said a certain person, we trust the messenger.  If the messenger said, I couldn’t find the person, so I bought from some other ne’eman, we don’t believe him.

Vav: One who enters a city and knows nobody there, and asks who is a ne’eman.  If the resident says, I am, we don’t believe him.  If he says a certain person is, we believe him.  If he goes to the specified person and asks, who sells dry grain, and the seller says the person who sent you, even though they seem to be in cahoots we trust them.

Zayin: Donkey drivers (who sell produce) who entered a city, one said, mine is new but my friend’s is old, but mine is me’usar and my friend’s isn’t, we don’t believe him.  Rabi Yehuda says we do.

Perek Hay

Aleph: One who buys from a baker, what does he do about ma’asrot?  He takes enough for trumat ma’aser and challa and says, one per cent of what is here, this here is ma’aser, and the rest that makes up ma’aser rishon is next to it.  What I did ma’aser is trumat ma’aser, and the rest that I took is for challa, and my ma’aser sheni is such and such part, and I redeem it with money.

Bet: One who wants to take ma’aser and trumat ma’aser at once takes one in 33 1/3 and says, one percent on this side is chulin, and the rest is truma from the whole. And the hundred chulin, this part is ma’aser and the rest of the ma’aser is next to it, this that I set aside is trumat ma’aser for it, and the rest is challa.  And this ma’aser sheni is redeemed with money.

Gimmel: One who buys from a baker can take ma’aser from the hot to allow him to eat the cold (inferior), and vice versa, even if they are different shaped breads, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda disagrees, saying, wheat from last night gets one ma’aser, and from today needs another one.  Rabi Shimon forbids crossover in trumat ma’aser, but allows for challa.

Daled: One who buys from a bread seller (who sells dmai from different bakers) takes ma’aser from each form according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, one ma’aser for all forms (i.e. the seller probably buys from only one baker).  Rabi Yehuda admits that if he buys from a monopolist (who will buy from all the bakers) he takes ma’aser on each.

Hay: One who buys from the poor, or if a poor person was given a slice of bread or pressed figs, he takes ma’aser from all of them separately.  But with dates and dried figs, he may mix them and take one ma’aser.  Rabbi Yehuda said, when is this?  When the gift is large, but if it’s small, he takes separate ma’asrot.

Vav: One who buys wholesale and buys from him again may not take ma’aser from one for the other, even if they are from the same container or the same type of food.  We believe the wholesaler if he says they are from one source.

Zayin: One who buys from the owner of a field and buys from him again may take ma’aser from one for the other.  Even if the food is from two containers or two towns.  A field owner who sold his food in the shuk, if the food is from his field, you may take ma’aser from one for the other, but if he gets from other people’s fields, you may not.

Chet: One who buys tevel from two different places can take ma’aser from one on the other even though one may not sell tevel unless it is necessary (if chulin was mixed in).

Tet: You can take ma’aser on a Jew’s produce to exempt a non-Jew’s produce, vice versa, a Jew’s on a kuti’s, and a kuti’s on a kuti’s.  Rabi Eliezer prohibits a kuti’s on a kuti’s.

Yud: Produce grown in a pot with a hole is as if it were grown in the soil.  If he gave truma from produce from the soil on that from a pot or vice versa, it counts.  From an un-holed pot on a holed it is still truma, but he must give from the holed.  From a holed on an un-holed, it’s truma, but he can’t eat it until he takes truma and ma’aser.

Yud Aleph: He took truma from dmai for dmai or from dmai on tevel, it’s truma, but he has to take truma again.  From tevel on dmai, it’s truma, but he can’t eat until he takes truma and ma’aser.

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who leases a field from a Jew, a non-Jew, or a kuti, may give his payment (for sharecropping) without taking truma or ma’aser.  One who rents from a Jew takes truma and pays.  Rabi Yehuda says, what is this talking about?  When he gives him from the same field and species, but if he gives from a different field or species, he just takes ma’aser and gives it.

Bet: One who rents a field (for a fixed fee) from a non-Jew must take ma’aser before paying.  Rabi Yehuda says, even if the non-Jew’s land used to belong to the Jew’s family, he must take ma’aser.

Gimmel: A kohen or levi who leased from a yisra’el doesn’t take truma.  Rabi Eliezer says, the ma’asrot he takes for himself, because it was an understood clause of the lease.

Daled: A yisra’el who leased from a kohen or levi, the ma’asrot are for the owners.  Rabi Yishma’el says, someone from outside of Yerushalayim who leases from someone inside Yerushalayim gives the ma’aser sheni to the owner.  Chachamim say, the leaser can take the food and eat in Yerushalayim.

Hay: One who leases olive trees and is going to pay in oil doesn’t take ma’asrot.  Rabi Yehuda says, a Yisra’el who did this with a kohen or levi, the owners get the ma’asrot.

Vav: Beit Shamay says, one shouldn’t sell olives to a non-chaver.  Beit Hillel says, you can also sell to someone who takes ma’aser, but the pious among Beit Hillel acted in accordance with Beit Shamay’s opinion.

Zayin: Two people who put their grapes in one wine press, one who takes ma’aser and one who doesn’t, the one who takes ma’aser should take, and half of what he takes is considered dmai (and he should take ma’asrot accordingly).

Chet: Two people (only one of whom takes ma’asrot) who sharecropped together, inherited together, or became partners in a field, the one who takes ma’asrot can say, you take part of this crop, and I will take the other part, but he cannot say, you take this crop and I will take that, for that is like trading tevel to an am ha’aretz.

Tet: A chaver and an am ha’aretz who inherited from their father, an am ha’aretz, follow the same rules as two random people.

Yud: A convert and a goy who inherited from their father, a goy, can cut a deal using forbidden items, i.e. saying you take the idols and I take the money.  But if the ger took possession of these items, he may not use them to barter.

Yud Aleph: One who sells fruits in Syria and says they are from Israel has to take ma’aser (even though it would normally be exempt from the laws of dmai).  If he says they are me’usar, we believe him, for the same person made them assur and mutar.  If a Jew says, they are from my field in Syria, they are dmai.  If he says they are me’usar, we believe him.  If the seller is known to have a field in Syria, even if he says nothing they’re dmai.

Yud Bet: If an am ha’aretz asked a chaver to buy him a bundle of vegetables or a fine loaf of bread, the chaver can buy without taking care and is patur.  But if he said, this specific piece is for the am ha’aretz and they mixed up, he has to take ma’aser, even if it’s outweighed by 100.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who is invited to the house of a person he doesn’t trust by ma’asrot says erev Shabbat, what I will separate tomorrow is ma’aser, and the adjoining will be the rest of the ma’aser, that which I took ma’aser from I did trumat ma’aser on it, and ma’aser sheni is in such and such a part, and I redeem it with money.

Bet: When they pour him wine, he says, what I am going to leave in the bottom of the cup is ma’aser, and the rest of the ma’aser is touching it, what I took ma’aser on has trumat ma’aser taken,  and ma’aser sheni I drank and I redeem it with money.

Gimmel: A laborer who doesn’t trust his boss, takes a dried fig an says, this and the next nine I will take are ma’aser on the 90 I will eat, this is trumat ma’aser on them,, and ma’aser sheni is at the end, and is redeemed for money.  So he saves one fig.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, he shouldn’t save, because he’s lessening the work for the owner.  Rabi Yossi says, he shouldn’t save, because the beit din said so.

Daled: One who buys wine from a kuti says, two lug which I am going to separate, that is the truma, and a tenth of that is ma’aser, and nine are ma’aser sheni.  He redeems, and then he can drink it.

Hay: One had tevel figs in his house, and he’s in the beit midrash or the field.  He says, two figs that I will separate are truma, and ten are ma’aser rishon, and nine are ma’aser sheni.  If they are dmai he says, what I will separate tomorrow is ma’aser, and the rest of the ma’aser is next to it, what I did ma’aser on it has trumat ma’aser done on it, and the ma’aser sheni is in such and such a place, and is redeemed for money.

Vav: There were two baskets of tevel in front of him, and he said, the ma’asrot of this basket are in that basket, the first is me’usar.  If he said the ma’aser of this one is in that and of that is in that, only the first (this) is me’usar, if he says the ma’aser of each is in the other, he has only said that the ma’aser has to come from those baskets.

Zayin: One hundred tevel mixed with one hundred chulin, he removes 101 ( to make sure he’s taking trumat ma’aser from the tevel).  If it’s ma’aser instead of chulin, he takes out 101.  One hundred of fully me’usar chulin, and one hundred ma’aser, he takes 110.  One hundred tevel and ninety ma’aser, ninety tevel and eighty ma’aser, he didn’t lose anything.  This is the general rule, as long as the tevel is greater, he loses nothing.

Chet: One who has ten rows of ten jugs of wine and said, one exterior row is ma’aser, and we don’t know which row, he takes two jars from opposite corners.  If he said, half of one of the external rows is ma’aser, and we don’t know which side, he takes a barrel from each corner.  If he says one row is ma’aser, and we don’t know which row, he takes one diagonal.  If he says half of one row is ma’aser, and we don’t know which one, you take both diagonals.  If he says one barrel is ma’aser, and we don’t know which barrel, he takes from each barrel.

Mesechet Kilayim

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Wheat and darnel (a grain that grows among wheat) don’t make each other kilayim.  Barley and oats, spelt and rye, beans and chickpeas, bitter peas and vetchling, and white beans and kidney beans, don’t make each other kilayim.

Bet: Squash and cucumber aren’t kilayim.  Rabi Yehuda says they are.  Lettuce and wild lettuce, endive and wild endive, leek and wild leek, coriander and wild coriander, mustard and Egyptian mustard, Egyptian gourd and bitter apple, and Egyptian beans and carob aren’t kilayim with each other.

Gimmel: Turnip and radish, cabbage and cauliflower, and beer and orach (a kind of beet) aren’t kilayim.  Rabi Akiva added garlic and small garlic, onion and small onion, and lupine and wild lupine.

Daled: And by trees, pears and small wild pears and quince and sorb-apples aren’t kilayim.  Apple and crab apple, peaches and almonds, and plums and pomegranates, even though they are similar, they are kilayim.

Hay: Radish and horse-radish, mustard and wild mustard, and Greek gourd with either Egyptian gourd or bitter-apple, even though they are similar, they are kilayim.

Vav: The wolf and the dog, the wild dog and the fox, goats and deer, mountain goats and ewes, the horse and the mule, the mule and the donkey, and the donkey and the wild donkey, even though they are similar, they are kilayim.

Zayin: One may not graft a tree on a tree, an herb on an herb, a tree on an herb, or an herb on a tree.  Rabi Yehuda allows an herb on a tree.

Chet: One may not plant herbs in the stump of a sycamore, one may not graft rue onto white cassia because it is an herb onto a tree, and one may not plant the shoot of a fig tree into a cistus in order to cool the cistus.  One may not put the cutting of grape into a watermelon such that it will water the cutting, because it is a tree onto an herb.  One may not put the seeds of a gourd into a mallow to preserve it, because it is an her in an herb.

Tet: One who buries turnip and radish under grapes, if they were partially exposed, there is no worry about kilayim, shmitta, or ma’aser, and you can dig them up on Shabbat.  One who sows wheat and barley together is doing kilayim,  Rabi Yehuda says, it is only kilayim if it is two species of one and one of the other or wheat, barley, and spelt.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Any se’ah worth of seeds that has a rova or more of a second type of seeds, he has to reduce it.  Rabi Yossi says, he must get rid of it.  Whether it’s one kind or two.  Rabi Shimon says it’s only one species.  Chachamim say if all the kilayim adds up to a rova.

Bet: What is this talking about?  Any mixture of grain and legumes.  What they really meant was seeds that aren’t eaten which make up 1/24 of the amount sown in a beit se’ah.  Rabi Shimon says, just as they were stringent by those seed, the are lenient by others, like flax (for three se’ah of flax is sown in a beit se’ah, so we need three rova for kilayim).

Gimmel: One’s field was sown with wheat and he decided to sow barley, he’ll wait until it becomes wormy, he’ll turn the soil, and he’ll plant.  If the wheat already sprouted, he can’t say I’ll plant and then plow, he has to plow first.  How much must he plow?  As the furrows are after the rain.  Abba Shual says, such that there won’t remain unplowed area greater than a rova in a se’ah.

Daled: He had sown and he decided to plant (with vines), he may not say, I’ll plant then plow, rather he plows first.  If it was planted and he decided to sow (with grain) he may not say, I’ll sow and then uproot, but rather he must uproot first.  If he wants, he can cut less than a tefach, sow, and then uproot.

Hay: If his field was planted with caraway or arum, he may not sow on top of them, because they don’t produce for three years.  Grain that had on it weeds of isatis, and so too if various weeds grew on the threshing floor, and so too if fenugreek grew weeds, he doesn’t have to weed them.  If he weeded or cut them, they say to him, uproot everything except for the one (desirable) kind.

Vav: One who wants to plant his field with beds of different species, Beit Shamay says, keep a distance of three open furrows, and Beit Hillel says the size of a yoke in the Sharon.  And what they say is similar.

Zayin: If the head of a row of wheat entered into a row of barley, it is permitted, because it is recognized as the end of the field.  If his is wheat and his neighbor’s is a different species, he may plant the species that his neighbor has.  If they both have wheat, he may plant flax between them (because such little flax isn’t profitable, and isn’t for sale) but not any other species.  Rabi Shimon says, it can be linseed or any species.  Rabi Yossi says, even in the middle of his field he can test it with a bed of flax (to see if flax can be grown).

Chet: One may not plant mustard or safflower next to a grain field, but you can by a field of vegetables.  One may plant a different seed close to a fallow field, a plowed field, a stone fence, a road, a fence at least ten tfachim tall, a ditch ten tfachim deep and four wide, a tree that droops close to the ground, and a rock that is taller than ten tfachim and wider than four,

Tet: One who wants to lay out his field in beds of different species makes 24 patches in a beit se’ah, each a beit rova, and you can plant whatever you want.  If there are one or two sections, he can plant mustard.  If it’s three, he can’t, because it looks like a mustard field, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, nine patches are allowed (enough to segregate the mustards), ten are not.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, even if his field is a kor (30 se’ah) he may not make more than one patch.

Yud: Everything that is in a beit rova is calculated as part of the rova.  The spaces of grapes, graves, and rocks are also included.  Grain and grain must be separated by a beit rova, two vegetables, six tfachim.  A grain and a vegetable, beit rova.  Rabi Eliezer says, vegetable from grin is six tfachim.

Yud Aleph: Grain overhanging grain, vegetables overhanging vegetables, or one on the other is all allowed, except for Egyptian gourd.  Rabi Meir says, also the squash and the Egyptian bean, but I like tana kama’s opinion more.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: A bed that is six tfachim by six tfachim can be planted with five seeds, one on each side and one in the middle.  If it has a border a tefach high you can plant thirteen, three on each side and one in the middle.  He may not plant turnip heads on the border, because it will fill it up.  Rabi Yehuda says you can even plant six in the middle.

Bet: Seeds (normally only sown in large amounts) can’t be sown in a small patch, but vegetables can.  Mustard and smooth peas are considered seeds, and large peas are considered vegetables.  A border that was more than a tefach but got shortened is kosher, because it was originally kosher.  In a furrow or water channel a tefach deep you can sow three seeds, one on either side and one in it.

Gimmel: The head of a line of vegetables entered into a field of different vegetables, it’s allowed, because it looks like the end of his fields.  If his field was planted with vegetables, and he wants to plant a row of some other vegetable, Rabi Yishma’el says only if the furrow is completely open.  Rabi Akiva says it needs to be six tfachim long and its full width.  Rabi Yehuda says its width has to be the width of the sole of a foot.

Daled: One who plants two rows of squash, two rows of gourds, and two rows of Egyptian beans is allowed.  One row of each is asur.  One of each with another squash at the end, Rabi Eliezer allows, but the Chachamim don’t.

Hay: One plants squash and gourd in one hollow provided one leans one way and the other leans the other way, or the tips of one lean one way and those of the other the other way, because all kilayim derabanan is just because of marit ayin.

Vav: His fields was sown with onions, and he wishes to plant rows of gourds, Rabi Yishma’el says he pulls up two rows and plants one row, leaves two rows of onions the same, and then uproots two more rows and plants on of gourds.  Rabi Akiva says, he uproots two rows and plants two, leaves two rows, and then uproots two and plants two.  Chachamim say, if the gourds are closer than twelve amot from each other, you can’t have onions in between.

Zayin: When a single gourd is planted among vegetables, it is treated as another vegetable (and separated by six tfachim).  When it is in grain, it gets a beit rova.  If his field was planted with grain and he wanted to plant a row of gourds, you only need six tfachim.  If it grew, he must cut it back to size.  Rabi Yossi says, you give it four amot to work it.  They said to him, are you stricter with this than with grapes?  He said to them, it is stricter, because a single grape vine gets six tfachim and a single gourd gets a beit rova.  Rabi Meir says in the name of Rabi Yishma’el, wherever three gourds make up a beit se’ah, the beit se’ah can’t have any other seed.  Rabi Yossi ben Hachotef Efrati said in the name of Rabi Yishma’el, whenever there are three gourds in a beit kor, the beit kor can’t have any other seed.

Perek Daled

Aleph: How big must a vineyard’s karachat (see below) be to not be kilayim?  Beit Shamay says, twenty-four amot square.  Beit Hillel says sixteen.  How about the machol (see below)?  Beit Shamay says sixteen amot square.  Beit Hillel says twelve.  What is a vineyard’s karachat?  A vineyard that is empty in the middle, and if it’s not sixteen amot square, you may not bring in another seed.  If there is enough space, you give it the proper border to work the seed and you may plant it.

Bet: What is the machol of the vineyard?  The space between the vines and the fence.  If there aren’t twelve amot there, he may not plant another seed there.  If there is space, you leave space to work the grain and you may plant.

Gimmel: Rabi Yehuda says, that is merely called the fence of the vineyard.  So what is the machol?  Space between two vineyards.  What is considered a fence?  At least ten tfachim high.  What is considered a ditch?  At least ten tfachim deep and four wide.

Daled: A divider of reeds, if there are fewer than three tfachim between reeds, as much space as a kid needs to enter, it is a divider.  And a hole in a fence under ten amot is like an entrance, more than that, it is forbidden to plant (different species) near the hole.  A fence with many holes, if the fence is more than half there, it can be used.  If it is more than half holes, it is forbidden to plant near the holes.

Hay: One who plants a row of five vines, Beit Shamay says it’s a vineyard.  Beit Hillel says it isn’t until he plants two rows.  Therefore, one who plants within four amot of a vineyard, Beit Shamay says he made one row forbidden, and Beit Hillel says he made two rows forbidden.

Vav: If one plants two rows of two vines, and one projects like a tail (the fifth is its own column, forming a trapezoid), this is a vineyard.  Two rows of two with one in between (in its own row, forming a pentagon) or two rows of two with one in the middle (forming the five on a die) it’s not a vineyard, it only is if the fifth is like a tail.

Zayin: One who plants one row of vines on his land and there is a row on his neighbor’s land, even if it has a private or public path between it or a fence shorter than ten tfachim, these combine.  If the fence is greater than ten tfachim, they don’t combine.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he intertwined them above the fence, they combine.

Chet: One who plants two rows, if there are fewer than eight amot between them, you may not plant between them.  If they are three rows, if there aren’t sixteen tfachim between an two rows, you can’t plant between them.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says in the name of Chanania ben Chachinay even if the middle one was destroyed, and the two outer rows now have sixteen tfachim between them you can’t plant between them, because if you had planted those two rows originally you would need eight amot.

Tet: One who plants his vineyard with rows sixteen amot apart may plant between the rows.  Rabi Yehuda said, there was a case in Tzalmon where a man planted like this, and he would turn the shoots different directions in alternate years and plant the land he had turned the shoots away from (thus alternating fallow and planted years for these patches) and he cam before the Chachamim and they allowed it.  Rabi Meir and Rabi Shimon say this is even allowed for one who plants his vineyard with rows spaced eight amot.

Perek Hay

Aleph: A destroyed vineyard, if ten vines can still be harvested in any bet se’ah, and they are planted properly, this is a reduced vineyard.  An irregularly planted vineyard, if there is any place where the regular patter is found, it is a vineyard, and if no, it’s not.  Rabi Meir says, since it has an appearance that is the form of a vineyard, it is a vineyard.

Bet: A vineyard that is less than four amot between rows, Rabi Shimon says it’s not a vineyard (they are too close for proper development),  Chachamim say it is, and we see the intervening rows as non-existent.

Gimmel: A ditch that passes through a vineyard that is deeper than ten tfachim and wider than four, Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, if it travels the length of the vineyard, it is like lying between two vineyards and can be planted in.  If not, it is seen as a winepress.  A winepress of that size in a vineyard, Rabi Eliezer says you can sow in it, but the Chachamim prohibit it.  A lookout mound in a vineyard taller than ten tfachim and wider than four can be sown in, but if branches intertwine above it, it’s assur.

Daled: A vine planted in a winepress or cleft in the field, you leave room to till it and you may plant.  Rabi Yossi says, if there aren’t four amot in the winepress or cleft, you may not plant in it.  One may sow in a (roofed) house in the middle of a vineyard.

Hay: If one plants vegetables or leaves planted vegetables in a vineyard, this makes forty-five vines (those within sixteen amot) forbidden.  When is this? When they are planted four or five amot apart.  If they are planted six or seven amot apart, it prohibits sixteen amot in each direction, in a circle (radius), not a square (half a side).

Vav: If one sees a (wild) vegetable in a vineyard and says, I will remove it when I get there, it is permitted.  If he reached it and said, I will remove it when I come back, if it has grown by one two-hundredth, it is kilayim.

Zayin: One was passing through a vineyard and some seeds fell from him, or seeds were in manure or water he was using on the vineyard, or the wind blew them to an unacceptable place behind him without his knowledge, it’s mutar.  If the wind blew it in front of him, Rabi Akiva says if he sees blades growing, he must plow it, if it’s an underdeveloped stalk, he must beat it, and if it has produced grain, it must be burnt.

Chet: One who lets thorns stay in his vineyard, Rabi Eliezer says, it is forbidden.  Chachamim say it’s not unless that type of thorn is normally allowed to stay in that area (and is valued).  Iris, ivy, king’s-lily, and all seeds (except grains and vegetables) aren’t kilayim in a vineyard.  Hemp, Rabi Tarfon says isn’t kilayim, but Chachamim say it is.  And artichoke is kilayim.

Perek Vav

Aleph: What is aris (which is considered a vineyard)?  One who plants a row of five vines next to a fence ten tfachim tall (acting as a trellis), or next to ditch tat is ten tfachim deep and four wide, and has the four amot needed for tillage.  Beit Shamay says you measure the four amot from the stalk to the field.  Beit Hillel says from the wall to the field.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri says all who say like this are wrong!  Only if there are four amot from the stalk to the wall, you give it room for tillage, and sow the rest.  How much tillage space does the vine need?  Six tfachim in all directions, and Rabi Akiva says three.

Bet: An aris that projects from a terrace, Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, if he can stand on the ground and collect all the grapes it prohibits four amot on the field.  If not, it only prohibits what is next to it.  Rabi Eliezer says, also if one plants one row of vines on the ground and one row on a terrace, if the terrace is more than ten tfachim high, they do not combine.  And if it’s shorter, they do combine.

Gimmel: One who trains a vine over a trellis may not plant under open spaces in the trellis, but if he did, it is not forbidden.  But if the vine grew and covered the seed, it is forbidden.  And so too if he trained it over a non-fruit-bearing tree (serak).

Daled: One who trains a vine on part of a fruit tree can plant seeds under the rest of the tree.  Once Rabi Yehoshua went to Rabi Yishma’el in Kfar Aziz, and showed him a vine trained over part of a fig tree.  He said to him, Can I plant under the rest of the tree?  Rabi Yishma’el said, you may.  He went up with him to Bet Maganya and showed him a vine trained over a branch of a sycamore which had many branches.  Rabi Yishma’el said, under this branch is assur, but under the other branches is mutar.

Hay: What tree is a sarak?  That which produces no fruit.  Rabi Meir says, all trees other than olive and fig trees.  Rabi Yossi says, any tree that would not be planted over an entire field (and is thus tafel to the vine) is a serak.

Vav: Gaps in an aris, if it’s a little more than eight amot, it breaks the aris.  And of all measurements Chachamim gave in a vineyard, this is the only one that has “a little more.”  What are gaps in an aris?  If vines in the middle were destroyed, and there was a row of five vines on each side, if it’s exactly eight amot between them, he may not sow, but if it’s a bit more, you leave tillage room and sow the middle.

Zayin: An aris that projects over a wall from the corner and it stops, you leave tillage space and sow the rest.  Rabi Yossi says, if there aren’t four amot along the wall in the stop, you may not sow there.

Chet: Reeds which project from and aris and he avoided cutting them short, what is near them is mutar.  But if he left them to be as a trellis for the new tendrils, it’s assur.

Tet: A tendril that sticks out of an aris, we see it as if a plummet were hanging on it, what is next to it is assur, and so too with a trellised vine.  One who stretched a shoot from tree to tree, under the vine is assur.  If he used a rope or reed-grass to tie a short tendril over a greater distance, under the extension is mutar.  If he laid it out such that the new shoots would grow on it, it is assur.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: If one bends a vine into the ground (to make runners), if there are less than three tfachim of dirt on the covered part, he may not sow on it, even if he pressed it into a gourd or pipe (underground).  If he bends it into a rock, even though it doesn’t have three tfachim of soil, he may plant above it.  A vine that forms a “knee” when it emerges has its six tfachim measured from the top of the knee (for it might bend away from the stalk, and define a different area).

Bet: One who makes runners from three vines and their roots are visible, Rabi Elazar bar Tzadok says, if there are four to eight amot between them, they combine, and if not, they don’t.  A dried vine if forbidden to sow near, but doesn’t make kilayim.  Rabi Meir says, so too cotton can’t be sown next to but doesn’t make kilayim.  Rabi Elazar bar Tzadok says in the name of Rabi Meir, also above a vine is forbidden to sow, but it doesn’t make kilayim.

Gimmel: These things can’t be planted near, but don’t make kilayim: leftovers from a destroyed vineyard, the leftovers of the machol of a vineyard, the leftover of gaps in an aris, the remainder of a trellis.  But under a vine, the vine’s tillage space, and four amot in a vineyard, these do make kilayim.

Daled: One who causes his vine to grow over his neighbor’s grain, he made it kilayim and is liable for damages.  Rabi Yossi and Rabi Shimon say, one can not make something that isn’t his assur as kilayim.

Hay: Rabi Yossi said, once someone sowed in his vineyard during shmitta, and the case came before Rabi Akiva, who said, one cannot make something which isn’t his assur as kilayim.

Vav: An intruder who sowed a vineyard, and the owner got it back, he cuts down the grain even on chag.  Up to how much extra must he pay in order to find laborers to cut it?  Up to a third.  If they would want more than that, he cuts it down as he usually would, even after the chag.  From when is it considered a violent intruder?  From when the owner is forgotten, meaning the intruder had possession, made assur kilayim, and made it a necessity worth paying extra to remove.

Zayin: A wind that blows vines on top of grain, he must immediately make a fence (so that the vines will no longer overhang).  If it was an unavoidable circumstance (ones) it’s mutar.  Grain that bent under vines, and so too with vegetables, he straightens it and it isn’t assur.  From when does grain become assur?  From when it strikes roots.  What about grapes?  When they grow to the size of white beans.  Fully dried grain or fully ripened grapes do not become assur.

Chet: A pot with a hole makes kilayim in a vineyard, and one that doesn’t have a hole doesn’t.  Rabi Shimon says, both of these can’t be planted near but don’t make assur.  If one carries a pot with a hole through a vineyard, if it increased in size by a two-hundredth, it’s assur.

Perek Chet

Aleph: Kilayim in a vineyard may not be planted, maintained, or benefited from.  Kilayim by grain may not be planted or maintained, but may be eaten, and of course be benefited from.  Kilayim by clothes are allowed for all things except to wear.  Kilayim by animals may be raised and maintained, and it is only assur to breed them.  Kilayim by animals may not be paired with one another (for breeding or working).

Bet: A domesticated animal (behema) with a behema, a wild animal (chaya) with a chaya, behema with a chaya, chaya with a behema, non-kosher with non-kosher, kosher with kosher, non-kosher with kosher, and kosher with non-kosher may not plow together, pull together, or be harnessed together.

Gimmel: One who harnesses together receives lashes and one who sits on a (jointly pulled) wagon gets lashes.  Rabi Meir allows this.  And the third which is tied into the straps (and is of a different species than the other two) is forbidden.

Daled: A horse may not be tied beside or behind a wagon (drawn by oxen) and Libyan camels cannot be tied to camels.  Rabi Yehuda says, all animals born of a horse, even if their father is a donkey, may draw with one another.  And likewise with the offspring of a donkey, even though their father was a horse.  But, those who had a mother of a donkey are forbidden with those with a mother of a horse.

Hay: Mules with parents of unknown genders are forbidden (to be mixed in breeding or harnessing) but a mule with a horse mother may be.  Some man-like ape is considered a chaya.  Rabi Yossi says their corpses render a tent tame (unlike an animal).  The hedgehog and the bush weasel are chayot.  A bush weasel, Rabi Yossi says that Beit Shamay says it makes tame by carrying a kzayit or touching a lentil sized piece.

Vav: A wild ox is a behema.  Rabi Yossi says it is a chaya.  A dog is a chaya.  Rabi Meir says it’s a behema.  A pig is a behema.  The wild donkey is a chaya.  The elephant and the monkey are chayot.  Man is allowed with all of them to pull, to plow, and to harness.

Perek Tet

Aleph: The only kilayim by clothing is wool and linen.  Only wool and linen become tame because of afflictions (probably of tzara’at).  The kohanim only wear wool or linen in the beit mikdash.  Camel wool and ewe wool that were mixed together to make a garment, if it’s mostly camel it may (be mixed with linen), but if mostly ewe it may not.  If it’s half and half, it is forbidden.  So too with linen and hemp that were mixed together.

Bet: Silk and bask-silk are not kilayim, but we don’t mix them because they look like flax.  Large pillows and pillows don’t have an issue of kilayim, as long as one doesn’t touch them.  There is no ‘casual’ kilayim (only temporarily), and he can’t wear kilayim even over ten other garments, even if he’s evading customs (because clothing being worn wasn’t charged).

Gimmel: Hand towels, wraps for torahs, and bath towels have no issur of kilayim.  Rabi Eliezer says they can be assur.  And a barber’s capes do have an issur of kilayim.

Daled: Shrouds for the dead and a donkey’s pack-saddle have no issur of kilayim.  One may not put the pack saddle on his shoulders, even to use as toilet paper.

Hay: Sellers of clothes (who carried their wares on their backs) can sell kilayim garments as usual, as long as they don’t intend to shelter themselves from sun in sun or from rain in rain.  But those who are careful in kilayim carry them on a staff.

Vav: Tailors (who rested the clothes on their knees) may sew as usual, as long as they don’t intend to shelter themselves from sun in sun or from rain in rain.  But those who are careful in kilayim sew on the ground.

Zayin: Birsin, bardesin, dalmatikyon (all woolen garments named based on their places of origin), and felt shoes may not be worn until checked for kilayim.  Rabi Yossi says, clothes from the coast or overseas do not need to be checked, we assume they are made of hemp.  Shoes lined with wool do not have an issur of kilayim.

Chet: The only things which have an issur of kilayim are spun or woven, as we see a pasuk which implies they must be combed, spun, and twisted (into proper threads).  Rabi Shimon ben Elazar says, he is estranged and he estranges his Father in Heaven against him (if he wears kilayim).

Tet: Felted materials (which are unspun) are forbidden, because they are combed.  An edging of wool on linen is assur, because it interlaces the weaving.  Rabi Yossi says, Purple woolen chords are assur on linen, for one generally sews them to the back to hold them up until they are tied.  One may not tie a woolen ribbon on flax to tie up his loins, even though there is a leather strap in between.

Yud: Marks made by weavers or launderers are assur by kilayim.  One who stitches one stitch isn’t connecting, and it isn’t subject to kilayim, but if one undoes it on Shabbat, he is patur.  If one stitches both ends together with a single stitch, it is a connection, and it is subject to kilayim, and one who undoes it on Shabbat is chayav.  Rabi Yehuda says, it’s only subject to kilayim if he makes three.  A sack and a basket fastened together combine for (purposes of) kilayim.

Mesechet Sheviit

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Until when may one plow in an orchard before shmitta?  Beit Shamay says, as long as the fruits will actually benefit (the fruits of the sixth year).  Beit Hillel says, until Shavuot, and their words are very similar.

Bet: What makes an orchard?  Any three trees in a beit se’ah.  If they can yield a cake of pressed figs of a certain weight, you may plow the entire area for it benefits the trees.  If they don’t yield that much you may only plow the area around each tree taken up by the worker and the basket outside of him.

Gimmel: Whether a sarak or fruit tree, you see them as if they bear figs, if they make the required amount, you can plow the whole area, for it’s for their need.  And if not, you may only plow what they need.

Daled: If one tree makes enough, but two don’t, or two make and one doesn’t, you may only plow what they need until they are between three and nine.  If there are ten and up, whether or not they make enough you may plow the whole beit se’ah for their need, as it says, “in plowing and harvesting you shall rest,” it didn’t need to say the plowing and harvesting of shmitta, rather plowing of erev shvi’it when shmitta is entering and harvesting of shmitta when it is going out to motzei shvi’it.  Rabi Yishma’el says, just as it is optional plowing, so too it is optional harvesting, which excludes harvesting for omer.

Hay: Three trees which belong to three people, these combine, and you plow the entire beit se’ah for them.  How much must be left between them?  Raban Gamliel says, enough for an ox can pass with the plowing tools.

Vav: Ten saplings spread about a beit se’ah, one may plow the entire space for them up until Rosh Hashana (so they won’t dry up).  If they were planted in a row and surrounded by a fence you may only plow what they need.

Zayin: Saplings and gourds combine in a beit se’ah.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, if there are ten gourds in a beit se’ah, one may plow it all until Rosh Hashana.

Chet: Until when are they considered saplings? Rabi Elazar ben Azariah says, until they become permitted (from orla).  Rabi Yehoshua says until seven years.  Rabi Akiva says as long as they are called saplings.  A tree that was cut down and produced new roots less than a tefach, it’s a sapling, but if more than a tefach, it’s a tree, according to Rabi Shimon.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Until when may one plow in a ‘white’ field (not trees) be plowed on erev shvi’it?  Until the moisture has dried up, as long as people plow to plant squash and gourds.  Rabi Shimon said, you give law for each person individually (for fields dry up at different times).  Rather in a field until Pesach and an orchard until Shavuot.

Bet: One spreads manure and hoes squash and gourds until Rosh Hashana.  And so too in irrigated fields.  One may cut off flaws, strip leaves, cover up, or smoke out until Rosh Hashana.  Rabi Shimon says, one may even remove a leaf from a cluster of grapes on shmitta.

Gimmel: One may clear stones until Rosh Hashana.  One may clip, prune, and trim until Rosh Hashana.  Rabi Yehoshua says, like clipping and pruning of the fifth year (which continue into the next year) are clipping and pruning of the sixth year.  Rabi Shimon says, whenever I may work on a tree (until Shavuot) I may trim.

Daled: One may smear wounds on saplings with dung, wrap them, trim them, make shelter for them, and water them until Rosh Hashana.  Rabi Elazar ben Tzadok says, even during shmitta you may water the branches but not the trunk.

Hay: One may oil unripe figs and pierce them until Rosh Hashana.  Unripe figs of erev shvi’it that entered shvi’it and those of shvi’it that entered motzei shvi’it may not be oiled or pierced.  Rabi Yehuda says, a place where they would oil, they don’t oil, for it’s work, and a place where they don’t oil, you may oil.  Rabi Shimon allows work on a tree (even though it is shvi’it fruit), for work on a tree is allowed (in the eighth year).

Vav: One may not plant, make runners, or graft erev shvi’it less than thirty days before Rosh Hashana.  If you planted, made runners, or grafted, you must uproot it.  Rabi Yehuda says, any grafting that has not taken root in three days will never take root.  Rabi Yossi and Rabi Shimon say, two weeks.

Zayin: Rice, millet, poppy, and sesame which grew roots before Rosh Hashana, you take ma’aser for the past year, and they are allowed on shvi’it.  And if not, they are assur on shvi’it and you take ma’aser the next year.

Chet: Rabi Shimon Shezuri says, Egyptian bean that was planted, but for the purpose of seeds, by the beginning of shvi’it has the same rules as above.  Rabi Shimon says, large peas are also like them.  Rabi Elazar says, large peas if they began to form pods before Rosh Hashana.

Tet: Seedless onions and Egyptian beans which one prevented from getting water starting thirty days before Rosh Hashana, one takes ma’aser with the past year, and they are allowed on shvi’it.  If not, they are forbidden on shvi’it, and one takes ma’aser with the coming year.  In a rain irrigated field, if one prevented them from getting water for two seasons, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say three seasons.

Yud: Gourds which one made for seeds, if they hardened before Rosh Hashana and become unfit as human food, if is mutar to keep them during shvi’it.  If not, it is assur to keep them on shvi’it.  Their truma is assur on shvi’it. And one may water ‘white’ soil (non-orchard) according to Rabi Shimon.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov forbids it.  One may soak rice on shvi’it.  Rabi Shimon says, but you don’t trim the leaves.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: From when may one prepare manure in heaps (during shvi’it)?  When those who do work their fields on shvi’it (e.g. non-Jews) stop, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, from when the manure dries up.  Rabi Yossi says, from when the manure dries enough to form solid pallets.

Bet: How much manure can be deposited in the heaps?  Until three dung heaps per beit se’ah, each containing ten baskets of a letech (a unit of measurement making each heap 150 se’ah).  One may increase the number of baskets per heap, but not the number of heaps.  Rabi Shimon says, even the number of heaps.

Gimmel: One makes his field with three dung heaps in each se’ah.  If he makes more, he makes them into a triangle, according to Rabi Shimon.  Chachamim forbid making more piles unless they are three tfachim above or below the flat parts of the field.  One may make his dung heap one large pile.  Rabi Meir forbids this unless he raises or lowers it three tfachim.  If he had a small heap, he can add to it repetitively (not all his manure at one time).  Rabi Elazar ben Azariah forbids unless he lowers or raises three tfachim.

Daled: One who uses a field to let cows graze (and make manure), he must make the pen two beit se’ah.  He removes three sides and leaves the wall that stays between the old and new pen and makes a pen that makes a total of four beit se’ah.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, the pen can be eight beit se’ah.  If his whole field is four beit se’ah, he leaves part of it (unenclosed), because of marit ayin, and takes from the pen and puts in his field the way people normally spread manure.

Hay: One may not open a quarry for the first time (during shvi’it) in his field, until it has three layers, three amot by three amot by three amot high, their measure is twenty-seven stones.

Vav: A fence that has ten stones each able to support two people, these may be removed.  The measurement of a wall is ten tfachim.  If it’s less than that, he cuts it and can level it until it’s under a tefach.  What is this talking about?  When it’s his, but if it’s his friend’s, he can remove whatever he wants.  What is this talking about?  If he did not start from erev shvi’it, but if he did, he can remove whatever (of his wall) he wants.

Zayin: Stones which the plow forced up, or which had been covered but were uncovered, if there are two which each can support two people, these he may remove.  One who clears stones from his field, he may take the upper stones, but not those which touch the ground.  So too with a heap of pebbles or a stack of stones, he may take the top but leaves those which touch the earth.  If there is rocky ground or straw underneath, he may take them.

Chet: One may not build steps by ravines erev shvi’it after the rains stop, because he is fixing things for shvi’it.  But on may build them during shvi’it after the rain has stopped, because he is fixing for motzei shvi’it.  But he may not cement the stones with earth, but he may make a loose pile.  Any stone he can take with his hand (while in his field) he may take.

Tet: Stones so heavy they must be carried on the shoulders may be taken from anywhere.  And a contractor may take (even smaller shoulder stones) from anywhere.  What exactly are shoulder stones?  Anything one cannot take with one hand, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, shoulder stones are like their name, they have to be taken two or three on the shoulder.

Yud: One who builds a fence between himself and the public domain may dig down to rock.  What does he do with the earth?  He heaps it up in the public domain and then fixes it (flat), according to Rabi Yehoshua.  Rabi Akiva says, Justas one may not damage the public domain, one may not fix in it.  So what does he do with the earth?  He piles it in his field like one who piles manure.  So too with one who digs a whole, a trench, or a cave.

Perek Daled

Aleph: At first they said, one may gather wood, stones, and grass from his own property just as he can gather from his friend’s property, large pieces (clearly needed, not to tend the field).  When many people would sin they instituted that one should gather from the field of the other, not as a favor (a mutual partnership), and needless to say that it’s not to give food for a trade (to one who gathers things to improve his land).

Bet: A field cleared of thorns may be planted motzei shvi’it.  If it was improved or used to let cows graze, it may not be planted motzei shvi’it.  A field that was improved, Beit Shamay says you may not eat its fruit during shvi’it and Beit Hillel allows it.  Beit Shamay said, one may not eat shvi’it fruit as a favor (from the owner, it’s hefker), and Beit Hillel says, you may eat as a favor or not.   Rabi Yehuda says, flip the opinions, this is a leniency of Beit Shamay and a stringency of Beit Hillel.

Gimmel: One may rent freshly-plowed land from a non-Jew during shvi’it, but not from a Jew.  One may strengthen non-Jews during shvi’it (as in saying, good luck), but not Jews.  And one greets people, to keep the ways of peacefulness.

Daled: One who thins out (clusters of) olive trees, Beit Shamay says, he cuts only to the roots, and Beit Hillel says, he may pull out the roots as well (this is not tending).  What is thinning?  One or two trees.  Leveling?  Three, one next to the other.  What is this talking about?  In his field, but in his friend’s, even if he levels, he can uproot.

Hay: One who cuts wood off an olive tree may not cover it with earth, but covers it with stones or straw.  One who cuts the branches of a sycamore may not cover it in earth, but can cover it with stones or straw.  One may not cut a previously uncut sycamore, because it is considered work (it improves the tree).  Rabi Yehuda says, the normal way of cutting is assur, unless he cuts ten tfachim up or to the roots.

Vav: One who clips grapes or cuts reeds, Rabi Yossi Hagelili says he must keep a tefach from the ground.  Rabi Akiva says, he can cut as usual, with an ax, a sickle, a saw, or anything he wants.  A tree which split may be tied during shvi’it, not such that it will heal, but rather that it won’t continue to split.

Zayin: From when can you eat the fruit of a tree in shvi’it?  The unripe ones, when they glisten, you can eat them with your bread out in the field.  The ripe ones, you may bring into your house.  So too in the rest of the years in the cycle pertaining to when he has to take ma’aser.

Chet: Unripe grapes, from when they produce liquid he can eat them with his bread in the field.  Once they have ripened, he may take them into his house.  And so too in the rest of the years of the cycle pertaining to when he has to take ma’asrot.

Tet: Olives, once they yield a revi’it to the se’ah, he may crush them and eat in the field.  When they produce half a log, he may press and use for skin in the field.  When they yield a third, they may be pressed in the field and taken into his house.  And so too in the rest of the years of the cycle pertaining to when he has to take ma’asrot.  And the rest of the fruits of the tree, their season for ma’aser is the same as their season for shvi’it.

Yud: From when is it forbidden to cut down trees in shvi’it?  Beit Shamay says, all trees when they bring forth leaves.  Beit Hillel says, carobs from when they droop, grapes from when they produce ‘kernels’, olives from when they blossom, and all other trees from when they produce leaves.  And all trees, when they come to the time of ma’asrot, one may cut them down.  How much can be on an olive before it can be cut?  A rova.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, it all depends on the olive tree.

Perek Hay

Aleph: White figs, shvi’it also applies in the second year of the cycle, since they only produce every three years.  Rabi Yehuda says, Persian figs, their shvi’it is motzei shvi’it, since they only produce every two years.  They said to him, it only applies to whit figs.

Bet: One who buries luf (an onion-like plant) during shvi’it (to preserve it), Rabi Meir says not less than two se’ah, it has to be up to three tfachim, and no less than a tefach of dirt on top.  Chachamim say, no less than twelve kav (one third of Rabi Meir) and up to and covered with one tefach.  And you bury it in a place people step.

Gimmel: Luf which has remained through shvi’it, Rabi Eliezer says, if the poor picked its leaves, they picked them.  If they haven’t he must settle by giving to the poor.  Rabi Yehoshua says, if the poor picked, they picked, and if not, they don’t have a settlement.

Daled: Luf from erev shvi’it which entered shvi’it, and so too with onions, spring onions, and dyestuff from choice land, Beit Shamay says, you uproot it with wooden rakes.  Beit Hillel says, with metal spades.  But they agree by dyestuffs with lateral roots can be uprooted with metal spades.

Hay: From when can one pick luf on motzei shvi’it?  Rabi Yehuda says, immediately.  Chachamim say, once the new crop comes in.

Vav: These are tools which an artisan may not sell in shvi’it (that he suspects will be using them), a plow and its tools, a yoke, a winnow-fork, and a weeding-fork.  But he can sell a hand-sickle, a scythe, and a cart and all its tools.  This is the general rule, all tools which have specialized usage for a transgression, are assur, but those used for both transgressions and allowed work may be sold.

Zayin: A potter may sell five oil jugs and fifteen wine jugs, for one usually takes this much from hefker.  If one bought more than this, it’s mutar.  And he may sell to a non-Jew in Israel and a Jew outside of Israel.

Chet: Beit Shamay says, one may not sell a plowing cow during shvi’it.  Beit Hillel allows it, for he can shecht it.  One may sell him produce even when it’s time to sow (we assume he’ll eat it), lend him a se’ah measure even though one knows he has a threshing floor (we assume he’s measuring a small amount to be threshed), and change money even though on knows he has workers (we assume he’s covering mutar expenses).  But if he expresses any forbidden need, it is assur.

Tet: A woman may lend her friend who is suspect by shvi’it a sifter, a sieve, a hand-mill, or an oven.  But she may not sift or grind with her.  The wife of a chaver may lend to the wife of an am ha’aretz a sifter or a sieve, and she may separate, grind, or sift with her, but once she has poured water, she can’t touch it, for you don’t help those who are engaged in transgression.  And this was all said because of the ways peacefulness.  One may encourage non-Jews on shvi’it (as in, say good luck), but not a Jew.  And you greet people, out of the ways of peacefulness.

Perek Vav

Aleph: There are three lands to which shvi’it apply, all the land that those who returned from Bavel had, from Israel until Kziv, can’t be eaten from or worked.  All that those who returned from Egypt had, from Kziv until the river until Amana, can be eaten, but can’t be worked.  And from the river and from Amana inward, can be eaten and worked.

Bet: In Syria, one may work the produce that is detached from the ground, but not that which is attached.  One may thresh, winnow, stomp grapes, and bundle, but not harvest, gather grapes, or pick olives.  Rabi Akiva gives a general rule, anything which is allowed in Israel is allowed in Syria.

Gimmel: Onions which had rain water and sprouted, if their leaves are black (fresh and therefore shvi’it), they are assur.  If they become green, these are allowed.  Rabi Chanina ben Antigonus says, if they can be pulled out by their leaves, they are assur, like this during motzei shvi’it, they are mutar.

Daled: From when may a person take vegetables on motzei shvi’it?  Once one of the same species has ripened.  If a place which ripens early has ripened, one may eat from that which ripens late.  Rabi allowed one to immediately take on motzei shvi’it.

Hay: One does not remove oil that must be burned and the fruits of shvi’it from Israel.  Rabi Shimon said, I heard expressly that one may take to Syria, but not outside of Israel.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: There is an important principle they said about shvi’it, anything that is edible, fodder, dyestuff, and doesn’t stay good when left in the ground, it has the laws of shvi’it, and its proceeds hava the laws of shvi’it, it has to be burned after it is out of season (biur) as does its proceeds.  What are these?  Leaves of wild luf, mint leaves, chicory, leeks, portulac, and milkweed.  And fodder?  (Even to) thorns and thistles.  And dyestuff?  After-growth of woad and madder.  They and their proceeds have the laws of shvi’it and biur.

Bet: And they said another principle, whatever isn’t edible, fodder, dyestuff, and does keep when left in the ground, it as the laws of shvi’it as does its proceeds, but neither it nor its proceeds has biur.  What are these? The roots of wild luf, mint roots, hart’s tongue, milkweed root, and hazelwort.  And dyestuff?  Dyer’s madder and sowbread, the laws of shvi’it as does its proceeds, but neither it nor its proceeds has biur.  Rabi Meir says, its proceeds have biur until Rosh Hashana.  They said to him, they don’t have biur, so their proceeds obviously don’t have biur.

Gimmel: Peels of pomegranates and their blossoms and shells of nuts and their kernels have the laws of shvi’it, as do their proceeds.  The dyer may dye for his needs, but not for a pay, for you can’t trade with produce of shvi’it, and not with first-born animals (bechor), truma, an animal that died of natural causes, torn flesh, sheketz, or remes.  And one may not take produce from a field and sell it in the market, but he can harvest and have his son sell on his behalf.  If he took for himself and some happened to be left over, he may sell it.

Daled: One bought a bechor for his son’s wedding or the festival, and didn’t end up needing it, he may sell it.  Hunters of wild animals, fowl, and fish, when they happen upon tame species, they may sell them.  Rabi Yehuda says, even anyone who randomly found these may sell, as long as this isn’t his trade.  And Chachamim forbid it.

Hay: Fronds of the service-tree and carobs have the laws of shvi’it, as do their proceeds, and they and their proceeds have biur.  Fronds of terebinth, pistachio, and white thorn have the laws of shvi’it, as do their proceeds, but neither they nor their proceeds has biur, but the leaves do have biur, because they fall off the stem.

Vav: The rose, cypress, balsam, and lotus have shvi’it, as do their proceeds.  Rabi Shimon says, balsam doesn’t have shvi’it, because it’s not a fruit (it’s a resin).

Zayin: A new rose that has been preserved in old oil (during shvi’it), the rose may be taken out (and the oil is not subject to biur).  If it’s an old rose in new oil (during motzei shvi’it), it is chayav in biur.  New carobs preserved in old wine and old in new are chayav by biur.  This is the general rule, anything which gives flavor, one has to do biur if the thing is not in its own type (and got flavor).  If it is the same type (e.g. shvi’it oil in old oil), any amount makes it chayav biur.  Shvi’it forbids anything of the same type, but for different types, only something which imparts flavor.

Perek Chet

Aleph: There is an important principle they said about shvi’it, anything designated as human food, one does not make clotters out of it, or needless to say, for animals.  Whatever is not designated as human food, one may make a clotter out of it, but not for animals.  And anything which is not designated for human food or fodder is thought of as human and animal food, and gets the same stringencies.  If he intended to use it as wood, it is wood, like savory, hyssop, and thyme.

Bet: Shvi’it can be given for food, drink, or salve.  To eat what is normally eaten, and to make a salve from what is normally made into a salve.  One may not make wine or vinegar into a salve, but one use oil.  So too with truma and ma’aser sheni.  Shvi’it is even less stringent, because you can use oil to light candles.

Gimmel: One may not sell shvi’it produce by measure, weight, or number, nor figs by number, nor vegetables by weight.  Beit Shamay says, also not in bundles.  Beit Hillel says, things that are usually bundled at home, one my bundle at the shuk, as in leeks and milkweed.

Daled: One who says to a laborer, here is an issar (an amount of money), collect vegetables for me today, he may hire him.  If he said, collect vegetables for me on account of this money, he may not hire him.  If one took a loaf from a baker worth a pundyon and said, when I have gathered vegetables of the field I’ll bring them for you, it’s mutar.  If he just took from him, he may not pay from the proceeds of shvi’it, for one doesn’t fulfill a debt with shvi’it funds.

Hay: One may not give (proceeds of shvi’it as payment) to a well-digger, a bath attendant, a barber, or a sailor, but you may give to the digger of a well used for drinking.  And he can give to them all as a free gift.

Vav: Figs of shvi’it, one may not lay them out on a drying floor, but one may lay them out on an empty site.  One may not stomp on grapes in a winepress, but one may stomp in a kneading-though.  And one may not process olives in an olive press or crusher, but he may crush them and put them in a small press.  Rabi Shimon says, he may even grind them in an olive press and put them in a small olive press.

Zayin: One may not cook shvi’it produce in truma oil, so that it won’t come to be pasul.  Rabi Shimon allows it.  The last thing in a string of trades gets the shvi’it requirements, and the produce itself (that was from shvi’it) is assur.

Chet: One may not buy slaves, land, or non-kosher animals with shvi’it proceeds, but if he did, he must buy food of equal value and treat it as shvi’it.  One may not bring a bird offering as a zav, zava, or child-bearer using proceeds of shvi’it, but if they took he buys food of equal value and treats it as shvi’it.  One may not oil vessels with oil of shvi’it, but if he did, he buys food of equal value and treats it as shvi’it.

Tet: Leather that has been oiled with shvi’it oil, Rabi Eliezer says burn it, Chachamim say, he buys food of equal value and treats it as shvi’it.  They said before Rabi Akiva, Rabi Eliezer used to say, leather that has been burned with shvi’it oil must be burned.  He said to them, be quiet!  I won’t tell you what Rabi Eliezer said about this.

Yud: They also said before him, Rabi Eliezer used to say, one who eats the bread of cutim is as if he ate pork.  He said to them, be quiet!  I won’t tell you what Rabi Eliezer said about this.

Yud Aleph: Bath water that has been warmed using hay or straw of shvi’it, one is allowed to wash in it.  But if he is a distinguished person, he won’t bathe in it.

Perek Tet

Aleph: Rue, goosefoot, purslane, hill coriander, water-parsley, and meadow berries are exempt from ma’aser, and may be bought from anyone during shvi’it, because nothing like them is watched.  Rabi Yehuda says, randomly grown mustard is allowed, for we don’t suspect they will have been tended.  Rabi Shimon says, all randomly grown plants are allowed, except for those of cabbage, for there is nothing wild like them.  Chachamim say, all randomly grown things are assur.

Bet: Three different lands have biur: Judea, Transjordan, and the Galil (Galilee), and each of these is three lands.  The upper Galil, the lower Galil, and the valley.  Kfar Chanania and up, where no sycamores grow is the upper Galil.  Kfar Chanina and below, where one grows sycamores is the lower Galil.  The area around Teveria is the valley.  In Yehuda, the hill, the plain, and the valley.  And the plain of Lod is like the plain of the south, and its hill is like the hill of the king.  From Beit Choron until the sea, this is one region.

Gimmel: Why did they make three lands?  So you could eat in each land until the last of that land is eaten (and then do biur).  Rabi Shimon says, they only made three lands in Judea, and the rest is like the king’s mountain.  And all of the land is one for olives and dates.

Daled: One may still eat what can be found as hefker, but not on that which is protected from animals.  Rabi Yossi allows (delaying biur) even based on the protected.  One may eat based on the vetchling (degenerate crop which will last in the field) and the tree which blooms twice a season, but not on (inferior) autumn grapes.  Rabi Yehuda allows (grapes) from whenever they ripened before the end of summer.

Hay: One preserves three ‘pickles’ in one barrel, Rabi Eliezer says, you eat based on the earliest.  Rabi Yehoshua says, even on the latest.  Raban Gamliel says, whatever is finished in the field has to have biur from that barrel, and the halacha is like him.  Rabi Shimon says, all types of vegetables are like one when it comes to biur.  One can eat portulac until vetches have finished from the Beit Netofa valley.

Vav: One who gathers fresh herbs (may eat them) until the groundwater dries.  One who gathers dry (may eat) until the second rain.  Reed leaves and grape leaves, until they fall from their stems.  One who gathers them dry, until the second rain.  Rabi Akiva says, all of them until the second rain falls.

Zayin: Likewise, one who rents his friend’s house until the rain comes has until the second rain.  One who has a vow against taking benefit from his friend until the rains, it lasts until the second rain.  Until when may the poor enter orchards?  Until the second rain.  From when may one use or burn hay or straw of shvi’it?  From the second rain.

Chet: One who had shvi’it produce, and it came time for biur, he allots the food for three meals.  The poor can eat after biur, but not the rich, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, both rich and poor may eat after biur.

Tet: One who had produce of shvi’it which he inherited or received as a gift, Rabi Eliezer says, he shall give it to whoever will eat it.  Chachamim say, a sinner doesn’t benefit, rather he will sell it to those who will eat it, and the money he will give to anyone.  One who eats dough from shvi’it before challa was taken is chayav to be killed.

Perek Yud

Aleph: Shvi’it does shmitta (cancellation of loans) for a loan whether or not there is a written agreement.  Credit from a shop isn’t cancelled, but if it was made into a loan, it is cancelled.  Rabi Yehuda says, the first (converts and is) cancelled.  A worker’s wages aren’t cancelled, but if he converted it to a loan, it is cancelled.  Rabi Yossi says, (wages for) any work that must stop on shvi’it are cancelled, and for work which doesn’t stop on shvi’it aren’t cancelled.

Bet: One who shechted a cow and distributed it (among various buyers) on Rosh Hashana, if the new month was declared, it’s cancelled, if not (they calculated for the purpose of making Rosh Hashana) it’s not cancelled.  One who rapes, seduces, or denies spousal virginity, or any act of the court, isn’t cancelled.  One who lends with collateral or gives over his loans to beit din it’s not cancelled.

Gimmel: A prozbul isn’t cancelled.  This is one of the things Hillel Hazaken instituted.  When he saw that people refrained from giving loans to each other, and were transgressing on what is written in the torah, “guard yourself, lest there be a thing with your heart which is base etc.” Hillel Hazaken instituted prozbul.

Daled: This is the body of a prozbul, I give over to you, person so-and-so the judges in such-and-such a place, that anything which is owed to me I may collect whenever I wish, and the judges sign below, or the witnesses (sign).

Hay: A predated prozbul is valid, but a postdated one is invalid.  Predated documents of debt are invalid, but postdated ones are valid.  One who borrows from five writes a prozbul for each.  If five borrow from one, he only need write one prozbul for all.

Vav: A prozbul is only written on land.  If the debtor has no land, the lender gives him a tiny piece of land and writes on that.  If he has land in the city that is already collateral, he may write a prozbul on it.  Rabi Chutzpit says, one may write for a man on his wife’s property, and for orphans on the property of his guardians.

Zayin: A beehive, Rabi Eliezer says, it is like land, you may write a prozbul on it, it doesn’t take on tuma when it’s in its place, and one who takes (honey) from it on Shabbat is chayav.  Chachamim say, it isn’t land, one cannot write a prozbul on it, it gets tuma even in its place, and one who takes from it on Shabbat is patur.

Chet: One who repays a debt in shvi’it, the lender must say, it is forgiven.  If the debtor says, even so, he may take the money, as it says, “and this is the word of shmitta.”  Similarly, a murderer who was exiled to an ir miklat and the residents of the city want to honor him, he must say, I am a murderer.  If they say, even so, he may accept, for it says, “and this is the word of the murderer.”

Tet: One who repays debt during shvi’it, the Chachamim are pleased with them.  One who borrows from a convert whose sons converted with him need not pay back the sons, but if he did, the Chachamim are pleased with him.  All things are acquired by way of pulling, and whoever keeps his word (to keep a deal where the bought item hasn’t been acquired yet) the Chachamim are pleased with him.

Mesechet Terumot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Five people don’t take truma, and if they did, their truma isn’t truma, the deaf-mute, mentally infirm, minor, one who takes truma from what isn’t his, and a non-Jew who took from that of a Jew, even with permission, is not truma.

Bet: A deaf person who can speak, but not hear will not give, but if he gave, it is truma.  When Chachamim normally talk about a cheresh it is one who can’t hear or speak.

Gimmel: A minor who doesn’t yet have two hairs, Rabi Yehuda says, his truma is truma.  Rabi Yossi says, if he hasn’t reached the age of vows (twelve) his truma isn’t truma.  Once he has reached the age of vows, his truma is truma.

Daled: One may not take truma from olives for oil, and not from grapes for wine.  If they did separate, Beit Shamay says, only that which was taken for the fruit is truma, and Beit Hillel says, the truma isn’t truma.

Hay: One may not take truma from leket, shichicha, pe’ah, hefker, ma’aser rishon that has had truma taken, ma’aser sheni or hekdesh that has been redeemed, the chayav on the patur, the patur on the chayav, the harvested for the unharvested, the unharvested on the harvested, the new (from this year) on the old (from last year), the old on the new, from Israeli produce for non-Israeli produce, and not from non-Israeli produce on Israeli produce.  If one took these trumot, his truma isn’t truma.

Vav: Five types of people should not take truma, but if they did, their truma is truma.  The mute, drunk, (currently) naked, blind, and bal keri shouldn’t take truma, but if they did, their truma is truma.

Zayin: One doesn’t take truma by measure, weight, or number, but one takes truma from what has been measured, weighed, or counted.  One does not take truma by a basket or hamper of a set size, but he may fill them half or a third of their size (to show he is only holding the truma, not measuring).  One may not take truma as half of a se’ah measure, for that is a measure itself.

Chet: One doesn’t fake truma from olives which are going to be crushed or from grapes which are going to be stomped.  If he did, his truma is truma, but he must go back and take again.  If the first becomes mixed with chulin (and makes it like truma) by itself, so one who eats from it owes chomesh (a fifth extra), but not the second.

Tet: One may take truma from oil for olives to be crushed and from wine for grapes to be stomped.  If one took from oil for olives to be eaten, olives from olives to be eaten, wine on grapes for eating, or grapes on grapes for eating, and then he decided to process and not eat, he need not take more truma.

Yud: One may not take truma from a finished product for an unfinished product, not from an unfinished product for a finished product, and not from an unfinished product on an unfinished product.  But if he took, his truma is truma.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One may not take truma from pure on impure, but if you did, it’s truma.  They really said, if a dried-fig-cake had a part which became tame, you may take from the tahor for the tame.  So too on a bundle of vegetables or a heap.  If there were two cakes, bundles, or heaps, one tame and one tahor, he may not take from this on that.  Rabi Eliezer says, you may take from the tahor on the tame.

Bet: One may not take from the tame on the tahor, if he did accidentally, it’s truma, but if he did intentionally, it’s not.  So to with a Levi who had ma’aser tevel (trumat ma’aser hadn’t been taken) if he separates and goes along receiving (based on his original separation), accidentally, what he did is done, intentionally, he did nothing.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he knew about this before hand, even if he did it accidentally, he did nothing.

Gimmel: One who immerses utensils on Shabbat, if it was accidentally, he may use them, if intentionally he may not.  One who takes ma’aser or cooks on Shabbat, if it’s an accident, he may eat, but if he did it intentionally, he may not eat.  If he plants a tree on Shabbat, accidentally he may leave it, if intentionally, he must uproot it.  But if it’s shvi’it, whether accidentally or intentionally, he must uproot.

Daled: One may not take from one species for a different species, and if he took, his truma isn’t truma.  All types of wheat are one.  All types of figs, dried figs, and fig cake count as one, and he may take from one on the other.  Wherever there is a kohen, he takes from the choice (fresh), but wherever there is no kohen, he must take from what keeps best.  Rabi Yehuda says, he always takes from the choice.

Hay: One should take a whole, small onion rather than half of a large onion (it keeps better).  Rabi Yehuda says, no, rather half the large onion (it is choice).  And such Rabi Yehuda would say, one may take from town onions on village ones, but not from village on town, for the town onions are food of the upper class.

Vav: One may take from oil-olives for pickle-olives, but not vice versa, and non-cooked wine on cooked, but not vice versa.  This is the general rule, anything which is kilayim together can’t have truma taken from one on the other, even the choice on the inferior.  But everything which isn’t kilayim, one may take from the choice on the inferior, but not vice versa.  But if he took from the inferior on the choice, it is truma, except for darnel on wheat, for it’s not food.  And squash and cucumber are one type.  Rabi Yehuda says, two.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: If one took a squash for truma and he found it was bitter (and possibly not fit for food) or a watermelon and he found it was rotten, it is truma, but he must take again.  He took a barrel of wine and it was found to be vinegar, if it is known that it was vinegar before it was taken, it’s not truma, if it’s known to be after he gave it is truma, if it’s unsure, it is truma, but he must take again.  The first doesn’t make meduma (a mixture with chulin) on its own, and one doesn’t owe chomesh if he ate from it, and so too with the second.

Bet: One of them fell into chulin, it doesn’t make meduma, or if the second fell into the place of the first, it doesn’t make meduma.  If they both fell into the same place, it makes meduma according to the smaller of the two.

Gimmel: Partners who took truma one after another, Rabi Akiva says, their trumot are both truma.  Chachamim say, only the first’s is truma.  Rabi Yossi says, if the first took according to the proper measure, the second’s isn’t truma.  If the first didn’t take the full amount, the second’s is truma.

Daled: What is this (Rabi Akiva’s opinion) talking about?  If they didn’t speak (to each other).  But if he gave permission to a family member, his slave, or his maidservant to take, their truma is truma.  If he annulled, if he annulled before they took, the truma isn’t truma.  But if it was after they took, the truma is truma.  Workers don’t have a right to take, except for wine stompers, for they would impurify the winepress immediately (if they didn’t take truma).

Hay: One who says, the truma of this heap is within it, the ma’asrot are within it, and trumat ma’aser is within it, Rabi Shimon says, he declared it.  Chachamim say, he only declares it when he specifies a place.  Rabi Elazar Chisma says, one who says, the truma of the heap, from it, is on it, declared it.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, one who says, a tenth of ma’aser is made trumat ma’aser for it (even within the heap), he declared it.

Vav: One who takes truma before bikurim, ma’aser rishon before truma, or ma’aser sheni before ma’aser rishon, even though he is transgressing a lo ta’ase, what is done is done, as it says, “you shall not delay from your abundance and liquor.”

Zayin: How do we know that you should take bikurim before truma?  This called truma and reshit, and that is called truma and reshit!  Rather, bikurim come first, for they are the first fruits of everything (truma is only from what is harvested), truma before ma’aser rishon, for it is called reshit, and ma’aser rishon before sheni for it contains reshit.

Chet: One who meant to say truma but said ma’aser, meant ma’aser but said truma, meant olah but said shlamim, meant shlamim but said olah, meant I will not enter this one’s house but said (enter) that one, or meant I won’t derive benefit from this one but said (from) that one, he didn’t say anything, until his mouth and his heart agree.

Tet: A non-Jew and a kuti, their truma is truma, their ma’aser is ma’aser, and their hekdesh is hekdesh.  Rabi Yehuda says, a non-Jew has no rule for a fourth year vineyard, but Chachamim say he does.  The truma of a non-Jew makes meduma, and makes it chayav on a chomesh, but Rabi Shimon says it’s patur.

Perek Daled

Aleph: If one took part of truma and ma’asrot, he may take from that (heap) truma for it, but not for another place.  Rabi Meir says, he may even take from it for trumot and ma’asrot for another place.

Bet: One who had his produce in a storehouse, and he gave a se’ah to a levi and a se’ah to a poor person, he may take another eight se’ah (which are now chulin) and eat them according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, he may not take except for the exact amount (left, for if the trumot and ma’asrot have been eaten he can’t take the full amount).

Gimmel: The amount that is taken for truma, a generous person, one in forty.  Beit Shamay says, one in thirty.  The average, (one) from fifty, and the stingy (one) from sixty.  If he separated and found it to be one in sixty, it is truma, but he should go back and separate until it is as he normally takes, in the measure, weight, and number.  Rabi Yehuda says, it can even be from one isn’t close by.

Daled: One who says to his messenger, go and take truma, he takes according to the opinion of the owner.  If he doesn’t know the opinion of the owner, he takes as an average person, one in fifty.  If he lowered by ten or added ten, his truma is truma.  If he intended to add even one, it is not truma.

Hay: One who wishes to give more truma, Rabi Eliezer says, one tenth is the maximum, like trumat ma’aser.  If he took more than this, he should take trumat ma’aser on another place too.  Rabi Yishma’el says, half of it is truma and half is chulin.  Rabi Tarfon and Rabi Akiva say, as long as some chulin is left (he may take all he wants).

Vav: Three times one measures his baskets, for the first ripe fruits, the last summer fruits, and the middle of the summer.  One who counts is praiseworthy, one who measures is even more praiseworthy, and one who weighs is the most praiseworthy.

Zayin: Rabi Eliezer says, truma is nullified by one hundred to one.  Rabi Yehoshua says, in a hundred plus, and for the ‘plus’ there is no (set) measure.  Rabi Yossi ben Meshulam says, ‘plus’ is a kav per hundred se’ah, (‘plus’) is one sixth of what makes meduma.

Chet: Rabi Yehoshua says, black figs annul white ones (combine to help annul a mixture of meduma), white ones annul for the black ones, by pressed fig cakes, large annul the small and small annul the large, cakes annul the white ones, and the white ones annul cakes.  Rabi Eliezer makes this assur.  Rabi Akiva says, if you know what fell, they don’t help annul, but if you don’t know, they do help annul.

Tet: When?  Fifty black figs and fifty white, if a black one fell in, the black are assur and the white are mutar, if a white one fell, the white are assur and the black are mutar.  If you don’t know what fell, one helps annul the other.  And in this Rabi Eliezer is strict, and Rabi Yehoshua is lenient.

Yud: And in this Rabi Eliezer is lenient and Rabi Yehoshua is strict, one who pressed a litra (a measurement) of dried figs on the mouth of a jug (filled with a hundred litra of figs), and he doesn’t know which it is (tevel or chulin dried figs), Rabi Eliezer says, we see them as if they are separate (as in they scattered amongst each other), and the ones one the bottom annul the ones on the top, but Rabi Yehoshua says, it isn’t considered as rising up until there are one hundred jars there.

Yud Aleph: A se’ah of truma which fell onto a stored pile and skimmed off the top layer.  Rabi Eliezer said, if the skimmed off portion is one hundred se’ah, it becomes annulled in one hundred one.  Rabi Yehoshua says, it won’t annul.  A se’ah of truma which fell on a stored pile, he must skim it odd.  If so, why did they say truma is nullified in one hundred one?  If he doesn’t know if they mixed, or where it fell.

Yud Bet: Two baskets or two piles into one of which a se’ah of truma fell and it’s not know into which one, they annul one another.  Rabi Shimon says, even if they are in two towns they combine.

Yud Gimmel: Rabi Yossi said, once a case came before Rabi Akiva where fifty bundles of vegetables into which one fell which was half truma, and I said before hum, it is annulled, not that fifty-one annulled, but rather that there were one hundred two halves there.

Perek Hay

Aleph: A se’ah or tame truma that fell into less than one hundred (se’ah) of chulin, into ma’aser rishon, into ma’aser sheni, or into hekdesh, whether tame or tahor, they are left to rot.  If the one se’ah was tahor, they sell it to the kohanim at the price of truma, minus the price of the one se’ah.  If it fell into ma’aser rishon, he designates trumat ma’aser (and distributes accordingly).  If it fell into ma’aser sheni or hekdesh, these must simply be redeemed.  If the chulin were tame, it may be eaten in small cakes, roasted, kneaded with fruit juice, or split between doughs such that no dough contains more than a kbeitza.

Bet: A se’ah of tame truma that fell into one hundred (se’ah) of tahor chulin, Rabi Eliezer says, he takes truma and (the kohen must burn it, for I say, a se’ah that fell is a se’ah which was taken up (removed for truma).  Chachamim say, it is nullified, and it can be eaten in small cakes, roasted, kneaded with fruit juice, or divided between doughs, such that no dough contains more than a kbeitza.

Gimmel: A se’ah of tahor truma that fell into one hundred (se’ah) of tame chulin, it is nullified, and can be eaten as small cakes, roasted, kneaded with fruit juice, or divided between doughs, such that no dough has more than a kbeitza.

Daled: A se’ah of tame truma that fell into one hundred se’ah of tahor truma, Beit Shamay prohibits it, and bet Hillel allow it.  Beit Hillel said to Beit Shamay, since the tahor is assur to zarim and the tame is assur to kohanim, just as the tahor is nullified (when in chulin), so too the tame should be nullified.  Beit Shamay said, no, if chulin, which is treated leniently and is allowed to zarim nullifies the tahor, should the truma, which is treated strictly and is not allowed to zarim nullify the tame?  After they (Beit Shamay) admitted (that Beit Hillel was right), Rabi Eliezer says, he must take truma and (have the kohen) burn it.  And the Chachamim say, it is lost because it is so small.

Hay: A se’ah of truma that fell into one hundred (se’ah of chulin) which he lifted out but it fell into another place, Rabi Eliezer says, it makes meduma just as definite truma.  Chachamim say, it doesn’t make meduma, only as much as proportional in the removed se’ah (the part of the whole which was truma).

Vav: A se’ah of truma which fell into less than a hundred (se’ah of chulin), and part of the mixture fell into another place, Rabi Meir says, it makes meduma as if it were certainly truma, and Chachamim say it only makes meduma proportional to what made up the original meduma, leavened (dough, which was meduma) only makes meduma on leavened proportionally, and drawn water is pasul a mikva only proportionally (only if the drawn water was added in large enough portions, if not, it  does not combine with drawn water already in the mikva.)

Zayin: A se’ah of truma which fell into one hundred (se’ah of chulin), he picked it up and it fell into another, and he picked that up again and if fell into another, behold this is mutar until there is more truma than chulin (in the first bunch).

Chet: A se’ah of truma which fell into one hundred (se’ah of chulin), and he didn’t pick it up before another se’ah fell in, is assur.  Rabi Shimon allows it.

Tet: A se’ah of truma that fell into a hundred (se’ah of chulin), and he ground and they became less, just as the chulin became less, so too the truma became less, and it is mutar.  A se’ah or truma which fell into less than one hundred (se’ah or chulin), and he ground it and it became more, just as the chulin increased the truma increased, so it is assur.  If he knows the chulin is of superior quality than the truma, it’s mutar.  A se’ah of truma that fell into less than a hundred (se’ah of chulin), and afterwards more chulin fell in, if it was by accident, it’s mutar, but if intentionally, it’s assur.

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who accidentally eats truma pays the principal value and adds chomesh (one fifth of the whole amount paid, or one quarter of the original value).  Whether he eats it, drinks it, anoints with it, whether tahor or tame truma, he pays a fifth (and if he accidentally eats that he also pays) a fifth of a fifth.  He doesn’t pay with truma, rather with tithed chulin, and they become truma.  And the restitution is truma also.  Even if the kohen wants to forgo it, he cannot forgo.

Bet: The daughter of a yisra’el who ate truma and then married a kohen, if she ate truma the kohen hadn’t acquired, she pays the value and keeps the chomesh.  If he had acquired it, she pays the value to the owners and keeps the chomesh, as is said, one who accidentally eats truma pays the owners the principal and chomesh for whoever wants.

Gimmel: One who feeds his workers and guests truma pays the principal and they pay chomesh according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, they pay the principal and the chomesh, and he pays them the value of their meal.

Daled: One who steals truma but didn’t eat it pays double the principal value (kefel).  If he ate it, he pays double the principal and chomesh, one principal and chomesh from chulin and one principal from truma.  One who stole truma which a kohen made hekdesh pays two chumshim and one principal, for there is no kefel by hekdesh.

Hay: One may not pay from leket, shichicha, pe’ah, hefker, ma’aser rishon that has had truma taken, or ma’aser sheni or hekdesh that have been redeemed, for hekdesh cannot redeem hekdesh, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim allow these.

Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, one may pay (back for truma) with one kind for another, as long as he pays from the superior on the inferior.  Rabi Akiva says, you may only pay for one kind with the same one, therefore, if he ate squash on erev shvi’it, he waits for squash of motzei shvi’it and pays from them.  From the same source that Rabi Eliezer is lenient Rabi Akiva is stringent, as it says, “and you shall give to the kohen that which is holy.”  Anything which is fit to become holy, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Rabi Akiva says from there, the holy thing which he ate.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who intentionally ate truma pays the principal but not the chomesh.  The repayment is in chulin.  If the kohen wants to forgo, he may.

Bet: The daughter of a kohen who married a yisra’el and then ate truma, she pays the principal but not the chomesh, and her death is by burning (if she committed adultery).  If she married someone who is invalid (i.e. challa or mamzer) she pays principal and chomesh, and she will die by strangulation, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, both of these pay the principal but not chomesh, and die by burning.

Gimmel: One who serves is little children and his slaves whether adults or minors, eats truma from outside of Israel, or eats less than a kzayit of truma, pays the principal but not the chomesh and the restitution is in chulin.  If the kohen wants to forgo, he may forgo.

Daled: This is the general rule, anyone who pays principal and chomesh, the restitution is in truma.  If the kohen wants to forgo, he may not forgo.  And all who pay principal but not chomesh, the restitution is in chulin, and if the kohen wants to forgo, he may forgo.

Hay: There were two baskets, one of truma and one of chulin, and a se’ah of truma fell into one of them, and it isn’t known into which of them, I can say, it fell into the truma.  If it’s not known which is truma and which is chulin, and he ate one of them, he’s patur.  The second, he treats it as truma and it’s chayav challa, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi allows it.  If another person ate the second, he’s patur.  If one ate both of them, he pays according to the smaller of the baskets.

Vav: If one of them (the baskets) fell into chulin, it doesn’t make meduma.  If the second does too, he treats it as truma and it’s chayav challa, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi allows it.  If the second falls into a different place, it doesn’t make meduma.  If they both fell into one place, it makes meduma according to the smaller of them.

Zayin: If he sowed one of them, he’s patur, if he did the second also, he treats it as truma (he must plow it under or the produce will grow as truma) and it is chayav in challa, according to Rabi Meir.  And Rabi Yossi allows it.  If another person sowed the other, he’s patur.  If one person sowed them both, if it’s a type where the seed perishes (in the ground), it’s mutar, but a species where they don’t perish, it’s assur.

Perek Chet

Aleph: A woman was eating truma, and people came and told her, your husband died, or, your husband divorced you, and so too a slave who was eating truma and they came and told him, your master died, he sold you to a yisra’el, he gave you as a gift, or, he made you a freedman, and so too with a kohen who was eating truma and he found out he’s the son of a divorcee or widow, Rabi Eliezer says they owe the principal and chomesh, and Rabi Yehoshua allows it.  If a kohen was standing and making an offering on the altar, and he finds out that he is the son of a divorcee or a widow, Rabi Eliezer says, all the offerings he made on the altar are invalid, and Rabi Yehoshua says they are valid.  If he (the kohen) found out that he had a blemish, they are invalid.

Bet: And everyone who had truma in their mouth, Rabi Eliezer says, they swallow, and Rabi Yehoshua says, they must spit it out.  If they said to him, you were tame and the truma was tame, or he found that it is tevel, or ma’aser rishon that hasn’t had truma taken, or ma’aser sheni or hekdesh that wasn’t redeemed, or that he tasted the taste of a bug in his mouth, he must spit it out.

Gimmel: One was eating a bunch of grapes (from the garden, before taking ma’aser), and he moved from the garden to the courtyard (meaning it is no longer random and he must take ma’aser), Rabi Eliezer says, he may finish it, and Rabi Yehoshua says, he may not finish it.

Daled: Wine for truma that was found uncovered, he must spill it (even though it truma, it is not wasting for we fear it may have been tampered with).  And needless to say, this is the same if it is chulin.  Three drinks aren’t allowed once they are uncovered, water, wine, and milk.  All other drinks are allowed.  How much must they remain (uncovered) before they become assur (for fear of snake venom)?  Enough time for a reptile to come from close by and drink.

Hay: The amount of water that may be uncovered, enough for the venom to be lost in it (sufficiently diluted).  Rabi Yossi says in vessels any amount, but on the ground, up to forty se’ah.

Vav: Gnawed figs, grapes, squash, gourds, watermelons, or cucumbers, even if there is a kikar (a large measurement) of fruit on the tree all nibbled, whether the fruit is large or small, whether plucked or unplucked, if the fruit is moist, it’s assur (for fear of venom).  An animal bitten by a snake is assur (even if it doesn’t die that way) because it is dangerous to one’s life.

Zayin: A wine strainer becomes assur if uncovered, Rabi Nechemia allows wine strained through it.

Chet: A barrel of truma that upon it arose a doubt of uncleanliness (through venom), Rabi Eliezer says, if it was placed in an exposed place, he should put it in a hidden place, and if it was uncovered, he should cover it (to protect the truma from becoming unclean).  Rabi Yehoshua says, if it was in a hidden place, he should put it in an exposed place, and if it was covered, he should uncover it (so it will definitely be unclean, and he may dispose of it).  Raban Gamliel says, he shouldn’t change anything about it.

Tet: A barrel that broke in the upper part of a winepress (where grapes are pressed), and the bottom part (where the wine flows) contains tame wine, Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Yehoshua admit, if he can save a revi’it of the tahor, he should save it, but if not, Rabi Eliezer says, it should simply flow down and become tame, and not become tame by way of any action of his.

Yud: So too with a barrel of oil which spilled , Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Yehoshua admit, if he can save a revi’it of the tahor, he should save it, and if not, Rabi Eliezer says, let if go and be absorbed (by the ground) and not become tame b way of any action of his.

Yud Aleph: On both of these Rabi Yehoshua says, this isn’t truma that I must be careful not to let become tame, rather which I cannot eat (and thus may become tame).  And what may I not let become tame?  He was traveling from place to place, and had loaves of truma in his hand, and a non-Jew said to him, give me one to make tame, and if not, I will make them all tame, Rabi Eliezer says, let him make them all tame, he shouldn’t give one over to be tame.  Rabi Yehoshua says, let him place one on a rock before him.

Yud Bet: So too for women to whom non-Jews said, give us one of you and we will defile her, and if not we will defile all of you, let them all be defiled and let them not give over the soul of a Jew.

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who sows truma (seed), if by accident, he must plow it under, if intentionally, he must let it grow (and it is truma).  If it reached a third of its growth, whether he planted it unintentionally or intentionally,  he must let it grow. And flax, even intentionally he must plow it under.

Bet: And (planted truma) is chayav in leket, shichicha, and pe’ah, and the poor yisra’elim and kohanim ay glean, and the poor yisra’elim sell theirs to kohanim for the price of truma and the money is for them.  Rabi Tarfon says, only the poor kohanim may take, lest the yisra’elim forget and eat it.  Rabi Akiva said to him, if so, only tahor kohanim may take.

Gimmel: And it (the sown truma) is chayav in ma’asrot and ma’aser ani, and poor yisra’elim and kohanim take, and the poor yisra’elim sell to kohanim for the price of truma, and the money is for them.  One who flails the truma plants by hand is praiseworthy (because the animals may not eat it, so he must muzzle them, which is assur).  How does he thresh them (with animals)?  He hangs baskets around the necks of the animals, and puts into them from the same type of food, so he doesn’t muzzle the animal and he doesn’t feed it truma.

Daled: The growth of truma is truma, but the growth of that growth is chulin.  But tevel, ma’aser rishon, weeds from shvi’it, truma from outside Israel, meduma, and bikurim, their growth is chulin.  The growth of hekdesh and ma’aser sheni is chulin, and he redeems them when he plants it.

Hay: If there are one hundred beds of truma and one of chulin, all of them are allowed of a species that the seed disintegrates, but where the seed does not disintegrate, even if it is one hundred chulin and one truma, they are all assur.

Vav: Tevel, it’s growth is allowed in a species where the seed disintegrates, but in a species where the seed doesn’t disintegrate, its growth is assur.  What is a species where the seed does not disintegrate?  For example, luf, garlic, and onions.  Rabi Yehuda says, garlic is like barley (the seed disintegrates).

Zayin: One who weeds with a non-Jew in alliums, even though the product is tevel (despite the fact that the non-Jew owns it), he may eat randomly.  Truma seedlings which became tame, if they were replanted, they become tahor and do not make tame.  They are assur to be eaten until the edible part had been cut out (and then will subsequently regrow).  Rabi Yehuda says, until he cuts out and repeats (a second time).

Perek Yud

Aleph: One put an onion into lentils, if it’s whole, it is mutar (even though one is truma).  If he cut it up, if it imparts flavor (it’s assur).  In any other cooked dish, whether cut or whole, it’s (assur) if it imparts flavor.  Rabi Yehuda allows (a whole union) in pickled fish, for it is simply used to remove odor (and not for flavor).

Bet: An apple (truma) which one grated into a dough (chulin) and he leavened it, this is assur.  Barley (truma) which fell into a pit of water, even though it tainted the water, it’s mutar.

Gimmel: One who takes hot bread (chulin) from the oven and puts it on the mouth of a jar of truma wine, Rabi Meir prohibits, and Rabi Yehuda permits.  Rabi Yossi allows by wheat bread, but prohibits by barley, for barley absorbs more.

Daled: An oven which one heated with truma cumin and he baked in it, the bread is allows, for there is not flavor of cumin, only the scent.

Hay: Fenugreek which fell into a vat of wine (chulin) and it was truma or ma’aser sheni, if there is in the seed enough to impart flavor, but not in the stalk (it’s assur).  If it was shvi’it, vineyard kilayim, or hekdesh, if there is in the seed and the stalk enough to impart flavor (it’s assur).

Vav: One who had bundles of fenugreek of vineyard kilayim, he must burn them.  If the fenugreek bundles were of tevel, he pounds them and calculates how much seed there is in them and separate the seed, but he needn’t separate the stalk.  If he did separate, he may not say, I will beat and take the stalks and give the seeds, he must give the stalks with the seeds.

Zayin: Chulin olives which one pickled with truma olives, whether crushed chulin with crushed truma or whole truma, or in truma water, it’s assur.  But if it is whole chulin with crushed truma, it’s mutar.

Chet: A tame fish which one pickled with a tahor fish, any vessel which holds two se’ah, if it has a measure of ten zuz in Yehuda, which is five sela in the Galil, of tame fish, the brine is assur.  Rabi Yehuda says, a revi’it in two se’ah (1/192 of the total makes unclean), and Rabi Yossi says, one sixteenth of what is in it.

Tet: Tame locusts which were pickled with tahor locusts, they didn’t forbid the brine.  Rabi Tzadok testified that the brine of tame locusts is tahor.

Yud: All things pickled together are mutar, except leeks, chulin leeks with truma leeks or chulin vegetables with truma leeks are assur.  But chulin leeks with truma vegetables are mutar.

Yud Aleph: Rabi Yossi says, anything cooked with spinach is assur, for it imparts flavor.  Rabi Shimon says, (chulin) cabbage from irrigated soil with (truma) cabbage from rain-watered soil is assur, since it absorbs.  Rabi Yehuda says, anything cooked together is allows, except for things with meat.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri says, live makes assur, but doesn’t become assur, because it exudes but does not absorb.

Yud Bet: An egg cooked with forbidden spices is assur, even its yolk is assur, because it absorbs.  Stewing or pickling water of truma is forbidden to zarim.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: One may not put fig cake or dried figs (both truma) into fish brine, because he is spoiling it, but one may put (truma)wine into the brine (to improve the wine).  One may not perfume (truma) oil, but one may make wine into honeyed wine (with chulin honey).  One may not boil truma wine because it reduces it.  Rabi Yehuda allows it, because it improves it.

Bet: Date honey, apple wine, winter-grape vinegar, and all other fruit juices, Rabi Eliezer makes you chayav (if you eat it) the principal and chomesh, and Rabi Yehoshua says you’re patur (from chomesh).  Rabi Yehuda allows them to become tame, because they are liquids (meaning they are treated as food and therefore truma).  Rabi Yehoshua said, Chachamim didn’t count the seven liquids which become tame the same as they counted spices (which weren’t enumerated), rather they said, these seven liquids become tame, and all other liquids are tahor.

Gimmel: One may not make (truma) dates into honey, apples into wine, or winter-grapes into vinegar.  And all other fruits, one does not change from how it was made if truma or ma’aser rishon, except for olives and grapes.  One does not get forty lashes because of orla (liquids) except for products of olives and grapes.  One may not brink liquid bikurim except for olive and grape products.  Liquids don’t become tame except for olive and grape products (and the seven liquids).  And one does not bring up on the mikdash except for olive and grape products.

Daled: The twigs of figs, dried figs, klisim (a carob-like fruit), and carobs of truma are assur to zarim.

Hay: Seeds of truma, when one (kohen) keeps them, they are assur, but if he throws them away, they are mutar (to zarim).  So too, the bones of holy things if he keeps them, they are assur, but if he throws them away, they’re mutar.  Coarse bran is permitted.  Fine bran of new (fruit) is forbidden, but of old is permitted (to zarim).  And he deals with truma in the same way as chulin (i.e. he is not destroying truma).  One who sifts one or two kav from a se’ah (six kav) may not throw out the rest, rather he should put it in a hidden place.

Vav: A storeroom from which one cleared out truma wheat (to make room for chulin), we don’t make him sit and take out grain by grain, rather he sweeps as usual and may fill it with chulin.

Zayin: So too with a barrel of oil that spilled, we don’t make him sit and scoop it up, rather, he treats it as usual, as he treat chulin.

Chet: One who transfers from jar to jar and three drops drip (from the residue in the first jar), he may put chulin into it (the first jar).  If he inclined and drank it, it’s truma.  Hand how much trumat ma’aser of dmai must there be to force him to go to the kohen?  One eight of an eighth.

Tet: Vetchlings of truma, one may feed them to domesticated animals, wild animals, and fowl.  A yisra’el who rented a cow from a kohen, may feed it truma vetchlings, and a kohen who rented a cow from a yisra’el, even though he is responsible for its food, he may not feed it the vetchlings of truma.  A yisra’el who got an appraised cow from a kohen (making it essentially his, but the kohen still gets from the profits) may not feed it truma vetchlings, and a kohen who got an appraised cow from a yisra’el may feed it truma vetchlings.

Yud: One may burn oil which must be burned (tame truma) in a shul, a beit midrash, dark alleys, or for the sick, with the permission of a kohen.  The daughter of a yisra’el who married a kohen and she goes to her father’s house often, her father may light with her permission.  One may light at a wedding, but not in a house of mourning, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, in a house of mourning, but not at a wedding.  Rabi Meir forbids in both places.  Rabi Shimon allows in both places.

Mesechet Maasrot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: There is a general statement by ma’asrot, anything one eats, guards, and grows from the ground is chayav by ma’asrot.  And they said another general statement, anything which can be eaten at the beginning of growth and at the end of growth, even though he lets it grow to increase the food, both the beginning and end are chayav ma’asrot, and anything which starts off as inedible and becomes edible is only chayav once it becomes edible.

Bet: From when are fruits chayav ma’aser?  Figs from when they are one day after picking (bochal), grapes and wild grapes from when seeds show through the skin, sumac and mulberries from when they redden, and all red fruits from when they redden.  Pomegranates from when they soften, dates from when they swell, peaches from when they show veins, and nuts when the fruit separates from the shell, as something placed in a storeroom.  Rabi Yehuda says, nuts and almonds from when they make shells.

Gimmel: Carobs from when they become spotted and all black fruits from when they are spotted.  Pears, pippins, quince, and crab-apples, when they become smooth, and all white fruit from when they become smooth.  Fenugreek from when is can grow (new plants if planted).  Grain and olive, when they have reached a third of growth.

Daled: By herbage, squash, gourds, watermelons, cucumbers, apples, and etrogim, both big and small are chayav.  Rabi Shimon exempts small etrogim.  When bitter almonds are chayav, the sweet are patur and vice versa.

Hay: What is the ‘threshing floor’ (act of completion after which food is assur if tevel) for ma’asrot?  Squash and gourd from when one removes the tail, and if one doesn’t remove the tail, from when they are stacked.  Watermelon, from when they are made smooth (removing the tail), and if he doesn’t smooth them, from when he brings them out to dry.  Vegetables which one usually bundles, from when he bundles them, if he doesn’t bundle them, from when he fills a vessel, if he’s not filling a vessel, once he’s gathered all he needs.  (If the food is going into) a large basket, it’s until he covers it, but if he’s not covering it, until he fills the vessel, if he’s not filling the vessel, until he takes what he needs.  What is this talking about?  When he’s taking it to the shuk, but if he’s taking it home, he may eat randomly until he gets home.

Vav: Pomegranate seeds, raisins, and carobs, from when he stacks them into a pile.  Onions, from when he peels them, if he’s not peeling them, from when he stacks them into a pile.  Grain, from when he neatens the bundles, if he doesn’t neaten them, until he stacks them into a pile.  Legumes, from when he sifts, if he’s not going to sift them, until he neatens the pile.  Even if he has neatened the pile, he may take from the fragmented (not completely threshed), from the sides of the pile (which haven’t been smoothed), or from the inside of husks, and eat (randomly).

Zayin: Wine, from when he skimmed it.  Even if he skimmed, he may take from the upper winepress or the pipe (between the levels of the winepress) and drink.  Oil, from when it descended into the trough.  Even if it descended, he may take from the press-basket, from between the press stones, and from between the press boards and put it on a small cake or a plate, but he may not put it into a pot or saucepan when they are boiling.  Rabi Yehuda says, you can put it into any of them, except for something that has vinegar or brine.

Chet: A fig cake, from when he smoothes it.  One may smooth down (using the juice of) figs or grapes of tevel, but Rabi Yehuda forbids it.  A cake smoothed using grape juice is not susceptible to tuma, Rabi Yehuda says it is.  Dried figs, from when he stamps them down, in a stone bin from when they are pressed together.  If he threshed in a barrel or pressing in a stone bin and the barrel or bin broke, he may not eat from them randomly.  Rabi Yossi allows it.

Perek Bet

Aleph: If one (an am ha’aretz) was passing through the street and said, take some figs for yourselves, they may take and are exempt.  Therefore, if they take them into their house, they take ma’asrot as if certainly tevel.  If he said, take some home, one may not eat it randomly.  Therefore if you take it into your house, you take ma’asrot as dmai.

Bet: If they were sitting in a gateway or a shop, and he said, take some figs, one may eat and they are exempt, and the owner of the gateway or shop is chayav.  Rabi Yehuda says they are exempt, unless he turns his head (and isn’t seen eating) or moves (and is no longer is the place of exemption).

Gimmel: One who takes fruit from the Galil to Yehuda or up to Yerushalayim, he may eat from them until he reaches his destination, and so too on the way back.  Rabi Meir says until he reaches the place he will spend Shabbat.  And peddlers who go from town to town may eat until they come to the place they will sleep.  Rabbi Yehuda says, the first house (in the town) is considered his house.

Daled: Fruits from which one took truma before their work was finished, Rabi Eliezer forbids eating from them randomly, and Chachamim allow, except for large baskets of figs.  Large baskets of figs from which he took truma, Rabi Eliezer allows and Chachamim forbid.

Hay: One who says to his friend, take this issar (a coin) in exchange for five figs, he may not eat until he takes ma’asrot according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he eats them one by one, he is patur, but if he eats them together, he is chayav.  Rabi Yehuda says, once there was a rose garden in Yerushalayim and people would sell figs there three or four for an issar, and people never took trumot and ma’asrot.

Vav: One who says to his friend, here is an issar for ten figs I will chose, he may choose and eat (singly or he owes ma’aser).  (If he says) for a cluster of grapes which I will choose, he may pick (singly from the cluster) and eat.  For a pomegranate I will choose, he may pick the seeds and eat.  For a watermelon I will choose, he may cut slices and eat.  But, if he said for these ten figs, for these two clusters, for these two pomegranates, or for these two watermelons, he may eat as usual and is exempt since he bought them while attached to the ground.

Zayin: One who hires a worker to help him harvest figs, if the worker said to him, on condition that I may eat figs, he may eat and is exempt.  If he said, on condition that I and my son may eat, or my son will eat (the worth of) my wage, he may eat and be exempt, but his son eats and is obligated.  If he says, so that I may eat during the operation and after the operation, during the operation, he may eat and is patur, after the operation, he may eat and is chayav, for he isn’t eating based on the torah.  This is the general rule, one who eats while entitled by the torah is patur, and when his eating isn’t entitled by the torah, he’s chayav.

Chet: One was working with poor quality figs, he may not eat superior quality figs or poor quality figs, rather he must prevent himself until he gets to the place of the nice figs, and there he may eat.  One who trades with his friend, this one to eat and this one to eat (figs), this one to dry and this one to dry, or this one to eat and this one to dry, is chayav.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he trades for food, chayav, and for drying, patur.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One was passing figs through his courtyard to lay them out, his children and members of his household may eat and are patur.  The laborers, when that don’t have (as part of their salary) a right to food, they me eat and be patur, but when they do have a right to food, they may not eat.

Bet: One who takes his workers out into the field, when they don’t have a right to food, they may eat and are patur.  When they do have a right to food, the may eat figs one by one, but not from a basket, not from a hamper, and not from a shed.

Gimmel: One who hires a worker to work with olives, if he eats one by one, he’s patur.  If he ate them together, he’s chayav.  If to weed out onions, he said to him, such that I may eat the green,” he may pluck leaf by leaf and eat.  If he eats them together, he’s chayav.

Daled: One found cut dried figs on the road, even a field of cut dried figs, or a fig tree overhanging a path (he found figs beneath it), they’re allowed from a theft perspective, and are patur by ma’asrot, by olives and carobs you’re chayav.  One found a dried fig, and most people have already pressed their fig, it’s chayav, if not, it’s patur.  He found slices of fig cake, it’s chayav, for it’s known that it is from a finished product.  Carobs, until they have been taken up to the rooftop, he may take down for animals and is patur, since he is returning something which was mutar.

Hay: What is a courtyard which makes you have to take ma’asrot?  Rabi Yishma’el says, a courtyard like in Tzur (Tyre), where the goods are guarded.  Rabi Akiva says, one where one person opens it  and another locks it (neither consults the other when coming or going) is patur.  Rabi Nechemia says, any place where a person is not embarrassed to eat makes it chayav.  Rabi Yossi says, any place where one enters and nobody asks, what do you want here, is patur.  Rabi Yehuda says, two courtyards one inside the other, the inner is chayav and the outer is patur.

Vav: Roofs are patur, even if they are part of a chayav courtyard.  A doorway, patio, or balcony, these are like a courtyard, if they would make chayav, they’re chayav, if they would be patur, they’re patur.

Zayin: A cone-shaped hut, a guard shack, and a summer hut are patur.  A hut in Gnisar (where people guarded their plentiful fruit) even though there is a hand-mill and poultry in it (signs of permanence) it’s patur.  A potter’s hut, the inner (a dwelling) is chayav and the outer (a workshop) is patur.  Rabi Yossi says, anything which isn’t lived in summer and winter s patur.  A sukka on Sukkot, Rabi Yehuda says is chayav and Chachamim say is patur.

Chet: A fig tree which is in a courtyard, one may eat one by one and be patur, but if together, he’s chayav.  Rabi Shimon says, he may have one in his right hand, one in his left hand, and one in his mouth.  If he climbed on top of the tree, ha may fill his lap and eat.

Tet: A grape vine which is planted in a courtyard, one may take the whole cluster.  And so too with a pomegranate and watermelon, according to Rabi Tarfon.  Rabi Akiva says, he may pluck from a cluster of grapes, pick seeds from a pomegranate, and cut slices from a watermelon.  Coriander that is sown in a courtyard one may pluck leaf by leaf and eat, but if together, it’s chayav.  Savory, hyssop, and thyme which are in a courtyard, if they are guarded, they are chayav.

Yud: A fig tree that is in a courtyard and overhangs a garden, or is in a garden and overhangs a courtyard, if he eats one by one he’s patur, and if together, he’s chayav.  If it’s in Israel and overhangs outside of Israel, or is outside of Israel and overhangs Israel, it all goes according to the root.  In a house in a walled city (where property doesn’t revert in yovel), it all goes according to the root.  In an ir miklat (defining the city line), it all goes according to the branches.  In Yerushalayim, it all goes according to the branches.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who pickles, stews, or salts in a field is chayav ma’aser.  One who stores in the ground is patur.  One who dips (food) in the field is patur (it isn’t considered a finishing process).  One who bruises olives to get out sap is patur.  One who squeezes olives onto his skin is part.  If he squeezed them and put into his hand, he’s chayav.  One who skims (wine) into a cooked dish is patur, but into a cooking pot is chayav, because it is seen as a small vat.

Bet: Children who hid figs for Shabbat and forgot to take ma’asrot, they may not be eaten post Shabbat until ma’asrot are taken.  A large basket for Shabbat, Beit Shamay holds it’s patur (if one wants to snack from it before Shabbat), and Beit Hillel hold it’s chayav.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one who collects a large basket for his friend may not eat until he takes ma’asrot.

Gimmel: One who takes olives from a vat may dip into salt one by one and eat, but if he salted and then took, he’s chayav.  Rabi Eliezer says, if (a tame person) took from a tahor vat, he’s chayav, but from a tame vat, he’s patur, because he’s able to put them back (even after salting).

Daled: One who drinks from a winepress (while sitting in the upper part), whether he mixed warm or cold (water), he’s patur according to Rabi Meir. Rabi Elazar ben Tzadok says you’re chayav.  Chachamim say, if it’s hot it’s chayav (since he wouldn’t be able to pour it back), if cold, it’s patur.

Hay: One who husks barley may husk one by one and eat.  If he husked and put in his hand, he’s chayav.  One who rubs dried wheat (to get the chaff off) may pass from hand to hand and eat.  But if he sifted (with his hands, as before) and put into his lap, he’s chayav.  By coriander which one sowed to get the seed, the cilantro is patur.  If he sowed it for cilantro, both coriander and cilantro must be me’usar.  Rabi Eliezer says, by dill, the seed, greens, and thin stalks must be me’usar.  Chachamim say, he doesn’t take ma’aser from the seed or greens except for in the case of pepperwort and eruca.

Vav: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, the shoots of fenugreek, mustard, and white beans are chayav in ma’asrot.  Rabi Eliezer says, the caper is me’usar in the stalks, berries, and flowers.  Rabi Akiva says, One only takes ma’aser from the berries, for that is the fruit.

Perek Hay

Aleph: One who uproots seedlings from his own (property) and plants them among his own, he is patur.  If he bought something attached to the ground, it’s patur.  If he bought something to give to his friend, it’s patur.  Rabi Elazar ben Azariah says, if something like them is sold in the shuk, it is chayav (it is seemingly a marketable product).

Bet: One who uproots turnip or radishes from his (property) and plants it in his own for the seed, it’s chayav, because that is considered its ‘threshing floor.’  Onions, once they take root in the upper story (where they are stored) they become tahor if they were tame.  Or if debris fell on them and they got uncovered, they are as if planted in the field.

Gimmel: Once the season of ma’aser comes, one may not sell produce to someone who isn’t trusted by ma’asrot, and not shvi’it (produce) to one who is suspected about shvi’it.  But if some ripened, he may take the ripe and sell the rest freely.

Daled: One may not sell his hay, olive-peat, or grape residue to one who isn’t trusted by ma’asrot so that he can juice them.  If he juiced them, he’s chayav by ma’asrot but patur by trumot, for one who sets aside truma has in mind the broken bits, the sides, and what is inside the hay (to have trumot taken from it).

Hay: One who buys a vegetable field in Syria, if it’s not yet the season of ma’asrot, he’ll be chayav.  But if the season of ma’asrot has arrived, it’s patur, and he may continue gathering as usual.  Rabi Yehuda says, he may even hire laborers to harvest.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, what is this talking about?  When he acquired land, for if the season of ma’asrot didn’t come he’s patur.  Rabi says, (he must take ma’asrot) even according to calculation (of what grew when the field was his).

Vav: One who made wine from grape residue and put in a certain measure of water, and found the same measure (of wine as he had put in water) he’s patur.  Rabi Yehuda says you’re chayav.  If he found more than the water he put in, if he takes for it from somewhere else, he takes for the calculated increase.

Zayin: Ant hills which stayed an entire night next to a pile (of grain) which was chayav, they are chayav, for it is known that they dragged the whole night from completed produce.

Chet: Ba’al Bechi garlic, Richpa onions, Sicilian barley, and Egyptian lentils, Rabi Meir says, even the root of the Egyptian bean, Rabi Yossi says, even wild lentils, are patur from ma’asrot (since they are definitely from outside Israel), and may bought from anyone on shvi’it.  The upper seeds of luf, the seeds of leeks, the seeds of onions, the seeds of turnip and radish, and other garden seeds which aren’t eaten are patur from ma’asrot and can be bought from anyone on shvi’it, for even if their plant was truma, they may be eaten.

Mesechet Maaser Sheni

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Ma’aser sheni, one doesn’t sell it, give it as collateral, trade it, use it as a counterweight (in measuring weight), and one does not say to his friend in Yerushalayim, “here is wine for you, give me oil,” and so too with all other produce.  But you may give one another as a free gift.

Bet: Ma’aser of animals, one may not sell it unblemished and alive or blemished whether slaughtered or alive, and one doesn’t use it to betroth a woman.  The firstborn (by animals) may be sold unblemished and alive or blemished whether slaughtered or alive, and one may betroth a woman with it.  One may not redeem ma’aser sheni with an asimon (an unstamped coin), with an unacceptable coin, or with money that isn’t at that person’s disposal.

Gimmel: One who buys (in Yerushalayim with money from redeemed ma’aser sheni) an animal for a shlamim offering, or a wild animal for the lust for meat, the hide becomes chulin, even though the hide exceeds the flesh (in value).  Covered jugs of wine, where they normally sell sealed, the jar is chulin.  Walnuts and almonds, their shells are chulin.  Wine made from grape residue, before it turns, it may not be bought with ma’aser money, but once it has turned, it may be bought with ma’aser money.

Daled: One who buys (in Yerushalayim with money from redeemed ma’aser sheni) a wild animal for a shlamim offering, or a domesticated animal for the lust for meat, the hide doesn’t become chulin.  Jugs of wine, whether covered or not, where they normally sell unsealed, the jar isn’t chulin.  Baskets of olives or grapes with the vessel, the value of the vessel doesn’t become chulin (so he must use that value to buy more food).

Hay: One who buys water, salt, produce attached to the ground, or produce that can’t make it to Yerushalayim, he hasn’t bought ma’aser.  One who accidentally buys produce (with ma’aser sheni money, and the produce won’t make it to Yerushalayim), (the seller) must return the money.  If it was intentional, they must take the produce to Yerushalayim and eat it.  If there is not Beit Hamikdash, he must let it rot.

Vav: One who accidentally buys an animal (with ma’aser sheni money), (the seller) must return the money.  If it was intentional, he must bring it to Yerushalayim and eat it.  If there is no Beit Hamikdash, he must (abandon it and when it dies) bury it with its hide.

Zayin: One may not buy slaves, maidservants, land, and impure animals with ma’aser sheni money, and if one did, he must eat (buy produce) according to their value.  One does not bring the offerings of a zav, zava, or woman who just gave birth, chatat, or asham with money of ma’aser sheni, and if he did, he must eat according to their value.  This is the general rule, anything which isn’t food, drink, or ointment (which he bought) from ma’aser sheni money, he eats according to its value.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Ma’aser sheni (money) may be used to buy for food, for drink, and for anointing, for eating that which is usually eating, and for anointing something which is usually anointed.  One may not anoint with wine or vinegar, but he may with oil.  One may not spice ma’aser sheni oil.  One may not buy spiced oil with ma’aser sheni money, but one may spice (ma’aser sheni) wine.  If honey or spice fell into it (wine) and improved its value, the increased value is calculated according to the proportion (of worth of the components).  Fish which were cooked with leeks of ma’aser sheni and increased in value, the increased value is calculated according to the proportion.  Ma’aser sheni dough which was baked (with chulin wood) and increased in value, the increase in value is all in ma’aser sheni.  This is the general rule, anywhere the increase is recognizable in the finished product is by proportion, but anywhere the increase isn’t recognizable in the final product, it is all for ma’aser sheni.

Bet: Rabi Shimon says, one may not anoint with ma’aser sheni oil in Yerushalayim, and Chachamim allow.  They said to Rabi Shimon, if we are lenient by truma (we allow a kohen to anoint himself in it), which is stringent, shouldn’t we be lenient by ma’aser sheni which is lenient?  He said to them, it’s not so, if we’re lenient by truma, which is strict, where we were lenient by certain aspects of vetches and fenugreek, should we be lenient in the lenient ma’aser sheni, where they were not lenient with vetches and fenugreek?

Gimmel: Fenugreek of ma’aser sheni must be eaten while still sprouting, but of truma, Beit Shamay says one must do anything with it in a tahor state, except for wash his head (it is no longer food then) and Beit Hillel says one must do anything with it in a tame state, except dip it in water (making it tame from him).

Daled: Ma’aser sheni vetches must be eaten while still sprouting, and may enter and leave Yerushalayim.  If they become tame, Rabi Tarfon says they must be divided amongst doughs (so that none contains more than a kzayit), and Chachamim say, you redeem it.  And of truma, Beit Shamay says, they must be soaked and rubbed when tahor, and fed (to animals) when tame.  Beit Hillel says, one soaks while tahor, and rubs and feeds while tame.  Shamay says, they must be eaten dry.  Rabi Akiva says, all of the actions are done in tuma.

Hay: Chulin money and ma’aser sheni money which were scattered (together), whatever he picks up is for ma’aser sheni, until he picks up the right amount, and the rest is chulin.  If he made a pile and took by the handful, he takes according to proportion.  This is the general rule, what is picked up (one by one) is for ma’aser sheni, what is (picked up) mixed is according to proportion.

Vav: A sela of ma’aser sheni and one of chulin which got mixed up, he must take coins worth a sela and say, the sela of ma’aser sheni, wherever it is, is redeemed on this money, and he takes the nicer of the selas and redeems upon it, since they said, silver may be redeemed with copper when it’s necessary, not to leave it like that but to return it to silver.

Zayin: Beit Shamay says, one may not make his selas into golden dinars, and Beit Hillel allows.  Rabi Akiva said, I made Raban Gamliel and Rabi Yehoshua’s money into golden dinars.

Chet: One who changes for a sela from ma’aser sheni money, Beit Shamay says, he may change a whole sela (he won’t need copper before Yerushalayim).  Beit Hillel says, a shekel (half a sela) of silver and half of copper (so that he will be able to buy upon entering, and so that the moneychangers won’t have an influx of silver and make copper prices go up, causing ma’aser sheni to be lost).  Rabi Meir says, one may not change a shekel and produce (jointly) for a sela, but the Chachamim allow.

Tet: One who exchanges a sela of ma’aser sheni in Yerushalayim, Beit Shamay says, he may change the whole sela, and Beit Hillel says, half silver, half copper.  Ones who judge before the Chachamim say, three silver dinar and one dinar of copper.  Rabi Akiva says, three silver dinar and (the last dinar) one quarter copper.  Rabi Tarfon says, four silver aspers (some part of the last dinar).  Shamay says, let him leave the money in a shop and eat its equivalent.

Yud: One who has some tame sons and some tahor, puts down the sela and says, what the tahor drink, this sela is redeemed for it, so the tahor and tame drink from one jug.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One should to his friend, take this produce up to Yerushalayim for a share (of the produce).  Rather he should say to him, take them up so that we may eat and drink them in Yerushalayim.  But they may give one another a present, for free.

Bet: One may not buy truma with ma’aser sheni money, since this reduces the number of (possible) consumers, and Rabi Shimon allows.  Rabi Shimon said to them, just as if they ruled leniently (may be bought) by shlamim offerings, which are limited by pigul (if one intends to eat after the time limit), notar (if the time limit for eating has passed), and tuma (where it is forbidden to eat), shouldn’t we be lenient by truma?  They said to him, is it just so if we were lenient by shlamim, which is allowed to zarim, should we be lenient by truma, which is assur for a zar?

Gimmel: One who had money in Yerushalayim and needs it (for non-allowed things), and his friend has produce, he may said to his friend, this money is redeemed on your produce.  This one eats the produce while tahor, and that one uses the money for whatever.  But he may not say this to an am ha’aretz except on dmai.

Daled: Produce in Yerushalayim and money in the country, one says, that money is redeemed on this fruit.  Money in Yerushalayim and produce in the country, one says, this money is redeemed on that fruit, as long as he takes the produce up to Yerushalayim to eat.

Hay: Money may enter and leave Yerushalayim, but produce enters but doesn’t leave.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, even produce may enter and leave.

Vav: Produce which has had all work completed and was passed through Yerushalayim its ma’aser sheni must be brought back and eaten in Yerushalayim.  If the work hasn’t been completed, (as in) baskets of grapes for the winepress or baskets of figs to be dried, Beit Shamay says, he must return their ma’aser sheni to Yerushalayim, and Beit Hillel says he should redeem and eat it anywhere.  Rabi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabi Yossi, Beit Shamay and Beit Hillel didn’t disagree about fruits which weren’t completed, for you redeem them and eat them anywhere.  What did they disagree about?  One completed fruits , for Beit Shamay says, he must return their ma’aser sheni to Yerushalayim, and Beit Hillel says he should redeem and eat it anywhere.  And dmai enters, leaves, and may be redeemed.

Zayin: A tree which stand inside (Yerushalayim) but leans outside, or stands outside and leans inside, what faces the wall’s inside is as if inside, and what faces the wall’s outside is like outside.  Oil presses whose openings are inside but their interiors are outside or whose opening are outside and their interiors are inside, Beit Shamay says, they are all as if inside, and Beit Hillel says, facing the wall inward is like inside, and facing the wall outward is like outside.

Chet: Chambers build in the holy (Beit Hamikdash courtyard) with their entrances in the non-holy (towards the temple mount), their insides are non-holy and their roofs are holy.  If they are built in the holy and non-holy and their entrances are in holy and non-holy, their insides and roofs that are facing the holy are holy, and those facing the non-holy are non-holy.

Tet: Ma’aser sheni that entered Yerushalayim and became tame, whether it became tame from the source of tuma on a contaminated object, whether inside or outside of Yerushalayim, Beit Shamay says, he should redeem it and eat it in Yerushalayim, except (the value of) the portion which was contaminated from the source of tuma outside of Yerushalayim.  Beit Hillel says, he should redeem it and eat it outside of Yerushalayim, except for what was contaminated by a contaminated object outside Yerushalayim.

Yud: Something bought using ma’aser sheni money which became tame, must be redeemed.  Rabi Yehuda says, it must be buried.  They said to Rabi Yehuda, just as ma’aser sheni itself, if it becomes tame may be redeemed, something bought with ma’aser sheni money which became tame, shouldn’t it be redeemed?  He said to them, no, if you say about ma’aser sheni itself, which when tahor may be redeemed far from Yerushalayim, would you say so by something bought with ma’aser sheni money, which when tahor cannot be redeemed far from Yerushalayim?

Yud Aleph: A deer which was bought with ma’aser sheni money and died, it must be buried with its hide.  Rabi Shimon says, it may be redeemed.  If he bought it live and slaughtered it, and it became tame, he may redeem.  Rabi Yossi says, it must be buried.  If one bought it slaughtered and it became tame, it is like produce.

Yud Bet: One who lends jars for ma’aser sheni, even though he (the borrower) sealed them, they (the jars) do not get the status of ma’aser sheni.  If he poured into them without declaring, before he seals they don’t become ma’aser, but after he seals they do become ma’aser.  Until he seals it (the jug) can be nullified by one in a hundred (referring to truma), but after he seals it, it makes holy in any amount.  Until he seals it, he may take truma from one on all of them.  Afterwards, he takes from each jug.

Yud Gimmel: Beit Shamay says, (if one wants to buy wine with ma’aser sheni money but doesn’t want the jar to become ma’aser sheni) the seller must open the jar and spill into a winepress.  Beit Hillel says, he must open, but there’s no need to spill.  What is this talking about?  A place where they normally sell sealed jars, but in a place where they normally sell open jars, the jar cannot be chulin.  But if one wants to take a stringency upon himself and sell the wine by measure (and not price by jar) the jar will always be chulin.  Rabi Shimon says, even one who says to his friend, I am selling you this barrel, except for the jar, the jar is chulin.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who take ma’aser sheni produce from an expensive place to a cheap one, or from the cheap to the expensive, her redeems it as the price of the (current) place.  One who brings grain from the threshing floor to the city of wine from the winepress to the city, the increase in value is ma’aser sheni, and the transportation (cost) is from the owner.

Bet: One may redeem ma’aser sheni at a cheap price, as a shopkeeper buys (wholesale price) not sells (retail price), the rate at which a moneychanger accepts, and not at which he exchanges.  One may not redeem ma’aser sheni as a mound (and not measure).  If an object’s price is known, he may redeem based on one (judge), and that which isn’t known, it may be redeemed based on three, like wine that has formed a film, rotten fruit, or rusty coins.

Gimmel: If the owner says, (I will redeem some ma’aser sheni) for a sela, and another said, for a sela, we take the owner first, because he has to add chomesh (whereas another doesn’t have to if it’s not his).  If the owner says, for a sela, and another person says, for a sela and an issar, we take the one who says a sela and an issar first, because he is adding to the principal.  One who redeems his ma’aser sheni adds a fifth, whether it’s his or whether he was given it as a gift.

Daled: One maybe clever regarding ma’aser sheni.  How so?  One say to his adult son or daughter or his Jewish slave or servant, here is this money, and redeem for yourself this ma’aser sheni (which exempts him from chomesh).  One may not say this to his minor children of to his Cana’ani slave or servant, for their hands are considered his.

Hay: One was standing in the threshing floor, but he had no money at his disposal (to pay chomesh either), he may say to his friend, this produce is given to you as a gift, the friend returns and says, this produce is redeemed on money I have in my house.

Vav: One acquired ma’aser sheni from his friend for a sela, and he didn’t manage to redeem it and the price went up to two sela, he gives a sela and profits a sela, and the ma’aser sheni is his.  If he acquired the ma’aser sheni for two sela, and the price went down to one, he gives the person a sela of chulin, and the ma’aser sheni sela is his.  If he was an am ha’aretz, he may give from dmai.

Zayin: One who redeemed ma’aser sheni but didn’t specify (the money, simply setting it aside), Rabi Yossi says, it’s enough, but Rabi Yehuda says, he must specify.  One was speaking with a woman regarding the matter of her divorce or betrothal, and he gave her her divorce or betrothal, but he didn’t specify it, Rabi Yossi says, it’s enough, but Rabi Yehuda says, he must specify.

Chet: One who puts aside an issar, but only eats half of it, if he goes to another place where it’s worth a pundyon (two issar), he eats upon his money the worth of another issar.  One who sets aside a pundyon, and he ate half of it, and he goes to another place where it’s worth an issar, he may eat upon his money the worth of another half (an issar).  One who sets aside an issar of ma’aser sheni, one may eat one eleventh on an issar or one hundredth of an issar (there is much disagreement about the meaning of this phrase, but non are particularly conclusive).  Beit Shamay says, always one tenth, but Beit Hillel says, for definite (tevel) one in eleven, in dmai, one in ten.

Tet: All coins which one finds are (assumed) chulin, even a golden dinar with silver and copper coins (not usually mixed unless being redeemed).  If one found among them a piece of pottery upon which is written ‘ma’aser,’ it is all ma’aser.

Yud: If one finds a vessel and it is written upon it ‘korban,’ Rabi Yehuda says, if it is pottery, it’s chulin, and what is inside of it is korban.  If it’s metal, it is a korban, and what is inside of it is chulin.  They said to him, people don’t put chulin inside a korban.

Yud Aleph: One finds a vessel with a kuf on it, it’s korban, a mem, ma’aser, a daled, dmai, a tet, tevel, and a taf, truma, for in times of danger they would write taf instead of truma.  Rabi Yossi says, they are all people’s names.  Rabi Yossi said, even if he fond a barrel filled with fruit and it says on it, ‘truma,’ it is chulin, for I say, last year it was filled with truma and it has been emptied.

Yud Bet: One who says to his son, ma’aser sheni is in that corner, and it was found in another corner, the produce is chulin.  If (he says,) there is a maneh, and it’s found to be two hundred zuz, the extra is chulin.  If he said two hundred and one hundred was found, it’s all ma’aser.

Perek Hay

Aleph: A vineyard in its fourth year is marked off with clods of earth, an orla (young tree) is marked off with clay, and graves with lime which one dissolves and pours out.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, what is this talking about?  In shvi’it.  The scrupulous put down money and say, whatever will be gathered from this (vineyard, in its fourth year) is redeemed on this money.

Bet: Kerem revai (a fourth year vineyard) must be brought to Yerushalayim from a day’s journey in every direction.  And what were it limits?  Eilat from the south, Akrevat in the north, Lod from the west, and the Jordan in the east.  When produce (in Yerushalayim) became abundant, they instituted that the produce would be redeemed close to the wall.  And there was a condition in the matter, that whenever they want, they could return the matter to the way it was.  Rabi Yossi says, since the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed we had this condition, and the condition was that when the Beit Hamikdash is rebuilt, it will return to as it were.

Gimmel: Kerem revai, Beit Shamay says, it doesn’t have chomesh or biur.  And Beit Hillel says it does.  Beit Shamay says, it has peret and olelet, and the poor redeem for themselves.  Beit Hillel says, it may all go to the winepress.

Daled: How does one redeem neta revai?  He puts down a basket in from of three (judges) and says, how much does a person want for a sela one the condition that he would pay all the expenses (that are involved in getting to the fruit).  And he puts the money down in front of them and says, anything taken from this (fruit) is redeemed on this money, so and so baskets for a sela.

Hay: On shvi’it, he redeems for its value.  And if everything is hefker, he only has the costs of harvesting.  One who redeems his leket revai adds a fifth whether it’s his or it was given to him as a gift.

Vav: Erev Pesach (the first day) of the fourth year and shvi’it there was biur.  What was biur?  We give truma and trumat ma’aser to their owners (kohanim), ma’aser rishon to its owners (levi’im), and ma’aser ani to its owners (the poor), and ma’aser sheni and bikurim are removed everywhere.  Rabi Shimon says the bikurim are given to the kohanim as with ma’aser.  A cooked dish, Beit Shamay says, you must do biur, but Beit Hillel says, it is as if removed.

Zayin: One who has produce at this time (after the destruction of the Beit Hamikdash) and the time of biur comes, Beit Shamay says, one must redeem it for money.  Beit Hillel says, whether money or produce (he sets it aside and doesn’t use it).

Chet: Rabi Yehuda said, they used to send people to field owners in the country to tell them, hurry up and tithe your produce before the time of biur comes.  (This happened) until Rabbi Akiva came and taught, any produce which didn’t come into the season of ma’aser is patur from biur.

Tet: One whose produce is far from him (such that he did not give over the tithes he separated), he must specify them.  Once Raban Gamliel and the Zekenim were traveling in a ship and Raban Gamliel said, a tithe which I will measure is for Yehoshua, and the space is rented to him (so he acquires on it), another tithe which I will measure is for Akiva ben Yosef, who will take it on behalf of the poor, and its place is rented to him.  Rabi Yehoshua said, ma’aser which I will measure is given to Elazar ben Azariah, and they took rent from one another.

Yud: At mincha of the last day of Yom Tov (of Pesach) they would confess.  How would they confess?  (They would say) “I have removed the kodesh from my house,” this is ma’aser sheni and neta revai.  “And I gave it to a levi,” this is ma’aser for a levi.  “And I have given it,” this is truma and trumat ma’aser.  “For the convert, orphan, and widow,” this is ma’aser ani, the leket, shichicha, and the pe’ah even though one doesn’t impede a confession.  “From the house,” this is challa.

Yud Aleph: “According to all of the mitzvot you commanded us,” for if he did ma’aser sheni before ma’aser rishon, he cannot confess.  “I didn’t transgress your mitzvot,” I didn’t take from one species on account of another, not from the disconnected on what is connected to the ground or vice versa, or from the new for the old or vice versa.  “And I didn’t forget,” I didn’t forget to bless You and mention Your name about it.

Yud Bet: “I didn’t eat in grieving from it,” behold, if he ate from it in grieving, he cannot confess.  “And I didn’t remove from it while tame,” behold, if he removed from it while tame, he cannot confess.  “And I didn’t give from it to the dead,” I didn’t take from it a coffin or shrouds for the dead, and I didn’t give to others who were grieving.  “I listened to the voice of Hashem my God,” I brought to the Beit Hamikdash.  “I did all which He commanded me,” I was happy and helped others be happy through it.

Yud Gimmel: “Look from Your holy house, from heaven,” we did what You ruled upon us, so You do what you promised us, “look from Your holy house, from heaven and bless your nation Yisra’el,” our sons and daughters.  “And the land which You have given us,” with dew and rain and with the kids of animals.  “Just as You promised our forefathers a land flowing with milk and honey,” such that You might give flavor in the produce.

Yud Daled: From here they said, a yisra’el and a mamzer confess, but converts and freedmen don’t, for they hold no part in the land.  Rabi Meir says, also not kohanim and levi’im, for they don’t hold a part of the land.  Rabi Yossi said, they have cities with lots.

Tet Vav: Yochanan the kohen gadol abolished the confession over ma’aser.  He also nullified the awakeners (a line in one of the daily songs about Hashem sleeping) and the strikers (of a korban between its eyes to daze before slaughter).  And until his days the striking of the hammer (on chol hamo’ed) was (heard) in Yerushalayim.  And in his days, nobody had to ask about dmai (when buying, because only trumat ma’aser and ma’aser sheni had to be taken, the others could be eaten unless a levi or ani could prove that it was tevel).

Mesechet Challah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Five things are chayav in challa, wheat, barley, spelt, oats, and rye.  These are liable for challa and combine (if kneaded together they combine towards the minimum measurement).  They are assur because of ‘chadash’ a month before Pesach, or if harvested before the omer.  If they took root before omer, the omer allows them, but if not, they are assur until the next omer.

Bet: One who eats a kzayit of matza made of them on Pesach he fulfilled his obligation.  A kzayit of chametz (leavened bread), he is chayav caret.  If (chametz of) one of these mixed up with something else, this is transgressing on Pesach.  One who makes a vow against bread and cereal grains (tvu’a) is prohibited from having them, according to Rabi Meir. Chachamim say, one who takes a vow against things stacked like grains (dagan) is only prohibited from having them.  And they (the grains) are chayav in challa and ma’asrot.

Gimmel: These are chayav in challa but patur from ma’aser.  Leket, shichicha, pe’ah, hefker, ma’aser rishon from which truma has been taken, redeemed ma’aser sheni and hekdesh, leftover from omer, and produce which hasn’t reached a third of its final growth.  Rabi Eliezer says, produce which hasn’t reached a third of its size is chayav by challa.

Daled: These are chayav in ma’aser but patur in challa.  Rice, millet, poppy seed, sesame, legumes, anything less than five rova of produce, doughnuts, cakes fried in honey, griddle cakes, pancakes and meduma cakes, these are patur from challa.

Hay: Dough that started as for doughnuts, and ends as doughnuts is patur from challa.  If it starts as dough and winds up doughnuts or the reverse, it is chayav by challa.  Kenuvka cakes (small cakes mad of bread crumbs) are also chayav.

Vav: Me’isa (flour mixed into boiling water), Beit Shamay says it’s patur and Beit Hillel says it’s chayav.  Chalita (boiling water poured over flour), Beit Shamay says it’s chayav and Beit Hillel say it’s patur.  Loaves for a (korban) toda and wafers of a (korban) nazir, if he made it for himself (for his korban) it’s patur, but if he made to sell in the shuk, he’s chayav.

Zayin: A baker who made a leavened (dough) in order to divide it up (into loaves too small to need challa) he’s chayav in challa.  If women give a baker dough to make into leaven, if none of them is enough (to require challa) it’s patur from challa.

Chet: Dough for dogs (which contains bran), if shepherds (would) eat from it it’s chayav challa, and it may be used as part of an eruv (to allow carrying on Shabbat), for shituf (allowing carrying between courtyards), one makes a bracha on it, one makes a zimun on it, it may be made on Yom Tov, and one can fulfill his obligation on Pesach.  If shepherds don’t eat from it, it’s not chayav challa, and one doesn’t make an eruv on it, do shituf with it, make a bracha on it, make a zimun on it, make it on Yom Tov, or fulfill his obligation on Pesach.  Either way, it becomes tame with the tuma of food.

Tet: Challa and truma incur death penalties and require chomesh, are assur to zarim, are the property of a kohen, are nullified by one in a hundred, require washing of hands (before touching) and sunset (for a kohen who immersed that day), and may not be separated from the tahor on the tame, and only from nearby and finished products.  One who says, my entire threshing floor is truma, or, the whole dough is challa, didn’t say anything until he sets aside part.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Produce from outside of Israel which was brought into Israel is chayav in challa.  They left here (Israel) to there, Rabi Eliezer says chayav and Rabi Akiva says patur.

Bet: Dirt from outside of Israel which came to Israel on a boat is chayav in trumot and ma’asrot.  Rabi Yehuda says, when?  When the ship beaches.  Dough which was kneaded with fruit juice is chayav in challa and may be eaten with unclean hands (juice doesn’t take on tuma).

Gimmel: A woman may sit and cut off challa while naked, because she can cover herself (by crossing her legs), but a man cannot.  One who can’t make his dough while tahor should make kav (sized doughs, not chayav challa) and not make it (a large dough) while tame.  Rabi Akiva says, let him make it while tame and not make it into kabim (he will do challa and simply burn it) and just as he designates while tahor, he will designate while tame, for this he will designate challa and for that he will designate challa, for there is no challa in kabim.

Daled: One who makes doughs of kabim and they touch each other, they are patur from challa until they stick together.  Rabi Eliezer says, even one who takes down (from the oven) and puts them in a basket, the basket combines them for challa.

Hay: One who takes his challa from flour, it’s not challa, and it’s stolen in the hand of a kohen.  The dough itself is chayav by challa.  And flour, if it has enough to be the full measurement, it’s chayav for challa and assur to zarim, according to Rabi Yehoshua.  They said to him, once an elder, who was a zar, took it (the challa flour).  He said to them, he ruined for himself (is punishable) but fixed for others (who will do such based on his example and be innocent).

Vav: Five rova of flour is chayav in challa.  They, their leaven, fine bran, and coarse bran are five rova, they’re chayav.  If the coarse bran was removed (and it wasn’t enough) but then added back, it’s patur.

Zayin: The measure of challa is one in twenty-four.  One who makes dough for himself and one who makes dough for his son’s wedding, one in twenty-four.  A baker who makes to sell in the shuk, and so too a woman who made to sell in the shuk, one in forty-eight.  If her dough became tame by accident or for reasons beyond her control, it’s one in forty-eight.  If she intentionally made it tame, one in twenty-four, such that a sinner would not get a reward (from the sin).

Chet: Rabi Eliezer says, it may be taken from the tahor on the tame.  How?  A tahor dough and a tame dough, he takes enough for challa from the dough which hasn’t had challa taken, and puts less then a kzayit of dough between them (not enough to transfer tuma) in order that he should be taking from what is nearby, but the Chachamim prohibit this.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One may eat randomly from dough, until it is rolled in wheat or kneaded into a cohesive ball in barley.  If he rolled in wheat and kneaded it in barley, one who eats from it is chayav to be put to death.  Since when she pours the water she takes off challa, unless there aren’t five rova of flour

Bet: A dough became meduma before it was rolled is patur, for meduma is patur, and since it was rolled, it’s chayav.  A doubt of tuma came upon it before it was rolled, it should be made tame, and if it’s since it has been rolled, it should be made tahor.

Gimmel: If she made her dough hekdesh before she rolled it, and she redeemed it, it’s chayav (challa).  If it was after it was rolled and she redeemed it, it’s chayav.  If he made it hekdesh before it was rolled and the treasurer rolled it, and afterward she redeemed it, it’s patur, for in the time of it’s chiyuv, it was patur.

Daled: Similarly, one who dedicates his produce before the season of ma’aser, and he redeemed them, he’s chayav.  If the season of ma’aser cane and he redeemed it, it’s chayav.  He dedicated them before they were finished and the treasurer finished them, and afterwards he redeemed them, they’re patur, for in the time of their chiyuv they were patur.

Hay: A non-Jew who gave a Jew with what to make dough, its patur from challa.  If he gave it as a present, before he (the non-Jew) rolled it it’s chayav, after, it’s patur.  One who makes dough with  a non-Jew, if the Jew’s part isn’t enough for challa, he’s patur in challa.

Vav: A convert who converted, and he had dough, if it’s from before he converted, it’s patur, if since he converted, it’s chayav.  If it’s a doubt, it’s chayav, but one is not chayav chomesh on it.  Rabi Akiva says, everything goes according to the forming of the crust in the oven.

Zayin: One who makes dough of wheat and rice if it has in it the flavor of cereal, it’s chayav in challa, and one fulfills his observation on Pesach, but if it doesn’t have the flavor of cereal, it’s not chayav challa and one doesn’t fulfill his obligation on Pesach.

Chet: One who takes leaven out of dough from which challa hasn’t been taken and he puts it into a dough from which challa has been taken , if he can provide from somewhere else, he takes out according to the proportion (due on the leaven), and if not, he takes out one challa on all of them.

Tet; Similarly, gathered olives which were mixed with nikuf (early fallen and collected) olives, or gathered grapes and olelet grapes, if he has wealth from somewhere else, he take out according to the proportion, and if not, he takes out truma and truma ma’aser one everything and the rest he takes ma’aser and ma’aser sheni by proportion.

Yud: One who takes leaven from a wheat dough and puts it into rice dough, if it has in it a taste of cereals, it’s chayav challa, and if not, it’s patur.  If so, why did they say, tevel is forbidding any at all?  A species in its own type or not, until it imparts flavor.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Two women who made two kabim and they touched each other, even if they are one type (of flour) they’re patur.  When they belong to one woman, one type with the same type is chayav, but not of its type is patur.

Bet: What is a type with the same type?  Wheat doesn’t combine with any (different type) other than spelt.  Barley combines with all but wheat.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri says, the rest of the types combine with each other.

Gimmel: Two kabim and a kav of rice or a kav of truma between them, they do not combine.  Something which its challa has been taken from it is in the middle, they combine, since it was already chayav by challa.

Daled: A kav of new and a kav of old which stuck together, Rabi Yishma’el says, he should take from the middle, and Chachamim say it’s assur, One who takes challa from a kav, Rabi Akiva says, it’s challa, and Chachamim say, it’s not challa.

Hay: Two kabim, each had challa taken from it, he returned and made them into one dough, Rabi Akiva makes patur, and Chachamim make chayav.  It’s stringency becomes its leniency (according to Rabi Akiva the challa was challa, so it makes this case lenient).

Vav: One takes the amount for challa from a dough which hasn’t had challa taken to make it tahor, to be separating (challa) on it, and he goes (on) with a dough of dmai until it rots, for challa of dmai is taken from the tahor on the tame and from that which isn’t nearby (this mishna on the whole is poorly understood).

Zayin: A Jew who was a tenant for non-Jews in Syria, Rabi Eliezer makes their produce chayav in ma’asrot and shvi’it, and Raban Gamliel makes it patur.  Raban Gamliel says, there are two chalot in Syria (one to be burnt and one for the kohen) and Rabi Eliezer says one.  They adopted the leniency of Raban Gamliel and the one of Rabi Eliezer.  Then they returned to using the opinion of Raban Gamliel in both cases.

Chet: Raban Gamliel says, there are three lands for challa, from Israel until Kziv there is one challa.  From Kziv to the great river there are two chalot, one to be burnt and one for the kohen, the one to be burnt has a measurement, and the one for the kohen has no measurement.  From the river until and from Amana inward there are two chalot, one to be burnt and one for the kohen, to be burnt has no measurement, and for the kohen has a measure, and one who immersed that day may eat it.  Rabi Yossi says, he doesn’t even need to immerse.  It’s assur for a zav, zava, nidda, or woman who has just given birth.  And it may be eaten on the table with a zar and can be given to any kohen.

Tet: And these may be given to any kohen, devoted things, firstborn (kosher animals), redemption of a firstborn son, the redemption of the firstborn of a donkey, the shank bone, the cheeks, the maw (these three are given to the kohanim even from chulin), the first of the fleece (shorn), oil which must be burnt, holy things from the Beit Hamikdash, and the first fruits.  Rabi Yehuda prohibits by first fruits.  Truma vetches, Rabi Akiva allows but Chachamim prohibit.

Yud: Nitai of Tkoa brought chalot from Betar, and they didn’t accept from him.  The people of Alexandria brought their chalot from Alexandria and they didn’t accept from them.  The people of Har Tzvo’im brought their first fruits before Shavuot and they did not accept from them, because of the pasuk in the torah, and the holiday of harvest the first fruits of what you make, that which you sow in your field.

Yud Aleph: Ben Antinos brought first fruits from Bavel, and they did not accept from him.  Yosef the kohen brought the first fruits of wine and oil and they did not accept from him.  He even brought his sons and his household to make Pesach Katan (Sheni, a month later for those who were tame), but he returned them, lest if become an obligation.  Ariston brought first fruit from Apamiah, and they accepted from him, since they said, one who acquires in Syria is like one who acquires in a suburb of Yerushalayim.

Mesechet Orlah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: One who plants for a fence of beams is patur from orla (a prohibition of eating the first three years of fruit from any tree).  Rabi Yossi says, even if he says, the inner side is for eating and the outer is for a fence, the inner is chayav and the outer is patur.

Bet: In the time when our forefathers came to the land, if they found planted, it’s patur.  If they planted, even though they had not conquered (the land), it’s chayav.  One who plants for the masses, it’s chayav, Rabi Yehuda says it’s patur.  One who plants in a public place, a non-Jew who plants, a robber who plants, one who plants on a boat, or a tree which grew on its own, is chayav by orla.

Gimmel: A tree (that isn’t chayav orla) that was uprooted with a rock (a clump of earth around its roots), or a river washed it away with a rock, if it could live, it’s patur, and if it couldn’t live, it’s chayav.  If a rock was removed from its side, the plow shook it, or it was shaken and made like the earth, if it could live, it’s patur, and if not, it’s chayav.

Daled: A tree which was uprooted and it kept a root is patur.  And how much is considered a root?  Raban Gamliel says in the name of Rabi Elazar ben Yehuda a person from Bartota, like a needle used for stretching.

Hay: A tree which was uprooted and it has a runner which it lives off of, the old part returned to be like the runner (now chayav in orla).  He made runners year after year, and the original runner (in the line of runners) became detached, he counts from the time it became detached.  Engrafting grapes, and an engraftment upon an engraftment, even though the runner is in the earth, is allowed (patur from orla, since it still draws nourishment from the parent plant). Rabi Meir says, in a place where its strength (the parent vine’s nourishment) is good, it’s mutar, but where it’s bad, it’s assur.  So too with a runner which detached and is full of fruit, if it creased by one two-hundredth (from the ground and not the parent plant) it’s assur.

Vav: A shoot of orla or vineyard kilayim which mixed up with shoots, this may not be gathered.  And if he gathered, it becomes nullified in two hundred to one, as long as he doesn’t mean to gather it (the forbidden was gathered accidentally).  Rabi Yossi says, even if he intended to gather it, it is nullified by one in two hundred.

Zayin: The leaves, fronds, saps, and buds are allowed from a perspective of orla and revai and to a nazir, and are forbidden by an ashera.  Rabi Yossi says, the buds are assur, since it is a fruit.  Rabi Eliezer says, if one curdles milk with the sap of an orla, it’s assur.  Rabi Yehoshua said, I heard explicitly that if one curdles milk with the sap of the leaves or roots, it’s mutar, but the sap of unripe fruit, it’s assur, since it’s fruit.

Chet: Defective grapes, kernels, husks, and wine made from them pomegranate skin and its sprout, nutshells, and seeds are assur in orla, ashera, and to a nazir, but are mutar in revai.  And unripe fruit is assur in all.

Tet: Rabi Yossi says, one may plant a shoot of orla, but one does not plant a nut of orla, since it is a fruit.  And one may not graft early date-berries of orla.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Truma and trumat ma’aser of dmai, challa, and bikurim are nullified by one in a hundred, mix with one another, and must be taken off (an equivalent value of the mixture to the kohen).  Orla and vineyard kilayim are nullified by one in two hundred, combine, and does not need to be taken off.  Rabi Shimon says, they do not combine.  Rabi Eliezer says, they combine if it imparts flavor (as in with liquid products), but not to make assur.

Bet: Truma nullifies orla and orla to truma.  How?  A se’ah of truma which fell into a hundred (se’ah), and then three kabim of orla fell in, of three kabim of vineyard kilayim, this is hoe truma nullifies orla and orla to truma.

Gimmel: Oral nullifies kilayim, kilayim to orla, and orla to orla.  How?  A se’ah of orla which fell into two hundred, and afterwards a se’ah plus of orla fell in, or a se’ah plus of vineyard kilayim, this is how orla nullifies kilayim, kilayim to orla, and orla to orla.

Daled: Anything which causes fermentation, seasons, or makes meduma with truma, orla, or vineyard kilayim is assur (if mixed in).  Beit Shamay says, it even makes tame.  Beit Hillel says, nothing ever makes tame unless it is a kbeitza.

Hay: Dostai, a person from Kfar Yitma, was of the students of Beit Shamay and said, I heard from Shamay the elder, for he said, nothing ever makes tame unless it is a kbeitza.

Vav: And for what did they say, anything which causes to ferment, spices, or makes meduma is stringent?  For a kind with its own kind.  (For what did they say it) is stringent and lax?  A kind with not its own kind.  How?  Leaven of wheat which fell into a wheat dough, if it has enough to leaven, whether it is outweighed by one hundred to one or not, it’s assur.  If it doesn’t have enough to be outweighed a hundred to one, whether there’s enough to ferment or not, it’s assur.

Zayin: (The previous mishna taught) to be stringent and lax by a kind in another kind, how (do we do this)?  Like crushed beans (truma) cooked with lentils (chulin) and there is enough to impart flavor, whether there is enough to nullify by one in a hundred or not, it’s assur.  If it doesn’t have enough to impart flavor, whether there is enough to nullify by one in a hundred or not, it’s mutar.

Chet: Chulin leaven which fell into dough, and there is enough to ferment, and then truma leaven fell in, or leaven of vineyard kilayim and there is enough to ferment, it’s assur (even though the leavening may have been caused by only the chulin).

Tet: Chulin leaven which fell into dough and leavened it, and then truma leaven fell in, or leaven of vineyard kilayim and there is enough to ferment it’s assur even though we know it was only the chulin leaven).  Rabi Shimon allows it.

Yud: Spices, two or three categories (of issur, i.e. truma, orla, etc.) of one species or of three, is assur, and they combine.  Rabi Shimon says, two or three categories of one species or two species of one category don’t combine.

Yud Aleph: Chulin leaven and truma leaven which fell into a dough, and neither has enough to ferment, but the combined and fermented, Rabi Eliezer says, I go by the last one (to fall in).  Chachamim say, whether the assur one fell first or last, it never prohi8bits unless there’s enough to ferment.

Yud Bet: Yoezer of the Birah was one of the students of Beit Shamay and he said, I asked Raban Gamliel the elder who was standing in the east gate, and he said, it never prohibits until there is enough for it to ferment.

Yud Gimmel: Vessels which one oiled with tame oil, and he returned and oiled with tahor oil, or vice versa, Rabi Eliezer says, I go according to the first one.  Chachamim say, according to the last one.

Yud Daled: Leaven of truma of vineyard kilayim which fell into dough, and there isn’t enough in either to ferment, but they combined and fermented, it’s assur to zarim and mutar for kohanim.  Rabi Shimon allows for both zarim and kohanim.

Tet Vav: Spices of truma or vineyard kilayim which fell into a pot, and neither one is enough to spice it, but the combined and spiced it, it’s assur to zarim and allowed to kohanim.  Rabi Shimon allows for both zarim and kohanim.

Tet Zayin: A piece of the most holy (chatat or asham), pigul, or notar which cooked with other pieces is assur to zarim and mutar to kohanim.  Rabi Shimon allows for both zarim and kohanim.

Yud Zayin: The most holy meat or holy meat which mixed up with ordinary meat is assur to the tame and mutar to the tahor.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: A garment that was dies with the peels of orla must be burnt.  If it was mixed with others, they must all be burnt, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, it is nullified by one in two hundred.

Bet: One who dyes (thread) the length of a sit (a measurement) with orla peels and he wove it into a garment, and it’s not know which it is, Rabi Meir says, the garment is burnt.  Chachamim say, it is nullified by one in two hundred.

Gimmel: One who weaves the length of a sit of wool from a firstborn in a garment, the garment must be burnt.  And from the hair of a nazir or the first born of a donkey (either of which) made into a sack, the sack must be burnt.  And with holy things, it makes the whole thing holy.

Daled: A dish which one cooked with peels of orla must be burnt.  If it mixed with other (food) it is nullified by one in two hundred.

Hay: An oven which one heated with orla peels, and he baked in it bread, the bread must be burn.  If it was mixed with others, it is nullified by one in two hundred.

Vav: One who had bundles of fenugreek of vineyard kilayim, they must be burnt.  If they mixed in others, they must all be burnt according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, they are nullified by one in two hundred.

Zayin: For Rabi Meir used to say, whatever is customary to count (while selling), makes holy (causes everything to be burnt, for things sold individually always have a significant value).  Chachamim say, only six things (are important enough to) make anything holy.  Rabi Akiva says, seven.  And these are they, perech nuts, Badan pomegranates, sealed barrels (of wine), spinach shoots, heads of cabbage, and Greek gourd.  Rabi Akiva says, even loaves of a homeowner (superior to bakers’).  Whichever of these is liable to orla, is (makes the mixture) orla, and (whatever) is vineyard kilayim (the mixture) is vineyard kilayim.

Chet: How (do the things in the previous mishna sanctify in any quality)?  (If whole, but) if the nuts split, the pomegranates burst open, the barrels opened,  the gourds were cut, or the loaves were sliced, they are nullified by one in two hundred.

Tet: Something which we’re not sure if it’s orla, in Israel is assur, is Syria is mutar, and outside of Israel, he may go and buy, as long as he doesn’t see the person gather (the orla fruit).  A vineyard planted with vegetables, and the vegetables are sold outside of it, in Israel it is assur, in Syria it’s mutar, and outside of Israel he may go and buy it, as long as he doesn’t gather it in his (own) hand.  New cereals (before omer) is assur from the torah everywhere, orla (outside of Israel) is by halacha (to Moshe at Sinai), and kilayim is by Rabbinic law.

Mesechet Bikkurim

Perek Aleph

Aleph: There are those who bring bikurim (first fruits) and recite (certain psukim), those who bring but don’t recite, and there are those who don’t bring.  Those who don’t bring are those who plants in his domain and makes runners in the domain of another or public domain, and so too one who makes runners in his domain from another’s domain or the public domain.  One who plants in his domain and made runners in his domain, and a private road or a public road is between them, this person doesn’t bring.  Rabi Yehuda says, this person brings.

Bet: For what reason does he not bring?  Since it says, “the beginning of the first fruits of your land,” until all of the growth is from your land.  Tenant farmers, lessees, people who take land by threatening the owner’s life, and robbers don’t bring for that reason, for it says, “the beginning of the first fruits of your land.”

Gimmel: One doesn’t bring bikurim except for in the seven species special to Israel (shivat haminim), not from dates of the hills, not from fruits of valleys, and not from olive oil which isn’t the best quality.  One doesn’t brink bikurim before Shavuot.  The people of Har Tzvo’im brought before Shavuot and they didn’t accept from them, since it is written in the torah, “and the holiday of the harvest, the first fruits of your work, which you have sown in the field.

Daled: These people bring and don’t recite, the convert brings but doesn’t recite, for he can’t say, “which Hashem swore to our forefathers to give us.”  And if his mother was Jewish, he may bring and recite.  And when he would with himself, he says, the God of the forefathers of Israel.  When he is in the Beit Knesset he says, the God of your forefathers.  And if his mother is Jewish he says, the God of our forefathers.

Hay: Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, the daughter of converts may not marry a kohen, until her mother is Jewish.  Whether converts or freedmen, even to ten generations, (she can only marry a kohen) if her mother is Jewish.  A guardian, messenger, slave, woman, tumtum (one who has no specific gender), and androgynous (person with characteristics of both genders) bring but don’t recite, for they can’t say, “which Hashem gave me.”

Vav: One who buys two trees in his friend’s domain, brings and doesn’t recite.  Rabi Meir says, he brings and recites.  If the spring (irrigating the field) dried up, or the tree is cut down, he brings and does not recite.  Rabi Yehuda says, he brings and declares.  From Shavuot until Sukkot, he brings and recites.  From Sukkot to Chanuka, he brings but doesn’t recite.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says, he beings and recites.

Zayin: He separated bikurim and sold his field, he brings and doesn’t recite.  And the other, from the same kind (that the first person brought), he doesn’t bring.  From any other type, he beings and recites.  Rabi Yehuda says, even from the same type he brings and recites.

Chet: He separated bikurim and they were plundered, mottled, stolen, lost, or became tame, he brings others in their stead and doesn’t declare, and the replacements, he’s not chayav chomesh on them (if he eats them).  If they became tame in the Beit Hamikdash’s court, he scatters them and doesn’t recite.

Tet: And from where do we know that he’s responsible for them until he brings them to the temple mount?  As it says, “the beginning of the first fruits of your land shall you bring to the temple mount.”  It teaches that he is responsible until he brings to the temple mount.  If he brought of one type and recited and he returned and brought a different type, he doesn’t recite.

Yud: And these bring and recite, from Shavuot to Sukkot, from shivat haminim, from the fruits of the hills, from the dates of the valley, from olives for oil, and from Transjordan.  Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, one doesn’t bring bikurim from Transjordan, for it is not a land flowing with milk and honey.

Yud Aleph: One who buys three trees in his friend’s field, brings and recites.  Rabi Meir says, even two.  If he acquired a tree and land he brings and recites.  Rabi Yehuda says, even tenants and lessees bring and recite.

Perek Bet

Aleph: For truma and bikurim one is chayav death and chomesh, they are assur to zarim, they are the property of a kohen, they are nullified by one in a hundred, and they require washing hands and sundown (for one who immersed that day).  These are applicable by both truma and bikurim, but not ma’aser.

Bet: There are (laws) by ma’aser and bikurim that are not like those of truma, for ma’aser and bikurim must be brought somewhere (Jerusalem), they require confession, and they are assur for a griever.  Rabi Shimon allows it (for a griever).  They are chayav in biur, and Rabi Shimon exempts them.  They make assur in any amount (when mixed with chulin) in Yerushalayim and their growth is assur to eat (as chulin when the growth occurred) in Yerushalayim, even to a zar or animal.  Rabi Shimon allows it.  Behold, these (laws) are by ma’aser and bikurim but are not like those of truma.

Gimmel: These are (laws) by truma and ma’aser that aren’t by bikurim, truma and ma’aser are make the (product of the) threshing floor assur (before they are taken), they have a measurement, they apply to all produce, they are when there is a Beit Hamikdash and when there isn’t, and they are by the tenant, lessee, one who extracts land through terror, and thieves.  These are by truma and ma’aser but not by bikurim.

Daled: And there are (laws) by bikurim which there aren’t by bikurim and ma’asrot.  For bikurim are acquired while attached to the ground, a person can make hi whole field bikurim, one is responsible for them, and they require a korban, song, waving, and staying overnight.

Hay: Trumat ma’aser is equivalent to bikurim in two ways, and to truma in two ways.  One may take from the tahor on the tame or that which isn’t nearby, like bikurim, and it makes the threshing floor assur and has a measurement, like truma.

Vav: An etrog is like a tree in three ways, and like a vegetable in one.  It is like a tree in orla, revai, and shvi’it.  And to a vegetable in one way, that the time you collect it is the time it becomes assur (before tithing), According to Raban Gamliel.  Rabi Eliezer says, it is like a tree in every way.

Zayin: The blood of something that walks on two (limbs, referring to humans) is like the blood of an animal, in that it makes seeds susceptible (to tuma).  (Human blood, like) the blood of a sheretz, doesn’t make one chayav (for having eaten blood).

Chet: The koy (an animal) in some ways is like a wild animal, in some ways is like a domesticated animal, in some ways is like a wild animal and a domesticated animal, and in some ways is like neither a wild nor domesticated animal.

Tet: How is it (a koy) like a wild animal?  Its blood must be covered like that of a wild animal and one may not shecht it on Yom Tov.  If one did shecht it (on Yom Tov) he does not cover the blood.  Its fat contaminates with the tuma of an animal carrion, it’s tuma is in doubt, and one does not redeem the first born.

Yud: How is it like a domesticated animal?  Its fat is assur like the fat of a domesticated animal and one isn’t chayav karet for (eating the fat of) it.  It may not be bought with ma’aser sheni money to be eaten in Yerushalayim and one owes (the kohen) the shank bone, the cheeks, and the maw.  Rabi Eliezer exempts (from these gifts) for (there is a concept of) the one who is taking from his friend bears the burden of proof.

Yud Aleph: How is it like neither a wild animal nor a domesticated animal?  It is assur because of kilayim with either a wild or domesticated animal.  One who wrote over his wild or domesticated animals to his son didn’t write over his koy.  If he said, I am a nazir if this is a wild or domesticated animal, he is a nazir.  All the rest of its rules are like a wild animal and domesticated animal, it needs schita like both of them, it gives tuma of animal carrion and (is chayav in) tearing flesh from a live animal like both of them.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: How does one separate bikurim?  One goes into his field and sees a fig which ripened, a cluster of grapes which ripened, or a pomegranate which ripened, he ties reed-grass around it and says, these are fro bikurim.  Rabi Shimon says, even so, he returns and designates them bikurim after they are separated from the ground.

Bet: How does one take up bikurim?  All the cities in a ma’amad (groups who would send collective gifts to the Beit Hamikdash using a set of agents) would gather in the city of the ma’amad, the people would sleep in the streets of the city, and they wouldn’t enter into houses (for fear of becoming tame).  And for the early risers, the office would say, “get up and we will go to Zion to Hashem our God.”

Gimmel: People close by would bring figs and grapes, and people far away would bring dried figs and raisins.  Before them walked an ox with its horns covered in gold and (wearing) an olive-branch crown.  The flute played before them until they got close to Yerushalayim.  When they got close to Yerushalayim, they sent (people) before them and adorned their bikurim.  The supervisors, deputies, and treasurers went out to meet them, and they went out (in number) according to the honor (size) of the people entering.  And all the craftsman in Yerushalayim would stand before them and greet them, our brothers the people of such-and-such a place, you come in peace.

Daled: The flute played before them until they reached the Beit Hamikdash.  When they got to the temple mount, even King Agrippas would take his basket on his shoulders and bring it in, until he got to the temple court.  When the reached the temple court, the levi’im would say in song, “I will exalt you Hashem for you have raised me up, and you didn’t gladden my enemies about me.”

Hay: The pigeons which were on the baskets would be for olot, and what was in their hands would be for the kohanim..

Vav: When the basket was still on his shoulders, he reads from, “and I shall tell today to Hashem your God,” until he finishes the section.  Rabi Yehuda says, until, “my father was a lost Aramean.”  He says up to, “my father was a lost Aramean,” he takes the basket down from his shoulders, holds it by the rim, a kohen puts his hand under it, waves it, reads from, “my father was a lost Aramean,” until he finishes the section, places it by the altar, bows, and leaves.

Zayin: At first, whoever knew to read would read, and whoever didn’t know, they would read for him.  When they (who didn’t know) refrained from bringing, they instituted that they would read for those who know and those who don’t know.

Chet: The rich would bring their bikurim in baskets of gold and silver, the poor would bring in wicker baskets of peeled willow (bark), and the baskets and the bikurim were given to the kohanim.

Tet: Rabi Shimon ben Nanas says, one may decorate the bikurim with (fruits which are) not the shivat haminim.  Rabi Akiva says, one may only decorate bikurim with the shivat haminim.

Yud: Rabi Shimon says, there are three aspects of bikurim, the bikurim, the addition to the bikurim (not only the first fruits), and the decoration of the bikurim.  Addition to the bikurim is a type among those of its type.  The decoration of the bikurim may be a type in a different type.  The addition to bikurim is eaten while tahor and it is patur if dmai, but the decoration of the bikurim is chayav if dmai.

Yud Aleph: When did they say additions to bikurim are like bikurim?  When it comes from Israel.  If it doesn’t come from Israel, then it isn’t like bikurim.

Yud Bet: Why did they say the bikurim are like the property of a kohen?  For he may buy with them slaves, land, and non-kosher animals, a creditor may take them for his debt, (he may pay) a woman for her ktuba, as a torah (may be used for the previous two examples).  Rabi Yehuda says, one may not give them except to a chaver as a favor.  Chachamim say, one may give them to the kohanim and they would divide them amongst themselves like the (other) holy things of the Beit Hamikdash.

Perek Daled

Aleph: An androgynous has some manners which are similar to men, has some manners similar to women, has some manners similar to men and women, and has some manners similar to neither men nor women.

Bet: How are they like men?  He becomes tame from white (seminal fluid) like men, he dresses like men, he takes a wife and is not taken as a wife like men, his mother sits for him in clean blood like men (thirty-three days after giving birth like men, not women), he may not be alone with women like men, he isn’t maintained like daughters (who get some money after the father’s death) like men, and he would transgress upon not rounding (hair), not destroying (the corners of the beard), and not become tame for the dead (if a kohen) like men, and he is chayav in all the mitzvot in the torah like men.

Gimmel: How is he like women?  He becomes tame from red (menstrual blood) like women, he may not be alone with men like women, he doesn’t make a need to do yibum (for his brother’s wives) like women, he doesn’t divide (inheritance) with his brothers, like women, he may not eat of the holies of the Beit Hamikdash like women, his mother sits for him in unclean blood like women (fourteen days of tuma before the thirty-three clean), he is ineligible for testimony like women, and if he was subjected to sinful (intercourse) he is invalidated from eating truma, like a woman.

Daled: How is he like men and women?  He makes chayav for one who wounds or curses him like man and women, one who kills him accidentally is exiled and intentionally is killed like men and women, his mother brings a korban (after giving birth to him) like men and women, he eats holy things in the borders like men and women, and he inherits all the inheritance (if the only heir) like men and women.

Hay: How is he like neither men nor women?  One doesn’t burn truma on account of their zava and he isn’t chayav for entering the Beit Hamikdash (while having emitted white or red) like neither men nor women, he isn’t sold as a Jewish slave like neither men nor women, and he isn’t given a value like neither a man nor a woman.  And if one said, I am a nazir if this one is neither a man nor a woman, he is a nazir.  Rabi Yossi says, an androgynous is creation of its own, and the Chachamim couldn’t decide about it whether it was a man or a woman.  But a tumtum isn’t like this, (for) there are times he is a man, and times he is a woman.

Seder Moed

Mesechet Shabbat

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Taking out on Shabbat are two which are four inside and two which are four outside.  How?  A poor person stands outside and the homeowner inside, the poor person puts out his hand, inside, and the homeowner puts something inside his hand or he took from him and took it out, the poor person is chayav and the homeowner is patur.  If the homeowner puts out his hand, outside, and the poor person put something in his hand or he took something from him and took it in, the homeowner is chayav and the poor person is patur.  If the poor person put his hand inside and the homeowner took something from it or out something in it and he (the poor person) took it out, they’re both patur.  If the homeowner puts his hand outside and the poor person took from it or he put something in it and he (the homeowner) brought it in, they’re both patur.

Bet: One should not sit before a barber close to mincha (on erev Shabbat), until he davens.  One should not enter a bathhouse, tannery, nor eat, nor judge.  And if they started they do not stop them.  They stop to read shma, and they do not stop for shmone esray.

Gimmel: The tailor should not take out his needle close to when it darkens, lest he forget and go out, and the scribe does not go with his pen.  One may not search his garments (for lice) or read by the light of a candle.  They truly said, the chazzan (a teacher) may see where the children read, but he may not read.  Likewise, a zav may not eat with a zava, for habit (leads to) sin.

Daled: And these are from the laws which they said in the upper chamber of Chanania ben Chizkiya ben Gurion when they went up to visit him, they counted and declared that Beit Shamay was greater (in number) than Beit Hillel, and they decreed eighteen things on that day.

Hay: Beit Shamay says, one does not soak (on Friday) in ink, dyes, and vetches, unless it’s to dye for that day, and Beit Hillel allows.

Vav: Beit Shamay says, one may not put bundles of flax into an oven, unless they will be steamed that day, and (one may) not put wool into a pot (of boiling dye) unless it will gather the appearance (that day) and Beit Hillel allows.  Beit Shamay says, one may not set traps for animals, birds, or fish except to trap that day, and Beit Hillel allows.

Zayin: Beit Shamay says, one may not sell to a non-Jew (on Friday), one does not load (an animal) with him, and one does not lift on him (a load which he is carrying), unless he is going to a nearby place, and Beit Hillel allows.

Chet: Beit Shamay says, one doesn’t give hides to a leatherworker and not vessels (clothes) to a non-Jewish washer, unless they do that day.  And Beit Hillel allows all of them with the sun (still up).

Tet: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, they were accustomed in the house of my father to give white vessels (clothes, which were hard to clean) to the non-Jewish cleaners three days before Shabbat.  And both of these agree that one may load the beams of an olive press (so the oil will be extracted over Shabbat) and the cylinders of a wine press (to further squish the grapes over Shabbat).

Yud: One may not roast meat, onion, or egg unless they will be roasted that day.  One may not put bread in the oven with (the onset of) darkness, and not charara (a type of cake baked) on coals, unless their surface will crust that day.  Rabi Eliezer says, enough for their bottom to become crusted.

Yud Aleph: One may put the korban pesach down into the oven with nightfall, and one may kindle the fire in a bonfire of Beit Hamoked (a fire in the Beit Hamikdash to warm the kohanim) and in the country, (they may only kindle) if most of them will catch fire.  Rabi Yehuda says, with charcoal, any amount (if lie makes it mutar).

Perek Bet

Aleph: With what do we light, and with what do we not light?  One doesn’t light with cedar cambium (material between bark and heartwood), uncarded flax, silk waste product, a wick of willow cambium, a wick if the desert (a certain desert grass), or algae which is on the water (which grows off of boats).  Not with (liquid) tar, (liquid) wax, castor oil, oil which must be burnt (for ritual reasons), fat-tail (of an animal), or forbidden fats (chelev).  Nachum of Mede says, one may light with cooked chelev.  Chachamim say, whether cooked or not, one may not light with it.

Bet: One may not light with oil which must be burnt on Yom Tov.  Rabi Yishma’el says, one may not light with waste matter from pitch out of respect for Shabbat, and the Chachamim allow with all oils, sesame oil, nut oil, radish seed oil, fish oil, oil from the seeds of a (specific but unidentifiable) wild vine, waste matter from pitch, and gasoline.  Rabi Tarfon says, we don’t light except with olive oil.

Gimmel: Whatever comes from a tree (plant) one does not light with except flax.  Whatever comes from a tree (plant) does not become tame as a tent except flax.  A wick made of clothing, which was folded (and braided) but not singed (as a starter) Rabi Eliezer says, it’s tame and may not be lit.  Rabi Akiva says, it’s tahor and may be lit.

Daled: One may not make a hole in the shell of an egg, fill it with oil, and put it above the candle such that it will drip in, even if it is an earthenware (vessel), and Rabi Yehuda allows it.  But if the potter joined it, originally it’s mutar, since it is one vessel.  One may not fill a bowl with oil, put it beside the candle, and put the wick inside the bowl such that it will absorb.  And Rabi Yehuda allows it.

Hay: One who puts out a candle out of fear of goyim, bandits, evil spirit, or for a sick person who is sleeping is patur.  If he wants to spare the candle, the oil, or the wick, he’s chayav.  And Rabi Yehuda exempts all except the wick since it makes soot.

Vav: For three sins women die when they give birth, for not being careful with nidda, challa, and lighting candles.

Zayin: There are three things a person must say on erev Shabbat when it gets dark (and they are), have you taken ma’aser?, have you made an eruv?, and light the candle!  If it is a doubt whether or not it’s (already) dark, one may not take ma’aser from certain (tevel), immerse vessels, or light the candles, but one may take ma’aser from dmai, make an eruv, and insulate hot food.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: A hotplate which one heated with straw or straw remainders taken from the field, one may put a dish of food on it.  (If he heated) with peat and sticks, he may not put on it until he rakes or until he puts ashes on it.  Beit Shamay says, hot (water may be put on), but not food, and Beit Hillel says, water and food.  Beit Shamay says, one may remove, but not return, and Beit Hillel says, he may even return.

Bet: An oven which one heated with straw or straw remainders one may not put in it or in it.  A half-sized hotplate (which maintains heat better) which one heated with straw or straw remainders, it is like a hot plate, with peat or wood, it is like an oven.

Gimmel: One may not put an egg next to a hot pot so that it will roll, he may not crack it in a scarf (which has been heated by the sun), and Rabi Yossi allows.  And he may not bury it in sand and the dirt of roads so that it will be roasted.

Daled: Once the people of Tveria brought a pipe of cold (water) into a channel of hot (water, to heat it up).  Chachamim said to them, if it’s on Shabbat, it is like how water which was heated on Shabbat, which are assur for washing and drinking.  If on Yom Tov, they are like hot water which was heated up on Yom Tov, assur for washing and mutar for drinking.  A raked water hotpot may be drunk from on Shabbat.  A water heater (with coals under a vessel for heating) even if raked it may not be drunk from.

Hay: A hot pot which was removed (from the flame), one may not put into it cold water such that they will get warmer, but he may put it into a cup (with cold water) to make it lukewarm.  The stewpot and cauldron that he removed while boiling, he may not put spices in them, but he may put it into a bowl or a serving dish.  Rabi Yehuda says, he may put it into anything unless there is in it vinegar or brine.

Vav: One may not put a vessel under the candle to collect from it the oil, but if he put it there during the day it’s mutar.  One may not derive benefit from it, since it is not prepared (for use on Shabbat).  One may move a new candle (never used to light for Shabbat) but not an old one.  Rabi Shimon says, any candle may be moved, except for the one he is lighting that Shabbat.  One may put a vessel under the candle to collect its sparks, but he may not put water in it, since that is extinguishing.

Perek Daled

Aleph: With what may one insulate, and with what may one not insulate?  One may not insulate with peat, manure, salt, lime, sand, whether moist or dry, hay, pomace (waste from pressed grapes), soft substances, or herbs, when they are moist, but one may insulate with them when they are dry.  One may insulate with coverings, produce, dove feathers, the sawdust of carpenters, and chips of fine flax.  Rabi Yehuda forbids with fine and allows with coarse.

Bet: One may insulate with hides and one may move them, with wool shearings but one may not move them.  How does he do this (use the pot if he may not move the insulation)?  He removes the cover and they fall.  Rabi Eliezer ben Azariah says, he tilts it on its side and takes it, lest he take it and be unable to return it (to the basket where it was apparently preserved, for the wool will fill its place).  Chachamim say, he takes it out and returns it.  If he didn’t cover it that day, he may not cover it when it darkens.  If he covers it and it became uncovered, he may cover it.  One may fill a jug and put it under a pillow or a mattress.

Perek Hay

Aleph: With what may an animal go out with (put on by the owners, going into the public domain) and with what may an animal not go out?  A camel may go out with a bit, a female camel with a ring (placed in the nose to allow for extra control), an especially difficult donkey with a halter, a horse with a chain, and all animals which go out with a chain may go out with a chain and be pulled by a chain, and (while still on the animal) one may sprinkle them (the chain, to make them tahor if they became tame) and immerse them while they are in their place (one the animal’s neck).

Bet: A donkey may go out with a cushion for warming it, while it is tied to it (the donkey).  Rams may go out covered (so they do not mount the females), ewes may go out exposed (tail tied up), tied (tails tied down), or covered (to keep their wool clean).  Goats may go out bound (bags on their teats to control milk flow).  Rabi Yossi forbids all of them, except for ewes covered.  Rabi Yehuda says, goats may go out tied.  Rabi Yehuda says, goats may go out tied to dry them (tightly to prevent milk) but not to make them have milk (loosely to protect the milk).

Gimmel: And with what do they not go out?  A camel may not go out with a pad on its hump, a front leg tied to a back leg, or its leg tied to its thigh (to immobilize that leg), and so too with all animals.  One may not tie camels to each other and pull, but he may gather the ropes in his hand and pull, as long as he doesn’t wrap (the ropes around his hand).

Daled: A donkey may not go out with a cushion if it’s not tied to it, not with a bell, even if it is muffled, not with a ladder around its neck (a type of yoke which prevents it from turning its head), and not with a strap on its leg (to protect from rubbing).  Roosters may not go out with strings or straps on their legs, rams may not go out with wagons under their fat-tails, ewes may not go out with nose chips (a device which makes them sneeze and has worms fall from their heads), a calf may not go out with a small yoke, and a cow may not go out with a hedgehog skin (the spikes would protect the teats from being drunk from as the cow sleeps) or a strap between its horns.  The cow of Rabi Elazar ben Azariah would go out with a strap between its horns, which was not according to the will of Chachamim.

Perek Vav

Aleph: With what may a woman go out, and with what may she not go out?  She may not go out with wool stings, flax strings, or straps in her hair, and she may not immerse until she loosens it.  (She may not go out with) a frontlet (necklace tied from ear to ear) or headdress when they aren’t sown (onto a hat), or a cap (to protect he neck from the frontlet) to the public domain, and not with a ‘city of gold’ (a crown with an engraving of Yerushalayim), a necklace, earrings, a ring which has no seal, or with a needle which is unpierced.  If she did go out with it, she isn’t chayav a chatat.

Bet: A man may not go out with nailed sandals, one (sandal) if he doesn’t have a wound, tfillin, an amulet when he’s not an expert (in healing people with amulets), a coat of mail, an army helmet, or army boots.  And if he did go out, he’s not chayav a chatat.

Gimmel: A woman may not go out with a pierced needle, a ring with a seal, a diadem, a sachet of perfume, and not with a flask of perfume.  And if she went out, she is chayav a chatat, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim exempt by a sachet or flask of perfume.

Daled: The man may not go out with a sword, bow, shield, alah (some object of war), or spear, and if he did go out, he is chayav a chatat.  Rabi Eliezer says, they are ornaments for him.  Chachamim say, they (these weapons) are nothing but reproach, as it says, “they shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks, a nation will not raise to a nation a sword, and they will not learn war any longer.  A garter on the thigh is (always) tahor, and one may go out with it on Shabbat.  Foot chains (can become) tame, and may not be taken out on Shabbat.

Hay: A woman may go out with hair ribbons whether they are hers, her friend’s, or an animal’s, with a frontlet, with a headdress when they are sown, with a cap or a secular wig she may go out to the courtyard, with absorbent cotton in her ear, with cotton (to pad) in her sandal, with absorbent cotton that she set aside for her menstrual cycle, with pepper, with a grain of salt, and anything she will put in her mouth, as long as she isn’t first putting it there on Shabbat.  A false tooth and a gold tooth, Rabi allows and Chachamim forbid.

Vav: She may go out with a sela (coin) on a foot wound, girls may go out with thread and even chips in their ears.  Women from Arabia may go out veiled, women from Media may go out (with their commonly worn outer coats) fastened, and anyone (may go out like this), rather Chachamim spoke about the present (conditions).

Zayin: She may fasten (the coat) on a rock, a nut, and a coin (a common practice to help form a loop), as long as she didn’t first tie it on Shabbat.

Chet: An amputee may go out with his artificial leg according to Rabi Meir, and Rabi Yossi forbids it.  And if it has a compartment for pads, it (can become) tame.  His supports get midras tuma (a kind of tuma transmitted to objects used for sitting or laying on), one may go out with them on Shabbat, and he may enter the Temple courtyard with them.  His chair and its supports get midras tuma, one may not go out with them on Shabbat, and they are not brought into the Temple courtyard.  A specific sort of mask is (always) tahor, and one may not go out with them.

Tet: Sons may go out with knots (on their shoes as a remedy for missing their fathers) and the sons of kings may go out with bells, and so too all people, but the Chachamim speak (based on) the present.

Yud: One may of out with the egg of a type of locust, the tooth of a fox, and the nail from (where) someone was hanged since they are cures, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, even on a weekday it is assur because it is the way of the Emorim.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: They said a great general rule about Shabbat, whoever forgets the principle of Shabbat and does many melachot (work prohibited on Shabbat) on many Shabbatot, he is only chayav one chatat.  One who knows about the principle of Shabbat (but forgot about it) and he did many melachot on many Shabbatot, he is chayav for each Shabbat.  One who knows it is Shabbat and does many melachot, he is chayav on each category of melacha.  One who does many melachot which are all similar to one melacha (the av melacha) he is only chayav one chatat.

Bet: There are forty minus one categories of melacha, one who sows, plows, harvests, bundles, threshes, winnows, sorts (out the bad grains), grinds, sifts, kneads, bakes, shears wool, bleaches, cards, dyes, spins, sets the warp (thread) on the loom, makes two loops, weaves two strings, ‘unweaves’ two strings, ties, unties, sews two stitches, tears in order to sew two stitches, traps a dear, shechts it, skins it, salts it, works its leather, smoothes it, cuts it (to size), writes two letters, erases in order to write two letters, builds, dismantles, puts out a fire, lights a fire, strikes with a hammer (completing a process), and takes from domain to domain, behold, these are the forty minus one categories of melacha.

Gimmel: And they said another general principle, anything which is fit to be set aside (is of sufficient use to be taken care of) and people set aside things like it (of that size such that it is useful) and one carried it on Shabbat, he is chayav a chatat.  And whatever isn’t fit to be set aside and people don’t set aside things like it, he isn’t chayav, only if the person himself (would) set it aside.

Daled: One who carries straw (must carry), enough to fill a cow’s mouth; pea stalks, enough to fill a camel’s mouth; sheaves, enough to fill a lamb’s mouth; herbs, enough to fill a kid’s mouth; moist garlic leaves (greens) and moist onion leaves, the size of a dried fig; and dry, enough to fill a kid’s mouth.  They do not combine with one another, since they don’t have equal measures.  One who carries food the size of a dried fig is chayav, and they combine, since they have the same measure, except their skins, pits, stems, and coarse and fine bran.  Rabi Yehuda says, except for the skin of lentils, for they are cooked with them.

Perek Chet

Aleph: One who carries wine, enough to mix a cup; milk, enough for a gulp; honey, enough to put on a sore; oil, enough to anoint a small limb (little toe of a newborn); water, enough to dilute eye salve with it; all other liquids, a revi’it; and all that is poured out (non-potable water), a revi’it.  Rabi Shimon says, all of them are a revi’it, and they only said all of these measurements for those who set them aside.

Bet: One who carries rope, enough to make a handle for a large basket and reed grass, enough to make a holder for a sifter or sieve.  Rabi Yehuda says, enough to take from it the size of a child’s shoe.  Paper, enough to write on it a customs collector’s knot (which the customs collector would write to show that customs had been paid), and one who carries a customs collector’s knot is chayav.  Erased paper, enough to wrap on the mouth of a small flask of a certain perfume.

Gimmel: Leather, enough to make an amulet; parchment, enough to write on it the smallest section of the tfillin, which is shma yisra’el; ink, enough to write two letters; and eye shadow, enough to make up one eye.

Daled: Glue, enough to put on the top of a shoot; tar and sulfur, enough to fix a hole; wax, enough to put on a small hole; clay, enough to seal the hole of a gold-smelter’s furnace.  Rabi Yehuda says, enough to make a peg.  Bran, enough to put on the hole of a gold-smelter’s furnace and lime, enough to paint onto the smallest of girls (one of her fingers).  Rabi Yehuda says, enough to make a hair-crown (a hairdo).  Rabi Nechemia says, enough to make andipy (either redden the forehead or mark off bottles).

Hay: Earth (possibly a reddish clay), enough to make a seal on a product’s bag, according to Rabi Akiva.  Chachamim say, like the seals of letters.  Manure and fine sand, enough to manure a cabbage stalk, according to Rabi Akiva.  Chachamim say, enough to manure a leek.  Coarse sand, enough to put on a trowel full of lime (used together as a plaster); reed, enough to make a pen; and if it was thick or broken, enough to cook with it the lightest egg beaten and put in a crock.

Vav: Bone, enough to make a spoon.  Rabi Yehuda says, enough to make (the tooth of) a key.  Glass, enough to scrape (in order to sharpen) with it the top of a shuttle and a pebble or stone, enough to throw at a bird (to scare it away).  Rabi Eliezer bar Ya’akov says, in order to throw at an animal.

Zayin: Earthenware, enough to between a board and the one next to it, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Meir says, enough to use it to transfer coals.  Rabi Yossi says, enough to hold with it a revi’it.  Rabi Meir said, even though there is no proof for it, there is a mention of it, “and will there not be found among the pieces of earthenware (enough) to transfer fire from the hearth.”  Rabi Yossi says, from that there is a proof (for you?), “and to take out water from a cistern” (is how the pasuk ends, it is a proof for me).

Perek Tet

Aleph: Rabi Akiva said, from where do we learn that carrying (but not necessarily touching) avoda zara becomes tame, just as a menstruating woman (nidda).  As it says, “put them as far away as an unclean woman, ‘get out’ shall you tell it.”  Just as a nidda makes tame by carrying so too avoda zara makes unclean by carrying.

Bet: From where (do we know that) a boat is (always) tahor?  As it says, “the path of a ship in the heart of the sea” (equating the ship to the sea).  From where (do we know that) a bed which is six by six tfachim one may sow five types of seed, four on the four sides and one in the middle?  As it says, “for like the land produces its vegetation and like a garden her seeds she will sprout.”  It doesn’t say, her seed, but rather her seeds.

Gimmel: From where (do we know that) a woman who emits semen on the third day (after having relations) is tame?  As it says, “be ready for three days.”  From where (do we know that) one may wash a baby who had a brit mila on the third day if it falls out on Shabbat?  As it says, “and it was on the third day when they were in pain.”  From where (do we know that) that they tie a tongue of red wool on the head of the scapegoat?  As it says, “if your sins will be like red wool, like snow they will be whitened.”

Daled: From where (do we know that) anointing is like drinking on Yom Hakippurim?  Even though there is no proof for the thing, there is a mention of it, as it says, “and come like water to his insides and like oil on his bones.

Hay: One who carries wood, enough to cook alight egg; spices, enough to season a light egg, and they combine; nut shells, pomegranate peels, woad (an herb producing blue dye), and madder (an herb producing red dye), enough to dye with them a small garment in a headdress; urine, natron, and lixivium, Cimolian earth (a type of chalk), and potassium, enough to wash a small garment in a headdress.  Rabi Yehuda says, enough to pass over a stain (to check if it is blood or dye).

Vav: Pepper, any amount; sap from a tree, any amount; various spices and various metals, any amount; from the stones of an altar, the dirt of an altar, worm-eaten books and worm-eaten bands, at all, for people may put them aside to bury them.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one who carries the tools of avoda zara, any amount, as it says, “and it should not stay in your hand anything from the excommunicated.”

Zayin: One who carries a peddler’s basket, even though it has may types, he is only chayav one chatat.  Garden seeds, less than a dried fig.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says, five (seeds).  Squash seeds, two; gourd seeds, two; and Egyptian beans, two.  A live, tahor locust, any amount, and dead, like a dried fig.  The bird of vineyards, whether alive or dead, any amount, for one sets it aside for medicine.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one who carries a live, tame locust any amount, for one sets it aside for children to play with.

Perek Yud

Aleph: One who set aside for a seed, to use as a sample, for medicine, or moves it to another domain on Shabbat, he is chayav in any amount.  And all (other) people aren’t chayav on it unless it is of the set measurement.  If he returned and brought in, he is only chayav if it is of the set measurement.

Bet: One who carries food and places it on the threshold, whether he returned and brought them out or someone else brought it our, he’s patur, since he didn’t do the melacha in one go.  A basket which is full of fruit  and was put on the outer threshold, even though most of the fruits are outside, he’s patur, until he takes the whole basket out.

Gimmel: One who takes out, whether with his right or his life, in his bosom, one on his shoulder, he’s chayav, for this is how the sons of Kehat carried.  With the back of his hand, his foot, in his mouth, with his elbow, with his ear, with his hair, with a belt opening downward, between his belt and his cloak, on the hem of his cloak, in his shoe, or in his sandal, he is patur, for he didn’t carry the way people carry.

Daled: If one intended to carry (an object tied to his cloak) before him, but he carried it behind him, he’s patur.  If he intended behind him and if came in front of him (and was therefore better guarded), he’s chayav.  They truly said, a woman who wraps in an apron, whether in front or behind, is chayav, for it slips around.  Rabi Yehuda says, even the receivers of edicts (which were carried in a tube on a belt which could move about).

Hay: One who carries a loaf into the public domain is chayav.  If two brought it out, they are patur.  If one (alone) couldn’t take it out and two took it out, he’s chayav, and Rabi Shimon allows it.  One who takes out food less than the set measurement in a vessel, is patur even on the vessel, for the vessel is secondary to it; a live person in a bed, the bed is patur, for the bed is secondary to him; and the dead on a bed, he’s chayav.  And so too a kzayit of a corpse, a kzayit of an animal which died of natural causes, or a lentil sized piece of sheretz, he’s chayav, and Rabi Shimon allows it.

Vav: One who cuts his nails with each other or his teeth, so too with his hair, mustache, beard, a woman who braids, a woman who uses eye shadow, and a woman who parts her hair, Rabi Eliezer makes chayav, and the Chachamim make assur because of shvut (work which while not prohibited, is against the spirit of sanctity and assur derabanan).  One who plucks from a flowerpot with a hole is chayav, and if it doesn’t have a hole, he’s patur.  And Rabi Shimon exempts both.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: One who throws from the private domain to the public domain or vice versa is chayav.  From a private domain to a private domain or from a public domain to itself, Rabi Akiva makes him chayav and Chachamim exempt.

Bet: How?  There are two balconies (private domains) opposite each other in the public domain one, who passes or throws from one to the other is patur.  If they are both in one row (next to each other) one who passes is chayav and one who throws is patur, for this was the work of the levi’im (in the Mishkan, which is where we learn the melachot from), there were two wagons one behind the other in the public domain, they would pass the beams from one to the other, but not throw.  The rim of a pit and a rock which are taller than ten (tfachim) and their width is four (tfachim), one who takes from (on top of) them or puts on top of them is chayav.  If it’s less than this, he’s patur.

Gimmel: One who throws (a fig cake) four amot and it sticks to a wall taller than ten tfachim, it is as one who throws in the air (which is patur).  Under ten tfachim, it is like one who throws on he ground (chayav).  One who throws four amot while on the ground is chayav.  If one threw less than four amot and it rolled outside of four amot, he’s patur.  (If he threw) outside of four amot and it rolled inside of four amot, he’s chayav.

Daled: One who throws four amot into the sea is patur.  If there was a shallow pool of water and the public domain goes into it, one who throws four amot into it is chayav.  And how much is a shallow pool of water?  Less than ten tfachim.  If there was a shallow pool of water and the public domain went into it, one who throws four amot in it is chayav.

Hay: One who throws from the sea to land or from land to the sea; from the sea to a boat or a boat to the sea; or from a boat to another boat is patur.  If the boats are tied to each other, one may pass from one to the other.  If they aren’t tied, even though they are close, one may not pass from one to the other.

Vav: One who throws and remembers after it has left his hand, and another intercepted it, a dog intercepted it, or it burnt, he’s patur.  If he threw it in order to in order to make a wound, whether in a person or an animal, and he remembered before it made a wound, he’s patur.  This is the general rule, all who are chayav a chatat aren’t chayav until their beginning and end are (with an intention which is) by accident.  If the beginning is by accident and the end is on purpose or vice versa, they’re patur, until they’re both by accident.

Perek Yud Bet

Aleph: One who builds, how much will does he build to become chayav?  One who builds any amount.  And one who unbuilds, hits with a hammer or adze, or bores a hole at all is chayav.  This is the general rule, anyone who does a melacha and his melacha stays on Shabbat, he’s chayav.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, even one who hits with a sledgehammer on the anvil when work is being done is chayav, for it is as if he is improving the work product.

Bet: One who plows any amount, and the one who weeds, cuts, or trims any amount is chayav.  One who collects wood, if to improve, he’s chayav, but if to heat, enough to cook a light egg.  One who collects herbs, if to improve, any amount, but if (to feed) an animal, enough to fill the mouth of a kid.

Gimmel: One who writes two letters, whether with his right or left (hand), whether of one name (letter, i.e. both the same) or of two names, whether from two dyes, and in any language, he’s chayav.  Rabi Yossi said, they only made two letters chayav because it’s making a mark, for this is how they would write on the beams of the Mishkan, to know which is its pair.  Rabi said, we have found a long name (is used) in place of a long name, like Shem from Shimon or Shmuel, Noach from Nachor, Dan from Daniel, and Gad from Gadiel.

Daled: One who writes two letters in one stint of unawareness is chayav.  If he wrote in ink, sam (a colored earth), sikra (a red dye), gum resin, or calcanthum, with anything which marks (lastingly), the two walls of a corner, the two boards of a writing tablet, and they can be read with one another, he’s chayav.  One who writes on his flesh is chayav.  One who scratches on his flesh, Rabi Eliezer makes chayav a chatat, and Rabi Yehoshua permits it.

Hay: If he wrote with liquids, fruit juices, the dust of roads, dust of a scribe, and anything which doesn’t last, he’s patur.  With the back of his hand, his foot, with his mouth, and his elbow, or if he writes one letter close to what is written, he wrote on top of something written, he intended to write a chet and wrote two zayins, one in the earth and one on a beam, he wrote on two walls of the house, or on two boards of a writing tablet which don’t go together, he’s patur.  If he wrote a letter after an acronym, Rabi Yehoshua ben Bteira makes chayav, and Chachamim allow.

Vav: One who writes two letters in two stints of unawareness, one in the morning and one in the afternoon, Rabi Gamliel makes chayav and Chachamim allow.

Perek Yud Gimmel

Aleph: Rabi Eliezer says, one who weaves three strings at the beginning (starting a new garment) or one on a woven patch is chayav.  Chachamim say, whether it’s the beginning or the end, the set measurement is two stings.

Bet: One who makes two loops, if on heddles (a part of the loom), the sley (an implement which aids the weaving process), the sieve, the sifter, or the basket, is chayav.  And one who sows, two stitches, and one who rips, in order to sow two stitches.

Gimmel: One who tears in anger or for the dead, or anything destructive, is patur.  One who destroys in order to fix, the set measurement is like one who fixes.

Daled: The set measurement of one who bleaches, cards, dyes, and spins, enough to fill a sit (a measurement) twice.  And one who weaves two strings, the set measurement is to fill a sit.

Hay: Rabi Yehuda says, one who traps a bird into a tower (a closet considered a trap for birds) or a deer into a house is chayav.  Chachamim say, a bird into a tower and a deer into a house, courtyard, or vivarium.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, not all vivariums are the same.  This is the general rule, if it’s missing (a final) trapping, he’s patur, and what isn’t missing trapping (i.e. is trapped in a sufficiently small area), he’s chayav.

Vav: A deer which entered and one locked it in, he’s chayav.  If two locked him in, they’re patur.  If one couldn’t lock it (alone) and two did, they’re chayav, and Rabi Shimon exempts them.

Zayin: If one sat in the entrance (to the place the deer was)and didn’t fill it, and a second sat and filled it, the second is chayav.  If the first sat in the entrance and filled it, and a second came and sat next to him, even if the first one got up and left, the first is chayav and the second patur.  Behold, what is this like?  Like one who locks a house in order to guard it, and a deer was guarded (by someone else) in the house already.

Perek Yud Daled

Aleph: Eight shratzim (a class of animals) are mentioned in the torah, and one who traps them or wounds them is chayav.  Other shekatzim and remasim one who wounds them is patur.  One who traps them for a use is chayav, not for any use is patur.  A wild animal or fowl which is in his domain, one who traps them is patur, and one who wounds them is chayav.

Bet: One may not make himli (a saltwater brine made in large quantities), but one may make salt water and dip his bread in it, and dip in cooked food.  Rabi Yossi said, and isn’t it (the salt water) himli, whether a lot (himli) or a little?  And these are the permitted salt waters, if he first puts the oil (used in himli) in the water or the salt (and not make straight salt water at any time, which is seen as part of curing foods).

Gimmel: One may not eat Greek hyssop on Shabbat, because it is not food of healthy people (it was used as medicine), but he may eat maidenhair and drink liverwort.  One may eat anything as a medicine and drink anything except for palm water (water from a specific spring in Israel) and a cup of root (tea), because they are for jaundice (and it will be clear that he is taking them to cure his jaundice).  But he may drink palm water if he’s thirsty and anoint with root oil if not for medicine.

Daled: One who feels pain in his teeth, he may not swallow vinegar, but he may dip (in vinegar) as he normally would, and if he is healed, he is healed.  One who feels pain in his loins may not anoint in wine or vinegar, but he may anoint with oil, but not rose oil.  Royalty may anoint with rose oil on their wounds, for this is how they anoint during the week.  Rabi Shimon says, all Jews are royalty.

Perek Tet Vav

Aleph: These arte knots which one is chayav for, the camel’s knot and the sailor’s knot.  And just as one is chayav for tying them, one is chayav for untying them.  Rabi Meir says, all knots which one can untie with one hand, one isn’t chayav for.

Bet: There are knots which one is not chayav for like the camel knot and sailor knot.  A woman may tie the opening of her robe, the cords of her hairnet, her belt, the straps of a shoe or sandal, flasks of wine or oil, and on a pot of meat (to seal in the heat).  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, one may tie before an animal so it doesn’t escape.  One may tie a bucket, but with a belt not a rope, and Rabi Yehuda allows it.  Rabi Yehuda said a general rule, any knot which isn’t meant to last, one isn’t chayav on it.

Gimmel: One may fold vessels (clothing) even four or five times (if it is to preserve them for later on Shabbat), and one may arrange the beds on Shabbat evening (Friday night) for Shabbat (Saturday), but not on Shabbat for motzei Shabbat.  Rabi Yishma’el says, one may fold clothing and arrange beds on Yom Kippur (which falls out on Friday) for Shabbat, and the chelev from Shabbat may be offered on Yom Kippur (which falls out on Saturday night).  Rabi Akiva says, those of Shabbat are not offered on Yom Kippur, and those of Yom Kippur are not offered on Shabbat.

Perek Tet Zayin

Aleph: All holy writings one may save from a fire, whether or not they are read from.  And even if they are written in any language (other than Hebrew, and are burned) they must be buried.  And why don’t we read in them (ktuvim, referred to in the first line)?  Because of the neglect of the beit midrash (house of study, where sermons were given on Shabbat, but people might skip and read the ktuvim).  One may save the case of a book with a book and the bag of tfillin with the tfillin, even if they have money in them.  And to where does one save them?  Into an alley which isn’t open (a dead end alley which can easily be closed off).  Ben Bteira says, even if it’s open.

Bet: One may save food (from a fire) for the three meals, that which is fit for a person, (is saved) for a person, and that which is fit for an animal, (is saved) for an animal.  If a fire broke out on Shabbat evening, one saves food for three meals, if at shacharit (in the morning) one saves food for two, if at mincha time (the afternoon) one saves for one.  Rabi Yossi says, a person always saves for three meals.

Gimmel: One may save a basket full of loaves, and even though it has in it a hundred meals, a cake of pressed figs, or a barrel of wine.  And he says to others, come and save for yourselves.  And if they were prudent, they would settle accounts with him after Shabbat.  To where do they save them?  To a courtyard with an eruv.  Ben Bteira says, even if it doesn’t have an eruv.

Daled: And one may take all of his utensils out to there, and he may wear everything he can wear (fit on at once), and wraps in everything ha can wrap in.  Rabi Yossi says, eighteen garments and he returns and put on and takes out (more clothing, but only eighteen at a time) and he may tell others, come and save with me.

Hay: Rabi Shimon ben Nanas says, one may spread the hide of a kid on a dresser, a chest, and a cupboard (all wooden) in which the fire has caught, because it (the hide, only) is singed.  And they may make a divider with any vessel, whether they are filled or empty so that the fire doesn’t pass.  Rabi Yossi forbids with a new, earthenware vessel filled with water, for they cannot accept the fire, and will burst and put out the fire.

Vav: A non-Jew who comes to put it out, one does not say to him, put it out or, don’t put it out, for his resting of Shabbat is not on them (they aren’t accountable for him), but a minor who came to put out, they do not listen to him, for his resting on Shabbat is on them.

Zayin: One may put a dish on top of a candle so it doesn’t catch on the (ceiling) beam, on the excrement of a minor, and on a scorpion so it won’t sting.  Rabi Yehuda said, a case (of a scorpion) came before Raban Yochanan ben Zakai in Arav, and he said, I fear (that he is chayav for) a chatat (for trapping).

Chet: A non-Jew who lit a candle, a Jew may use the light, but if he lit it for the Jew, it’s assur.  If he filled (a trough with) water to water his flock, a Jew may water after him, but if he filled it for the Jew, it’s assur.  If a non-Jew made a ramp to go down on, a Jew may go down on it, but if he made it for the Jew, it’s assur.  Once Raban Gamliel and the Zekenim were coming on a boat, and a non-Jew made a ramp on which to go down, and they went down on it.

Perek Yud Zayin

Aleph: All vessels may be moved on Shabbat, and their doors with them (such as the door of a cupboard), even if they weren’t attached (to the vessel) at the beginning of Shabbat, for they are not like the doors of houses, because they (house doors) are not made ready (to be moved about).

Bet: A person may move a mallet on Shabbat in order to crack open nuts, an axe to cut a pressed fig cake, a saw to saw cheese, a spade to shovel dried figs, a winnowing shovel and a pitchfork to put a child on, the reed and the whorl (a wooden needle used in weaving) to stick (into a potentially dirty or sticky food), a hand needle to take out a thorn (from one’s skin), and (a needle) of sack-maker to open a door (to pick the lock).

Gimmel: A reed used for (stirring) olives, if it has a knot at its end, it is able to become tame (the knot is seen as a receptacle, making it a vessel), and if not, it doesn’t become tame.  Either way, it may be moved on Shabbat.

Daled: Rabi Yossi says, all vessels may be moved, except for a large saw and the pin of a plow (they have no other use).  All vessels may be need whether for a need or not.  Rabi Nechemia says, one may only move them for a need.

Hay: Any vessel which is moved on Shabbat, its shards may be moved with it, as long as they are doing something productive, (like) the shards of a kneading trough (which can be used to) cover the mouth of a barrel, or glass shards which can be used to cover the mouth of a flask.  Rabi Yehuda says, as long as they do something like their purpose, shards of a kneading trough to pour into them a stiff mass, and shards of glass to pour into them oil.

Vav: A stone which is in a (dried) pumpkin (which weighed it down, allowng it to be used as a bucket), if they fill it and (the stone) doesn’t fall, they may fill, but if not, they may not fill it.  A branch which is tied to a small earthenware bucket, one may fill it on Shabbat.

Zayin: A cap for a window (to close it since there were no panes), Rabi Eliezer says, when it is tied and hung up, one may stop with it, and if not, one may not stop with it.  Chachamim say, either way, one may stop with it.

Chet: All covers of vessels which have a handle may be moved on Shabbat.  Rabi Yossi said, what is this talking about?  Covers of land (like a well) but covers of vessels, either way they may be moved on Shabbat.

Perek Yud Chet

Aleph: One may clear out even four or five piles of hay and produce because of guests and because of neglect of the beit midrash (to clear space for the students), but not the (entire) storehouse (for he may be flattening the floor).  One may clear out tahor truma, dmai, ma’aser rishon which had truma taken, ma’aser sheni and hekdesh which were redeemed, and dry lupine, because it is food for the poor.  But not tevel, ma’aser rishon from which truma wasn’t taken, ma’aser sheni and hekdesh which weren’t redeemed, luf, and not mustard.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel allows luf, since it is the food of ravens.

Bet: Bundles of straw, wood, or greens, if he prepared them to feed animals, he may carry them, and if not, he may not carry them.  One may turn a basket upside-down so young birds may go up and down it.  A rooster which escaped, one pushes it until it goes back in (to the coop).  One may lead a calf or pull it in a public domain.  A woman may lead her child.  Rabi Yehuda says, when?  When he takes one (foot) and rests one (a.k.a. can walk somewhat), but if he was dragging, it’s assur.

Gimmel: One may not deliver an animal (from its mother’s womb) on Yom Tov, but one may assist.  One may deliver from a woman on Shabbat, call her a midwife from this place to that, one may desecrate Shabbat for her, and one may tie the umbilical cord.  Rabi Yossi says, one may even cut it.  And all of the needs of a brit mila may be done on Shabbat.

Perek Yud Tet

Aleph: Rabi Eliezer says, if he didn’t bring a vessel (the knife for a brit mila) on erev Shabbat, one may bring it on Shabbat uncovered.  If it a time of danger, he may bring the knife based on witnesses (who will testify that he brought only the knife).  And another thing said Rabi Eliezer, one may chop wood to make charcoal and to make an iron vessel (knife, if they don’t have one).  Rabi Akiva said a general rule, any melacha you can do from erev Shabbat (like preparing the knife) does not push off Shabbat, but any melacha which one cannot do from erev Shabbat (like the brit itself) pushes off Shabbat.

Bet: One may fulfill the needs of mila on Shabbat, one may circumcise, tear, suck, and put on a bandage and cumin.  If he didn’t grind (the cumin) from erev Shabbat, he chews with his teeth and puts.  If he did not mix the wine and oil (to put on the wound), he puts on each by itself.  From the outset, one may not make a robe for it, but he may wrap it with a rag.  If he didn’t prepare if from erev Shabbat, he wraps (a rag) on his finger and brings it (on the wound), and (he may bring one) even from another courtyard.

Gimmel: One may wash the baby, whether before or after the brit mila, they (wash him by) sprinkling on him with their hand, but not a vessel.  Rabi Elazar ben Azariah says, one may wash a baby on the third day (after the brit mila) if it falls out on Shabbat, as it says, “and it was on the third day when they were in pain.”  If there is a doubt about whether there is a brit mila (based either on a doubt in the length of the pregnancy or the actual day the baby was born) and an androgynous, one does not violate Shabbat for him, and Rabi Yehuda allows for an androgynous.

Daled: One who had two babies, one to have a brit mila after Shabbat and one to have on Shabbat, and he forgot and circumcised the one for after Shabbat on Shabbat, he’s chayav.  If he had one to circumcise on erev Shabbat and one on Shabbat, and he forgot and circumcised the one for erev Shabbat on Shabbat, Rabi Eliezer says he’s chayav, and Rabi Yehuda says he’s patur.

Hay: A baby may have a brit on the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, or twelfth day, no more and no less.  How is this?  Normally, the eighth; if he was born at twilight, the ninth; twilight before Friday, the tenth; Yom Tov which fell after Shabbat (and the baby was born twilight before Friday), the eleventh; and Rosh Hashana (after Shabbat) the twelfth.  And a baby who is sick, we do not give him a brit mila until he becomes healthy.

Vav: These are shreds (of foreskin) which hinder (the validity) of a brit mila, those which the flesh covers most of the corona (the head of the penis).  (If he still has this) he may not eat truma.  And if he is fat, he corrects it (removes more than the foreskin, for the leftover still seems to cover the penis) for the sake of a proper appearance (so we don’t think he was improperly circumcised).  If he circumcised but didn’t tear the circumcision, it is as if he didn’t circumcise.

Perek Kaf

Aleph: Rabi Eliezer says, one may hang a strainer (for wine) on Yom Tov, and one may put into a suspended strainer on Shabbat.  Chachamim say, one may not hang a strainer on Yom Tov, and one may not put into a suspended strainer on Shabbat, but one may put into a suspended (strainer) on Yom Tov.

Bet: One may put water in lees such that they will be clear, one may strain wine with scarves or an Egyptian basket, one may put an egg in a strainer of mustard (so the yolk will drip in and color it, and one may make enomlin (a mixture of wine, honey, and peppers) on Shabbat.  Rabi Yehuda says, on Shabbat a cup (of enomlin is all one is allowed to make, otherwise it is too much work), on Yom Tov by log, and on Chol Hamo’ed, by the barrel.  Rabi Tzadok says, it is all based on the (number of) guests.

Gimmel: One may not soak asafetida (an herb) in lukewarm water (a weekday activity) but he may put it in vinegar.  And one may not soak vetches or rub them, but he may put inside a sieve or a large basket.  One may not sift hay in a sieve and one may not put it in a high place such that the chaff will fall down, but he may put it in a sieve and put it into a stable.

Daled: One may sweep (a stable on Shabbat) before the fatting (bull, so that its food will be clean and will still want its food), and one may move (feed) to the sides because of animal droppings according to Rabi Dosa, and Chachamim prohibit it.  One may take (food) from this animal and put it before that animal on Shabbat.

Hay: Straw which is on a bed (used for warmth), one may not shake it with his hand, but he may shake it with his body (to smooth it), but if it’s the food of an animal or there was on it a pillow or sheet, one may shake it with his hand.  A household clothing one may open (to remove clothes) but not press, but those of launderers, one may not touch.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it was opened from before Shabbat, he may open it completely and remove (the clothes).

Perek Kaf Aleph

Aleph: A person may take his son who has a stone in his hand and a large basket with a stone inside of it.  And one may carry tame truma with tahor (truma) and chulin.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may even take the meduma in one hundred one (where even if the truma is nullified by a hundred one, one must give one part to the kohen, which Rabi Yehuda holds may be done on Shabbat).

Bet: A stone which is on a barrel, one tilts it on its side and the stone falls.  If it was between barrels, one raises it and tilts it and the stone falls.  Money which is on a pillow, one shakes the pillow and it falls.  If there was an unclean substance on it, he may wipe it with a rag.  If it is made of leather, one puts water on it until it is gone.

Gimmel: Beit Shamay says, one may take from the table bones and shells.  Beit Hillel says, one takes the entire board and shakes it.  One may take from the table crumbs of less than a kzayit, and leftovers of peas and lentils since they are food for animals.  A sponge, if it has a leather handle, one may wash with it, and if not, one may not.  Chachamim say, either way it may be handled on Shabbat, and it doesn’t accept tuma.

Perek Kaf Bet

Aleph: A barrel which broke, one may save from it food for three meals.  And he may tell others, come and save for yourselves, as long as (none of them) use a sponge (to collect the wine and then squeeze it out later).  One may not squeeze fruits to get their juice out, and if they came out on their own, they are assur.  Rabi Yehuda says, if they were for food what comes out of them is mutar, if it was for a drink, what comes out of them is assur.  Honeycombs which one crushed before Shabbat, and (the honey) came out by itself, it’s assur, and Rabi Elazar allows it.

Bet: Whatever comes in hot water (was boiled) from before Shabbat, one may soak in hot water on Shabbat, and whatever didn’t come in hot water before Shabbat, one may rinse it in hot water on Shabbat, except for an old salty fish, small salted fish, and Spanish kolyas (a type of fish), for this rinsing is finishing their work (of prepare to eat).

Gimmel: One may break a barrel to eat from it dried figs, as long as he doesn’t intend to make a vessel.  One may not make a hole in the bung (stopper) of a barrel, according to Rabi Yehuda, and Chachamim allow.  And he may not make a hole in its side, and if it had a hole, he may not put wax on it, since he is spreading.  Rabi Yehuda said, a case came before Raban Yochanan ben Zakai in Arabia and he said, I fear for him a chatat.

Daled: One may put a cooked dish in a pit to preserve it, good water in bad such that it will become colder, and cold water in the sun so that it will heat up.  One whose vessels (garments) got soaked in water on the way, he may walk in them and not worry.  When he reaches the outer courtyard (of a city, which is guarded and he could leave his clothes to dry), he spreads them in the sun, but not opposite the people (they might think he washed clothes on Shabbat).

Hay: One who bathes in cave water and in water from Tveria (both referring to warm waters) and he wipes, even with ten towels, he won’t take them in his hand (home, for he might come to wring them out), but ten people wipe with one towel their face, hands, and feet, and they may take it in their hand.

Vav: One may anoint or rub on the stomach, but one may not knead (rub vigorously) or scrape (with a brush).  One may not go down to Kordima (a river with a slippery base, so we are afraid his clothes will become wet and he will wring them), use ipecac, one may not manipulate (the spinal alignment) of a child, and one may not set a break.  One whose hand and foot were dislocated, he may not heal them with cold water, but he may wash as usual, and if it healed, it healed.

Perek Kaf Gimmel

Aleph: One may borrow from his friend jugs of wine and oil, as long as he doesn’t say, loan me, and so too with a woman (borrowing) from her friends loaves.  And if he doesn’t believe him, he leaves his cloak with him and they settle accounts after Shabbat.  And so too with Pesach which falls on erev Shabbat, he leaves his cloak by him and takes his pesach, and settles the accounts after Yom Tov.

Bet: A person may count his guests and his courses orally, but not from a written list.  One may have a lottery (to determine who gets which portion and the like) with his sons and the people of his household, as long as he doesn’t intend to have one large portion against a small one because of dice (which would make it like an exchange, assur on Shabbat).  And one may cast lots for sacrifices on Yom Tov, but not on portions.

Gimmel: One may not hire workers on Shabbat, and he may not tell his friend to rent workers for him.  One may not go to the limit (2,000 amot that one may walk outside a city) near nightfall (before motzei Shabbat) in order to hire workers or get produce (from a field).  But, he may (go out) by nightfall in order to guard (his field, for it would be allowed on Shabbat if within the walking limit, unlike the previous cases) and may bring produce with him.  Abba Shmu’el said a general rule, anything in which I am innocent for speaking about, I may wait at nightfall for it.

Daled: One may wait at nightfall at the limit to care for the matters of a bride and for the matters of the dead, to bring for him a coffin and shrouds.  A non-Jew who brought flutes on Shabbat, a Jew may not eulogize with them, unless they come from a nearby place.  If they made for him a coffin and dug for him a grave, a Jew may be buried in it, and if it was for a (made) Jew, one may never be buried there.

Hay: One may do all the needs of a dead person, one may anoint and wash him, as long as they do not move his limb (it is muktza).  One may take a pillow from beneath him and put him on the sand so that he will last.  One may tie the cheek (which naturally falls open), not so that it will close, but rather that it should no increase (in size).  So too a beam which broke, one may support it with a bench or bedposts, not that it will be raised up, just so that it will not increase.  One may not close the eyes of a corpse on Shabbat and not on a weekday with (near) the departure of the soul, and if he closes near the departure of the soul, behold he is killing (he may bring death faster).

Perek Kaf Daled

Aleph: One who nightfall (starting Shabbat) came when he was on the road, he gives his purse to a non-Jew, and if there is no non-Jew with him, he lays it on his donkey.  When he reaches the outside courtyard, he removes the vessels which may be removed on Shabbat, and those which cannot be removed on Shabbat, he unties their ropes, and the bags fall from them.

Bet: One may untie bundles of sheaves before an animal, and one may separate moist cedar shoots (or else the animal cannot eat them) but not bundles of straw tied with three knots.  One may not chop up young corn or carobs before an animal, whether small or large, Rabi Yehuda allows small carobs.

Gimmel: One may not stuff a camel (with food so it will last) or cram food down its throat, but one may put food in its mouth.  One may not stuff calves, but one may put food in its mouth.  One may stuff roosters and put water in bran, but not knead it (as feed for them).  And one may not put water before bees or doves ion a birdhouse, but one may put before geese, roosters, and domesticated doves.

Daled: One may cut gourds before cattle, and a carcass before dogs.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it was not a carcass from erev Shabbat, it’s assur, since it isn’t something prepared.

Hay: One may nullify oaths on Shabbat and borrow things which are needed for Shabbat.  One may stop up an illuminating (hole) and measure a strip (of cloth which transferred tuma if it was big enough) and a mikva.  And there was once in the days of the father or Rabi Tzadok and the days of Abba Shaul ben Batnit who stopped up an illuminating hole with a pitcher (not usually used for this purpose, so theoretically assur according to the beginning of the mishna) and tied a fire pot with reed-grass, to know if there was in the tub (the size of) less than a tefach or not.  And from their actions we have learned that one may stop up, measure, and tie on Shabbat.

Mesechet Eruvin

Perek Aleph

Aleph: A mavoy (an alley with courtyards, which are private domains, around it) which has a height (the entrance) of greater than ten amot, he must reduce it.  That which is wider than ten amot, must be reduced.  But if it has the form of an entry, even though it is wider than ten amot, one doesn’t need to reduce it.

Bet: Making a mavoy fit, Beit Shamay says, a lechi (poles surrounding the entrance) and a kora (a beam as a distinctive marker), and Beit Hillel says, a lechi or a kora.  Rabi Eliezer says, two lechi.  In the name of Rabi Yishma’el one student said in front of Rabi Akiva, Beit Hillel and Beit Shamay didn’t disagree about a mavoy which is less than four amot, which is with either a lechi or a kora.  One what did they argue about?  Wider than four until ten, for Beit Shamay says a lechi (poles surrounding the entrance) and a kora (a beam as a distinctive marker), and Beit Hillel says a lechi or a kora.  Rabi Akiva said, they argued about both.

Gimmel: The kora they talked about, it’s wide enough to accept (pass through) an arich, and an arich is half of a brick three tfachim wide  It is sufficient for a kora that it will be a tefach wide, in order to accept an arich by its length.

Daled: If it is wide enough to accept an arich, and strong enough to accept an arich, Rabi Yehuda says, wide, even if it isn’t strong (since he holds it is simply a partition).

Hay: If it was of straw or reeds, we consider it as if it is made of metal.  If it’s bent, we see it as if it’s straight.  Round, we see it as if it’s a square.  Whatever has a circumference of three tfachim, it has the width of a tefach.

Vav: The lechis of which they said, their height is ten tfachim, and their width and depth is any amount.  Rabi Yossi says, their width is three tfachim.

Zayin: One may make lechis out of anything, even something which is alive, and Rabi Yossi prohibits this.  It becomes tame from golel (covering a grave), and Rabi Meir makes it (always) tahor.  And one may write on it a get for a woman, but Rabi Yossi Hagelili prohibits this.

Chet: A caravan which encamped in a valley and they encircled it with vessels for animals, one may carry in it, as long as there it forms a wall taller than ten tfachim and the gaps don’t exceed the building (there is more eruv than not).  Any gap which is about ten amot is allowed, because it is like an entrance.  Anything more than that is assur.

Tet: One may surround with three ropes, this on top of that and this on top of that, as long as between them there isn’t three tfachim.  The measurement of the ropes and their thickness is more than a tefach, so the whole thing can be ten tfachim.

Yud: One may surround with reeds, as long as there isn’t three tfachim between one reed and the next one.  They’re speaking about a caravan according to Rabi Yehuda.  Chachamim say, they’re not talking about a caravan but rather a current case.  Any partition which isn’t of a warp and a weft isn’t a partition according to Rabi Yossi bar Rabi Yehuda.  Chachamim say, one of them (is sufficient, seeing as rope is like a weft and reeds are like a warp).  There are four things the allowed in a camp (of soldiers), one may bring (take) wood from anywhere (and it’s not stealing), they’re patur from washing their hands (before a meal), from dmai, and from making an eruv.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One may set boards around a well (to make it like a private domain) four double boards (at a right angle) which are similar to eight (they are placed at the corners of a square around a well, with a space between each one, creating an entrance on each side) or eight which seem like twelve, four double boards and four singles (two entrances on each side, the large entrance divided by a single board).  Their height must be ten tfachim, their width is six (tfachim), their width is any amount, and between them the space of two teams of three oxen each according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, of four (oxen) each, tied and not untied, one can go in and one can leave.

Bet: One may bring (boards) close to the well, as long as the head and most of (the body of) a cow can be inside and it can drink.  One may move it out until any amount, as long as he increases the number of boards.

Gimmel: Rabi Yehuda says, until (the enclosed area) is the size of two beit se’ah.  They said to him, two beit se’ah is only said by a garden or a closed in are used for storage, but if it was a pen used while animals fertilize, an enclosure, a backyard, or a courtyard, even if it is the size of five kur (a total of 150 se’ah), and even ten kur is mutar.  And one is even permitted to move it out any amount, as long as he increases the number of boards.

Daled: Rabi Yehuda says, if a public road separates them, he should divert it to the side (outside the boards).  Chachamim say, he doesn’t have to.  Whether a public pit, a public well, or a private well, the boards may be made around it.  But for a private pit, one makes a divider around it ten tfachim high according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bava says, one only makes board around the public well, and for the rest, one makes an enclosure ten tfachim high.

Hay: And furthermore said Rabi Yehuda ben Bava, a garden and closed storage area which are seventy amot and a bit by seventy amot and a bit (making it 5,000 square amot or two beit se’ah) surrounded by a fence taller than ten tfachim, one may carry in it provided there is a guard shack or a dwelling, or it is close to a city.  Rabi Yehuda says, even if all it has is a pit, a cistern, or a cave one may carry in it.  Rabi Akiva says, even if it has none of these, one may carry in it, as long as it is seventy amot and a bit by seventy amot and a bit.  Rabi Eliezer says, if its length is longer than its width by even an amah, one may not carry inside.  Rabi Yosef says, even if its length is twice as long is its width, one may carry in it.

Vav: Rabi Elay said, I heard from Rabi Eliezer, even if it is the size of a kur (thirty se’ah).  And I also herd from him, people of a courtyard, and one of them forgot and didn’t make an eruv, his house is assur to enter and exit for him, but for the others it’s mutar.  And I also heard from him that one is yotze with akravanim (a plant) on Pesach (for maror).  And I went back to all of his students and I asked for a colleague (to confirm my statements) and I didn’t find one.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: With anything one may make an eruv and participate, except with water and salt.  Anything may be bought with ma’aser money, except for water and salt.  One who makes an oath against food may have water and salt.  One may make an eruv with a nazir with wine and a yisra’el with truma, Sumchos says, (only) with chulin.  (One may make) with a kohen in a beit pras (an area around a plowed up grave, which is assur to a kohen).  Rabi Yehuda says, even in a graveyard, for he can go outside and eat it.

Bet: One may make an eruv with dmai, with ma’aser rishon from which truma has been taken, with ma’aser sheni and hekdesh which have been redeemed, and kohanim with challa and truma, but not with tevel, ma’aser rishon from which truma hasn’t been taken, or ma’aser sheni or hekdesh which haven’t been redeemed.  One who sends eruvin in the hand of a deaf-mute, mentally infirm person, or minor, or to one who doesn’t accept an eruv, it’s not an eruv.  And if he said to another to receive the eruv from him (the assur people) it’s an eruv.

Gimmel: If they put it in a tree higher than ten tfachim, it’s not an eruv, lower than ten tfachim, it’s an eruv.  If they put it in a pit, even if it’s a hundred amot deep, it’s an eruv.  If they put it on a reed or a pole, if it was detached (from the round) and then stuck in, even if it was taller than a hundred amot, it’s an eruv.  They put it on a tower and lost the key, this is an eruv.  Rabi Eliezer says, if he doesn’t know that the key is in his place, it’s not an eruv.

Daled: If it rolled out of the city limit, and a mound fell on it or it burnt, or it is truma which became tame, if it’s during the day, it’s not an eruv, but if it’s since it became dark, it is an eruv.  If it’s a doubt, Rabi Meir and Rabi Yehuda say, it is like a person riding a donkey and a camel (an idiom meaning both are useless, and he may not trust any eruvim which are like this, and may therefore not walk more than 2,000 amot from his home or from the city limits).  Rabi Yossi and Rabi Shimon say, a doubtful eruv is valid.  Rabi Yossi said, Avtulmos testified based on five elders that a doubtful eruv is valid.

Hay: A person may (set down two eruvim and) make conditions on an eruv, by saying, if non-Jews came from the east, my eruv is in the west (so I can flee), if from the west, my eruv is in the east, if they come from both, my eruv is where I’ll want it, and if they come from neither, I am like the people of my city (who set no eruv).  (He may also say) if a wise person comes from the east, my eruv is in the east, if from the west, my eruv is from the west, if from both ways, my eruv is where I’ll want it, and if from neither, I am like the people of my city.  Rabi Yehuda says, if one of them was his rabbi, he walks to his rabbi, and if both are his rabbis, he goes where he pleases.

Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, a Yom Tov which is next to Shabbat, whether before or after, one may make two eruvim and say, the eruv for the first (day I need to carry) is in the east and the second in the west, the first is for the west and the second for the east, may eruv is for the first and the second I am like the people of my city, or my eruv is for the second and the first I am like the people of my city.  Chachamim say, one makes an eruv for one direction or he doesn’t make an eruv at all, and one makes for two days, or he doesn’t make an eruv at all.  How does he do it?  He sets the first day and when it becomes nightfall, he brings it (home) and on the second, nightfall comes and he eats from it.  (If so,) we find he benefits (from the eruv) by his walking and his eruv (eating it).  If he ate on the first, his eruv is for the first and not an eruv for the second (day).  Rabi Eliezer said to them, you admit to me there may be two holies (as you need one for each day, you may have one for each direction).

Zayin: Rabi Yehuda says, Rosh Hashana  which he feared might have ibur (pushing off by one day), one may make two eruvim and say, the eruv for the first (day) is for the east and the for second for the west, for the first for the west and for the second for the east, my eruv is for the first, and on the second I am like the people of the city, or, my eruv is for the second and on the first I am like the people of the city.  And the Chachamim didn’t agree with him.

Chet: Furthermore said Rabi Yehuda, one may make a condition on a large basket (of tevel, which he makes some terms about the timing of his taking truma) on the first day of Yom Tov and eat it on the second.  And so too with an egg which was laid on the first, it may be eaten on the second.  And the Chachamim didn’t agree with him.

Tet: Rabi Dosa ben Harkinos says, one who is the shatz (leader of prayers) on the Yom Tov of Rosh Hashana says, strengthen us Hashem our God on this day of Rosh Chodesh, whether today or tomorrow.  And the next day he says, if today or yesterday, and the Chachamim didn’t agree with him.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who non-Jews took him out or an evil spirit (fit of craziness), he only has four amot (outside of the city limits).  If they return him, it’s as if he never left.  If they brought him to a different city, or they put him in a temporary pen or a guarded pen, Raban Gamliel and Rabi Elazar ben Azariah say, he may walk through all of it.  Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Akiva say, he only has four amot.  Once they came from Brundisium (a port in Italy) and their boat set out to sea, Raban Gamliel and Rabi Elazar ben Azariah walked all throughout it, and Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Akiva didn’t mover more than four amot, for they wanted to be strict with themselves.

Bet: Once, they didn’t enter the port by the time it got dark.  They said to Raban Gamliel, can we go down?  He said to them, you are allowed, for I already looked and we were within the limits before it got dark.

Gimmel: A person who went out (of the limits) with permission (i.e. to testify or save a life) and they said to him, the act (which you set out to do) has already been done, he has 2,000 amot in any direction.  If he was within the limits, it’s as if he never left, for all who go out to save return to their place.

Daled: One who sat on the road (and thought he would stay there for Shabbat) and stood and saw that he was close to the city, since it wasn’t his intention, he may not enter according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, he may enter.  Rabi Yehuda said, once there was a case Rabi Tarfon entered when he hadn’t intended.

Hay: One who slept on the road and didn’t know it had become dark (enough to be considered Shabbat) he has 2,000 amot in any direction according to Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri.  Chachamim say, he only has four amot.  Rabi Eliezer says, (he has four amot) and he is at the center (it is a square of side four amot, not a square with half its side four amot).  Rabi Yehuda says, to whichever direction he wants.  And Rabi Yehuda admits that if he chose for himself, he may not return (on his choice).

Vav: There were two (people) and part of this one’s amot are inside part of that one’s amot they may bring and eat in the middle as long as neither exits from his (amot) and enters those of his friend’s.  If there were three, and the middle is swallowed by the other two (his space is partially enclosed in both of theirs), he may be with them and they may be with him, but the two outer are assur to each other.  Rabi Shimon says, what is this like?  Three courtyards which are open to each other and the public domain, they both mix with the middle one, he is mutar to be with them and they are mutar to be with him, but the outer are assur to each other.

Zayin: One who was coming on a road and it darkened for him, and he knows of a tree or a fence, so he said, my Shabbat ‘station’ (the center where an eruv would go) is under it, he said nothing.  If he said it is at its root, he may walk 2,000 amot to its root and then 2,000 to his house, and thus he walks after it darkens 4,000 amot.

Chet: If he doesn’t know (a tree or fence) or ha isn’t an expert in the law, and he said, my Shabbat ‘station’ is in my place, he gets from his place 2,000 amot in any direction.  Round (in a circle, not out as in cardinal directions) according to Rabi Chanina ben Antigonus.  And Chachamim say, square like a square board, so he has the benefit of the corners.

Tet: And this is what they said, a poor person may make an eruv with his feet.  Rabi Meir said, we only have this by a poor person.  Rabi Yehuda says, whether a poor person or a rich person, for they only said to make an eruv on a rich person (so that he will make it on bread in stead of his feet),

Yud: Whoever went out to walk to (on behalf of) a city in which they can make an eruv and his friend turned back, he may go, and all of the people of the city are assur (for he might not have gone) according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Meir says, whoever could have made an eruv but didn’t he is like ‘one riding a donkey and a camel (he may not go anywhere outside of the town limits in the end, because he has no eruv).

Yud Aleph: When he went out of the limits, even one amah, he may not enter.  Rabi Eliezer says, two, he may enter but three, he may not.  One who it got dark for outside the limits, even one amah, he may not come in.  Rabi Shimon says, even fifteen amot, he may enter, for the surveyors don’t measure exactly because of those who err (so they will not transgress).

Perek Hay

Aleph: How does one extend (the limits) of a city?  If one house is in (from the line) and on house goes out (of the line), or a turret is in and a turret is out.  If there were ruins ten tfachim high and bridges and mausoleums which have a space to live in, we move out the measurement according to them and we make it like a square board, such that we get the advantage of the corners.

Bet: One gives a city an extra karpef (seventy and two-thirds amot and then begins the measurement of 2,000 amot) according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, they didn’t say a karpef except between two towns, if this has seventy and a bit and that one has seventy and a pit, he can make a karpef for both of them and make them like one.

Gimmel: And so too three towns in a triangle, if the two outer (farthest) towns have a hundred forty one and a third (to karpefs), the middle one makes the three to be as one.

Daled: One only measures with a rope fifty amot in length, no more and no less.  And one may only measure opposite his heart (they hold the rope at the level of the heart).  If one was measuring and he got to a valley or fence, he absorbs it (ignores the vertical distance by measuring at a different height) and returns to his height.  If one came to a hill, he absorbs it and goes back to his height, as long as he doesn’t exit the limits.  If he can’t absorb it, in this Rabi Dostai bar Rabi Yanay in the name of Rabi Meir, I heard that they bore through them.

Hay: One may not measure unless they are an expert.  If he increased (the measure) in one place and decreased in another, we hold by the place where he increased.  If he increased for one and decreased for another (two measurements were taken and they came out differently) we hold by the larger one.  We even believe a slave or a maidservant when they say, until here is the limit of Shabbat, for the Chachamim didn’t say this to be stringent but rather to be lenient.

Vav: The city (referring to a courtyard) of an individual which was made to be of many and of many which was made to be of an individual, one may not make an eruv for all of it, unless he made what was outside of it (another city) like the city of Chadasha in Yehuda, which has fifty residents (and since they are a suburb of an older city, they make one eruv all together) according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Shimon says, three courtyards of two houses (each, they suffice to be the omitted portion).

Zayin: One who was in the east and he said to his son, make an eruv in the west, or was in the west and said, make an eruv in the east, if there is from him to his house 2,000 amot and for the eruv more than that, it is mutar to (walk to) his house and assur to (walk to) his eruv.  If he is 2,000 amot from the eruv and to his house more than that, it’s assur to his house and mutar to his eruv.  One who puts his eruv in the addition to the city, he didn’t do anything.  If he put it outside the limit, even one amah, what he gains (by using the eruv as his ‘station’) he loses (in the opposite direction).

Chet: The people of a big city may walk in all of the small city (when it is entirely within the limits of their city), but the people of the small city can’t walk in all of the big city.  How?  One who was in the large city and put his eruv in the small city, or one who was in of the small city who put his eruv in the big city, he may walk throughout the whole city (even) outside of his 2,000 amot.  Rabi Akiva says, he has only 2,000 amot from the place of his eruv.

Tet: Rabi Akiva said to them, don’t you admit to me that by one who puts his eruv in the west, he only has from his eruv 2,000 amot?  They said to him, when?  When it has no residents, but when it has residents, he may walk all of it and outside his 2,000 amot.  This shows that (a cave’s) inside is lenient compared to on it (for one who puts in the cave has the entire space of the cave for it is fit to be lived in, unlike the top of the cave).  And for the measurer (who doesn’t have an eruv) they said for him 2,000 for even the end of his measurement ends in the cave (and doesn’t include all of it).

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who lives with a non-Jew in the (same) courtyard, or with one who doesn’t hold by eruv, this one forbids upon him (to carry into the other part of the courtyard) according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, he will never forbid, until two Jews forbid to each other.

Bet: Raban Gamliel said, there is a story about a Sadducee who lived with us within one mavoy in Yerushalayim, and father said to us, hurry, take all of the vessels out into the mavoy before he carries out and prohibits for you (if he takes out first he may restrict you).  Rabi Yehuda gives a different version (of what could have been said), hurry and fulfill your needs in the mavoy before he carries out and forbids for you.

Gimmel: People of a courtyard where one of them forgot and didn’t make an eruv, his house is assur from bringing in and out of to him and to them, and theirs are allowed (for bringing in and out ) for him and for them.  If they gave him (the rights to) their domains, it’s mutar for him and assur for them.  If they were two, they prohibit each other, for one can give or take (rights to) a domain, and two can give but not take a domain.

Daled: From when can they give over a domain?  Beit Shamay says, from that day, and Beit Hillel says, (even) from when it darkens.  One who gave over his domain and carried out, whether accidentally or intentionally, he prohibits (to the others, as if withdrawing his transfer of rights) according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, if intentionally he prohibits, but if accidentally, he doesn’t prohibit.

Hay: A homeowner who was a partner with his neighbors (on things in the mavoy), each with wine, they don’t need to make an eruv, if to one with wine and the other with oil, they need to make an eruv.  Rabi Shimon says, in this case or that, they don’t need to make an eruv.

Vav: Five parties which spent Shabbat in one divided hall (each with an entrance to the courtyard), Beit Shamay says, each party makes an eruv, and Beit Hillel says, one eruv (is good) for all of them.  And they (Beit Hillel) admit that when some of them lodge in rooms or different floors, they need to make an eruv for each party.

Zayin: Brothers who were partners who ate at their father’s table and slept in their own houses, each one needs an eruv.  Therefore, if one of them forgot and didn’t make an eruv, he renounces his domain.  When?  When they carry their eruv to another place, but if the eruv came to them (was in their father’s house) or there are no other residents in the courtyard, they don’t need an eruv.

Chet: Five courtyards open to each other and a mavoy, if they made an eruv in the courtyards and didn’t participate in the mavoy, they are allowed (to carry) in the courtyards and not in the mavoy, but if they participated in the mavoy, they are allowed in both.  If they made an eruv in the courtyards and participated in the mavoy, and one of the people of the courtyards forgot and didn’t make an eruv, they’re allowed in both, if it was on of the mavoy and didn’t participate, they’re allowed in the courtyards and not the mavoy, for the mavoy to the courtyards is like the courtyard to the house.

Tet: Two courtyards one inside of the other, if he made an eruv for the inner but not the outer, the inner is mutar and the outer is assur.  If (he made an eruv for) the outside but not the inside, they are both assur.  If each one had an eruv for itself (they do not have a common eruv), each is ‘allowed for itself’.  Rabi Akiva prohibits the outer one, for the treading of the foot makes it assur (right of way the inner people have in the outer one), but Chachamim say the treading of the foot does not make assur.

Yud: If one of the outer forgot and didn’t make an eruv, the inner is mutar and the outer is assur.  (One forgot) from the inner and didn’t make an eruv, they are both assur.  They put their eruvin in one place and one forgot and didn’t make an eruv, whether from the inner or outer they are both assur, and if they were of individuals, they don’t need to make an eruv.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: A window between two courtyards, four by four (tfachim), within ten (tfachim of the ground) they make two eruvim, and if they want, they can make one.  If it’s less than four by four and above (the ground by more than) ten, they make two eruvim and not one.

Bet: A wall between two courtyards ten tall and four wide, they make two eruvim and not one.  If there was produce at the top, they may both go up and eat, as long as they don’t take it down.  If it is broken up to ten amot, they may make two eruvim or if they want one, since it is like an entrance.  If (the break is) more than this, they make one eruv and not two,

Gimmel: A furrow which is between two courtyards deeper than ten and wider than four (tfachim) they make two eruvim and not one, even if it is filled with stray or hay.  If it (the trench) is filled with earth or gravel, they make one eruv and not two.

Daled: If he put on a board which is wider than four tfachim, and so too (with) two balconies opposite each other they make two eruvim and if they want they make one.  If  (the board) is less than this, they make two eruvim and not one.

Hay: a pile of hay which is between two courtyards and taller than ten tfachim, they make two eruvim and not one, these feed from he and those from there (opposite sides for the two courtyards).  If it became less than ten tfachim, they make one eruv and not two eruvim.

Vav: How does one participate in a mavoy?  One rests a barrel and says, this is for all the people of the mavoy and he can give them (the other people) possession through his adult son or daughter, his Jewish slave or maidservant, and his wife, but not through his children who are minors or his Cana’ani slave or maidservant, since their hand is like his hand (it can’t be relinquished by them).

Zayin: If the food became tame, he adds and gives over possession, and he doesn’t need to inform (the others).  If they (the number of people) increased, he adds and gives over possession, and has to inform them.

Chet: How much is the set measurement?  When they (the number of people) are many, food for two meals for everyone.  When they are few, a dried fig’s worth, for carrying on Shabbat, for each person.

Tet: Rabi Yossi said, what is this talking about?  For the beginning of an eruv, but for the leftovers of an eruv, any amount.  And they only said to make an eruv in courtyards so children should not forget (the concept of eruv).

Yud: One can make an eruv and participate with anything, except with water and with salt according to Rabi Eliezer.  Rabi Yehoshua says, a loaf is an eruv.  Even something baked with a se’ah (of flour) if sliced, one does not make an eruv with it.  A loaf made with an issar (of flour) which is whole, one may make an eruv with it.

Perek Chet

Aleph: How does one participate in (an eruv) tchumin (to extend the city limits)?  One sets down a barrel and says, this is for all the members of my town for anyone who will go to a house of mourning or a wedding (i.e. walk out for the purposes of a mitzvah).  And anyone who accepted it upon themselves that day is mutar (to leave the bounds).  If (they accept it) from when it darkens, they’re assur, for one doesn’t make an eruv after it darkens.

Bet: How much is its set measurement?  Food for two meals (suffices) for everyone.  Food for a weekday and not Shabbat according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, for Shabbat and not a weekday.  And each one is intending to be lenient (based on different views of how much is eaten at the respective meals).  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, a loaf of a pundyon, when four se’ah are (sold for) a sela.  Rabi Shimon says, two thirds of a loaf (which is made) three to a kav.  (The time needed to eat) half of it (a loaf that size) for (becoming fully tame in) a house of tzara’at.  And half of half of it (a quarter, must be eaten to) invalidate a body (from eating truma).

Gimmel: The people of a courtyard and the people of a balcony who forgot and didn’t make an eruv, anything higher than ten tfachim, is for (in the domain of) the balcony, less than that, for the courtyard.  The bank around a cistern or a rock, if they are taller than ten tfachim, it’s for the balcony, less than that, for the courtyard.  What is this talking about?  When they are close to each other, but when it is far (from the balcony), even if it is taller than ten tfachim, it’s for the courtyard.  What is considered close to?  Whatever isn’t farther than four tfachim.

Daled: One who puts his eruv in a gatehouse (for a watchman), patio, or balcony, it’s not an eruv, and the one who lives there does not prohibit him (from carrying in those areas).  (If he made an eruv in) a hay shed, a barn, a woodshed, or a storehouse, that is an eruv, and one who lives them can prohibit him.  Rabi Yehuda says, if the homeowner has a grasping of the hand (rights of possession) there, it doesn’t prohibit him.

Hay: One who left his house and went to spend Shabbat somewhere else, whether (he was) a non-Jew or a Jew, he prohibit according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, he doesn’t prohibit.  Rabi Yossi says, a non-Jew prohibits, but a Jew does not prohibit, for the Jew cannot come there on Shabbat.  Rabi Shimon says, even if he left his house and went to spend Shabbat by his daughter in the same town, he doesn’t prohibit, for he already removed it from his heart (any intention to come to his house).

Vav: A cistern between two courtyards one may not fill from it on Shabbat, unless they made for it a divider taller than ten tfachim, whether above (the water), whether below, or whether in the basin.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, Beit Shamay says, below and Beit Hillel say above.  Rabi Yehuda said, the divider doesn’t have to be any bigger than the wall between them.

Zayin: A water channel which passes through a courtyard, one may not fill from it on Shabbat, unless they made dividers for it taller than ten tfachim at the beginning and end.  Rabi Yehuda says, a wall which is on it will be judged as a divider.  Rabi Yehuda said, there was once a channel of Avel from which they would fill with the approval of the elders on Shabbat.  They said to him, since it wasn’t the set measurement (and didn’t constitute a karmelit, an intermediary domain).

Chet: A balcony which (sticks out) over the water, one may not fill from it water, unless they made for it a divider taller than ten tfachim either above or below (the water).  And so too with two balconies one above the other.  If they made for the upper (balcony) and not the lower, both are assur until they make an eruv.

Tet: A courtyard which is less than four amot, one may not pour water into it on Shabbat, unless they made for it a pit which can hold two se’ah from the hole (made in the lip linking it to the public domain) downwards, whether outside or inside (in the public domain or not).  But if it’s outside, he has to cover it (so people won’t fall) but if it’s inside, he doesn’t have to cover it.

Yud: Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, a drain which is covered (for at least a length of) four amot in the public domain, one may pour water into it on Shabbat.  Chachamim say, even a roof or a courtyard (through which the drain passes are) of one hundred amot, he may not pour into a drain on Shabbat, but he may pour from roof to roof, and the water will fall into the drain.  A courtyard and a patio combine to form four amot.

Yud Aleph: So too two rows of two story buildings which face each other.  Some of them made pits and some didn’t make pits, those who made pits are allowed and those who didn’t make pits are forbidden.

Perek Tet

Aleph: All the roofs of a town are one domain, as long as one isn’t ten tfachim higher or lower according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, each one is its own domain.  Rabi Shimon says, whether roofs, courtyards, or enclosed storage areas (for lumber and the like) are one domain for vessels which spent Shabbat  within them, but not vessels which spent Shabbat inside the house.

Bet: A large roof which is next to a small roof, the large is mutar and the small is assur.  A large courtyard which (has a) hole (in the fence adjoining) a small one, the large is mutar and the small is assur, since it is like an entrance for the large one.  A courtyard which has a hole to the public domain, one who takes from it (the public domain) to the private domain or one who takes from the private domain to it is chayav according to Rabi Eliezer.  Chachamim say, from in it to the public domain, or from the public domain into it is patur, since it is like a karmelit.

Gimmel: A courtyard which had a hole to the public domain from two directions, and so too a house which had a hole in two directions, and so too a mavoy which its kora or lechi have been taken, they are mutar that Shabbat and assur for the future (Shabbatot) according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, if they are mutar for that Shabbat, they are mutar for the future, and if they are assur for the future, they are assur for that Shabbat.

Daled: One who builds an upper room on top of two houses, and so too bridges which have thoroughfares, one may carry under them on Shabbat according to Rabi Yehuda, and Chachamim prohibit.  And furthermore said Rabi Yehuda, one may make an eruv from a mavoy that is a thoroughfare, and Chachamim prohibit.

Perek Yud

Aleph: One who finds tfillin (and fears it might become tame) can carry them in pair by pair (by putting them on).  Raban Gamliel says, two by two.  What is this talking about?  With old ones (clearly tfillin with holiness), but with new ones he’s patur (they may be missing an aspect and therefore may not be actual tfillin).  If he found them in sets or bundles, he waits until it gets dark and brings them.  In (times of) danger, he covers them and continues on his way.

Bet: Rabi Shimon says, one may give to his friend, and his friend to his friend, until it gets to an outer courtyard.  And so too with his son, he can give to his friend, and his friend to his friend, even one hundred.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may give a barrel to his friend, and his friend to his friend, even outside of the city limits.  They said to him, it (the barrel) may not go more than the feet (distance from its spot) than its owner (i.e. 2,000 amot from where it is).

Gimmel: One was reading a book on the threshold and the book rolled from his hand, he may roll it to himself.  He was reading on a roof and the book rolled from his hand, until it reaches ten tfachim (from the ground), he may roll it to himself.  If it reaches ten tfachim, he turns it on its writing (a respectful position).  Rabi Yehuda says, even if it is removed from the ground by even a needle’s worth he may roll it to himself.  Rabi Shimon says, even if it is on the ground itself, he may roll it to himself, for a thing of shvut (rabbinically prohibited work on Shabbat) does not stand in the way of the holy writings.

Daled: A ledge in front of a window one may put on it and take from it on Shabbat.  A person may stand in a private domain and move objects in the public domain or (stand in) the public domain and move objects in the private domain, as long as he doesn’t move from four amot.

Hay: A person may not stand in a private domain and urinate into the public domain, or (stand in) the public domain and urinate into a private domain.  And so too he shouldn’t spit.  Rabi Yehuda says, even when spit is detached in his mouth, he may not walk four amot until he spits.

Vav: A person may not stand in a private domain and drink in the public domain, or in the public domain and drink in a private domain, unless he brings his head and most of his body into the place he is drinking.  And so too with a winepress.  One may catch from a gutter lower than ten tfachim, and from a pipe, he may drink from anywhere.

Zayin: A cistern in the public domain with a lip more than ten tfachim high, (people in) a window above it may fill from it on Shabbat.  A garbage pile in the public domain taller than ten tfachim, (people in) a window above it may pour water onto it on Shabbat.

Chet: A tree which overshadows the ground, if its branches are less than three tfachim above the ground, one may carry under it.  If its roots are more than three tfachim above the ground, he may not sit on them.  A door which is in an area designated for a certain purpose and thorns in a hole in a wall (to stop them up) or (reed) mats (in a hole) one may not close with them (closing a hole with them does not seem like a door but rather building), unless they are above the ground.

Tet: A person may not stand in a private domain and open (something locked) in the public domain, or (stand) in the public domain and open in a private domain, unless he made a divider ten tfachim high according to Rabi Meir.  They said to him, once in a fattener’s shuk in Yerushalayim that they would lock and put the key in the window which is on top of the opening.  Rabi Yossi says, it was a shuk of wool dealers.

Yud: A bolt which has a knob on top, Rabi Elazar forbids (licking with it) and Rabi Yossi allows.  Rabi Elazar said, once in the shul in Tveria they did it as if permitted until Raban Gamliel and the Zekenim came and forbade it.  Rabi Yossi says, they treated it as assur and Rabi Yehuda and the Zekenim came and allowed it.

Yud Aleph: A bolt which is dragged, one may lock the Beit Hamikdash with it, but not in the country, but if it is lying (on the ground) it is assur in both places.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it is lying it is mutar in the Beit Hamikdash, and the dragged one in the country (is mutar).

Yud Bet: One may replace the lower hinge in the Beit Hamikdash, but not in the country, and the top one, it’s assur in both.  Rabi Yehuda says, the top one (is mutar) in the Beit Hamikdash and the lower (is mutar) in the country.

Yud Gimmel: One may replace a band-aid in the Beit Hamikdash, but not in the country.  If it’s for the first time (not replacing), it’s assur in both.  One may tie a cord in the Beit Hamikdash, but not in the country, if it’s the first time (not retying) it’s assur in both.  One may cut off a wart in the Beit Hamikdash, but not in the country, if with a vessel, it’s assur I both.

Yud Daled: A kohen who got hurt on his finger, he may wrap reed grass around it in the Beit Hamikdash, but not in the country, if its to bleed himself, it’s assur in both.  One may scatter salt on a ramp so that people don’t slip, and one may fill from the pilgrim’s well or the great well with a pulley on Shabbat, and from the hakar well on Yom Tov.

Tet Vav: A sheretz which was found in the Beit Hamikdash, a kohen carries it out with his belt in order not to let the tuma stay according to Rabi Yochanan ben Broka.  Rabi Yehuda says, with wooden tongs so as not to increase the tuma.  From where do they bring it out?  From the sanctuary, the entrance hall, and from between the entrance hall and the mizbe’ach according to Rabi Shimon ben Nanas.  Rabi Akiva says, a place where one is chayav karet for intentionally (entering) and a chatat for unintentionally (entering), from there we remove it, and all other places they put over it a large pot.  Rabi Shimon says, a place where the Chachamim allowed you they gave you what was (already) yours (i.e. already mutar), for they didn’t allow for you (an act) unless it is (assur) because of shvut.

Mesechet Pesachim

Perek Aleph

Aleph: When it is still light on the fourteenth (nightfall) we check for chametz (leavened baked goods) by the light of a candle.  Anywhere one does not bring chametz one does not need to check.  Why did they say (one has to check) two rows (of barrels) in a cellar?  It’s a place one may go into with chametz.  Beit Shamay says, two rows over the whole cellar and Beit Hillel says, the two outer rows which are the uppermost (both of these statements are difficult and debated in the gemara).

Bet: One does not suspect that perhaps a rat dragged from house to house or place to place, for if so it (can be) from courtyard to courtyard and city to city, the thing has no end.

Gimmel: Rabi Yehuda says, one checks the evening of the fourteenth, and in the morning of the fourteenth and the time of burning, and the Chachamim say, if he didn’t check the evening of the fourteenth, he checks during the holiday.  If he didn’t check during the holiday, he checks after the holiday.  And whatever he leaves, he puts in a hidden place so that it doesn’t need another checking.

Daled: Rabi Meir says, one may eat all five (of the first hours of the day) and burns at the beginning of the sixth, and Rabi Yehuda says, one eats all four, suspends the fifth, and burns at the beginning of the sixth.

Hay: And furthermore said Rabi Yehuda, two loaves of a toda (offering) which are pasul are laid on the roof of the itzteva (a place in the Beit Hamikdash, as a signal).  Whenever they are placed there, the whole nation would eat.  If one is taken, they suspend, they don’t eat and don’t burn.  If they are both taken, the whole nation would start to burn.  Raban Gamliel says, chulin may be eaten the whole fourth, truma the whole fifth, and they burn at the beginning of the sixth.

Vav: Rabi Chanina a sgan (vice) of the kohanim says, from the days of the kohanim, they didn’t refrain from burning meat that became contaminated with an offshoot of the tuma with meat which became contaminated from the source of tuma, even though they are adding tuma on tuma.  Rabi Akiva added and said, from the days of the kohanim they didn’t refrain from lighting oil which became invalid from one who had immersed that day with a candle which became contaminated from a dead body, even though they are adding tuma to tuma.

Zayin: Rabi Meir said, we learn from their words (in the previous mishna) that one may burn tahor truma with tame truma on Pesach.  Rabi Yossi said to him, that is not the right argument.  And Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Yehoshua admit that you burn this by itself and this by itself.  One what did they disagree?  On the suspended and the tame, for Rabi Eliezer says, let this be burnt by itself and this burnt by itself, and Rabi Yehoshua says, they are both like one.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Any hour which it is permitted to eat, one may feed to a domesticated animal, a wild animal, and fowl, he may sell it to a non-Jew, and he is allowed to benefit from it.  If the time passed, he is prohibited from benefiting from it and he may not light with it an oven or stove.  Rabi Yehuda says there is not removal of chametz other than burning, and the Chachamim say, he may also crumble it up and throw it to the wind or cast it to the sea.

Bet: Chametz of a non-Jew which has had Pesach pass over it is allowed to be benefited from, and that of a Jew is assur to have benefit from, as it says, “and leaven shall not be seen to you.”

Gimmel: A non-Jew who lent to a Jew on (a collateral of) his chametz, after Pesach it may be benefited from.  A Jew who lent to a non-Jew on his chametz, after Pesach it is assur to be benefited from.  Chametz which a ruin fell on behold it is like removed, Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, anything which a dog cannot search after it (is considered removed).

Daled: One who accidentally eats truma chametz on Pesach, he pays the principal plus chomesh.  Intentionally, he’s patur from restitution and from its value as wood (as fuel, since it isn’t used as food on Pesach).

Hay: These are things which a person fulfills his obligation (to eat matza) on Pesach, with wheat, barley, spelt, rye, and oats.  One can fulfill with dmai, ma’aser rishon which its truma has been taken, ma’aser sheni and hekdesh which were redeemed, and kohanim with challa and truma.  But not with tevel, ma’aser rishon which didn’t have its truma taken, ma’aser sheni and hekdesh which weren’t redeemed, and the loaves of a toda (offering) and the wafers of a nazir.  If he made them for himself (to offer) he doesn’t fulfill with them, but if he made them for selling in the shuk (to those he need to make an offering) he fulfills with them.

Vav: And these are vegetables with which one fulfills his obligation (of maror) on Pesach, chazeret (a type of lettuce), chicory, endive, eryngium, and horseradish.  One fulfills with them whether moist or dry, but not pickled, stewed, or cooked.  And they combine to make a kzayit.  One fulfills with their stalk, dmai, ma’aser rishon from which truma has been taken, and with ma’aser sheni and hekdesh which have been redeemed.

Zayin: One may not soak bran for chickens, but one may scald it.  A woman may not soak bran that she carries in her hand to the bathhouse, but she may rub her skin dry.  One may not chew wheat and put it on his wound on Pesach, since it leavens.

Chet: One may not put flour in charoset or mustard, but if he did, he must eat it immediately, and Rabi Yossi forbids it.  One may not cook the (korban) pesach, not with liquids or fruit juice, but one may baste and dip it in them.  Water used for the needs of a baker must be spilled, for they leaven.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: These transgress on Pesach, the Babylonian sauce (which contains breadcrumbs), the Median liquor, the Edomite vinegar, the Egyptian zitom (a type of beer), a dyer’s broth, a cook’s starch, and the paste of scribes.  Rabi Eliezer says, even women’s jewelry.  This is the general rule, anything which is from a type of grain transgress on Pesach.  Behold, these are strongly warned against, but they don’t have karet.

Bet: Dough in the cracks of a trough, if there is a kzayit in one place, he must remove it, and if not, it is nullified by its smallness, and so too in the matter of (contracting) tuma.  If he is careful about it, it impedes contact, if he wants to let it be there, it is like (a piece of) the trough.  Dough of the deaf (dough which has no fermentation), if there is something like it which has leavened, it is assur.

Gimmel: How does one separate challa if tame on Yom Tov?  Rabi Eliezer says, he doesn’t designate it until it is baked.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says, put it in cold water.  Rabi Yehoshua said, this is not chametz that we are careful about by not seeing and not finding, rather he separates it and rests it until the evening, and if it leavened, it leavened.

Daled: Raban Gamliel says, three women may knead as one and may bake in an oven one after another.  Chachamim say, three women deal with the dough, one kneads, one lays out, and one bakes.  Rabi Akiva says, not all women, trees, and ovens are equal.  This is the general rule, if it rises, she wets it with cold water.

Hay: Siur (dough which is not completely leavened) must be burnt, and one who eats it is patur.  Siduk (dough which has cracks, a sign of leavening) must be burnt, and one who eats it is chayav karet.  What is siur?  (With cracks) like a locust’s horns (one on each side).  Siduk?  When its cracks mix together, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Chachamim say, in both one who eats gets karet.  And what is siur?  All whose face has become pallid like a person whose hair is standing on end.

Vav: If the fourteenth falls out on Shabbat, one removes everything before Shabbat according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, in their time.  Rabi Elazar ben Tzadok says, truma before Shabbat and chulin in its time.

Zayin: One who is going to shecht his pesach, to circumcise his son, or to eat a meal of betrothal at his father in law’s house, and he remembers he has chametz in his house, if he can return, remove, and return to his mitzva, he returns and removes.  If not, he nullifies it in his heart.  (If he can’t return because he is) saving (people) from troops, a river, bandits, fire, or debris, he nullifies in his heart.  If to establish a resting Shabbat for optional things, he returns immediately.

Chet: And so too one who left Yerushalayim and remembered that he had in his hand holy meat, if he passed Tzofim, he burns it on the spot.  If not, he returns and burns it before the birah (a place around the Beit Hamikdash) from the wood of the pile (designated for such).  For how much do they return?  Rabi Meir says, either way a kbeitza.  Rabi Yehuda says, either way a kzayit.  Chachamim say, holy meat a kzayit and chametz a kbeitza.

Perek Daled

Aleph: A place where their custom is to do melacha on the eve of Pesach until midday they do, and a place where their custom is not to do, they don’t do.  One who goes from a place where they do to a place where they don’t do or vice versa, we give upon him the stringencies of the place he left and the stringencies of the place he is.  And a person shouldn’t do differently, because (it causes) disagreement.

Bet: Similarly, one who takes shvi’it produce from a place where it finished (and needed biur, removal from the house) to a place it didn’t finish or vice versa, he must remove it.  Rabi Yehuda says, they tell him, go out and bring even for yourself (the meaning of this statement is disputed).

Gimmel: A place where their custom was to sell small cattle (sheep and the like) to non-Jews, one may sell.  In a place where their custom is not to sell, one may not sell.  And nowhere may one sell them a big animal (cows etc.), calves, or young donkeys, whole or broken (healthy or not), and Rabi Yehuda allows a broken.  Ben Bteira allows by a horse.

Daled: A place where it is their custom to eat roasted meat on erev Pesach, one may eat.  A place where it is their custom not to eat, one may not eat.  In a place where it is their custom to light a candle on erev Yom Kippur, one lights.  In a place where it is their custom not to light, one does not light.  And one lights in shuls, a Beit Midrash, dark alleys, and for the sick.

Hay: In a place where it is their custom to do melacha on Tisha B’Av one does.  In a place where it is their custom not to do work, one does not do.  And in all places torah scholars are idle (from their studies).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, one should always make himself a torah scholar.  Chachamim said, in Yehuda they used to do work on erev Pesach until midday, and in the Galil they would not do (work) at all.  And the evening (before), Rabi Shamay prohibits and Beit Hillel allows until sundown.

Vav: Rabi Meir says, any melacha which he started before the fourteenth he may finish on the fourteenth, but he may not start at the beginning of the fourteenth, even if he can finish it (before melacha has to stop).  Chachamim say, three craftsmen may do melacha on erev Pesach until midday, and they are tailors, barbers, and launderers.  Rabi Yossi bar Yehuda says, also leather workers.

Zayin: One may place eggs to be incubated under chickens on the fourteenth, and a chicken which escapes may be returned to its place.  If it died, one may put another instead of it.  One may rake under the legs of animals (to collect the manure) on the fourteenth, and on Chol Hamo’ed one may remove (the manure) on its sides.  One may take and bring back utensils from the workshop, even though they are not for the purpose of Chol Hamo’ed.

Chet: Six (objectionable) things which the people of Yericho did, on three they were warned on three they were not warned.  These are those they weren’t warned for, they would graft palm trees all day (erev Pesach), they shortened shma, and they harvested and stacked before the omer, and they didn’t warn them.  And for these they did warn them, they permitted (the fruit of) soft branches which grew on (carobs and sycamores, which because of fear of robbers cutting down the trunk were made) hekdesh, they ate from the fallen fruits on Shabbat, and they gave pe’ah from vegetables (which would give an undue exemption from ma’aser), and for there they  were warned.

Tet: Chizkiyahu the king did six things, for three they agreed with him, and for three they didn’t agree with him.  He dragged the bones of his father on a bed of ropes (since he was a bad king) and they agreed with him, he crushed the brass snake and they agreed with him, and he hid the book of curse and they agreed with him.  The three for which they did not agree with him he cut down the doors of the sanctuary and sent them to the king of Ashur and they didn’t agree with him, he stopped the waters of the upper Gichon and they didn’t agree with him, and he did ibur for Nissan in Nissan (turned it into Adar bet) and they didn’t agree with him.

Perek Hay

Aleph: The tamid is slaughtered at eight and a half (hours) and offered at nine and a half.  One erev Pesach it is slaughtered at seven and a half and offered at eight and a half, whether a weekday or Shabbat.  When erev Pesach falls out one erev Shabbat it is slaughtered at six and a half and offered at seven and a half, and the pesach after it.

Bet: A pesach which was slaughtered not for its sake and one accepted it and carried threw (the blood) not for its sake is pasul.  What is for its sake and (then) not for its sake?  For the sake (with the intention) of a pesach and (then) for the sake of a shlamim.  (What is) not for its sake and (then) for its sake?  For the sake of a shlamim and (then) for the sake of a pesach.

Gimmel: If they slaughtered for (people who are) not its eaters or not its participants, or for (those who are) uncircumcised or tame, it’s pasul.  For those who eat and those who don’t, for its participants and not its participants, for those circumcised and uncircumcised, or for tahor and tame, it’s kosher.  If they slaughtered before midday, it’s pasul, since it says, “bein ha’arbayim (a time which starts at six hours).”  If they slaughtered it before the tamid, provided one mixes its blood (to prevent clotting) until the blood of the tamid is sprinkled.  And if it was thrown, it’s kosher.

Daled: One who slaughters the pesach with chametz is over a lo ta’ase.  Rabi Yehuda says, even the tamid.  Rabi Shimon says, the pesach on the fourteenth for its sake is chayav, and not for its sake is patur.  And all other zvachim (sacrifices) whether for their sake or no, they’re patur.  And on Yom tov, for its sake is patur, not for its sake is chayav, and all other zvachim, whether for their sake or not, they’re chayav, except for a chatat which he slaughtered not for its sake.

Hay: The pesach was slaughtered in three groups, as it says, “and they slaughtered it all the congregation of the assembly of Israel,” congregation, assembly, and Israel.  The first group comes in, the courtyard is filled, and they lock the courtyard’s doors.  They did a tkiya, trua, tkiya (three sounds on a shofar).  The kohanim would stand in lines, and in their hands silver bowls and golden bowls.  One row was all silver and one all gold, they wouldn’t mix.  And the bowls didn’t have flat bottoms, lest they put them down and the blood will clot.

Vav: A yisra’el slaughtered and a kohen accepted (a bowl of blood), he gave it to his friend (and he) to his fiend (etc.) and they would full the empty and return the empty.  The kohen close to the altar would sprinkle one sprinkling against the base (of the altar).

Zayin: When the first group exited, the second entered.  When the second left, the third entered.  Like the doing of the first so was the doing of the second and third.  They (the levi’im) would read Hallel.  If they finished, they would repeat, and if they (finished) the repetition, they would do a third time, even though they never (needed to) do a third time.  Rabi Yehuda says, in all the days, the third group didn’t get to (the chapter of) “I love for Hashem hears,” because the people are so few (in the third group).

Chet: What they did on a weekday so they did on Shabbat, except that the kohanim would wash the courtyard against the will of the Chachamim.  Rabi Yehuda says, a cup would be filled with mixed blood (from the floor before they washed it) and would throw it on the altar, and the Chachamim did not agree with this.

Tet: How do they hang and flay?  Hooks of iron were fixed in the walls and pillars on which to hang and flay.  And everyone who doesn’t have a place to hang and flay, they had thin smooth rods there and he places it on his shoulder and his friend’s shoulder and hangs and flays.

Yud: He ribbed it (the slaughtered animal) and took out the emurim (fats to be offered on the altar), they put them in a tray and burned them on the altar.  The first group left and sat on the Temple Mount, the second in the chel (an area in the temple) and the third is standing in its place (in the courtyard).  When it got dark, they would go and roast their psachim.

Perek Vav

Aleph: these are the things of pesach which push off Shabbat, its slaughtering, sprinkling of its blood, the cleaning of its entrails, and the burning of its chelev (fats to be burnt).  But its roasting and the rinsing of its entrails don’t push off Shabbat.  Carrying it, bringing it outside of city limits, and cutting off its wart do not push off Shabbat.  Rabi Eliezer says, they do push off.

Bet: Rabi Eliezer said, and isn’t it obvious, just as slaughtering which is because of melacha pushes off Shabbat, these which are because of shvut should push off Shabbat.  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, Yom Tov will prove, for they allowed on it because of melacha (slaughtering) and they prohibited on it because of shvut (going outside the limits).  Rabi Eliezer said to him, what is this Yehoshua?  What proof is there from an option for a commandment?  Rabi Akiva responded and said, sprinkling will prove, for this is a mitzva because of shvut and does not push off Shabbat, but you don’t be astounded by these, for even though those are a mitzva and these are because of shvut and do not push off Shabbat.  Rabi Eliezer said to him, about these I argue, and just as slaughtering which is because of a melacha pushes off Shabbat, sprinkling, which is because of shvut doesn’t push off Shabbat?  Rabi Akiva said to him, on the contrary!  Just as sprinkling which is because of shvut doesn’t push off Shabbat, slaughtering, which is because of melacha should not push off Shabbat.  Rabi Eliezer said to him, Akiva, you uprooted what is written in the torah, “bein ha’arbayim… at its time,” whether weekday or Shabbat.  He said to him, rebbe, give me a time for these as we have a time for slaughtering.  Rabi Akiva said a general rule, any melacha which one can do from erev Shabbat doesn’t push off Shabbat, and slaughtering, which one can’t do from erev Shabbat, pushes off Shabbat.

Gimmel: When does he bring a chagiga with it?  When he is coming on a weekday, tame, and it (the pesach) is (too) small (for the group of eaters).  When he comes on Shabbat with many and tame, he does not bring a chagiga with it.

Daled: A chagiga comes from the flocks, cattle, sheep, goats, mountain goats, and ewes.  And it may be eaten for two nights and one day.

Hay: A pesach which they slaughtered not for its sake on Shabbat, he is chayav a chatat (for breaking Shabbat).  And all other zvachim (on Shabbat) which he slaughtered in the reason of a pesach, if they are not fit (to be a pesach, a.k.a. not the same type of animal) he is chayav, and if they are fit, Rabi Eliezer makes chayav a chatat, and Rabi Yehoshua exempts.  Rabi Eliezer said, just as a pesach, which is allowed for its sake, and when he changes its sake (the intention) he’s chayav, so too all zvachim, which are assur (even) for their sake, when he changes its sake, shouldn’t it be chayav?  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, no, if you say by a pesach for he changed it to something assur, would you say by zvachim that he changed it to something mutar?  Rabi Eliezer said to him, public offerings will prove, for they are mutar for their sake, and one who slaughters (other sacrifices) for their sake is chayav.  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, no, if you said by public offerings which have a limit, would you say that by a pesach which has not limit?  Rabi Meir says, even one who slaughters (other sacrifices) for the sake of a public offering is patur.

Vav: If he slaughtered for those who don’t eat or aren’t participants, or for uncircumcised or tame, he’s chayav.  For those who eat it and those who don’t, for its participants and not its participants, for circumcised and uncircumcised or tahor or tame, he’s patur.  If he slaughtered it and found it to be blemished, he’s chayav.  If he slaughtered and found it to be internally torn, he’s patur.  If he slaughtered it and found out the owners withdrew (from this sacrifice), died, or became tame, he’s patur, since he slaughtered with permission.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: How does one roast the pesach?  One brings a spit of pomegranate (wood), he thrusts it from his mouth to its anus, and he puts its legs and entrails inside it, according to Rabi Yossi Hagelili.  Rabi Akiva says, this is a form of cooking (not roasting) rather, one hangs it (on the spit) outside of it.

Bet: One may not roast the pesach on a spit or grill.  Rabi Tzadok said, once Raban Gamliel said to Tavi his slave, go out and roast the pesach for us on the grill.  If it touched the clay of an oven, he must peel off that place.  If some of its gravy dripped into fine flour, he must remove (a handful) from that place.

Gimmel: One rubbed it in truma oil, if it’s a group of kohanim, they may eat.  If a yisra’el, if it’s still raw, he washes it off, if it’s cooked, he peels off the outside.  If he rubbed it in oil of ma’aser sheni he may not charge its value (if he is splitting the cost with the group), for ma’aser sheni may not be redeemed in Yerushalayim.

Daled: Five things may come (as an offering) while (the kohanim or holy things) are tame, and may not be eaten while tame, omer, the two breads (on Shavuot), the showbreads, public shlamim offerings (on Atzeret), and the goats of Rosh Chodesh.  A pesach which comes while tame is eaten while tame, for it only came in the beginning in order to be eaten.

Hay: If the meat became tame but the chelev remained, he does not sprinkle the blood.  If the chelev became tame but the meat remained, he does sprinkle the blood.  And with things made holy it’s not like this, even if the meat became tame and the chelev remained, he sprinkled the blood.

Vav: If the community became tame or most of it did, or the kohanim are tame and the community is tahor, they do it (the pesach) while tame.  If a minority of the community became tame, the tahor do it first, and the tame do it second.

Zayin: A pesach which had its blood sprinkled and after that they found out it was tame, the tzitz (golden head plate of the kohen gadol) accepts it (the tzitz is made to accept sins against holy things).  If the body became tame (the owners were found to be tame), the tzitz does not accept, for they said, a nazir and one who makes a pesach, the tzitz accepts on the tuma of the blood, and the tzitz does not accept on the tuma of the body.  If he became tame with a tuma of tehom (when it is discovered that there was a corpse under a place he walked), the tzitz accepts.

Chet: If the whole (pesach) or most of it became tame, they burn it before the birah (a place in the Beit Hamikdash) with wood from the pile.  If a minority of it became tame or (if there is) notar (leftovers) they burn it in their courtyards or on their roofs with their own wood.  Misers burn it before the birah in order to benefit from the pile of wood.

Tet: A pesach which was taken out (from Yerushalayim) or became tame must be burnt immediately.  If the owners became tame or they died, its form is violated (it is now notar) and it is burnt on the sixteenth.  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, even this should be burnt immediately, for it has no eaters.

Yud: The bones, the tendons, and the notar must be burnt on the sixteenth.  If the sixteenth fell out on Shabbat, they must burn on the seventeenth, for it does not push of either Shabbat or Yom Tov.

Yud Aleph: Whatever is eaten from a large ox is eaten of a tender kid, and the wing tips (shoulder blades) and certain cartilages and floating ribs.  One who breaks a bone in a tahor pesach is lashed forty, but one who leaves over meat (even) of a tahor or breaks a bone of a tame is not lashed forty.

Yud Bet: A limb which partly went out (of its bounds for being eaten), he cuts until he reaches the bone, flays until he reaches a joint, and cuts (thus getting rid of the entire limb).  With other sacrifices, he can chop with a cleaver, for there is no problem of breaking a bone.  From the doorpost inward, (is considered space) as if inside, from the doorpost outward, as if outside.  And windows and the thickness of the walls, as if inside.

Yud Gimmel: Two groups who were eating in one house, one group may turn facing there and eat, and those turn and face there and eat, and the kettle (to dilute wine with) is between them.  And when the waiter stands to mix, he closes his mouth and turns his face until he gets to his group, and then he eats.  And a bride may turn her face and eat.

Perek Chet

Aleph: A woman, when she is in the house of her husband, and he husband slaughtered for her and he father slaughtered for her, she shall eat from he husband’s.  If she went the first days of Yom Tov to spend in her father’s house, and he father slaughtered for her and her husband slaughtered for her, she eats in whichever place she wants.  An orphan whose guardians slaughtered for him may eat wherever he wants.  A slave belonging to two partners may not eat from either of theirs.  One who is half a slave and half free may not eat from his master’s.

Bet: One who says to his slave, go out and slaughter for me this pesach, if he slaughtered a kid he may eat, if he slaughtered a lamb he may eat, if he slaughtered a kid and a lamb he eats the first one (that was slaughtered).  If he forgets what his master told him, what should he do?  He should slaughter a kid and a lamb and say, if my master said a kid, the kid is his and the lamb is mine, if my master said a lamb, the lamb is his and the kid is mine.  If his master forgot what he said to him, they are both burned and they are exempt from doing Pesach Sheni.

Gimmel: One who says to his sons, I am slaughtering the pesach for whichever of you get to Yerushalayim first (and the others will get through him), since (the time when) the first entered his head and most of his body, he merited for himself and all of his brothers merit through him.  People can group up forever (in any number) as long as there is a kzayit for each.  They may group up or withdraw (from a group) until it is slaughtered.  Shimon says, until they sprinkle the blood for it.

Daled: One who includes other people with him in his portion, the people of the group have a right to give him is part, and he eats with his (people and portion) and they eat with them.

Hay: A zav who saw two sightings (of seminal flux), they may slaughter for him on the seventh (on the night of which he can become clean).  If he saw three, they slaughter for him on the eighth of his (days of purity, at the night of which he may become fully clean).  A woman keeps a day against a day (of seeing blood) and they slaughter for her on the second.  If she saw two days, they slaughter for her on the third.  A zava, they slaughter for her on the eighth (when she becomes fully clean).

Vav: An onen (a person who has a relative who died that day, and is assur from eating sacrifices), one who removes a pile (of stones which fell on a person, and we do not know if the person is dead or alive), and so too one who was promised to be released from prison, and a sick person and an old person who can eat a kzayit one may slaughter for them.  On all of them one may not slaughter for them on only their behalf, for perhaps they will make the pesach tame.  Therefore, if they happen to be pasul, they are patur from Pesach Sheni except for one who removes a pile, for he is tame at the outset.

Zayin: On may not slaughter the pesach for an individual according to Rabi Meir, and Rabi Yossi allows it.  Even a group of one hundred who cannot eat a kzayit, they do not slaughter for them.  And one may not make a group of women, slaves, and minors.

Chet: An onen immerses and eats his pesach at night, but not any other offerings (the pesach is a mitzvat ase and a lo ta’ase).  One who hears he has a dead (relative) and one who gathers bones for himself (to rebury in a permanent grave) immerses and may eat other sacrifices.  A convert who converted erev Pesach, Beit Shamay says, he immerses and eats his pesach at night, and Beit Hillel says, one who separates from a foreskin is (like) one who separates from a grave (he may not eat).

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who was tame or far away and didn’t do the first (Pesach) shall do the second.  If he made a mistake or was forced and didn’t do the first, he does the second.  If so, why does it say one who was tame or far away?  For they are exempt from karet (if they don’t keep Pesach Sheni) and those are chayav karet.

Bet: What is far away?  From Modi’im and outward, and its measurement in every direction according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Eliezer says, from the threshold of the courtyard and outward (if he only made it there before chag).  Rabi Yossi says, therefore there is a dot on the hay to say (on the word ‘rechoka’ in the torah, making it farther than it), not because it is surely far, but rather because it’s the threshold of the courtyard and outward.

Gimmel: What is the difference between Pesach Rishon and Pesach Sheni?  The first is assur by, “it shall not be seen,” and, “it shall not be found.”  On the second, he can have matza and chametz in his house.  The first requires hallel while eating, and the second doesn’t need hallel while eating.  Both need hallel when they are done, and may be eaten roasted with matza and maror, and it pushed off Shabbat.

Daled: A pesach which was offered while tame, a zav, zava, nidda, and woman who just gave birth may not eat from it, and if they did, they are patur from karet.  Rabi Eliezer exempts even for one who enters the Beit Hamikdash (accidentally when in one of these states).

Hay: What is the difference between the pesach which was done in Egypt and the one for all other generations?  The pesach of Egypt they took on the tenth, it required sprinkling with a hyssop branch on the lintel and the two doorposts, it was eaten hastily, and in one night, and the Pesach of all other generations (the prohibition against chametz) is observed all seven (days).

Vav: Rabi Yehoshua said, I heard that a substitute for a pesach (if one designates an animal for the pesach but then switches, the original animal still retains some obligation and should be brought as a shlamim) is offered, and a substitute for a pesach isn’t offered, and I can’t explain it.  Rabi Akiva said, I’ll explain it.  The pesach (which got lost) was found before the slaughtering of the (second) pesach should be put out to pasture until it becomes blemished and then sold, and with that money the owner will buy a shlamim, and so too for its substitute.  After the slaughtering of the pesach the shlamim is brought, and so too with a substitute.

Zayin: One who separates a ewe for his pesach, or a two-year-old mountain goat he puts it out to pasture until it becomes blemished and sells it, and the owner uses the money as a nedava (donation offering).  One who separates a pesach and dies, his son may not bring it as a pesach, but rather as a shlamim.

Chet: A pesach which got mixed up with other zvachim, they all go to pasture until they become blemished, and the owner sells them and buys animals (equal in number to the first) based on the best of this species (each animal for the highest price he received for one of that species) and he will lose the extra (of what he’s spending over what he got).  If it got mixed in with bechorot (firstborn animals), Rabi Shimon says, if there is a group of kohanim, they eat it.

Tet: A group which lost its pesach, and they said to one, go out, fins, and slaughter for us, and he went out, found, and slaughtered, and they bought and slaughtered, if his (the individual) was slaughtered first, he eats of his and they eat with him of his, and if theirs was slaughtered first, they eat their own and he eats his own.  And if it’s not known which one was slaughtered first, or if they were slaughtered together, he eats of his and they do not eat of his, and theirs goes out to be burnt, and they are patur from Pesach Sheni.  If he said to them, if I take too long, go and slaughter for me, and he went, found, and slaughtered and they bought and slaughtered.  If theirs was slaughtered first, they eat of theirs and he eats with them, if his was slaughtered first, he eats of his and they eat of theirs.  If it’s not known whose was slaughtered first or they were slaughtered together, they eat of theirs and he does not eat with them, and his goes to be burnt and he is patur from doing Pesach Sheni.  If he said to them, and they said to him, everyone eats of the first and if it’s not known which of them is first, they both go to be burnt.  If he didn’t say to them and they didn’t say to him, they are not responsible for each other.

Yud: Two groups whose pesachs became mixed up, each takes one, one from each group goes to the other, and they all say, if this is our pesach, you withdrew from yours and you subscribed to ours, and if this is yours, we have withdrawn from ours and subscribed to yours.  And so too five groups of five each or ten each, they take on from each of the groups and say like this.

Yud Aleph: Two whose pesachs got mixed up, each takes one, each subscribes to his one (person) from the shuk, they come to each other (the person who just joined the other group) and say, if this pesach is mine, you leave your group and come to mine, if this is the is yours, I leave mine and come to yours.

Perek Yud

Aleph: One erev Pesach close to mincha, one does not eat before it gets dark.  And even a poor Jew may not eat until he reclines (as in the seder).  And they may not diminish (what they give) to him (and make it) any less than four cups of wine, even from the charity plate.

Bet: They mixed him the first cup, Beit Shamay said, he recites the blessing for the day and then for the wine, and Beit Hillel says, he blesses on the wine and then the day.

Gimmel: When they brought before him, he may dip the chazeret (lettuce) until he gets to the bread side dish.  They brought before him matza, chazeret, and charoset (a dish of chopped apples), even though charoset is not a mitzva.  Rabi Eliezer the son of Rabi Tzadok says, it is a mitzva.  And in the (times of the) Beit Hamikdash they would bring before him the body of the pesach.

Daled: They mixed him a second cup, and here the son asks his father (the questions of the seder).  And if the son doesn’t know, his father teaches him, how is this night different from all other nights?  For on all other nights we eat chametz and matza, tonight it is all matza.  For on all other nights we eat different vegetables, tonight we eat maror (bitter vegetable).  For on all other nights we eat food roasted, stewed, and cooked, tonight we eat only roasted.  For on all other nights we dip once (food was normally dipped in vinegar, brine, or the like), tonight we dip twice.  And according to the knowledge of the son his father teaches him.  He starts with despairing (talks about the slavery) and ends in glorious, he expounds from, “my father was a lost Aramean,” until he finishes the entire section.

Hay: Raban Gamliel used to say, anyone who has not said these three things on Pesach has not fulfilled his obligation, and these are they, pesach, matza, and marror.  Pesach because Hashem passed over the hoses of our forefathers in Egypt (in the plague of firstborns).  Matza since our forefathers were saved from (slavery in) Egypt.  Maror, because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our forefathers in Egypt.  In every a person is obligated to see himself as if he had left Egypt, as it says, “and you shall tell your children on that day saying, on behalf of this Hashem did for me when I left Egypt.”  Therefore, we are obligated to exalt, extol, praise, adorn, laud, beautify, bless, raise up, and commend the One who did all of these miracles for our forefathers and for us, He took us out from slavery to freedom, from depression to happiness, from mourning to holiday, from darkness to great light, and from subservience to salvation.  And we will say before Him Halleluya.

Vav: Until where does he say?  Beit Shamay says, until, “the mother of children is joyful” and Beit Hillel says, until, “a flint into his spring of water.”  And he seals it with (the blessing of) redemption.  Rabi Tarfon says, (the blessing is) that you have redeemed us and redeemed our forefathers from Egypt.  Rabi Akiva says, likewise Hashem our God and the God of our forefathers will bring us to other festivals and holidays which are coming towards us, in peace, happy in the building of Your city, and rejoicing in our service of You, and we will eat there from zvachim and psachim etc. until, “blessed are you Hashem, the redeemer of Israel.”

Zayin: They poured him a third cup, he blesses on his food.  The fourth, he finishes the Hallel, and says on it the blessing of the song (the gemara differs on the meaning of this).  Between these cups, if he wants to drink, he may drink, but between the third and the fourth he may not drink.

Chet: One may not conclude after the pesach with afikoman (a term referring to desserts).  If some of them slept (during the seder) they may eat it, if all of them (slept at one point) they may not eat.  Rabi Yossi says, if they dozed, they may eat, if they fell asleep, they may not.

Tet: A pesach after midnight makes ones’ hands tame (it’s notar).  Pigul and notar tame the hands.  If he blesses the blessing on the pesach, he exempted him self from (blessing by) (the blessing) of zvachim, but if he blessed on the zvachim, he didn’t exempt that of the pesach, according to Rabi Yishma’el.  Rabi Akiva says, this does not exempt that and that does not except this.

Mesechet Shekalim

Perek Aleph

Aleph: On the first of Adar they announce concerning shkalim (to prepare) and kilayim (to check the fields).  One the fifteenth of Adar, they would read the megilla in large cities, fix the roads, paths, and mikva’ot, attend to needs of the public, mark the graves, and go out looking for kilayim.

Bet: Rabi Yehuda said, they used to uproot and throw in front of the owners, but when many people transgressed, they would uproot and throw on the paths, and they decreed that they declare the entire field hefker.

Gimmel: On the fifteenth of Adar, moneychangers would go sit in the country.  On the twenty-fifth they sat in the beit hamikdash.  From the twenty-fifth, they began to (forcibly) collect collateral.  Who would they take collateral from?  From levi’im, yisra’elim, converts, and freedmen, but not from women, slaves, and minors.  Any minor whose father began to contribute for him shall not stop.  And they do not take collateral from kohanim, out of the ways of peacefulness.

Daled: Rabi Yehuda said, Ben Bruchri testified at Yavneh that any kohen who gives a half-shekel hasn’t sinned.  Raban Yochanan ben Zakai said to him, this isn’t so, but any kohen who doesn’t give a half-shekel is sinning.  Rather the kohanim explain this pasuk for themselves, “every mincha (an offering) for the kohen, complete (burned) shall it be, it shall not be eaten.”  Since the omer, and the two breads, and the showbread is for us, how may we eat them (they come from communal funds, and should be burnt, but the kohanim may eat them which shows that the rules for these offerings don’t apply, and thus they don’t have to bring the half-shekel)?

Hay: Even though they said, one does not take collateral from women, slaves, and children, if they give a half-shekel, we accept it.  A non-Jew or kuti who gives, we do not accept from them.  Nor do we accept from them the offerings of a zav, zava, or woman who has just given birth, or chata’ot or ashamot, but we do accept vow offerings or gift offerings.  This is the general rule, anything that can be vowed or gifted we accept, but whatever can’t be vowed or gifted we don’t accept.  And likewise is learned out from Ezra, as it says, “it is not for them and us to build the Beit Hamikdash.”

Vav: And these are those which are chayav in the surcharge on the half-shekel (a kalbon), levi’im, yisra’elim, converts, and freedmen, but not kohanim, women, slaves, and children.  One who gives the half-shekel on behalf of a kohen, women, slave, or child is patur.  And if he gave for himself and for his friend, he only owes one kalbon.  Rabi Meir says, two kalbon.  One who gives a sela (a full shekel) and takes a shekel (changes money) owes two kalbon (one for changing money and one as a surcharge).

Zayin: One who gives a half-shekel on behalf of a poor person, his neighbor, or his townsman is patur (from the kalbon).  If he lent them, he’s chayav.  Brothers and partners are chayav by a kalbon, but they are exempt from ma’aser behema.  But when they are obligated in ma’aser behema (when the property is not part of a partnership), they are patur from the kalbon.  How much is a kalbon?  A silver ma’ah (one twenty-fourth of a sela), according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, half that.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One was allowed to exchange shkalim for darics (a gold coin worth two sela) so it wouldn’t be a burden during the journey.  Just as there were shofarot (a shofar shaped collecting bin) in the Beit Hamikdash, so too there were shofarot in the country.  Townspeople who sent their half-shkalim and they were stolen or lost, if the (funding for) truma was already withdrawn, he would swear to the treasurer, and if not, he would swear to the townspeople, and they would contribute for him.  If they were found or the thieves returned them, both are given as half-shekels, but the recovered aren’t given until the following year.

Bet: One who gives his half-shekel to give on his behalf, but he (the friend) contributes it himself, if the truma has already been withdrawn, he stole kodesh (committed me’ila).  One who gives his half-shekel from hekdesh, if truma has been taken and the animal was sacrificed, he’s done me’ila.  If it is from the money for ma’aser sheni or shvi’it, he must eat an equivalent value.(in Jerusalem).

Gimmel: One who collected up coins and said, these are going towards my shekel, Beit Shamay says, any extra must be a donation to the Beit Hamikdash.  Beit Hillel says, they may be used as general money.  If he said, these are for a chatat, the extra must be a donation.  If he said, that I will bring from these a chatat, the extra is general money.

Daled: Rabi Shimon said, what’s the difference between shkalim and chatat?  Shkalim have a set limit, but a chatat doesn’t.  Rabi Yehuda says, so too shkalim don’t have a set limit, for when the Jews returned from exile they gave darics (four shekels of the mishna, or two of the torah), the then brought selas (two shekels), then they brought tva’in (half sela, the right amount), and they wanted to bring dinars (which was too little).  Rabi Shimon said, despite this, they all still paid the same amount, whereas a chatat, this one can bring a sela, and that can bring two (sela’s-worth), and that brings three.

Hay: Extra for the shekel is general money.  Extra from the tenth of the epha (chatat), the bird offering for a zav, zava, or woman who has just given birth, a chatat, or an asham, is a donation.  This is the general rule, anything which is going to be used for a chatat or asham, the extra is a donation.  Extra from an olah is for an olah.  Extra from a mincha is for a mincha.  Extra from a shlamim is for a shlamim.  Extra from a pesach is for a shlamim.  Extra from nezirim (collected for poor nezirim) is for nezirim.  Extra from a nazir is a donation.  Extra from money for the poor is for the poor.  Extra money for a specific poor person is for that person.  Extra money for captives if for captives.  Extra money for a specific captive is for that captive.  Extra money for the dead is for the dead.  Extra money for a specific dead person is for his heirs.  Rabi Meir says, extra from money for a specific dead person should be left until Eliyahu comes.  Rabi Natan says extra money for a specific dead person is use to build a monument on his grave.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Three times a year would they withdraw from the chamber, half a month before Pesach, half a month before Shavuot, and half a month before Sukkot.  And these are the times we gather ma’aser behema, according to Rabi Akiva.  Ben Azay says, the twenty-ninth of Adar, the first of Sivan, and the twenty-ninth of Av.  Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Shimon say, the first of Nisan, the first of Sivan, and the twenty-ninth of Elul.  Why do they say the twenty-ninth of Elul and not the first of Tishray?  Because it’s yom tov, and you can’t take ma’aser on yom tov, therefore, they made it earlier to the twenty-ninth of Elul.

Bet: Three chests of three se’ah each are withdrawn from the chamber, and on them is an aleph, bet, and gimmel.  Rabi Yishma’el says, it was written in Greek, alpha, beta, and gamma.  The withdrawer may not enter with a hemmed garment, shoes, sandals, tfillin, or an amulet, lest he become poor and people will say, he was getting rich by the donations in the chamber, since a person needs to please people the same way he pleases Hashem, as it says, “and you shall be clean from Hashem and Yisra’el,” and” and find favor and good thoughts in the eyes of Hashem and man.”

Gimmel: (Members) of the house of Raban Gamliel would enter with their shekel between their fingers, and they would throw them before the withdrawer of funds, and he would push it into the chest.  The one withdrawing would not withdraw until he told them, “I will withdraw,” and they would say to him, “withdraw, withdraw, withdraw,” three times.

Daled: He made the first withdrawal and he covered (the shkalim) with leather covers (as a divider for the new shekels which would come later) and second and covered with leather covers.  The third time he doesn’t put them, lest he forget and he’ll withdraw from money from which a withdrawal has been made.  He withdrew the first in the name of Israel, the second because of the cities encircling it, and the third because of Bavel, Madai, and far off countries.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Withdrawn funds, what did they do with it?  They buy korban tamid, korban musaf, the libations, the omer, two breads, showbreads, and all public offerings.  Those who guard the aftergrowth in shvi’it (to make sure people aren’t using properly), their salary comes out of public funds.  Rabi Yossi says, even one who wants can volunteer and do it for free.  They said to him, even you say that they only come for the community.

Bet: The (red) heifer, the sent away goat, and the strip of red wool (for the para aduma) come from the withdrawal from the chamber.  The ramp built for a red heifer , a ramp built for the sent away goat, the thread between his horns (of the goat), the water canal (in the courtyard), the city wall and its towers, and all the needs of the city come from the leftovers of the chamber.  Abba Shaul says, the ramp for the red heifer, the large kohanim build it themselves.

Gimmel: Extra leftovers from the chamber, what would they do with it?  They would buy wine, oil, fine flour (to resell for those who needed for service), and the profit was for the Beit Hamikdash, according to Rabi Yishma’el.  Rabi Akiva says, one may not profit from hekdesh of the poor.

Daled: Extra truma, what would they do with it?  Gold sheets for covering for the kodesh kadashim.  Rabi Yishma’el says, extra fruits for the altar’s ‘dessert’ (extra korbanot) and extra truma for the vessels of service.  Rabi Akiva says, extra truma is for the altar’s ‘dessert’ and the extra libations are used for the vessels of service.  Rabi Chanina sgan of the kohanim says, the extra libations are for the altar’s ‘dessert’ and the extra truma is for the vessels of service.  Neither one nor the other admitted about the fruits.

Hay: Extra incense, what did they do with it?  They take from it (communal money) wages of the artisans, redeem (the extra) on the wages of the artisans, and they give it to the artisans with their salary, and they return and buy more with the new donations.  If the new came on time, they buy from the new, and if not, from the old.

Vav: One who dedicates his possessions and there is something fit for the public korban (as in spices), they are given to the artisans as part of their salary according to Rabi Akiva.  Ben Azay said to him, this is not the method, rather they take from them the wages of the artisans, they redeem them on the money of the artisans, they give them as part of the artisan’s salary, and they return and buy from the new donations.

Zayin: One who dedicates his possessions and there is in them an animal fit for the altar male and female, Rabi Eliezer says, the males are sold for the needs of olot, and the females are sold for the needs of shlamim, and their  proceeds will fall in with the rest for the upkeep of the Beit Hamikdash.  Rabi Yehoshua says, the males themselves will be olot, and the females will be sold for the needs of shlamim, and their money will be for olot, and the rest of his possessions will fall in for the upkeep of the Beit Hamikdash.  Rabi Akiva says, I agree with the words of Rabi Eliezer more than with those of Rabi Yehoshua, for Rabi Eliezer was consistent in his method and Rabi Yehoshua divides his.  Rabi Papyas said, I agree with both of them, Rabi Eliezer for when he dedicates specifically (for the upkeep) and Rabi Yehoshua for when he doesn’t specify.

Chet: One who dedicates objects and there were in them things fit for (offering) on the altar, wines, oils, and fowl, Rabi Elazar says, they should be sold for the needs of those kinds (to buy new ones) and the proceeds should go for olot, and the rest of the objects will fall in with the upkeep of the Beit Hamikdash.

Tet: Once every thirty days prices are set for the chamber.  Anyone who accepts upon himself to supply fine flour at four (se’ah to the sela) and the price stood at three, he must supply four, if it was at three and it stood at four, he must supply four, for hekdesh is given the upper hand.  And if fine flour became wormy, the wormy is for him, and if wine turned, it turned for him.  And he doesn’t get his money until the altar accepts it (if a product spoils before being used, the supplier loses that value).

Perek Hay

Aleph: These are the appointed who were in the Beit Hamikdash, Yochanan ben Pinchas over the seals, Achiya over the libations, Matitya ben Shmu’el over the lots (for which kohanim have which duties), Patachia over the bird korbanot.  Patachia is Mordechai, so why was he called Patachia?  For he could open matters (patach) and explain them (though they had seemed unfathomable) and spoke seventy languages (referring to all languages).  Ben Achiya over one those with stomach illnesses (for the kohanim got sick often due to their diet and work), Nechunya digger of pits (to ensure sufficient water for Jerusalem), Gviri the herald, Ben Gever over the locking of gates, Ben Bevi over the wicks, Ben Arza over the cymbals, Hugras ben Levi over the singing, the house of Garmu over making the showbreads, the house of Avtinas over the making of the incense, Elazar over the curtains, and Pinchas over the garments.

Bet: They do not have less than three treasurers and seven supervisors (of the treasurers), and they do not make an authority (to collect money) over the community by money with less than two except for Ben Achiya who is over those with stomach illnesses and Elazar who is over the curtains, for those the majority of the public accepted upon themselves.

Gimmel: There were four seals in the Beit Hamikdash, and it was written on them, calf, ram, kid, (and) sinner.  Ben Azay says, they were five, and in Aramaic they said on them, calf, ram, kid, poor sinner, (and) rich sinner.  ‘Calf’ was used with libations of large and small cattle, male and female; ‘kid’ was used with the libations of large and small flocks, male and female, except for those of rams; ‘ram’ was used only with rams; and ‘sinner’ was used with the libations of the three animals of those with tzara’at.

Daled: One who needed libations (for a sacrifice) went to Yochanan who was in charge of the seals, gave him money, and got a seal from him.  He would go to Achiya who was in charge of the libations, give him the seal, and get a libation.  And at night, they would come to each other, Achiya would take out the seals and get money according to them.  If there was leftover, it was for the Beit Hamikdash, and if there was a deficit, Yochanan would pay from his house, for the Beit Hamikdash has the upper hand.

Hay: One who lost his seal, they would have him wait until evening and if (Yochanan) found extra (money) corresponding to his seal, they would give him, and if not, he wouldn’t have.  And they would write them name of the day on them (the seals) because of defrauders.

Vav: There were two chambers in the Beit Hamikdash, one the chamber of secrets and on the chamber of vessels.  The chamber of secrets, those who fear sin would put (charity) in it secretly, and the poor of good people would get money from it in secret.  The chamber of the vessels, anyone who donates a vessel throws it in, and once every thirty days the treasurers open it and anything they find a use for in the upkeep of the house the leave, and the rest they sell for their value and (the money) falls in with the chamber (fund) for the upkeep of the house.

Perek Vav

Aleph: Thirteen chests, thirteen tables, (and) thirteen (places for) prostrations were in the Beit Hamikdash.  People of the house of Raban Gamliel and of the house of Rabi Chanina sgan to the kohanim would bow fourteen times.  Where was the extra?  Opposite the wood pen, for they had a tradition in their hands from their forefathers that the ark was hidden there.

Bet: Once there was a kohen who was occupied (chopping wood) and he saw that the floor was different than the others.  He went and told his friend, and he didn’t manage to finish the thing (telling them) and his soul departed and it is known with certainty that the ark was hidden there.

Gimmel: And where would they bow?  Four in the north, four in the south, three in the east, and two in the west according to the thirteen gates.  The southern gates near the west (were) the upper gate, the fuel gate, the bechorot gate, and the water gate.  And why is it called the water gate?  Because there they would bring in the dish of water for the libation on Sukkot.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, because water trickles through it and in the future they will be under the threshold of the Beit Hamikdash.  Opposite them in the north near the west, the Yechonya gate, the korban gate, the women’s gate, and the song gate.  And why is it called the Yechonya gate?  For there Yechonya went out in hi exile.  In the east, the Nikanor gate, and it had two small gates, one on its right and one on its left, and the two in the west they didn’t have a name.

Daled: There were thirteen tables in the Beit Hamikdash, eight of marble in the slaughterhouse upon which they would rinse the viscera, and two to the west of the ramp, one of marble one of silver, on the marble they would put the limbs and on the silver they would put the service vessels.  Two in the hall on the inside near the entrance of the Beit Hamikdash, one of marble and on of gold, on the marble they would put the (new) showbreads on their way in (to the Beit Hamikdash) and on they gold (they would put the old showbreads) on their way out, for one goes up in holiness and does not go down.  And there was on of gold on the inside, and upon it there were always the showbreads.

Hay: There were thirteen chests in the Beit Hamikdash and it was written on them, (in Aramaic) new shekels, old shekels, nests, young birds for an olah, wood, frankincense, gold for the kaporet, and six for donations.  New shekels, (a chest) for each year, old (shekels), one who did not give for the previous year gives the next year.  Nests, they are turtledoves.  Young birds for olot, they are pigeons, and they are all olot according to Rabi Yehuda.  Chachamim say, nests, for both chatat and olah, and young birds for olot are all for olot.

Vav: One who says, wood is upon me (to donate) shall not (give) less than two logs.  Frankincense, shall not (give) less than a handful.  And six for donations.  Donations, what would they do with them?  They would buy olot with it and meat for its sake (to offer) and hides for the kohanim.  This interpretation was expounded by Yehoyada the kohen gadol, “it is an asham, for he is certainly guilty before Hashem.”  This is the general rule, anything which comes because of sin or guilt, it will be used to buy olot, the meat is for its sake and the hides are for the kohanim.  There were two psukim found to be meaningful, asham for Hashem and asham for the kohanim, and it says, “the money of the asham and the money of the chatat will not be brought to the Beit Hamikdash, they will be for the kohanim.”

Perek Zayin

Aleph: Money found between (the chest of) shkalim and (the chest of) donations what is close to shkalim falls in with shkalim, (close to) the donations for the donations, midway falls in with the donations.  Between the wood and the frankincense, close to the wood for wood, to the frankincense for frankincense, and midway for frankincense.  Between the nests and the young birds for an olah, close to the nests for nests, to the young birds for an olah for the young birds for an olah, and midway for the young birds for an olah.  Between chulin and ma’aser sheni, close to the chulin for chulin, to the ma’aser sheni for ma’aser sheni, and midway for ma’aser sheni.  This is the general rule, we go according to the closer to the lenient, and midway according strict.

Bet: Money found before the sellers or animals, is made into ma’aser.  If it’s on the temple mount, it’s chulin.  If in Yerushalayim during a holiday, it’s ma’aser.  On all other days of the year, it’s chulin.

Gimmel: Meat found in the sanctuary, limbs are olot, slices, chatat.  In Yerushalayim, shlamim.  In either case, it must lose its shape and go to be burned.  If it is found in the borders, limbs are nevelot (not allowed), slices are allowed.  And in the time of a holiday when meat is abundant even limbs are allowed.

Daled: An animal found from Yerushalayim to Migdal Ever and that distance in every direction, rams, are olot, ibex, shlamim.  Rabi Yehuda says, what is fit to be a pesach is psachim if it is (at most) thirty days before the holiday.

Hay: At first they used to take collateral from the finder until he would bring its libations.  When they started to let it down and flee, the court established that its libations would be from the public (funds).

Vav: Rabi Shimon said, the court established seven things, and this is one of them.  A non-Jew who sent olot from the island nations and sent their libations with them, they offer from his and if not (he didn’t send) they offer from the public.  And so too with a convert who died and set aside offerings, if he has libations, they bring from his and if not, from the public.  And it was a condition of the court on a kohen gadol who died that his mincha (which he normally brought every day of his own money) would be brought from the public.  Rabi Yehuda says, fro his heirs.  And it was offered whole.

Zayin: On salt and wood that the kohanim would enjoy of them, on the (red) cow that one could not commit misappropriation with its ashes, and on invalid nests that they should come from the public.  Rabi Yossi says, one who supplies the bird offerings supplies (replacements) for the invalid ones.

Perek Chet

Aleph: All spittle found in Yerushalayim is (considered to be) tahor, except for that of the upper shul according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, on the other days of the year (not holiday) that in the middle (of the street) is tahor and that at the sides (where tahor people walk to stay tahor) is tahor.  And during the times of the holidays, that in the middle is tahor and that one the sides is tame, because they (the tame) are a minority and remove themselves to the sides.

Bet: All utensils which are found in Yerushalayim on the way down to the place of immersing are tame, on the way up, are tahor, for the way down is not the way up according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, they are all tahor, except the basket, spade, and a crusher designated for graves (people used to be buried and after a certain amount of time their bones would be transferred to a family plot, and these tools were used in the process of adding to and maintaining the family plot).

Gimmel: A knife which was found on the fourteenth (of Nisan), one may slaughter with it immediately.  If on the thirteenth, he immerses it again.  A cleaver (not used for slaughtering but rather chopping meat), in either case he immerses it again.  If the fourteenth fell out on a Shabbat (and he found even a cleaver), he may slaughter with it immediately (for one may not immerse on Shabbat, so we assume the owner immersed it on Friday).  On the fifteenth, he may slaughter with it immediately.  If it (a cleaver) was found tied to a knife, behold, it is like a knife.

Daled: A curtain which became tame from a contaminated object, they immerse it within (in the mikva in the courtyard of the Beit Hamikdash), and they bring it in immediately.  One which became tame from the source of tuma, they immerse it outside and lay it out in the chel (an area in the Beit Hamikdash between the soreg, a partition, and the wall of the women’s courtyard).  If it was new, they spread it on the roof of a portico so that the nation will see its work which is beautiful.

Hay: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabi Shimon ben haSgan, the curtain was one tefach thick; was woven of seventy-two strands, with each thread (containing) twenty-four threads; it was forty amot long; it was twenty amot wide; it was made from eighty-two ribo (either ten thousand, referring to either the number of the number of threads or the value, or girls employed in its manufacturing); they would make two every year; and three hundred kohanim would immerse it.

Vav: The meat of the most holy which became tame, whether from a source of tuma or a contaminated object, whether inside or outside (the courtyard), Beit Shamay says, it must all be burnt inside, except what was made tame from a source of tuma outside.  Beit Hillel says, everything is burnt outside, except for what was made tame from a contaminated object inside.

Zayin: Rabi Eliezer says, if it became tame from a source of tuma whether inside or outside it is burned outside, and if it became tame from a contaminated object, whether inside or outside, it is burned inside.  Rabi Akiva says, the place where it became tame is the place it is burned.

Chet: The limbs of a tamid are placed on the lower half of the ramp to the east (the tamid was not brought up all in one trip, so this is where it was left), of musaf is placed on the lower half of the ramp to the west, and of Rosh Chodesh were placed on the karkov (walkway between the corners for the kohanim) of the mizbe’ach above.  Shkalim and bikurim aren’t done unless there is a Beit Hamikdash, but ma’aser on grain, ma’aser on animals, and firstborn (animals) are done when there is a Beit Hamikdash and when there isn’t a Beit Hamikdash.  One who makes shkalim and bikurim hekdesh, behold they are hekdesh.  Rabi Shimon says, one who says his bikurim are kodesh, they aren’t kodesh.

Mesechet Yoma

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Seven days prior to Yom Hakippurim they take the kohen gadol from his house to the palhedrin chamber, and they set for him another kohen under him for perhaps an invalidating thing will befall him.  Rabi Yehuda says, they even establish another wife for him, for it says, “and he will atone on his behalf and on behalf of his house,” his house, this is his wife.  They said to him, if so, the thing has no end (we would need to give him an unending number of wives to ensure that he will have a living wife that day).

Bet: All the seven days he sprinkles the blood, offers the incense, sets up the candles (of the menorah), and offers the head and the leg (of the tamid).  And all the other days (of the year) if he wants to offer, he offers, for the kohen gadol is at the head (has the first right) in offering a portion, and is at the head in taking a portion.

Gimmel: They gave him elders from the elders of the court and they would read before him the order (service) of the day and say to him, my lord the kohen gadol, read it with your mouth (yourself) for perhaps you forgot or perhaps you didn’t learn.  The morning of the eve of You Hakippurim, they stand him up in the eastern gat and they pass before him bulls, rams, and sheep such that he will know and be familiar with the service.

Daled: The whole seven days they wouldn’t withhold from him food and drink.  On the eve of Yom Hakippurim when it darkens they would not let him eat much, because food brings on sleep.

Hay: The elders of the court would hand him over to the elders of the kohanim and they brought him up to the upper chamber of the house of Avtinas and they (the elders of the court) made him swear (that he would not change in the service) and they took their leave and left.  They said to him (for the oath) my lord the kohen gadol, we are messengers of the court and you are our messenger and a messenger of the court, we make you swear by the One who dwells His name in this house that you will not change a thing from everything we have told you.  And he turns aside and cries (they suspected him of being a Sadducee) and they turn aside and weep (they inappropriately suspected him).

Vav: If he was wise, he would expound (psukim for himself) and if not, the scholars would expound before him.  If he regularly read (in scripture), and if not they would read before him.  And from what do they read before him?  From Iyov (Job), Ezra, and Divrei Hayamim (Chronicles).  Zecharia ben Kvutal says, many times I read before him in Daniel.

Zayin: If he asked to doze, the young kohanim snap before him with their middle finger and they would say to him, my lord the kohen gadol, stand up and drive away (sleep) once on the floor (which was cold).  And they kept him busy until the time of slaughtering arrived.

Chet: Every day they take (ashes) from the mizbe’ach by kriyat gever (an unclear time in the morning) whether before or after it, on Yom Hakippurim from midnight and on, and on the holidays from the first watch (after a third of the night) and kriyat hagever wouldn’t be reached before the time that the courtyard was filled with Jews (i.e. this would occur before kriyat hagever).

Perek Bet

Aleph: At first anyone who wanted to lift (ashes) from the mizbe’ach could lift, and when there were many, they would run and go up the ramp and whoever came four amot before his friend would win.  And if they were equal, the one in charge would say to them, stick out a finger (so he would go around until a specified number, and the one who it landed out on would get the job).  And what do they put out?  One or two, and they do not put out a thumb in the Beit Hamikdash.

Bet: One they were equal and they ran up the ramp and one pushed his friend, and fell and broke his foot.  And since the court saw that they were coming to danger they instituted that they will not lift from the mizbe’ach except by lot.  There were four lots there, and this is the first lot.

Gimmel: The second lot (is) who slaughters, who sprinkles, who cleans the inner mizbe’ach, who cleans the menorah, and who brings the limbs up the ramp (and the limbs are) the head and the leg, the two front legs, the rump and the foot, the breast and the neck, the two flanks, the entrails, the fine flour, the chavitin (the meal offering of the kohen gadol), and the wine.  Thirteen kohanim won in it.  Ben Azay said before Rabi Akiva in the name of Rabi Yehoshua, the way it walked (the front most parts first) was (the way it) was offered.

Daled: The third lot (was announced as) those who are new to (never have offered) the incense come and draw lots.  And the fourth, new and old, who takes limbs up from the ramp to the mizbe’ach.

Hay: A tamid was offered by nine (kohanim), ten, eleven, and twelve, no less and no more.  How?  By itself it was nine.  On sukkot, in the hand of them there was the dish of water, behold there are ten.  If it is ben ha’arbayim it was by eleven, nine for it and two had with them two logs of wood.  And on Shabbat, eleven, nine for itself and two with dishes in hand of frankincense of the showbreads, and on Shabbat Sukkot, (it was twelve, eleven plus) in the hand of one the dish of water.

Vav: A ram was offered by eleven, the meat by five, the entrails, fine flour, and wine by two each.

Zayin: A bull was offered by twenty-four, the head and the leg, the head by one and the leg by two.  The rump and the foot, the rump by two and the foot by two.  The breast and the neck, the breast by one and the neck by three.  Two forelegs by two, the two flanks by two, and the entrails, fine flour, and wine by three each.  What is this talking about?  In public offerings.  But in private offerings, if he wants to offer, he offers.  The flaying and dismembering of these and those (both types of offerings) are the same.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: The one in charge said to them, go out and see if the time for slaughtering has come yet.  If it came, the one who sees says, barkai (the dawn has flashed).  Matitya ben Shmu’el says, the entire east is lit up (only then may they slaughter).  (They ask) until Chevron?  And he says, yes (and they slaughter).

Bet: And why did they need this?  Because once the light of the moon rose, they thought the east had lit up, and they slaughtered the tamid and brought it out to the place of burning.  (Before the Yom Hakippurim service) they would lead the kohen gadol to the place of immersion.  This is the general rule that was in the Beit Hamikdash, all who cover their feet (meaning relieve themselves) needs immersion, and all who pass water (urinate) need to sanctify (wash) their hands and feet.

Gimmel: A person may not enter the courtyard for holy work even tahor until he immerses.  Five immersion and ten sanctifications (washings) the kohen gadol does on that day (on Yom Hakippurim) and they are all in the Beit Hamikdash near the house of haparava, except only this one (the first).

Daled: They spread a linen sheet between him and the people.  He would undress, go down, and immerse, and come up and dry himself.  They brought him golden clothing, and he put them on and washed his hands and feet.  They brought him the tamid, he cut it, another finishes the slaughter on his behalf, and he got the blood and sprinkled it.  He entered (the Beit Hamikdash proper) to offer the incense, set the candles, and offer the head, limbs, chavitin, and wine.

Hay: The incense of the morning was offered between the (sprinkling of the) blood and the (offering of the) limbs.  That of bein ha’arbayim (afternoon) was between the limbs and the libations.  If the kohen gadol was old or sensitive, they warm for him hot water and pout it into the cold water (of the mikva) to reduce their coldness.

Vav: They brought him to the house of haparava, which was in the kodesh (holy area).  They spread a sheet of linen between him and the nation, and he washed his hands and feet and undressed.  Rabi Meir says, he undressed and (then) washed his hands and feet.  He went down and immersed and came up and dried off.  They would bring him white clothing, and he put them on and washed his hands and feet.

Zayin: In the morning he would wear plusim (clothing of fine Egyptian linen) of (a value of) twelve maneh, and in the afternoon (he wore) hindvin (clothing on Indian linen) of eight hundred zuz, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, in the morning he wore of eighteen maneh, and in the afternoon (he wore) of twelve maneh, all in all thirty maneh.  These are from (the funds of) the public, and if he (the kohen gadol) wanted to add, he added from his own.

Chet: He (the kohen gadol) came to his bull, and his bull was standing between the hall and the mizbe’ach, its head to the south facing west, and the kohen stands to the east facing west, and he places both of his hands on it and confesses.  He used to say like this, please Hashem I have done wrong, I have been negligent, I have sinned before you, me and my house.  Please Hashem, please atone for the wrongs, the negligences, and the sins which I did wrong, was negligent, and sinned before you, me and my house, as is written in the torah of Moshe your servant, “for on this day he will make atonement upon you etc.”  And they would answer after him, “blessed is His holy name and His kingship for ever and eternity.”

Tet: He came to the east (part) of the courtyard, north of the mizbe’ach, the sgan to his right and the head and the head of his father’s house to the left.  And there were two goats and there was an urn there and in it there were two lots.  They were made of boxwood and Ben Gamla made them out of gold, and they would remember him favorably.

Yud: Ben Katin made twelve spigots for the sink, for it only had two.  And he even made a machine for the sink (a waterwheel or a machine connecting to a cistern) so that its waters wouldn’t become pasul because of leyna (being left over night in a receptacle in the Beit Hamikdash).  Munbaz the king (a king who converted to Judaism) would make all the handles of the vessels for Yom Hakippurim out of gold.  Helena his mother (who also converted) made a golden candlestick for the entrance of the holy area and she also made a golden tablet upon which the parsha of sota was written.  (The) Nikanor (gate)had miracles done to its doors, and they would remember him favorably.

Yud Aleph: And these (were remembered) for unfavorably, those of the house of Garmu, for they didn’t want to teach how to make the showbreads, those of the house of Avtinas, for they didn’t want to teach how to make the incense, Hurgas ben Levi, he knew singing well but would not teach it, and Ben Kamtzar, he didn’t want to teach the wart of writing.  On the first it is written, “remember the righteous in blessing,” and on these it is said, “and the name of the wicked shall rot.”

Perek Daled

Aleph: He shook the urn and lifted the two lots.  One was written on it, for Hashem, and on was written on for Azazel (hell).  The sgan is to his right and the head of his father’s house is to the left.  If the one for Hashem came up in his right, the sgan says to him, my lord the kohen gadol, raise your right (hand).  And if the one for Hashem came up in his left, the head of his father’s house says to him, my lord the kohen gadol, raise your right.  He puts them on the two goats and says, for Hashem a chatat.  Rabi Yishma’el says, he didn’t need to say, a chatat, only, for Hashem.  And they answer after him, blessed is His holy name and His kingship for ever and eternity.

Bet: He tied a strip of crimson (wool) on the head of the scapegoat and stood it pointing toward the place of sending out, and the one to be slaughtered toward the place of slaughtering.  He came to his bull a second time and he placed both his hands on it and confessed.  And he would say please Hashem I have done wrong, I have been negligent, I have sinned before you, me and my house.  Please Hashem, please atone for the wrongs, the negligences, and the sins which I did wrong, was negligent, and sinned before you, me and my house, as is written in the torah of Moshe your servant, “for on this day he will make atonement upon you etc.”  And they would answer after him, “blessed is His holy name and His kingship for ever and eternity.”

Gimmel: He slaughtered it and took its blood in a bowl, and he gave it to the one who was to stir it in the fourth terrace of the sanctuary so that it doesn’t coagulate.  He took a pan and went up to the top of the mizbe’ach and cleared coals to this way and that, scoops from the innermost consumed (brunt) ones and went down and rested it in the fourth terrace in the sanctuary.

Daled: One all (other) days he would scoop with silver and pour into a gold one, and that day he would scoop with gold and with it he would bring in.  All days he would scoop with one of four kav and pour into one of three kav, and on that day he would scoop with one of thee kav and bring in.  Rabi Yossi says, on all days he would scoop with one of a se’ah (six kav) and pour into one of three kav and on that day he would scoop with one of three kav and bring in.  On all days it was heavy, and on that day it was light.  On all days its handle was short, and on that day it was long.  On all days the gold was yellow, and on that day it was red according to Rabi Menachem.  On all days he would offer a pras (half a maneh, of incense) in the morning and a pras in the afternoon, and on that day he added the size of his handfuls.  On all days it was thin (the pieces of the incense), and on that day it was the thinnest of thin.

Hay: On all days the kohanim go up in the east of the ramp and come down in its west, and on that day the kohen gadol would go up in the middle and come down in the middle.  Rabi Yehuda say, the kohen gadol always goes up in the middle and comes down in the middle.  All days the kohen gadol washes his hands and feet from the sink, and that day from the golden jug.  Rabi Yehuda says, the kohen gadol always washes his hands and feet from the golden jug.

Vav: On all days they were four woodpiles there, and on that day five, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, every day there were three, and on that day four.  Rabi Yehuda says, on all days there were two and on that day three.

Perek Hay

Aleph: They brought out for him the scoop and the pan and he filled his handfuls and put it into the scoop, the large (amount of incense) according to his (hands’) largeness and the small according to its smallness, and that was its measurement.  He took the pan in his right and the scoop in his left.  He would walk in the sanctuary until he gets to between the two curtains which divide between the holy and the holy of holies, and there was an amah between them.  Rabi Yossi says, there was only one curtain there, as it says, and the curtain shall divide for you between the holy and the holy of holies.”  The outer was clasped (folded to make an opening) in the south and the inner to the north.  (The kohen gadol would go in on the south side,) walk between them, until he got to (enter the holy of holies on) the north side.  When he got to the north, he would turn to face the south, walk to his left with the curtain until he reached the ark.  When he got to the ark he put the pan between the two bars (of the ark).  He piled the incense on the coals and the entire house filled with smoke.  He exited in the same way he had entered, prayed a short prayer in the outer house, and didn’t lengthen his prayer so as not to alarm the people (that he may have died).

Bet: From when the ark was taken (after the first Beit Hamikdash was destroyed) there was a stone there from the days of the early prophets and it was called shtiya (foundation), it was above the ground by (the length of) three fingers and on it he would put (the incense).

Gimmel: He took the blood from the person stirring it, he entered the place he had entered (the holy of holies) stood in the place he had stood, and sprinkled on it one above and seven below, and he didn’t set himself (his hand in the normal way to) to spray up or down, rather (he held his hand) as a whip (is held).  And this is how he would count, one, one and one, one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five, one and six, one and seven.  He came out and rested it on the golden stand that was in the sanctuary.

Daled: They brought him the goat and he slaughtered it and got its blood in a bowl.  He entered the place he had entered (the holy of holies) stood in the place he had stood, and sprinkled on it one above and seven below, and he didn’t set himself (his hand in the normal way to) to spray up or down, rather (he held his hand) as a whip (is held).  And this is how he would count, one, one and one, one and two etc.  He came out and rested it on the second stand that was in the sanctuary.  Rabi Yehuda says, there was only one stand there.  He took the blood of the bull and rested the blood of the goat and he sprinkled from it on the curtain which is opposite the ark on the outside, one above and seven below etc.  He poured the blood of the bull into that of the goat, and put the full (bowl) into the empty one.

Hay: “And he will go out to the mizbe’ach which is before Hashem,” this is the golden mizbe’ach.  He began sprinkling and moved downwards.  From where does he start?  From the northeast corner, northwest, southwest, southeast.  The place he starts for the sprinkling on the outer mizbe’ach, from there he would finish on the inner mizbe’ach.  Rabi Eliezer says, he would stand in his place and sprinkle (without moving around the mizbe’ach).  And on all of them he would sprinkle from bottom to top, except that which was before him, for on that one he would sprinkle from top down.

Vav: He sprinkled on the surface of the mizbe’ach seven times and the rest of the blood he would spill on the western base of the outer mizbe’ach, and of the outer mizbe’ach he would spill on the southern base (of the mizbe’ach).  And both of these mix in a trench, go out to the Kidron river, were sold to gardeners as manure, and there is me’ila by them (they cannot be used unless paid for).

Zayin: All of the actions of Yom Hakippurim (that) were stated (needed to be done) in order, if he made a thing earlier than another, he didn’t do anything.  If he made blood of the goat come before the blood of the bull, he must return and sprinkle from the blood of the goat after the blood of the bull.  And if before he finished the sprinkling within the blood was spilled, he will bring different blood and he returns and sprinkles from the start inside.  And so too in the sanctuary, and so too with the golden mizbe’ach, for they are all an atonement in their own right (a separate piece which must be repeated).  Rabi Elazar and Rabi Shimon say, from the place he stopped he (re)starts.

Perek Vav

Aleph: The two goats of Yom Hakippurim their commandment is that they will be equal in appearance, height, and value and bought together.  And even if they are not equal, they are kosher.  If he bought one today and one tomorrow, they’re kosher.  If one of them dies, if it died before the lot (for Hashem or hell), they take a pair for the other, and if it died after the lot, they bring another pair and make a lot on them from the beginning and say, if the one of Hashem died, the one of Hashem here will stand in its stead, and if the one of hell died, the one of hell here will stand in its stead.  And the second will graze until it develops a blemish and will be sold, and its money will fall in with donations, for a public chatat is not left to die.  Rabi Yehuda says, is should be left to die.  And also said Rabi Yehuda, if the blood was spilled, the scapegoat is to die, and if the scapegoat dies, the blood is spilled.

Bet: He came to the scapegoat and placed both his hands on it and confessed.  And he used to say like this, please Hashem, they have done wrong, been negligent, and sinned before you, your nation the house of Yisra’el.  Please by Hashem, atone for their wrongs, negligences, and sins which they have done wrong, been negligent, and sinned before you your nation the house of Yisra’el, as is written in the torah of Moshe your servant, saying, “for on this day He will atone for you to purify you from all of your sins, before Hashem you will become pure.”  And the kohanim and the nation which were standing in the sanctuary when they would hear the pronounced name (of Hashem) which would come out of the mouth of the kohen gadol, they would kneel, bow, and all on their faces and say, blessed is the honored name of His kingship for ever and eternity.

Gimmel: He would hand it over to who was leading it.  All are fit to lead, but the kohanim gedolim made it fixed to not let a yisra’el lead it.  Rabi Yossi said, once Arsela led it, and he was a yisra’el.

Daled: and they made a ramp for him because of the Babylonians (a nickname for mischievous people) for they would pull his hair and say to him, take and leave, take and leave (they wanted to do away with sin more quickly).  Some notable people from Yerushalayim would take him until the first shack (where people waited to accompany him).  There were ten shacks from Yerushalayim to the cliff, ninety ris, seven and a half (ris) to each mil (2,000 amot).

Hay: At each shack they would say to him, here is food and here is water, and they would escort him from shack to shack, except for the last of them, for they did not get with him to the cliff, rather he would stand from afar and see the deed.

Vav: What would he do?  He divided the crimson thread, half tied to the rock and half tide between its horns, and it pushed it from behind, and it rolls and goes down, and it would not get halfway down the hill before it became many pieces.  He came and sat under the last booth until it got dark.  And from when are his clothes tame?  From when he exits from the wall of Yerushalayim.  Rabi Shimon says, from the time he pushes it from the cliff.

Zayin: He came to the bull and goat to be burnt (and had been slaughtered).  He tore them open and removed their sacrificial portions, he put them in a tray and smoked them on the mizbe’ach.  He twisted them around poles and took them out to the place of burning.  And from when is their clothing tame?  From when they exit from the wall of the sanctuary.  Rabi Shimon says, from when the fire has seized (lit) most of them.

Chet: They said to the kohen gadol, the goat has reached the desert.  And from where did they know that the goat reached the desert?  For they set up relay stations who waved with scarves and know that the goat had reached the desert.  Rabi Yehuda said, and didn’t they have a great sign?  From Yerushalayim to the house of Chidudo is three mil, they would go a mil, come back a mil, and wait the time of a mil and they knew the goat had reached the desert.  Rabi Yishma’el says, and didn’t they have another sign?  A thread of crimson was tied on the opening of the entrance to the sanctuary.  And when the goat got the desert the thread would whiten as it says, “if your sins will be like crimson, like snow they will be whitened.

Perek Tet

Aleph: The kohen gadol came to read.  If he wanted to read in the linen garments, he reads, and if not, he reads in a white garment of his own.  The beadle of the shul (synagogue) takes the torah scroll and gives it to the head of the shul, the head of the shul gives it to the sgan, the sgan gives it to the kohen gadol, and the kohen gadol receives standing, reads standing, and reads (the portions of), “after the death,” and, “but on the tenth.”  And he rolled the torah scroll and places it in his lap and says, more than what I read is written here.  “and on the tenth,” which is in Bamidbar he reads by heart.  And he blesses on it eight blessings, on the torah, and on the service, and on the praise, and on the forgiveness for wrong, and on the Beit Hamikdash in its own right, and on Yisra’el in its own right, and on the kohanim in their own right, and on the rest of the prayer.

Bet: One who sees the kohen gadol while he is reading does not see the bull and the goat which are burnt, and the one who sees the bull and goat which are burnt does not see the kohen gadol reading.  And not because he wasn’t allowed, but because the way was far and the work of both of them (the time the work was done) was the same.

Gimmel: If he reads in linen, he would wash his hands and his feet; undress, go down, and immerse; and come up and dry off.  They would bring him golden garments, he would put them on and wash his hands, go out and do his ram and the nation’s ram and the seven unblemished lambs which were one year old, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Rabi Akiva says, with the tamid of the morning they were offered, and the olah bull and the goat done outside they would offer with the tamid of the afternoon.

Daled: He washed his hands and feet and undressed, went down, immersed, came up, and dried off.  They brought him white garments and he put them on and washed his hands and his feet.  He went in (to the holy of holies) to get out the scoop and the pan, washed his hands and feet, went down, immersed, came up, and dried off.  They brought him gold garments and he put them on and washed his hands and feet.  He entered to offer the incense of the afternoon and fix the lights (of the menorah), washed his hands and feet, and undressed.  They brought him his clothes, and he put them on.  And they accompanied him to his house.  And he made a festival (meal) for those who he liked when he came out of the holy peacefully.

Hay: The kohen gadol serves with eight vessels (items of clothing), and a lay kohen serves with four, with the tunic, pants, turban, and girdle.  The kohen gadol added to this the breastplate, apron (ephod), robe, and frontlet (tzitz).  The urim vetumim (jeweled golden breastplate with a parchment of holy writing folded inside it) was consulted (for it could be used to consult Hashem) in these.  And they do not consult except for the king, the court, and for whom the public needed.

Perek Chet

Aleph: (On) Yom Hakippurim (one is) assur by eating, drinking, bathing, anointing (with perfuming), wearing (leather) sandals, and sexual relations.  And the king and the brief may wash their faces.  A woman after childbirth may wear sandals, according to Rabi Eliezer, and Chachamim prohibit.

Bet: One who eats (the amount of) a large date including the pit and one who drinks a mouthful is chayav (karet if intentional, chatat if not).  All foods combine to (the amount of) a date and all drinks combine to (the amount of) a mouthful.  Food and drink do not combine.

Gimmel: If a person ate and drank in one fit of craziness, he is only chayav one chatat.  If he ate and did melacha, he is chayav two.  If he ate foods which aren’t fit to be eaten or drank drinks which aren’t fit to be drunk, or drank brine or fish brine, he’s patur.

Daled: Babies (referring to children), one does not make them fast on Yom Kippur, but one teaches them one year or two years before (they become adults) so that they will become regular with (keeping) the mitzvot.

Hay: A pregnant woman who smelled (and thus craved food), they feed her until she returns to herself.  A sick person, they feed him based on (the opinions of) experts.  And if there are no experts there, they feed him based on himself, until he says it’s enough.

Vav: One who was seized by bulmos (a hunger-induced ailment) they feed him even tame things until his eyes light back up.  One who was bitten by a rabid dog, they do not feed him from the lobe of its liver, and Rabi Matya ben Charash allows.  And furthermore said Rabi Matya ben Charash, one who has a sore throat, they may put medicine in his mouth on Shabbat, since it is a doubt of life, and all doubt of life and all doubt of life pushes off Shabbat.

Zayin: One who debris fell on, and it’s a doubt whether he’s there or he’s not there, there is a doubt whether he is alive or if he’s dead, it’s a doubt if he’s a Jew or he’s a non-Jew, they open the pile for him (even on Yom Kippur).If they found him alive they remove for him, if he’s dead, they leave it.

Chet: A chatat and a sure asham atone (for what they are brought).  Death and Yom Hakippurim atone with repentance.  Repentance atones on light transgressions, on a (mitzvat) ase and on a lo ta’ase, and on strict (transgressions)  it hangs until Yom Hakippurim comes and atones.

Tet: One who says, I will sin and repent, I will sin and repent, he does not have enough in his hands to repent.  (If he says)  I will sin and Yom Hakippurim will atone, Yom Hakippurim doesn’t atone.  Rabi Elazar ben Azaria expounded this, “from all of your sins before Hashem you will be made tahor,” all transgressions which are between man and Hashem, Yom Hakippurim atones, and transgressions between man and his friend, Yom Hakippurim atones until he appeases his friend.  Rabi Akiva says, you are fortunate Yisra’el, before who to you become tahor?  Who makes you tahor?  Your Father in heaven, as it says, “and I will throw upon you water that is tahor and which makes you tahor.”  And it says, “hope of Yisra’el, Hashem.”  Just as a mikva makes the tame tahor, so too the Holy one Blessed be he makes Yisra’el tahor.

Mesechet Sukkah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: A sukka which is taller than twenty amot is pasul, and Rabi Yehuda allows it.  And one which is not taller than ten tfachim, or does not have three walls, or has more sun than shade is pasul.  An old sukka, Beit Shamay invalidate and Beit Hillel holds valid.  What is an old sukka?  All (sukkot) which one made thirty (or more) days before the holiday.  But if he made it for the purpose of the holiday, even from the beginning of the year it is valid.

Bet: One who makes his sukka under a tree, it is as if he made it inside the house.  A sukka on top of a sukka, the top one is valid, and the bottom is invalid.  Rabi Yehuda says, if they don’t live in the upper one, the bottom is valid.

Gimmel: If he spread a sheet over it (the schach) because of the sun (to block it out) or under it because of leaves dropping (from the schach), or he spread it over the four posts of a bed (he brought into the sukka) it is invalid.  But he may spread it on the crossbar of a bed.

Daled: If he trained over it (the sukka) a (growing) grapevine, gourd, or ivy and he put schach over it, it’s invalid.  And if the schach is more than them, or he cut them, it’s valid.  This is the general rule, anything which can accept tuma and is not grown from the ground one does not make schach with it, and anything which does not accept tuma and is grown from the ground one does make schach with it.

Hay: Bundles of straw, bundles of wood, and bundles of brushwood, one does not use as schach.  And all which he untied are valid.  And they are all valid for the walls.

Vav: One may make schach with wooden planks according to Rabi Yehuda.  And Rabi Meir forbids.  If he put on them a board which is wider than four tfachim, it’s valid, as long as he doesn’t sleep under it.

Zayin: A ceiling which has no plaster on it, Rabi Yehuda says, Beit Shamay says, one loosens and removes one from between (every) two (alternating planks), and Beit Hillel says he loosens or takes one from between every two.  Rabi Meir says, he takes one from between every two and he doesn’t loosen.

Chet: One who makes a ceiling for his sukka from spits or long (rods of) beds, it there is space between them like them (their width), it’s valid.  One who burrows in a pile of grain to make a sukka in it, it is not a sukka.

Tet: One who hangs walls from the top down, if it is above the ground by three tfachim, it is invalid.  From the bottom up, if it is above the ground by (up to) ten tfachim, it is valid.  Rabi Yossi says, just as from the bottom up is ten tfachim, so too from the top down is ten tfachim.  If he made the schach more than three tfachim away from the walls, it is invalid.

Yud: A house which was diminished (broke in the middle) and he put schach on it, If from the wall to the schach it is (at least) four amot, it’s invalid.  And so too with a courtyard which is surrounded by a roof structure (which only goes along the sides, next to the houses, but the middle is open).  A large sukka which they encircled with a thing which one may not make schach with, if there are under it (the invalid part) four amot, it is invalid.

Yud Aleph: One who makes his sukka like a teepee (a cone) or he leaned it against a wall, Rabi Meir invalidates since it has no roof, and Chachamim allow.  A large mat of reeds, if he made it to lie on, it accepts tuma and one may not make schach with it, (but) if he made it for schach, one may make schach with it and it does not accept tuma.  Rabi Eliezer says, whether small or big, if he made it for lying it accepts tuma and one does not make schach with it, and if (he made it) for schach, one makes schach with it and it does not accept tuma.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One who sleeps under a bed in a sukka did not fulfill his obligation.  Rabi Yehuda said, we used to do, that we would lie under a bed in front of the elders, and they didn’t say anything to us.  Rabi Shimon said, there was a story with Tavi the slave of Raban Gamliel who would sleep under a bed, and Raban Gamliel said to the elders, you see my slave Tavi, he is a scholar and knows that slaves are exempt from the (mitzva of) sukka, and therefore he is sleeping under the bed.  And from our ways (experiences) we have learned that one who sleeps under a bed does not fulfill his obligation.

Bet: One who supports his sukka with the legs of a bed, it is valid.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it cannot stand on its own, it is invalid.  A sukka in disarray, or its shade is more than its sun is valid.  One which is (covered) thick like a house, even though one cannot see the stars from inside it, it is valid.

Gimmel: One who makes a sukka on a wagon or a boat, it is valid, and on may go up into it on Yom Tov.  On a tree or a camel, it’s valid, and one may not go up onto it on Yom Tov.  If two (walls) were in (made of) a tree and one was manmade, or two manmade and one by a tree, it’s valid, and one may not go into it on Yom Tov.  Three manmade and one by a tree, it’s valid, and one may go into it on Yom Tov.  This is the general rule, all which the tree is removed and it can stand on its own is valid, and one may go into it on Yom Tov.

Daled: One who makes his sukka between trees, and the trees are walls for it, it’s valid.  Those who are messengers for a mitzva are exempt from the sukka.  Sick people and their attendants are exempt from the sukka.  One may eat and drink randomly (a small meal) outside the sukka.

Hay: Once they brought to Raban Yochanan ben Zakai to taste a dish, and (people brought) to Raban Gamliel two dates and a bucket of water, and they said, bring them up to the sukka.  And when they gave to Rabi Tzadok food less than a kbeitza, he took it in a napkin and ate it outside of the sukka and did not bless after it.

Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, one must eat fourteen meals in a sukka, one in the day and one at night.  Chachamim say, the thing has no set number, except for the nights of the first Yom Tov of Sukkot alone.  And furthermore said Rabi Eliezer, one who didn’t eat the nights of the first Yom Tov will fill in the nights of the last Yom Tov.  And Chachamim say, there is no fill in for this matter, as it says, “what is bent cannot be straightened, and what is missing cannot be counted full.”

Zayin: One who has his head and his bulk (most of his body) in the sukka and his table is in the house, Beit Shamay invalidates, and Beit Hillel validates.  Beit Hillel said to Beit Shamay, wasn’t there a story that the elders of Beit Shamay and the elders of Beit Hillel went to visit Rabi Yochanan ben Hachorani, and they found that he was sitting with his head in the sukka and his table in the house, and they said nothing to him?  Beit Shamay said to them, from there is a proof?  They actually said to him, if this is how you have acted, you never fulfilled the mitzva of sukka in all of your days.

Chet: Women, slaves, and minors are patur from sukka.  A minor who doesn’t need his mother (is independent) is chayav in sukka.  There was a story where the daughter-in-law of Shamay the elder gave birth, and he opened the plaster (of the ceiling) and put schach on top of the bed for the child.

Tet: All the seven days a person makes his sukka set (as his place to live) and his home casual (he passes through).  If rain falls, from when may he leave?  From when the porridge gets ruined.  They made a parable, to what is the thing similar?  To a servant who comes to mix a cup (of wine) for his master, and he (the master) dumped the jug on his face.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: A stolen or dry lulav (palm frond) is invalid, that of an ashera (idolatry) or wayward city is pasul.  If its tip is cut off or its leaves separated, it is invalid.  If they spread abort, it is valid.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may tie them on top.  The thorn palms of the iron mountain are valid.  A lulav which has three tfachim with which to shake is valid.

Bet: A dry or stolen hadas (myrtle branch) is invalid, that of an ashera or wayward city is invalid.  If its tip cut off, its leaves separated, or its berries were greater (in number) than its leaves, it’s invalid, and if they are less, it’s valid.  And they (the berries) are not removed on Yom Tov.

Gimmel: A stolen or dry arava (willow branch) is invalid, that of an ashera or wayward city is invalid.  If its tip was broken off, its leaves separated, and mountain willow, is invalid.  If it shriveled, some of its leaves fell off, or one of a field is valid.

Daled: Rabi Yishma’el says, three hadasim, two aravot, one lulav, and one etrog, even if two (hadasim) are broken and one isn’t.  Rabi Tarfon says, even if three of them are broken.  Rabi Akiva says, just as the lulav is one and the etrog is one, so too the hadas is one and the arava is one.

Hay: A stolen or dried etrog (citron) is invalid, of ashera or a wayward city is invalid.  One of orla is invalid, one of tame truma is invalid.  One of tahor truma he shouldn’t take, but if he did, it’s valid.  One of dmai, Beit Shamay invalidates, and Beit Hillel validate.  Of ma’aser Sheni in Yerushalayim he shouldn’t take, but if he took, it’s valid.

Vav: If there were scabs on most of it, its pitom separated, it was peeled, it was cracked open, or it was pierced and any amount was lost, it’s invalid.  If there were scabs on part of it, its stem was separated, or it was pierced and nothing was missing, it’s valid.  An Ethiopian etrog is invalid.  And one which is green like a leek, Rabi Meir validates, and Rabi Yehuda invalidates.

Zayin: The measurement of the smallest etrog, Rabi Meir says, like a walnut, and Rabi Yehuda says, a kbeitza.  And the large, for one to hold two in one hand according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, even one in two hands.

Chet: One does not bind the lulav (to the other species) except for with its own species according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Meir says, even with string.  Rabi Meir said, there was a story with the people of Yerushalayim that they would bind their lulavim with threads of gold.  They said to him, they would bind it with its own species below.

Tet: And where would they shake (the lulav during Hallel)?  In “hodu la’Hashem,” at the beginning and end, and in “ana Hashem hoshi’a na,” according to Beit Hillel.  Beit Shamay said, even in “ana Hashem hatzlicha na.”  Rabi Akiva said, I watched Raban Gamliel and Rabi Yehoshua, for all the nation would shake their lulavim, and they only shook in “ana Hashem hoshi’a na.”  One who came from a journey and didn’t have with him a lulav to take, when he gets into his house, he will take on his table.  If he didn’t take in the morning, he takes in the afternoon, for the entire day is valid for lulav.

Yud: One who a slave, woman, or minor read (Hallel) for him (if he is illiterate) answers (repeats) after them what they say, and it will be a curse on him.  If an adult was reading for him, he answers after him, “hallelya.”

Yud Aleph: A place where they were accustomed to repeating (the end of Hallel), they must repeat, and (a place which has a custom to) say once, must say once.  One who buys a lulav from his friend on shvi’it gives him an etrog as a gift, since he is not allowed to buy it on shvi’it.

Yud Bet: Originally, the lulav was taken in the Beit Hamikdash seven days and in the country one.  From when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, Raban Yochanan ben Zakai instituted that the lulav would be taken in the country seven days, as a remembrance of the Beit Hamikdash and that the day of shaking (the new grain, on 16 nisan), the whole day is assur (to eat the new grain).

Yud Gimmel: The first day of Yom Tov of Sukkot which falls out on Shabbat, the entire nation lays their lulavim in the shul.  The next day when they get up and come, everyone recognizes his, and takes it.  For the Chachamim said, a person does not fulfill his obligation on the first Yom Tov of Sukkot with his friend’s lulav, and on the other days of Sukkot, a person does fulfill his obligation with his friend’s lulav.

Yud Daled: Rabi Yossi says, The first day of Yom Tov of Sukkot which falls out on Shabbat, and he forgot and brought his lulav out into the public domain, he’s patur, since he took it out with a right.

Tet Vav: A woman can take it from the hand of her son or the hand of her husband and return it to the water (where the lulav was stored) on Shabbat.  Rabi Yehuda says, on Shabbat we return, on Yom Tov one may add (water) and on Chol Hamo’ed one may change (the water).  A minor who knows how to shake is chayav in lulav.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Lulav (taking the four species) and arava (aravot were brought to the mizbe’ach, were observed for) six or seven (days), Hallel and festivity eight, sukka and the water libation seven, and the flute (instruments played during the water libation) five or six.

Bet: Lulav seven how?  If the first Yom Tov fell out on Shabbat (they would still take and so) lulav (was taken) seven (days).  And all other days (the first day fell out, they would take the lulav) six.

Gimmel: Arava seven, how?  The seventh day of arava fell out on Shabbat, arava seven.  And (if it fell out on any other day), six.

Daled: How is the mitzva of lulav (done on Shabbat)?  If the first Yom Tov fell out on Shabbat, they would bring their lulavim to the temple mount, and the beadles would receive (the lulavim) from them and lay them out on the portico, and the elderly leave theirs in a chamber.  And they instructed them to say, whoever my lulav winds up in his hands, behold it is a gift for him.  The next day they would wake up and come and the beadles would throw them before them (the people) and they would snatch and hit each other.  And when the court saw that they came into the hands of danger (it was dangerous for people), they established that each person would take in their house.

Hay: How is the mitzva of arava (done)?  There was a place below Yerushalayim called Motza.  They would go down there and pick large young willow branches and place them at the sides of the mizbe’ach with their tips bending over the mizbe’ach.  They blew a tkiya, a trua, and a tkiya.  Every day they would circle the mizbe’ach once and say, “ana Hashem hoshi’a na, ana Hashem hatzlicha na.”  Rabi Yehuda says, “ani vaho hoshi’a na.”  And that day (the seventh day of Sukkot) they would circle the mizbe’ach seven times.  When they would leave (after the aravot service) what would they say?  “Beauty is yours, mizbe’ach, beauty is yours, mizbe’ach.”  Rabi Eliezer says, “To Hashem and to you, mizbe’ach, to Hashem and to you, mizbe’ach.”

Vav: As it was performed on a weekday it was performed on Shabbat, only they would pick it on erev Shabbat and leave it in golden basins so they don’t whither.  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, they would bring branches of palm and beat them on the floor next to the mizbe’ach, and that day was called the day of the beating of the branches.

Zayin: Immediately after (the end of Sukkot) the children would release their lulavim and eat their etrogim.

Chet: Hallel and festivity eight, how?  It teaches that a person is obligated in Hallel, festivity, and honoring the last day of holiday just as all the days of Sukkot.  Sukkot seven how?  If he finished eating he does not take down his sukka, rather he removes the vessels from mincha (time) and on because of honor of the last of Yom Tov.

Tet: The water libation how?  A dish of gold holding three log was filled from the Shilo’ach (a river).  They got to the water gate they blew a tkiya, trua, tkiya.  He (the kohen performing the libation) came up the ramp and turned left, and there were two silver bowls there.  Rabi Yehuda says, they were of plaster, but their insides were blackened because of the wine (that was usually poured in them).  And they were pierced like two thin snouts, one was widened and one was thick, such that they (the wine, which was concentrated, and the water) finish (empty) at once.  The west was of water and the east of wine.  If he poured water into (the bowl) of wine or wine into the one of water, he fulfills.  Rabi Yehuda says, he would do a libation with a log all the eight (days).  And to the one doing to libation they said to him, raise your hand.  For once one poured the libation on his feet, and the whole nation pelted him with etrogim.

Yud: Like what they did on the weekdays, so too they did on Shabbat, but he would fill from erev Shabbat a golden barrel which is not kodesh from the Shilo’ach and place it in the chamber.  If it spilled or became exposed he would fill from the sink, for wine and water which were exposed are invalid for the mizbe’ach.

Perek Hay

Aleph: The flute five and six, this is the flute of the Beit Hasho’eva (place of drawing, festivities held for the water libation) for it doesn’t push off either Shabbat or Yom Tov.  They said, all who hasn’t seen the festivities of Beit Hasho’eva has not seen festivities in all his days.

Bet: On motzei Yom Tov of the first (day) of the festival they went down to the women’s courtyard, and they would fix there a great fix (make a balcony for the women so as to keep a separation).  And there were golden lamps there and four golden bowls on their head, and four ladders for each one, and four children from the young kohanim and in their hands jars of one hundred twenty log of oil, which they would pour into each bowl.

Gimmel: From the worn out pants of kohanim and from their belts they would make wicks, and they would light with them.  And there wasn’t a courtyard in Yerushalayim which wasn’t lit up from the light of the Beit Hasho’eva.

Daled: The pious and men of (good) deeds would dance before them (the crowd) with torches of fire in their hands, and would say before them songs and praises.  And the levi’im with harps, lyres, cymbals, trumpets, and musical instruments which can’t be counted (they are so numerous).  By fifteen stairs they would go down from the yisra’el courtyard to the women’s courtyard, corresponding to the number of “shir hama’alot” (an introduction to certain psalms) in Tehilim, which on them the levi’im would stand with instruments and saying songs.  And two kohanim stood by the upper gate which goes down from the yisra’el courtyard to the women’s courtyard, and they held two trumpets.  The man (referring to a rooster) called (crowed) and they blew a tkiya, trua, tkiya.  When they reached the tenth step they blew a tkiya, trua, tkiya.  When they reached the courtyard, they blew a tkiya, trua, tkiya.  They would blow and walk, until they got to the gate which exited east.  When they got to the gate which exited east, they would turn themselves facing west and say, our forefathers who were in the place (turned their) backs to the sanctuary of Hashem and they faced the sun, and they would bow east to the sun, and we, to Hashem are our eyes.  Rabi Yehuda says, they would repeat and say, we are to Hashem and to Hashem are our eyes.

Hay: They do not do less than twenty-one tkiyot in the Beit Hamikdash, and they do not do more than forty-eight.  Every day there were twenty-one tkiyot, three for opening the gates, nine for the tamid of the morning, and nine for the tamid of the afternoon.  With a musaf they would add another nine, and on erev Shabbat they would add another six, three to stop the nation from its work and thee do differentiate between kodesh and chol.  Erev Shabbat which was during Sukkot there were forty-eight there, three for opening the gates, three for the upper gate (between the courtyards), three for the lower gate, three for filling the water, three on the mizbe’ach, nine for the morning tamid, nine for the afternoon tamid, nine for the musaf, three to stop then nation from its work, and three to differentiate between kodesh and chol.

Vav: On the first day of Yom Tov of Sukkot there were thirteen bulls, two rams, and one goat.  There were fourteen lambs for the eight watches (croups of kohanim).  On the first day, six offer two, two (two each) and the rest (offer) one, one (one each).  One the second (day, with one less bull there was one more unoccupied watch), five offer two each and the rest one each.  On the third, four offer two each and the rest one each.  One the fourth, three offer two each and the rest one each.  One the fifth, two offer two each and the rest once each.  One the sixth, one offers two and the rest one each.  One the seventh, they are all equal.  One the eighth, they returned to the lots like on the festivals (for who got to lift ashes from the mizbe’ach).  They said, those who offered bulls today will not offer tomorrow, rather they return to the rotation.

Zayin: At three times in the year (the three festivals) all the watches were equal in the stated festival (offerings) and in the division of the showbread.  On Shavuot they would say to him, for you matza and for you chametz (each got a piece of both).  The watch which its time is set (to be when there was a festival) offers the temidin, oath offerings, and all other public offerings, and offers everything (not special for the festival).  Yom Tov which was next to Shabbat, whether before it or after, all the watches would be even in division of the showbread.

Chet: It fell out to have one intervening day between (the festival and Shabbat), the watch which it was its set time took ten breads, and the remaining would take two loaves.  And in the other days of the year, the entering (watch) would take six and the leaving would take six.  Rabi Yehuda says, the entering takes seven and the leaving would take five.  The entering would divide (their portion) in the north, and the leaving in the south.  Bilga (a watch which was penalized either because a daughter from that watch had disrespected the Beit Hamikdash, or because they came late, which was disrespectful) would always divide in the south, its ring (to hold the animal while slaughtering) was fixed (and unusable) and its window (to the place where the knives were kept) was closed.

Mesechet Beitza

Perek Aleph

Aleph: An egg which was laid on yom Tov, Beit Shamay says, it may be eaten, and Beit Hillel says, it may not be eaten.  Beit Shamay says, leavening (the amount which is assur to be used on Pesach) is a kzayit and chametz by a drying date, and Beit Hillel says, both a kzayit.

Bet: One who slaughters an animal or fowl on Yom Tov, Beit Shamay says, he may dig with a shovel and cover (the blood), and Beit Hillel says, he shall not slaughter unless he has dirt ready from that day.  And they admit, that if he slaughtered he should dig with a shovel and cover, for ashes of a stove (he can use because) they are considered prepared.

Gimmel: Beit Shamay says, one may not move a ladder from dovecote (a place where doves live) to dovecote (to gather doves and slaughter on Yom Tov), but he may tip it from opening to opening.  And Beit Hillel allows.  Beit Shamay says, he may not take unless he mixed (up) them that day.  Beit Hillel says, he stands and says, I am taking this and that.

Daled: If he prepared for black and found white, white and found black, (or) two and found three, they are assur.  Three and he found two is mutar.  In the nest and he found before the nest, assur.  But if there are none there other than those, they are mutar.

Hay: Beit Shamay says, one may not remove the shutters (covers of boxes and the like) on Yom Tov (to get to food inside, because it is dismantling).  Beit Hillel says, one may even return.  Beit Shamay says, one may not take a pestle (even) to cut meat on it (for it is primarily used to grind and therefore is muktza), and Beit Hillel allows.  Beit Shamay says, one may not put a hide in a place it will be trampled (even to preserve if, for that is the first part of tanning) and he may not lift it, unless there is a kzayit of meat on it, and Beit Hillel allows.  Beit Shamay says, one may not take a child, lulav, or safer torah into the public domain (on Yom Tov) and Beit Hillel allows.

Vav: Beit Shamay says, one may not take (carry to the kohen) challa or gifts (ma’aser and the like) for the kohen on Yom Tov, whether they were lifted out (of the food) yesterday or that day, and Beit Hillel allows.  Beit Shamay told them a gzera shava (a parallel formed based on a repeated word), challa and the gifts are gifts for the kohen and truma is a gift for the kohen, just as one may not take truma, so too one may not take the gifts.  Beit Hillel said to them, no, if you said it by truma which does not need to be lifted out, would you say it by the gifts which have to be lifted out?

Zayin: Beit Shamay says, spices may be crushed (on Yom Tov) in a wooden grinder, and salt in a jar with a wooden ladle.  Beit Hillel says, spices are crushed in the usual manned with a stone pestle, and salt with a wooden pestle.

Chet: One who picks over beans on Yom Tov, Beit Shamay says, he picks the food out, and eats.  Beit Hillel says, he picks over as usual from his lap, a basket, or a plate, but not with a plank, sifter, or sieve.  Raban Gamliel says, he even wash and skim (off the bad parts).

Tet: Beit Shamay says, one may not send (gifts) on Yom Toc except food portions.  Beit Hillel says, one may send a live animal and a fowl alive or slaughtered.  He may send wines, oils, fine flours, and beans, but not produce.  And Rabi Shimon allows produce.

Yud: One may send vessels (clothing), whether sewn (ready to be worn) or not sewn, even if it has kilayim, if it is for the purpose of Yom Tov.  But (one may) not (send) a nailed sandal (it may not be worn) or an unsewn shoe.  Rabi Yehuda says, nor a white shoe, for it needs a craftsman (to make it black, which is what they wore).  This is the general rule, whatever one can uses on Yom Tov he may send.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Yom Tov which falls out on erev Shabbat, one may not cook from the outset from Yom Tov for Shabbat.  But, he may cook for Yom tov, and if there was leftover, it was leftover for Shabbat.  And he may make a dish (called an eruv tavshilin) from erev Yom Tov and depend on it (to allow cooking on Yom Tov) for Shabbat.  Beit Shamay says, two dishes, and Beit Hillel says, one dish.  They are the same (in opinion) that a fish and an egg (a popular dish) are two dished.  If he ate it or it was lost, he may not cook based on it from the outset, and if any amount of it is left, he may rely on it for Shabbat.

Bet: If it falls out after Shabbat, Beit Shamay says, everything (vessels and people) immerse before Shabbat, and Beit Hillel says, vessels are immersed before Shabbat, and a person on Shabbat.

Gimmel: And they are the same (in opinion) that one may put water in a stone vessel (which does not become tame) and do meshika (immersing the vessel until the water in the mikva touches the tame water in the vessel making it tahor), but he may not dip (another type of vessel, because it will become tame from the water and then be immersing a vessel).  And one immerses from one purpose to another (a vessel needs immersion with intention for use with objects of a certain level of holiness) and from one group to another (if changing groups with which he will eat the pesach, he may immerse again).

Daled: Beit Shamay says, one may bring a shlamim but he does not lean his hands on it, but (he may) not (bring) olot (which are not consumed by people).  Beit Hillel says, one may bring shlamim and olot, and even lean his hands on it.

Hay: Beit Shamay says, a person may not heat hot water for his feet unless they are fit for drinking, and Beit Hillel allow.  A person may make a bonfire and warm himself by it.

Vav: In three things Raban Gamliel was stringent according the opinion of Beit Shamay, one may not insulate hot food from Yom Tov for Shabbat, one may not set a menorah up on Yom Tov, and one may not bake breads (on Yom Tov) in large loaves but rather thin rolls.  Raban Gamliel said, in the days of my father’s house they would not bake large loaves but rather thin rolls.  They said to him, what was done in your father’s house, they would be stringent on themselves and lenient on all yisra’el, to bake breads in large loaves and thick cakes.

Zayin: Also he says three things to be lenient, one may sweep between beds, on may lay spices (on the fire as a perfumant) on Yom Tov, and one may prepare a mekulas goat (a lamb roasted whole) on the night of Pesach, and the Chachamim forbid.

Chet: Three things Rabi Elazar ben Azarya allows and Chachamim forbid, his cow may go out with a strap between its horns, one may comb an animal on Yom Tov, and one may grind pepper in its mill.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may not comb an animal on Yom Tov since it makes a wound, but one may brush.  And Chachamim say, one may not comb, (and one may) even not brush.

Tet: Pepper mills (can become) tame because of three vessels (which make it up), because of the vessel of receiving, it is a metal vessel (the grinder itself) and because it is a sifting vessel.

Yud: A carriage of a child (can get) tuma of midras (something which is made for sitting and the like which touches the source of tuma), may be carried on Shabbat, and may not be dragged except if over vessels (carpets or clothes).  Rabi Yehuda says, all vessels may not be dragged, except for a cart, since it presses (and doesn’t create furrows as scraping does).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One may not trap fish from a vivarium on Yom Tov, and one may not put food before them, but one may trap an animal or fowl from a vivarium, and one may put food before them.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, not all vivariums are equal.  This is the general rule, all which need to be hunted (which requires effort) their trapping is assur, and all which does not need hunting, its trapping is mutar.

Bet: Trappings of animals, fowl, and fish which he prepared from erev Yom Tov, he may not take from the on Yom Tov, unless he knows that they were caught on erev Yom Tov.  And there was a story with one non-Jew who brought fish to Raban Gamliel and he said, they are allowed, it is just that I don’t want to take them.

Gimmel: An animal in danger of dying may not be slaughtered (on Yom Tov) unless there is enough time in the day to eat from it a kzayit roasted.  Rabi Akiva says, even a kzayit raw from the place of slaughter.  If he slaughtered it in a field, he may not bring it (from the field) with a staff or pole (which publicizes what he is doing), but he brings it in his hands part by part.

Daled: A bechor which fell into a pit, Rabi Yehuda says, an expert goes down and sees, if it has a blemish it will be brought up and slaughtered, and if not, it will not be slaughtered.  Rabi Shimon says, all which its blemish isn’t recognized that day, it is not considered prepared (to be slaughtered, for such is only done when the animal develops a blemish).

Hay: An animal that died, he may not move it from its place.  And once they asked Rabi Tarfon about it and about challa which became tame.  He entered the beit midrash and asked, and they told him, he may not be move them from their place.

Vav: One may not separate rights to an animal from the outset on Yom Tov, but they may separate rights to it from erev Yom Tov and slaughter and divide amongst themselves.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may weigh meat against a vessel or cleaver.  Chachamim say, on may not go to scales at all.

Zayin: One may not sharpen a knife on Yom Tov, but one may pass it over its friend.  A person may not say to the butcher, weigh out for me a dinar of meat, but he slaughters and they separate it amongst themselves (the meat).

Chet: A person may say to his friend (a storekeeper), fill me this vessel, but not (tell) a size.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it was a vessel of a certain measurement, he may not fill it.  There was a story of Abba Shaul ben Batnit, who would fill his measures from erev Yom Tov and would give them to customers on Yom Tov.  Abba Shaul says, even on mo’ed he does like this, so the measures will be clear.  Chachamim say, even on a weekday he would do like that, because of the exactness of measures.  One may go before a shopkeeper with whom he is regular and say to him, give me eggs and nuts in their number, for this is the way of the homeowner to be counted in his house (so mentioning a number is not trading).

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who moves jugs of wine from place to place, he may not bring them in a basket or hamper, but he may bring them on his shoulders or in front of him (with his hands or clutching to his body).  And so too one who carries hay, he may not sling the hamper behind him, rather he brings it in his hands.  And one starts (taking) from a pile of hay, but not from wood in a backyard.

Bet: One may not take wood from a shack, only from what is next to it (the shack).  One may bring wood from the field from that which is gathered and from the karpef (a guarded area outside a city where people could store things), even from the scattered.  What is a karpef?  Anything close to the city, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, anything which one enters with a key (alone) even inside the limits for Shabbat (2,000 amot from town).

Gimmel: One may not chop wood (for firewood), not from boards (which have a general purpose of construction) and not from a board which broke on Yom Tov, and one may not chop with an axe, saw, or sickle, only with a cleaver.  A house which is full of produce which was closed (the entrance was piled with bricks) and it opened, he may take from the place of the opening.  Rabi Meir says, he may even open from the outset and take.

Daled: One may not open a lamp (a clay lamp was made by pressing one’s fist into clay, creating a cavity) because that is making a vessel.  And one may not make ashes on Yom Tov, and one may not cut a wick in two.  Rabi Yehuda says, he may cut it with fire to two lamps.

Hay: One may not brake earthenware, and one may not cut paper (and soak in oil) to roast a salted fish on it (this prevented it from burning).  One may not rake out oven or a stove, but one may press down (the ashes to make it more usable).  And one may not put two barrels together to support a pot on them, and one may not support a pot on a chip of wood, and so too with a door (for wood may only be used as firewood on Yom Tov).  And one may not lead an animal with a staff on Yom Tov, and Rabi Elazar beRebi Shimon allows.

Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, a person may take a toothpick which is before him to clean his teeth and he may gather from a courtyard and light, for everything which is in a courtyard is prepared.  And Chachamim say, he may gather from what is before him and light.

Zayin: One may not send forth fire, not from wood (rubbing together), not from stones (striking), not from earth (digging in dry earth produces sparks), and not from water (placing tinder under a glass of water in the sun).  And one may not warm tiles to roast with them.  Furthermore said Rabi Eliezer, a person may stand in a back yard on erev Shabbat in shvi’it (so no ma’aser must be taken) and say, I am eating from here tomorrow.  Chachamim say, (not) until hw will mark it and say, from here to here.

Perek Hay

Aleph: One may send produce through a trap door on Yom Tov (it he is drying it and it starts to rain), but not on Shabbat.  And one may cover produce with vessels because (of a fear the will get ruined by) a drip, and so too with jugs of wine and jugs of oil.  And one may put a vessel under a drip on Shabbat (to protect the house).

Bet: All which one is chayav for because of shvut (rabbinically declared work), reshut (an optional, pious act which is forbidden by shvut) or mitzva (which is nonetheless assur because of shvut) on Shabbat, one is chayav on them on Yom Tov.  And these are because of shvut, one may not climb a tree, one may not ride an animal, one may not swim on the water, and one may not clap, slap, or dance.  And these are because of reshut, one may not judge, one does not marry, one does not do chalitza (rejecting yibum), and one does not do yibum (having a child with the wife of a deceased brother in his memory).  And these are because of mitzva, one does not make hekdesh (donations to the Beit Hamikdash), one does not vow a value (to the Beit Hamikdash), one does not devote things (for the upkeep of the Beit Hamikdash), and one does not lift out truma and ma’aser.  All of these they said on Yom Tov, and kal vechomer on Shabbat.  There is nothing (no laws different) between Yom Tov and Shabbat except for food.

Gimmel: The animal and the vessel are like the feet of the owner (may only be taken where the owner can walk).  One who gives over his animal to his son or a shepherd, they (the animals) are (still) like the owner’s feet.  Vessels which are especially for (the use of) one of the brothers of the house, they are like his (the brother’s) feet, and which aren’t special (for one person, but for all of them, the place of) these are like (only) a place where they can all walk.

Daled: One who borrows a vessel from his friend from erev Yom Tov, it is like the feet of the borrower, (he borrowed) on Yom Tov, it is like the feet of the lender.  A woman who borrowed from her friend spice, water, and salt, for her dough, these are like the feet of both of them.  Rabi Yehuda exempts in water, for there is no substance in it.

Hay: A hot coal is like the feet of the owners, but a flame (which is insubstantial) can go anywhere.  A coal of hekdesh has me’ila, and a flame, on may not use, and there is no me’ila by it.  One who takes a coal out to the public domain is chayav, and a flame is patur.  (Water from) a private well is like the feet of the owner, and of the people of that town, like the feet of the people of that time, and of those going up from Bavel like the feet of the one who draws.

Vav: One whose produce was in another town, and the people of that town made an eruv to bring him his produce, they may not bring to him, and if he made an eruv, the produce is like him.

Zayin: One who invited over guests, they may not take in their hands gifts, unless he allowed them there gifts from erev Yom Tov.  One may not water of slaughter their field animals, but one may water and slaughter their house animals.  What are those?  Those which sleep in the city.  Wild animal?  Ones who sleeps in the meadow.

Mesechet Rosh Hashana

Perek Aleph

Aleph: There are four Rosh Hashanas, on the first of Nisan is Rosh Hashana for kings (counting a new year of reign) and for holidays (counting the festivals), the first of Elul Rosh Hashana for the ma’aser of animals.  Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Shimon say, on the first of Tishray.  The first of Tishray is Rosh Hashana for the years, shmitta, yovel, for planting, and for vegetables.  The first of Shvat is the Rosh Hashana for the tree, according to Shamay.  Beit Hillel says, on the fifteenth of it.

Bet: At four points the world is judged, on Pesach for produce, Shavuot for fruits, Rosh Hashana all people in the world pass before him like flocks of sheep, as it says, “the one who creates their hearts together understands all of their deeds.”  An on Sukkot, it is judged for water.

Gimmel: On six months the emissaries go out, Nisan because of Pesach, Av because of the fast, Elul because of Rosh Hashana, Tishray to fix the times, Kislev because of Chanuka, and Adar because of Purim.  And when the Beit Hamikdash existed, they would go out even on Iyar because of Pesach Katan (for those who were tame on the first Pesach).

Daled: For two months they desecrate the Shabbat, on Nisan and Tishray, for on them the emissaries went to Syria, and with them they would fix the times.  And when the Beit Hamikdash existed, they would desecrate it even for every month, in order to fix the korban (so that the musaf on Rosh Chodesh would be at the right time).

Hay: Whether it was clearly seen or not clearly seen, one desecrates Shabbat over it.  Rabi Yossi says, if it was not clearly seen, one does not desecrate Shabbat for it.

Vav: Once more than forty pairs came (to testify that they had seen the new moon), and Rabi Akiva stopped them in Lod (because people had already testified).  Raban Gamliel sent to him, if you hinder the many, it will be found that they will fail (to come) in the future (even though we might need them).

Zayin: a father and son who see the new moon go.  Not that they can combine with each other (to give testimony) rather that if one of them is invalid, the second will combine with some other person.  Rabi Shimon says, a father and son and all relatives are valid for testimony about the month.  Rabi Yossi said, there was a story with Tovya the doctor, who saw the new moon in Yerushalayim with his son and freed slave.  The kohanim accepted him and his son, and invalidated his slave.  And when they came before the court, they accepted him and his slave and invalidated his son.

Chet: These are pasul: gamblers, usurers, pigeon stealers, those who sell shmitta produce, and slaves.  This is the general rule, all testimony for which a woman is not valid even they are not valid.

Tet: One who saw the new moon and cannot walk, they lead him on a donkey, even in a bed.  And if people are waiting for them (as an ambush) they take sticks in their hands (to defend themselves).  If the way is long, they take food in their hands.  For on a walk of a day and a night they may desecrate Shabbat and go out for testimony of the new moon as it says, “these are the times of Hashem… which you should call them in their time.”

Perek Bet

Aleph: If they (the court) don’t know him (the witness) they send another with him to testify (about) him.  Originally, they would accept testimony about the new moon from anyone, when the heretics messed it up, they established that they would only accept from who they knew.

Bet: Originally, they would light flares, when the kutim messed it up, they established that messengers would go out.

Gimmel: How would they light flares?  They would bring long rods of cedar, reeds, oil wood (either a certain tree or a reference to olive wood), and chips of flax; they would tie it together with rope; go up the hill and set them on fire; and (wave) send (out) and bring (close to him), raise, and lower until he sees his friend, for they would do such on top of the second hill, and so too on top of the third hill (etc.).

Daled: And from where did they light flares?  From the Mount of Olives to Sarteva, from Sarteva to Agrippina, from Agrippina to Chavran, from Chavran to Beit Blitin, and from Beit Blitin they didn’t move, rather he would send, bring, raise, and lower until he saw the entire exile before him like a bonfire (the people in Pumpedita would see this and light torches on their roves to indicate such).

Hay: There was a large courtyard in Yerushalayim and it was called Beit Yazek, and the witnesses would assemble there and Beit Din would check them there.  And they would make big meals for them so they would be regular to come.  At first (if they came on Shabbat), they (the witnesses) wouldn’t move from there the whole day, (and then) Raban Gamliel established that they could go 2,000 amot in any direction.  And not just these (got the allowance), rather also a midwife who comes to deliver and one who comes to save from a fire, troops, a river, or a collapsed building, these are like the people of the city, and they have 2,000 amot in any direction.

Vav: How would they check the witnesses?  The pair that came first, they check it first, and they bring in the greater of them (to a chamber for interviewing) and say to him, say, how did you see the moon, before the sun or after the sun (i.e. was the crescent facing towards or away from the sun)?  To the north or the south?  How high was it and where was it leaning?  And how wide was it?  If he said, before the sun, he said nothing (for the dark part, the crescent is always away from the sun).  After that they would bring in the other and check him.  If their words were found to be in accord, their testimony stands.  And the rest of all the pairs they would ask them the main points, not that they needed them, rather so they won’t go out disappointed, such that they would be regular to come.

Zayin: The head of the court says, it is sanctified.  And the entire nation answers after him, it is sanctified.  Whether it was seen in its time or it wasn’t seen in its time (if the court knew that it had to be the new month by then and therefore could declare without witness) they would sanctify it.  Rabi Elazar ben Tzadok says, if it was not seen in its time, they do not sanctify it, for Heaven has already sanctified it.

Chet: Raban Gamliel had representations of the forms of the moon on a chart and on the wall in his upper chamber, and with them he would show the laypeople and say, did you see it like this or like this?  Once two came and said, we saw it in the east in the morning and the west in the evening.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri said, they are testifying falsely.  When they came to Yavne, Raban Gamliel accepted them.  And furthermore, two came and said, we saw it in its time (the thirtieth) and in the night of its addition (the thirty-first) we did not see it, and Raban Gamliel accepted them.  Rabi Dosa ben Harkinas said, they are false witnesses.  How can they testify about a woman that she gave birth, and the next day that she has her belly between her teeth (she is pregnant)?  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, I see (merit in) your opinion (and consider the thirty-first to be Rosh Chodesh).

Tet: Raban Gamliel sent (a message) to him (Rabi Yehoshua), I decreed upon you that you should come to me with your staff and your money on the Yom Hakippurim which falls out according top your calculation.  Rabi Akiva went out and found him distressed, and said to him, I can learn that everything which Raban Gamliel has done is done, as it says, “these are the times of Hashem, declarations of sanctification, which you shall declare,” whether on time or not on time, and I have no times other than these.  He came by Rabi Dosa ben Harkinas, he (Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas) said to him, if we come to judge after (investigate) the court of Raban Gamliel, we have to judge after every court which has stood from the times of Moshe until now, as it says, “and Moshe, Aaron, Nadav, Avihu, and the seventy elders went up.”  And why didn’t it expound the names of the elders?  Rather to teach that every three who stood to be a court over Yisra’el, behold it is like the court of Moshe.  He took his staff and money in his hand and went to Yavne by Raban Gamliel on the day which fell out to be Yom Hakippurim on his calculations.  Raban Gamliel stood and kissed him on his head and said to him, come in peace, my master and my student.  My master in wisdom and my student that you accepted my words.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: The court and all of Yisra’el saw it (the new moon), the witnesses were examined, and they didn’t manage to say, it is sanctified, before it got dark, it is added (a day to the month).  If only the court saw it, two would stand before them and say, it is sanctified, it is sanctified.  If three saw it and they are a court, two will stand and they will seat (two) from their friends with the one and they will testify before them and they will say, it is sanctified, it is sanctified.  For one person is not trusted by himself.

Bet: All shofarot are valid except that of a cow, since it is (called) a keren (horn).  Rabi Yossi said, and aren’t all shofarot called keren?  As it says, “when you elongate (a sound) with the yovel keren” (referring to a shofar).

Gimmel: The shofar of Rosh Hashana is of an ibex, straight, its mouth is covered in gold, and there are two trumpets to its side.  The shofar elongates (the sound) and the trumpets shorten for the mitzva of the day is with shofarot.

Daled: On a fast (the shofar is) of rams, bent, its mouth is covered in silver, and there are two trumpets in the middle.  The shofar shortens and the trumpets elongate, for the mitzva of the day is with the trumpets.

Hay: Yovel is equal to Rosh Hashana in blasts and blessings (shofar is blown on Yom Hakippurim in yovel).  Rabi Yehuda says, on Rosh Hashana they blow with those of rams, and on yovel with those of ibex.

Vav: A shofar which cracked and he glued it is invalid.  If he glued together fragments of shofarot, it’s pasul.  If it had a hole and he plugged it, if it hinders the sound, it’s invalid, and if not, it’s valid.

Zayin: One who blows in a pit, cellar, or barrel, if he heard the sound of the shofar, he’s yotze, and if he heard the sound of an echo, he is not yotze.  And so too one who was passing behind a shul or his house was close to a shul and he heard the sound of shofar or of megilla, if he directed his heart (had the proper intention), he is yotze, and if not, he is not yotze.  Even though this one heard and that one heard, this one had the proper intention and this one did not have the proper intention.

Chet: “And it was when Moshe would life his hands and Yisra’el would prevail etc.”  And do the hands of Moshe make a war or break a war?  Rather to tell you, all times which Yisra’el would look up and subject their hearts to their Father in the sky they would prevail, and if not, they would fall.  Similarly you can say, “make for yourself a serpent and put it on a pole, and it will be that all the bitten will see it and live.”  And does a snake kill or does a snake resurrect?  Rather to tell you, all times which Yisra’el would look up and subject their hearts to their Father in the sky they would be healed, and if not, they would perish.  A deaf person, a mentally infirm person, and a minor do not fulfill the obligation of the many.  This is the general rule, all who aren’t obligated in the thing does not fulfill the obligation of the many.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Yom Tov of Rosh Hashana which fell out on Shabbat, in the Beit Hamikdash they would blow, but not in the country.  From when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed Raban Yochanan ben Zakai instituted that they would blow wherever there was a (standing) court.  Rabi Elazar said, Raban Yochanan ben Zakai established in only Yavne.  They said to him (it is the same) whether it is Yavne or every place where there is a court.

Bet: And furthermore in this Yerushalayim was greater than Yavne, for in all cities which can see, hear, is close, and can come (to Yerushalayim) they would blow.  And in Yavne they would only blow in the court.

Gimmel: Originally, lulav was taken in the Beit Hamikdash seven (days) and in the country one.  From when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed Raban Yochanan ben Zakai instituted that lulav would be taken in the country seven as a remembrance of the Beit Hamikdash, and that one the whole day of shaking (the new grain, on 16 Nisan) it is assur (to eat the new grain).

Daled: Originally, they would take testimony for the new moon the entire day.  Once, the witnesses waited in coming, and the levi’im messed up the song (for they should have said the song for Rosh Chodesh with the afternoon tamid, but they didn’t know it was going to be Rosh Chodesh and they sand the regular song), they established that they would not accept except until mincha.  And if witnesses came from mincha on, they would observe that day sanctified and the next day sanctified.  From when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, Raban Yochanan ben Zakai instituted that they would accept testimony for the new moon the entire day.  Rabi Yehoshua ben Karcha said, and furthermore Raban Yochanan ben Zakai instituted this, even if the head of the court is in any place, the witnesses only (need to) go to the place of the meeting (where the court normally sits).

Hay: The order of the blessings (for musaf on Rosh Hashana was as follows), he would say (the blessings titled) forefathers, heroisms, holiness of the name, including malchuyot (kingship) with them, and he doesn’t blow, holiness of the day, and blow, zichronot (remembrances), and blows, shofarot, and blows, and he says temple service, thanksgiving, and (finally) the blessing of the kohanim, according to Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri.  Rabi Akiva said to him, if he doesn’t blow for malchuyot, who does he mention it?  Rather he says, forefathers, heroisms, and holiness of the name, he includes malchuyot with holiness of the day, blows, remembrances, blows, shofarot, and blows, and (then) says temple service, thanksgiving, and the blessing of the kohanim.

Vav: One does not do less than ten (psukim) of malchuyot, ten of zichronot, and ten of shofarot.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri says, if he says three each, he’s yotze.  One does not mention (psukim) of malchuyot, zichronot, or shofarot of punishment.  He starts with torah and finishes with prophets.  Rabi Yossi says, if he finished with torah, he’s yotze.

Zayin: One who goes before the ark (is the shali’ach tzibur, leader of the congregation) on the Yom Tov of Rosh Hashana, another one blows.  And at the time of Hallel, the first one reads Hallel.

Chet: (For) a shofar of Rosh Hashana one does not pass the (Shabbat) boundaries, and one does not remove a pile of stones from on top of it, one does not climb a tree, one does not ride an animal, one does not swim on the water, one may not cut it with a thing which is assur either because of shvut or because of a lo ta’ase.  But if he wants to put water or wine in it, he may.  One does not stop children from blowing, rather one deals with them until they learn.  And one who does it while engaged (without paying proper attention to the act of blowing) isn’t yotze, and one who hears from someone engaged isn’t yotze.

Tet: The order of the blowings is three of three each.  The length of a tkiya is like three tru’ot.  The length of a trua is like three yevavot (wailings).  If he blew the first and then lengthened it for the second to have as two (blasts) he only has one.  One who blessed (said musaf) and (only) afterwards got a shofar does a tkiya, tru’a, tkiya three times.  Just as the shali’ach tzibur is chayav, so too each individual is chayav.  Raban Gamliel says, the shali’ach tzibur fulfills the obligations for the many.

Mesechet Taanit

Perek Aleph

Aleph: From when do we mention the heroism of rain (a prayer for rain in the shmone esrey)?  Rabi Eliezer says, from the first (day of) Yom Tov of Sukkot.  Rabi Yehoshua says, from the last of Yom Tov of Sukkot.  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, since rain is only a sign of curse on Sukkot, why should he mention it?  Rabi Eliezer said (back) to him, even I didn’t say to ask (for rain) rather to mention, the one who makes the wind blow and the rain fall in its season.  He said (back) to him, (if) so, one should always mention.

Bet: One does not ask for rain except (when it is) close to (the period) of rain.  Rabi Yehuda says, the one who passes before the ark (the shaliach tzibur) on the last of Yom Tov of Sukkot, the last one (the one for musaf) mentions, and the first (for shacharit) does not mention.  On the first Yom Tov of Pesach, the first one mentions and the last one doesn’t mention.  Until when do they ask for rain?  Rabi Yehoshua says, until Pesach passes.  Rabi Meir says, until Nisan finishes, as it says, “and He will make rain fall for you, the first rain and last rain in the first (month, Nisan).”

Gimmel: On the third day of Marcheshvan they ask for rain.  Raban Gamliel says, on the seventh of it, fifteen days after Sukkot, such that the last in Israel will reach the Euphrates (and not be caught in the rains).

Daled: If the seventeenth of Marcheshvan comes and no rain fell, the individuals would start to fast three fasts (literally afflictions, but commonly used to refer to fasts).  They eat and drink when it gets dark, and are allowed to do melacha, wash, anoint, wear leather sandals, and have sexual relations.

Hay: If Rosh Chodesh Kislev came and no rain fell, the court enacts three fasts on the public.  They eat and drink when it gets dark, and are allowed to do melacha, wash, anoint, wear leather sandals, and have sexual relations.

Vav: If these passed and they haven’t been answered, the court enacts three other fasts on the public.  They may eat and drink while still day (the fast starts on the nightfall prior), and they are prohibited from melacha, bathing, anointing, wearing leather sandals, and sexual relations, and they lock the bathhouses.  If these passed and they weren’t answered, the court enacts another seven, which makes thirteen fasts, on the public.  Behold these are additional to the first ones, for on these they sound an alarm and lock the stores.  On Mondays they lean (open the doors) when it darkens (to allow people to buy food), and on Thursdays they are allowed out of respect for Shabbat.

Zayin: If these passed and they weren’t answered, they diminish trade, building, planting, engagements, marriages, social greetings, like people rebuked by Hashem.  The individuals return to fasting until Nisan goes out.  If Nisan went out and rain fell it is a sign of curse, for is says, “is it not the harvest of wheat today etc.”

Perek Bet

Aleph: The order of the (prayer on the last seven) fasts how (was it done)?  They take out the ark to the street of the city, and they put ashes from wood on the ark, the head of the president (a community leader), the head of the head of the court, and everyone puts on his own head.  The eldest of them says before them words of rebuke for repentance (saying), brothers, it was not said by the people of Ninve (a city of sinners who repented due to the warnings of Yona), and Hashem saw their sackcloth and their fasting, but rather, “and Hashem saw their deeds, for they returned from their evil ways,” and in other prophets he says, “and tear your hearts and not your clothes.”

Bet: They would stand in prayer, send down before the ark an elder and a (person) regular (to prayer) and he has children and his house is empty (he can’t support them), such that his heart will be wholly in prayer.  And he say before them (the people) twenty-four blessings, eighteen for everyday, and he adds on another six.

Gimmel: And these are they (the blessings added), zichronot, shofarot, “to Hashem in my distress I called and he answered me,” “I will raise my eyes to the mountains etc.”  “from the depths I called to You Hashem,” and, “prayer for the poor for he wraps (himself in prayer).”  Rabi Yehuda says, he shouldn’t say zichronot and shofarot, rather he should stay instead of them, “hunger when it will be in the land, disease when it will be etc.” and “for the word of Hashem came to Yirmiyahu because of the droughts,” and he says their seals (of the blessings).

Daled: On the first he says, “He who answered Avraham on the Moriah Mountain, He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, the savior of Yisra’el.”  On the second he says, “He who answered our forefathers on the Yam Suf (which was split) He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, who remembers the forgotten.”  On the third he says, “He who answered Yehoshu’a in the Gilgal (victory in the battle for Yericho with shofarot) He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, who hears the tru’a.”  On the fourth he says, “He who answered Shmu’el in Mitzpeh (where he was answered) He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, who listens for screams.”  On the fifth he says, “He who answered Eliyahu on Carmel Mountain, He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, He who listens to prayer.”  On the sixth he says, “He who answered Yon from the bowels of the fish, He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, the one who answers in a time of distress.”  On the seventh he says, “Hew how answered David and his son Shlomo in Yerushalayim, He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  Blessed are You Hashem, the one who has mercy on the world.”

Hay: There was a story in the days of Rabi Chalafta and Rabi Chananya ben Tardyon that one of the passed before the ark and finished the entire bracha (of “savior of Yisra’el”) and they did not answer amen.  (The supervisor of the shul would say,) blow, kohanim, blow.  (The shaliach tzibur would say,) he who answered Avraham our father on Mount Moriah He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  (The supervisor of the shul would say,) sound an alarm, children of Aaron, sound an alarm.  (The shaliach tzibur would say,) He who answered your forefathers by Yam Suf He will answer you and listen to the voice of your screams today.  And when the thing came before the Chachamim they said, we would not do like this except in the eastern gat and the Temple mount.

Vav: The first three fasts, the people of the watch (that week’s kohanim) fast, but doe not complete it.  And the people of the father’s house (who would fill in for that week’s watch if necessary) do not fast at all (so they will be able to fill in).  The second (next) three, the people of the watch fast and complete, and the people of the father’s house fast and do not complete.  The last seven, both of these fast and complete, according to Rabi Yehoshua.  And the Chachamim say, the first three both of these don’t fast at all.  The second three the people of the watch fast but do not complete and the people of the father’s house don’t fast at all.  The last seven the people of the watch fast and complete and the people of the father’s house fast but don’t complete.

Zayin: The people of the watch are allowed to drink wine at night, but not in the days, and the people of the father’s house, neither the night nor the day.  The people of the watch and the people of the ma’amad (yisra’elim who were appointed to stand as representatives when the public offerings were being given) are forbidden from getting a haircut and washing clothing, but on Thursday they may out of respect for Shabbat.

Chet: All which is written in Megilat Ta’anit (a list of miracles done for the Jews during the time of the second Beit Hamikdash) not to eulogize, before it is assur, after it is mutar.  Rabi Yossi says, before and after it is assur.  (If it says) not to fast on them, before and after it is mutar.  Rabi Yossi says, before it is assur and after it is mutar.

Tet: They do not enact fasts on the public at the beginning of Thursday, so as not to raise prices (the food suppliers would only bring enough for Shabbat, not knowing there would be a fast, and when the people would buy for enough for both a Shabbat and a fast, prices would rise).  Rather, the first three fasts would be on a Monday, Thursday, and Monday (so that there would be proper information and therefore supplies), and the second (set of fasts) would be Thursday, Monday, Thursday.  Rabi Yossi says, just as the first is nor on a Thursday, so too the second and not the last (seven fasts).

Yud: They do not decree a fast on the public on Rosh Chodesh, Chanuka, or Purim.  But if they started (a cycle of fasts), they do not interrupt it, according to Raban Gamliel.  Rabi Meir said, even though Raban Gamliel said we do not interrupt it, he agreed that we would not complete it (and would cut the fast short).  And so too with Tisha B’Av which falls out on erev Shabbat (we would cut it short).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: this order of fasts which was said, it is talking about the first rain.  But for plants which (were) changed (in their appearance, i.e. grew deformed on the whole), they blew for them immediately.  And so too if rains stopped (defined as a period where) between one rain to another was forty days, the blow for it immediately, since it is a plague of drought.

Bet: If (enough rain) fell for plants, but not (enough) fell for a tree, (enough for) a tree but not (a good amount to be helpful) for plants, or (they are good) for both but not for cisterns, pits, or caves (used to collect water for drinking), they blow for them immediately.

Gimmel: And so too a city which rain did not fall upon, as it is written, “and I will cause rain (to fall) on one city, and on one city I will not cause to rain, one piece will be rained on etc.”  That city fasts and blows, and all its surroundings fast and do not blow.  Rabi Akiva says, they blow and do not fast.

Daled: And so too a city which had plague or collapsing (buildings), that city fasts and blows, and all of its surroundings fast and do not blow.  Rabi Akiva says, they blow and do not fast.  What is plague?  A city which has five hundred feet (men), and out of it three died in three days, one after another, this is plague.  Less than this, it isn’t plague.

Hay: For these they blow in all places, on heat scorched (or wind-dried) crops, crop yellowing, locusts, chasil (another type of locust), wild animals, and sword (war).  They blow for them, for is a moving (spreading) plague.

Vav: Once the elders went down from Yerushalayim to their cities, and they decreed a fast for there were heat scorched crops enough to fill the mouth of an oven in Ashkalon.  Furthermore, they decreed a fast because two babies were eaten by wolves in Transjordan.  Rabi Yossi says, not because they ate, but rather because they were seen.

Zayin: For these they blow on Shabbat, for a city which goyim or a river encircled it, and for a ship being torn apart at sea.  Rabi Yossi says, for help and not for screaming.  Shimon the Timni says, even on the plague, and the Chachamim did not agree with him.

Chet: On any distress so that it will not come on the public they blow for it, except for too much rain.  Once they said to Choni Hama’agel (a person who was successful in praying for rain), pray that rain will fall.  He said to them, go and bring in (to your homes) the ovens for the pesach such that they do not get too soft.  He prayed, and rain didn’t fall.  What did he do?  He drew a circle and stood in it, and said before Him, Hashem, your children put their faces towards me, for I am like a member of the household for you.  I swear in your great name that I will not move from here until you have mercy on your children.”  The rains started to drizzle.  He said, I didn’t ask like that, rather rains for cisterns, pits, and caves.  They started to fall in a storm.  He said, I didn’t ask like that, rather rains of want, blessing, and devotion.  They fell like they should, until Yisra’el went out from Yerushalayim to the Temple mount because of the rains.  They came and said to him, just as you prayed they should fall, pray that they should go away.  He said to them, go out and see if the to’anim stone has been washed away (and only if it really destroying everything will I stop it).”  Shimon ben Shetach sent to him, were you not Choni, I would excommunicate you, but what can I do to you, for you indulge before Hashem and he does for you like your will like a sun who indulges before his father and he does his will.  And on you the pasuk says, “your mother and father will be happy and your children will rejoice.

Tet: If they were fasting and rain fell for them before sunset, they do not complete, after sunset, they complete.  Rabi Eliezer says, before midday, they do not complete, after midday they complete.  Once they decreed a fast in Lod and rain fell for them before midday.  Rabi Tarfon said to them, go out and eat and drink and make a Yom Tov.  And they went out, ate, drank, made Yom Tov, and in the afternoon they read the great Hallel.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Three times in the year the kohanim raise their hands four time in on day, at shacharit, musaf, mincha, and the locking of the gate (either in the Beit hamikdash or Heaven, depending on the day, and the times are) on fasts, the ma’amadot (yisra’elim who were appointed to stand as representatives when the public offerings were being given), and on Yom Hakippurim.

Bet: Which are the ma’amadot?  Since it says, “command Bnei Yisra’el and you shall say to them my offering my bread,” and so how can the offering of a person be brought and he is not standing beside it?  The early nevi’im established twenty-four watches, and on each watch there was a troop in Yerushalayim of kohanim, of levi’im, and of yisra’elim.  It came time for the troop to go up, the kohanim and the levi’im go up to Yerushalayim, and the Yisra’elim which are in that watch gather in their towns and read from (the portion of) the acts of creation.

Gimmel: And the people of the watch would fast four days of the week, from Monday until Thursday, and they would not fast erev Shabbat because of honor for Shabbat.  And not on Sunday, such that they do not go out from rest and enjoyment to pain and fasting.  (This is what they would read each day,) on the first day, “at first,” and, “let there be a firmament.”  On the second, “let there be a firmament,” and, “let the waters gather.”  On the third, “let the waters gather,” and, “let there be luminaries.”  On the fourth, “let there be luminaries,” and, “let the waters writhe.”  On the fifth, “let the waters writhe,” and, “let the land produce.”  On the sixth, “let the land produce,” and, “and the heavens were finished.”  A large section, they would read it as two (people), and a small one, in one, in shacharit and mincha.  And at mincha they enter and read by heart, like one reads the shma.  Erev Shabbat at mincha they would no enter, out of honor of the Shabbat.

Daled: Every day which has Hallel, it has no (reading by the people of the) ma’amad at shacharit.  (If there is) a musaf offering, there is no ne’ila.  A wood offering (some people would donate wood for a specific day), there is no mincha, according to Rabi Akiva.  Ben Azay said to him, Rabi Yehoshua used to teach like this, a musaf offering, this is no mincha.  A wood offering, there is no ne’ila.  Rabi Akiva returned and taught like Ben Azay.

Hay: The times the kohanim and the people would bring wood were nine.  On the first of Nisan, the children of Arach ben Yehuda; on the seventeenth of Tamuz, the children of David ben Yehuda; on the fifth of Av, the children of Parosh ben Yehuda; on the seventh of it (Av), the children of Yonadav ben Rechev; on the tenth of it, the children on Sna’ah ben Binyamin; on the fifteenth of it, the children of Zatu ben Yehuda; and with them kohanim, levi’im, anyone who mistook (didn’t know for sure) his tribe, and the sons of those who deceived with pestles and the children of the packers of dried figs (when there was a decree against bringing bikurim people hid their bikurim by pretending they were going to press fig cakes).  On the twentieth of it, the children of Pachat Mo’av ben Yehuda; on the twentieth of Elul, the children of Adin ben Yehuda; and on the first of Tevet, the children of Parosh returned a second time.  On the first of Tevet there was no ma’amad, for there was on it Hallel, a musaf offering, and a wood offering.

Vav: Five things happened to out forefathers on the seventeenth of Tamuz and five on Tisha B’Av.  On the seventeenth of Tamuz the luchot were broken, the tamid (offering) was stopped, the city (of Yerushalayim) was breached, Apostmos burned the torah, and he placed an idol in the sanctuary.  On Tisha B’Av it was decreed on our forefathers (in the desert) that they wouldn’t enter the land (of Israel), the first and second Beit Hamikdash were destroyed, Betar was taken, and the city (Yerushalayim) was plowed over.  When Av comes in, they reduce in happiness.

Zayin: The week in which Tisha B’Av falls, one is forbidden from getting a haircut and washing clothes, but on Thursday, on is permitted in honor of Shabbat.  On erev Tisha B’Av a person does not eat two (cooked) dishes, eat meat, or drink wine.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, he should change (his habits, i.e. if he normally drinks two cups of wine, he should drink one).  Rabi Yehuda obligates one to upturn the bed, and the Chachamim did not agree with him.

Chet: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, there are no holidays for Yisra’el like the fifteenth of Av (explained below) and Yom Hakippurim (on which one’s sins are forgiven).  For on them the girls of Yerushalayim would go out in borrowed white clothing, so as not to embarrass one doesn’t have, and all of the clothing must be immersed.  And the girls of Yerushalayim would go out and dance in vineyards.  And what would they say?  Man, raise up your eyes and see what you choose for yourself.  Do not focus your eyes on beauty, focus your eyes on a good family, (as it says,) “a lie is grace and useless is beauty, a woman who fears Hashem she will be praised,” and it says, “give her from the fruits of her hands and praise her for her work in her gates.”  And like this he says, “go out and see the girls of Tzion with the king Shlomo (a metaphor for Hashem in this case) with the crown which his mother crowned her on the day of their wedding and on the day of the gladness of his heart.”  The day of his marriage, this is the giving of the torah, and on the day of the gladness of his heart, this is the building of the Beit Hamikdash that will be build quickly in our time, amen.

Mesechet Megillah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: The megilla is read on the eleventh, the twelfth, the thirteenth, the fourteenth, or the fifteenth (of Adar), no more and no less.  Cities surrounded by a wall from the days of Yehoshua ben Nun read on the fifteenth.  Towns and large cities read on the fourteenth, but the villages advance it to the day of gathering (a Monday or Thursday when they would go to sell in the large cities).

Bet: How?  If the fourteenth fell out on a Monday, the villages and large cities read that day and (cities) surrounded by walls read the next day.  If it fell out on a Tuesday or Wednesday the villages would advance to the day of gathering, the large cities read that day, and surrounded by walls read the next day.  If it fell out on Thursday, villages and large cities read that day, and surrounded by walls read the next day.  If it fell out on Friday, the villages advance to the day of gathering and the large cities and surrounded by walls read that day.  If it fell out on Shabbat, villages and large cities advance and read on the day of gathering and surrounded by walls the next day.  If it fell out on Sunday, villages advance to the day of gathering, large cities read that day, and surrounded by walls read the next day.

Gimmel: What is a large city?  Any which has ten people of leisure (who do not work and who will always be in shul).  Less than thus behold it is a village.  In these (times for reading) they said they advance but do not postpone.  But the time of the wood for the kohanim, Tisha B’Av, the chagiga (offering), and hakhel (the king reading on Sukkot of shvi’it) they postpone and do not advance (if it falls out on Shabbat).  Even though they said you advance and do not postpone, it is permitted (to have) a eulogy and a fast (on a day to which they postponed the megilla) and gifts to the poor.  Rabi Yehuda says, when?  In a place where they gather on Monday and Thursday, but in a place where they do not gather on a Monday or a Thursday, they only read in its time.

Daled: If they read megilla in the first Adar and the year was made a leap year (adding a second Adar) they read it in Adar II.  There is nothing between Adar I and Adar II other than reading the Megilla and the gifts for the poor (which are only valid in Adar II).

Hay: There is nothing between Yom Tov and Shabbat other than food for people.  There is nothing between (the punishments) for Shabbat and Yom Hakippurim, except that this one his intentional sin is (punished) in the hands of man, and this one his intentional sin is in the hands of karet.

Vav: There is nothing between one who takes a vow against pleasure from his fried and one who swears on him against food except for the treading of the foot (being allowed through one’s courtyard) and vessels with which he does not make food for a person.  There is nothing between vow offerings and donations except that vow offerings are chayav on their responsibility (to replace them if necessary) and in donations he is not chayav on their responsibility.

Zayin: There is nothing between a zav (person who sees a problematic discharge) who sees two (discharges) and one who sees three (which takes on a higher level of being a zav) except a korban (an additional korban on the eight day).  There is nothing between a metzora (on who is stricken with the divine skin disease of tzara’at, usually translated as leprosy, though that does not fit the symptoms) who is quarantined (to see if the disease reaches a sufficient stage to be considered tzara’at) and a metzora who was declared (to have it for sure) except neglecting the hair and tearing the clothes.  There is nothing between a tahor (clean from tzara’at) quarantined and a tahor declared except shaving and birds (brought as a korban).

Chet: There is nothing between books (of the tanach) and tfillin and mezuzot except that the books may be written in (translated into) any language and tfillin and mezuzot may only be written in Ashurit (Hebrew).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, even the books were only allowed to be written in Greek.

Tet: There is nothing between a kohen (gadol) who is (initiated by being) anointed and a kohen who is increased in garments (after the anointment oil was hidden, they would signify initiation by wearing the additional garments of the kohen gadol) except for the bull which comes for all of the mitzvot (if the kohen gadol who was anointed sins, he brings a special bull).  There is nothing between a substitute kohen (gadol) and a kohen who passed (from the post if he was found to be unfit for a time, he was given a replacement for while he became fit) except the bull of Yom Hakippurim (only the normal kohen gadol offers it) and the tenth of the epha (of fine flour is offered every day, but only by the normal kohen gadol).

Yud Aleph: There is nothing between Shilo (where the mishkan was) and Yerushalayim except that in Shilo one eats lightly holy things (certain sacrifices are classified as such) and ma’aser sheni in all (places which) see (Shilo), and in Yerushalayim it is (only allowed) inside the wall.  And in both places the holiest of holies are eaten only in the enclosures (mishkan or Beit Hamikdash).  The holiness of Shilo, after it (leaves) there is permission (to use private altars) and Yerushalayim, there is no permission.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One who reads the megilla out of order isn’t yotze.  If he read it by heart or read a translation in any language, he’s not yotze.  But one may read in foreign languages to those who speak (only) foreign languages.  And one who speaks foreign languages who heard in Hebrew is yotze.

Bet: If he read it with interruptions or while dozing he’s yotze.  If he was writing it, expounding it, or correcting it, if he had the proper intention, he’s yotze, and if not, he’s not yotze.  If he was writing it with a paint, red paint, gum based paint, or calcanthum and on paper or unfinished parchment, he isn’t yotze until it is written on Hebrew on parchment with ink.

Gimmel: A person of a city who went to a large city or a person of a large city who went to a city, if he will return to his place, he reads like his place, and if not, he reads with them.  From where does a person read the megilla to be yotze in it?  Rabi Meir says, all of it.  Rabi Yehuda says, from “there was a Jewish man.”  Rabi Yossi says, “after these things.”

Daled: All are valid to read the megilla except a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, and minor.  Rabi Yehuda validates a minor.  They do not read megilla, they do not circumcise, they do not immerse, and they do not sprinkle (the water of the red heifer to make tahor).  And so too a woman who keeps a day (of being tahor) opposite one day (of being tame) does not immerse until sunset.  And all who did (their obligation) from first light is kosher.

Hay: The whole day is valid for the reading of megilla, reading Hallel, blowing shofar, taking lulav, for musaf prayers and offerings, confession (of a kohen gadol) on a bull (if he sinned), the confession (declaration) of ma’aser (that all things have been properly removed from the house), confession of You Hakippurim, leaning on an offering, slaughtering, waving (the omer), bringing near, taking a handful (of ashes), burning (all three of the mincha offering), severing of the neck (of birds), reception of blood to sprinkle on the mizbe’ach), for sprinkling (blood on the mizbe’ach), for having a sota drink (water to see if she was and adulterer), for killing of the heifer (when a corpse is found between towns a cow is killed as a scapegoat), and for making a metzora tahor.

Vav: The whole night is valid for harvesting the omer and burning fats and limbs (of korbanot which must be burnt).  This is the general rule, a thing where the mitzva is in the day, it is valid the whole day, and a thing where the mitzva is in the nigh, it is valid the whole night.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: If the people of a city sold their open area (where they would pray), they buy with the money a shul.  (If they sold) a shul, they buy an ark.  If an ark, they buy wrappings (for the torahs).  Wrappings, they buy books (of tanach).  Books, they buy a torah.  But if they sold a torah they may not buy books, (if they sold) books they may not buy wrappings, wrappings they may not buy an ark, an ark, they may not buy a shul, a shul, they may not buy an open space, and so too with their surpluses (they have from selling).  They do not sell something of many for an individual, since they are reducing it in its holiness, according to Rabi Yehuda.  They said to him, if so, even not (selling holy things) from a large town to a small town.

Bet: One may not sell a shul except for on condition that if they want, they will return it, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, they may sell it permanently except for (not to be used for the following) four things, a bathhouse, a tannery, immersion, and a place of water (either a urinal or laundry).  Rabi Yehuda says, they may sell it for a courtyard and the purchaser can do whatever he wants with it.

Gimmel: And furthermore said Rabi Yehuda, a shul which was destroyed, one may not eulogize in it, twist rope in it (as a factory), spread nets in it (as traps for animals), spread produce (to dry) on its roof, or use it as a cut-through, as it says, “and I will destroy your temples,” their holiness is even when they are barren.  If grass grew on it, one may not pluck because of the grief (so people will grieve for the shul).

Daled: Rosh Chodesh of Adar which fell out on Shabbat, they read the parsha of shkalim (because the announcement for the shkalim was made).  If it fell within the week, they advance it to the past Shabbat (the one before) and they pause on the next Shabbat.  On the second, (after, they read) “zachor,” the third, “the red heifer,” the fourth, “this month will be for you,” (and) the fifth they return to the order.  They interrupt (the normal haftora) for all (of the following), on Rosh Chodesh, Chanuka, Purim, fasts, ma’amadot, and on Yom Hakippurim.

Hay: On Pesach, they read from the parsha of the festivals in vayikra.  On Shavuot, “seven weeks.”  On Rosh Hashana, “in the seventh month on the first of the month.”  On Yom Hakippurim, “after the death.”  On the first of Yom Tov of Sukkot they read from the parsha of festivals in vayikra.  And on all the rest of the days of Sukkot, the offerings of Sukkot.

Vav: On Chanuka, from the princes (who brought gifts to dedicate the mishkan).  On Purim, “and Amalek came.”  On Rosh Chodesh, “and on your Rosh Chodesh.”  The ma’amadot, the works of creation.  On fasts, blessings and curses.  They do not stop in the curses, rather one reads them all.  On Monday, Thursday, and mincha on Shabbat, they read in the order and they are not taken into account (so as to change the parsha the following week), as it says, “and Moshe told the festivals of Hashem to Bnei Yisra’el,” their mitzva is that each one will be read in its time.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who reads the megilla may stand or sit.  If one read it or two read it, they are yotze.  In a place where it was customary to bless, they would bless, and (where it was custom) not to bless, they didn’t bless.  On Monday, Thursday, and Shabbat mincha three read.  They do not diminish or add to them, and they do not have a haftora from nevi’im.  The one who opens and seals (closes) in the torah blesses before it and after it.

Bet: On Rosh Chodesh and Chol Hamo’ed four read.  They do not diminish or add to them, and they do not have a haftora in nevi’im.  The one who opens and seals blesses before and after it.  This is the general rule, all which they read musaf and isn’t Yom Tov, four read.  On Yom Tov, five.  On Yom Hakippurim, six.  On Shabbat, seven.  They do not diminish, but they may add, and they have a haftora from nevi’im.  The one who opens and seals the torah blesses before and after.

Gimmel: One who is not pores shma (the meaning of this is debated) does not, pass before the ark (be a shali’ach tzibur), raise the hands (the kohanim bless), read from the torah, have a haftora from nevi’im, stand and sit (as part of the process of burial), say the blessing of the mourners, the consolation of mourners, the blessing of grooms, or have a zimun using the name of Hashem with less than ten (men).  And for (evaluating) lands, nine plus a kohen, and (evaluating) a person, the same as them (in number).

Daled: One who reads in the torah will not (recite) less than three psukim.  He will not read for a translator more than one pasuk, and in navi three.  If the three (psukim in navi) were three sections (each was a different topic) they read each one (separately).  They may skip in navi but may not skip in torah.  And how much can he skip?  Such that (the time needed to roll the scroll) will not stop the translator.

Hay: The one who read the haftora from navi is pores shma, he (may) pass before the ark, and he (may) raise his.  And if he was a minor, his father or rebbe pass (read and are shali’ach tzibur) for him.

Vav: A minor may read in the torah or translate, but he may not be pores shma, pass before the ark, or raise his hands.  One who is wearing torn clothing may be pores shma and translate, but he may not read from the torah, pass before the ark, or raise his hands.  A blind person may be pores shma and translate.  Rabi Yehuda says, one who never saw the luminaries in all his days may not be pores shma.

Zayin: A kohen who has blemishes on his hands may not raise his hands.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one whose hands were painted with istis (woad, a blue dye) and puah (madder, a red dye) may not raise his hands since the nation looks at him.

Chet: One who says, I will not pass before the ark in colored (clothes) may not pass even in white (for this vow was a sign of heresy).  (If he says) I will pass in a sandal, even barefoot he may not pass.  One who makes his tfilla (tfillin) round, it is a danger, and there is no mitzva in it.  If he put it on his forehead or his palm, this is heresy (for they took the psukim about the placement of tfillin literally).  If he covered them with gold and put them on the sleeve of his undergarment, this is an outsider’s way.

Tet: One who says, may the good ones bless you, this is the way of heresy.  (If one says) on a bird’s nest extends your mercy, for good will your Name be remembered, or thank You thank You, they quiet him.  One who modifies types of inappropriate sex, they silence him.  One who says, and from your children you should not give to pass by Molech, and from your children you should not give to an Arab woman, they silence him rebukingly (for this changes the meaning of the pasuk).

Yud: The incident of Reuven (with Bilha’s bed) is read but not translated.  The incident of Tamar is read and translated.  The beginning of the incident of the calf is read and translated, and the end is read but not translated.  The blessing of the kohanim and the incident of David and Amnon are not read and are not translated.  They do not make a maftir of the chariot, and Rabi Yehuda allows.  Rabi Eliezer says, the do not make a  maftir of, “inform Yerushalayim.”

Mesechet Moed Katan

Perek Aleph

Aleph: One may water an irrigated field on Chol Hamo’ed and shvi’it, whether from a spring which originally came forth (was already there) or from a spring which did not originally come forth.  But one may not water with rainwater (he might come to go collect water) or water of a deep well.  And one may not make cavities (trenches around the roots for collecting water) for vines.

Bet: Rabi Elazar ben Azarya says, one may not make a trench originally (make a new one) on Chol Hamo’ed or shvi’it.  Chachamim say, one may make a trench originally on shvi’it, and fix broken ones on Chol Hamo’ed.  They may fix the ruined (trenches of) water in the public domain and clean them out.  And they may fix the paths, roads, and mikvas, and they may do all the needs of the public, mark graves, and go out even (to check) for kilayim.

Gimmel: Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, one may draw water from tree to tree (if a lot of water collected under one tree, he may lead it to another) as long as he does not water the whole field.  Seeds that did not drink (were not watered) before the festival, he may not water them during Chol Hamo’ed, and the Chachamim allow both.

Daled: One may trap an ishut (possibly a mole) and mice from an orchard or grain field, not in its normal matter, on Chol Hamo’ed and shvi’it.  Chachamim say, in an orchard in its normal manner, and from a grain field not in its normal manner.  And one may close a breach (in a wall) on Chol Hamo’ed, and on shvi’it, he may build in the normal manner.

Hay: Rabi Meir says, they look at spots of divine sickness (tzara’at) in the beginning to be lenient (declare him clean) but not to be strict (to quarantine, for one does not grieve on Chol Hamo’ed).  Chachamim say, neither to be lenient nor strict.  And furthermore said Rabi Meir, one may gather the bones of his father or mother (after the flesh was eaten away, a person would collect the bones of his family and place them in a filial bone pit, because it is happiness for him.  Rabi Yossi says, it is mourning for him.  A person may not arouse (others to cry) for his dead, and he may not eulogize thirty days prior to a festival.

Vav: One may not dig burial chambers or graves on Chol Hamo’ed, but one may prepare (fix to the proper size and the like) burial chambers on Chol Hamo’ed.  One may make a wash-pond on Chol Hamo’ed and a coffin with a dead person in the courtyard (so people will know the woodwork is for a coffin).  Rabi Yehuda prohibits, unless there are board with him (which he simply has to assemble).

Zayin: One may marry women on Chol Hamo’ed, neither a virgin nor a widow.  And they don’t do yibum because he has joy (which cheapens the joy of Chol Hamo’ed), but he may remarry his divorced wife (he divorce for yibum).  And a woman may put on jewelry on Chol Hamo’ed.  Rabi Yehuda says, she may not be (covered in) lime (to treat her skin), for it is embarrassing for her (when it is on).

Chet: A layman may sew as usual and an artisan stitch (but not sew a group of stitches).  And he may weave the beds (weave the cords under beds to help them stay up).  Rabi Yossi says, he may even tighten (even though they are usable without tightening.

Tet: On may stand (set up) an oven, stove, or millstone on Chol Hamo’ed.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may not chisel a millstone from the beginning.

Yud: One may make a rail for a roof or a balcony, the work of a layman, not an artisan.  One may smooth cracks and flatten (a roof) with a roller, the hand, or the foot, but not with a rope-pulled roller.  A hinge, pipe, beam, lock, or key which broke, one may fix on Chol Hamo’ed, as long as he does not intend to (leave his) work for Chol Hamo’ed.  And so too pickles which (pickle fast enough such that) he can eat from on Chol Hamo’ed he may pickle.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One who turned his olives (the final step in prepare them for pressing, after which they will rot if not pressed in time) and morning or an unpreventable event befell him, or his workers misinformed him (they did not show up for work) he may lay the first board (on the press) and leave it until after the festival according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, he may pour, finish, and stop up (three steps in the process of finishing and packaging) as normal.

Bet: And so too one whose wine was in a pit and morning or an unpreventable event befell him, or his workers misinformed him, he may pour, finish, and stop up as normal, according to Rabi Yossi.  Rabi Yehuda says, he makes boards for it (to cover it) so it does not turn.

Gimmel: A person may take in his produce because of (fear of) robbers and remove the flax from its steeping (soaking in water to soften it) so it isn’t lost (to rot), as long as he doesn’t intend this work for Chol Hamo’ed.  And all of them, if he intended the work for Chol Hamo’ed, they get lost.

Daled: One may not buy houses, slaves, or animals except for the purpose of the festival of for the purpose of the seller, for he has nothing to eat.  One may not clear (objects) from house to house, but he may clear it into his courtyard.  One may not bring vessels (which have been repaired) from the house (workshop) of the artisan (on Chol Hamo’ed), if he fears for them (that they will be stolen) he clears them into a different courtyard (but does not bring them home).

Hay: One may cover figs with straw (to protect from the rain).  Rabi Yehuda says, (he may) even stack.  Sellers of produce, clothing, and vessels may sell privately for the purpose of the festival.  Trappers, porridge makers, and bean grinders, may do (their work) privately for the purpose of the festival.  Rabi Yossi says, they took a stringency upon themselves.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: And these may shave on Chol Hamo’ed, one who comes from overseas (and could not shave before the festival), from captivity, from prison, from excommunication and the Chachamim released, and so too one who was examined for excommunication and was released, a nazir (whose vow ended on Chol Hamo’ed), and a metzora coming up from his tuma to his tahara.

Bet: And these may do laundry on Chol Hamo’ed, one who comes from overseas, from captivity, from prison, from excommunication and the Chachamim released, and so too one who was examined for excommunication and was released, hand towels, barber’s wraps, bath towels, zavin, zavot, niddot, women who just gave birth, and all who go up from tuma to tahara, behold these are mutar, and all other people are assur.

Gimmel: And these may be written on Chol Hamo’ed, marriages for women, divorce documents, receipts, wills (for a person who is dying), gifts, pruzbolin (which prevent loans from being forgiven in shvi’it), assessments, documents of sustenance (to give sold property to family), bills of chalitza (refusal of a levirate marriage), refusals (of pre-arranged marriages by orphaned girls), arbitration documents, court decrees, and letters of authority.

Daled: One does not write promissory notes on Chol Hamo’ed, and if he doesn’t believe (the borrower without a document) or if he (the scribe) has nothing to eat (and needs the wages), for this he may write.  One may not write books, tfillin, or mezuzot on Chol Hamo’ed, and they may not correct (even) one letter, even if it is the torah of sanctuary.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may write tfillin and mezuzot for himself, and he may spin on his thigh (a different way than normal) tchelet for tzitzit.

Hay: One who buries his dead three days before the festival, the decree of seven (days of mourning) is cancelled for him.  If eight, the decree of thirty days (of lesser mourning) are cancelled for him, for they said, Shabbat is counted (in the days) and does not stop (the days), festivals interrupt and are not counted.

Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, since the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, Shavuot is like Shabbat (with regard to mourning).  Raban Gamliel says, Rosh Hashana and Yom Hakippurim are like festivals.  Chachamim say, not like this one and not like this one, rather Shavuot is like a festival and Rosh Hashana and Yom Hakippurim are like Shabbat.

Zayin: One does not tear (clothing, as a sign of mourning), lay bare (the shoulder), or have the meal for the mourner, except those who bury the dead (immediate relatives), and they have the meal for the mourner only on an upright couch (for lowering the couch as a sign of mourning is not done on Chol Hamo’ed).  And they do not bring (the meal) to the house of the mourner a tavla (an ornate plate), an iskulta (a silver or glass bowl) or a kanon (a special basket), only in baskets.

Chet: One does not set down the coffin in the street (on Chol Hamo’ed) so as not to make eulogy regular, and never (do they set down the coffin) of women out of respect.  Women on Chol Hamo’ed may wail, but they may not beat (hands).  Rabi Yishma’el says, those next to the coffin may beat.

Tet: On Rosh Chodesh, Chanuka, and Purim they wail and beat, and on this (chol Hamo’ed) and that (list) they may not lament.  (After) the dead is buried, they do not wail or beat.  What is wailing?  When all wail together (a dirge).  Lamenting?  When one speaks and all the others answer after her, as it says, “and teach your daughters wailing, and all of them their neighbor lamentation.”  But for the future is says, “death will be swallowed up forever, and Hashem wipe tears from all faces etc.”

Mesechet Chagigah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: All are chayav to see (the Beit Hamikdash on the festivals) except for, a deaf-dumb, a mentally infirm person, a minor, one of undetermined gender, an androgynous, women, unfreed slaves, the lame, the blind, the sick, the old, and one who cannot go up on his feet.  Who is a minor?  All who cannot ride on their father’s shoulders and go up from Yerushalayim to the temple mount according to Beit Shamay.  And Beit Hillel says, all who cannot hold their father’s hand and go up from Yerushalayim to the temple mount, as it says, “three festivals,” (and the word used for festivals is feet, showing one goes up on his own feet.

Bet: Beit Shamay says, the re’iya (a korban for seeing the Beit Hamikdash on the festivals) is (has a value of) two silver, and the chagiga (the festival korban) is a ma’ah (a sixth of a dinar) of silver.  Beit Hillel says, the re’iya is a ma’ah of silver, and the chagiga is two silver.

Gimmel: Olot on festivals come from (are bought with only) chulin (funds), and shlamim (may be bought from) ma’aser (sheni money).  On the first of Yom Tov of Pesach, Beit Shamay says, (the shlamim chagiga korban is paid for) from chulin.  And Beit Hillel says, from ma’aser.

Daled: Yisra’elim fulfill their obligation (to bring shlamei simcha) with vowed, donated, and animal ma’aser, and kohanim (fulfill) with chata’ot, ashamot, and with the bechor, the breast, and the shoulder (which are given to the kohanim), but not with birds or menachot.

Hay: One who has many eaters and little property brings many shlamim (which are eaten) and few olot (which are not eaten).  (If one has) a lot of property and few eaters, he brings many olot and few shlamim.  If he has little of both, on this it was said, a ma’ah silver and two silver (as the values of what he brings).  If he has a lot of both, on this it was said, “a person, like the gift of his hand according to the blessing of Hashem which He has given him.”

Vav: One who didn’t celebrate (through a korban) on the first Yom Tov, (may) offer the whole festival, and on the last of Yom Tov (Shmini Atzeret) he may offer.  If the festival passed and he didn’t offer, he is not chayav to compensate.  On this it was said, “what is bent cannot be straightened, and what is missing cannot be counted full.”

Zayin: Rabi Shimon ben Menasya days, what is something net which cannot be straightened?  This is one who has inappropriate relations and a mamzer is born from him.  If you say it is by a thief when he steals, he may return it and straighten things out.  Rabi Shimon ben Yochay says, We do not call something bent unless it was straight originally and was bent, and what is it?  This is a scholar who separates from torah.

Chet: Annulment of vows floats in the air and has nothing (no textual source) to support it.  The laws of Shabbat, chagiga (korbanot), and me’ila (misappropriation of holy objects) behold they are like hills hanging by a hair, for they have little text (which supports them) and many laws.  Legal matters, temple services, teharot and tumot, and inappropriate relations have what (texts) to support them.  These (all of the laws mentioned here) are the body (essentials) of torah.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One does not learn of inappropriate relations with three (or more students), the acts of creation with two, or the Chariot with one, unless he is intelligent and understanding of his knowledge.  All who look at four things, it would be fit for him to have not come to this world, (and the four things are) what is up (above the heavens), what is down (below the earth), what is before (creation), and what is after (the end of days).  And all who do not account for the honor of their Master, it would be fit for him to have not come to this world.

Bet: Yossi ben Yoezer says not to lay hands (on a sacrifice on Yom Tov, for doing such requires one to exert all his force), and Yossi ben Yochanan says to lay hands.  Yehoshu’a ben Prachia says not to lay hands.  Nitai the Arbeli says to lay hands.  Yehuda ben Tabay says not to lay hands.  Shimon be Shetach says to lay hands.  Shamaya says to lay hands.  Avtalyon says not to lay hands.  Hillel and Menacham did not disagree, Menachem left, and Shamay replaced him.  Shamay says not to lay hands.  Hillel says to lay hands.  The first (to be mentioned) were nesi’im (community leaders) and the second were heads of the court.

Gimmel: Beit Shamay says, they bring shlamim and do not lay hands, but not olot (on Yom Tov).  Beit Hillel says, they bring shlamim and olot and lay hands.

Daled: Shavuot which falls out on erev Shabbat, Beit Shamay says, the day of slaughtering is after Shabbat, and Beit Hillel says, there is no day of slaughtering after Shabbat, and they agree that if it fell out on Shabbat the day of slaughtering is after Shabbat.  And the kohen gadol does not dress in his garments and eulogy and fasting is mutar so as not to establish the opinion of those who say, Shavuot is after Shabbat.

Hay: One washes hands for chulin (bread), ma’aser (bread), and truma (produce).  And for holy (foods) one immerses (his hands in a mikva).  And for a chatat, (even) if (only) his hands became tame (as in when he touched a torah scroll), his body became tame.

Vav: One who immerses for chulin with the intention of chulin is assur from (eating) ma’aser.  If he immersed for ma’aser and intended for ma’aser, is assur from truma.  If he immersed for truma and intended for truma, he is assur from chatat.  If he immersed for something stringent, he is mutar for something lenient.  If he immersed without intention, it is as if he didn’t immerse.

Zayin: The clothes of an am ha’aretz (have a tuma of) midras for prushim (those who are separate and keep matter of kedusha).  The clothes of prushim are midras for those who eat truma.  The clothes of those who eat truma are midras for (those who eat) kodesh.  The clothes of kodesh are midras for (those who eat) chatat.  Yoseph ben Yoezer was a pious person among the kehuna, and his apron was madras for kodesh.  Yochanan ben Gudgeda would eat kodesh in purity all his days, and his apron was midras for chatat.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Kodesh is more stringent than truma, for one may immerse vessels inside vessels for truma, but not for kodesh (where vessels must be immersed in the mikva one by one).  (Vessels are considered to have independent) back, inside, and handle for truma, but not so by kodesh.  One who carries midras carries truma (at the same time as long as they don’t touch), but he may not carry kodesh.  The clothes of one who eats truma are midras for (eaters of) kodesh.  Dealing with kodesh is not like dealing truma, for (if he wants to immerse a garment with a knot) in kodesh, he unties, he dries, he immerses, and then ties, and in truma he ties (and may leave it like that) and immerses.

Bet: Vessels which were completed in tahara (although that type of vessel could become tame) need immersion for kodesh, but not for truma.  A vessel unites (in tuma) all things inside of it for kodesh (i.e. something in a vessel with an object which touched a tame object is assur for kodesh) but not for truma (it is mutar to have with truma).  The fourth (in tuma, where it has three intermediaries with a source of tuma) with kodesh is invalid, and the third (in tuma) in truma (is pasul).  In truma, if one of his hands became pasul, its friend (the other hand) is tahor, and in kodesh, they immerse both, for a hand makes its friend tame, though not in truma.

Gimmel: One may eat dry foods (which do not generally become tame) which are truma with defiled (tame) hands, but not kodesh.  A griever and one who lacks atonement (lacks sacrifices as the final step of becoming tahor) need immersion for kodesh, but not for truma.

Daled: Truma is stringent (more than kodesh), for in Yehuda, they are trusted about the tahara of wine and oil all the days of the year, and in the time of (using) the winepresses and the olive presses, truma as well.  If the time of the winepresses and the olive presses passed, and they brought him a barrel of truma wine, he will not accept it, but he (the am ha’aretz who is not trusted) should leave it for the next (time of the) winepress.  And if he (the am ha’aretz) says to him, (the kohen) I separated into it (i.e. in this barrel) a revi’it of kodesh, he is trusted.  Jugs of wine and jugs of oil which are meduma (a mix of truma and chulin which is only eaten by a kohen), they are believed (about their status) in the days of the winepresses and olive presses, and before the winepresses seventy days.

Hay: From Modi’it and inward (toward Yerushalayim, potters) are believed about earthenware vessels (being tahor).  From Modi’it outward they are not believed.  How?  A potter who sells pots comes into (the area between Yerushalayim and) Modi’it, he is (the same) potter, they are (the same) pots, and they are (the same) customers, he is trusted.  If he leaves, he isn’t trusted.

Vav: (Tax) collectors who enter the house (to take collateral), and so too thieves who returned vessels, they are believed to say, we didn’t touch (anything in a way to make it tame).  In Yerushalayim, they are believed about kodesh, and at the time of the festival even on truma.

Zayin: One who opens his barrel (of wine and an am ha’aretz touched it) or one who begins (to sell) his dough before the festival (and an am ha‘aretz touched it), Rabi Yehuda says, let him finish (selling as tahor, for at this time even amei ha’aretz are thought to be generally tahor).  Chachamim say, he may not finish.  Once the festival passed, they would remove (objects) for the tahara of the sanctuary.  If the festival ended on Friday, they would not remove out of honor for Shabbat.  Rabi Yehuda says, even not on Thursday, for the kohanim aren’t free.

Chet: How do they remove for the tahara of the sanctuary.  They would immerse the vessels which were in the Beit Hamikdash, and they say to them (to kohanim who are amei ha’aretz), be careful not to touch the table and make it tame.  All the vessels which were in the Beit Hamikdash, they had seconds and thirds, for if the firsts became tame they bring the seconds in their place.  All the vessels which were in the Beit Hamikdash need immersing, except for the golden mizbe’ach and the copper mizbe’ach, since they are earth, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Chachamim say, because they are plated.

Seder Nashim

Mesechet Yevamot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Fifteen women exempt their rivals (other wives of the same man), and the rivals of their rivals (wives from other brothers if one brother already died) from chalitza (rejection of yibum) and yibum (when a man dies without descendants, one of his brothers has a child with one of his wives and the son is named in the dead brother’s memory), forever (as in rivals of rivals of rivals etc. if there are multiple brothers).  These are they, his (the living brother’s) daughter (i.e. if she was his brothers wife), his daughter’s daughter, his son’s daughter, his wife’s daughter, the daughter of her son, the daughter of her daughter, his mother-in-law, his mother-in-law’s mother, his father-in-law’s mother, his sister from his mother (the two brothers must only share a father), his wife’s sister, the wife of his brother from his mother, a wife of a brother who was not in his world (the brother died before he was born), and his daughter-in-law, behold these exempt their rivals, and the rivals of their rivals, from chalitza and yibum forever.   And all of them, if they died, or refused (a minor whose father died may refuse contracted marriage including yibum), or divorced, or if they were found to be incapable of having children, their rivals are exempt.  And you cannot say by his mother-in-law, the mother of his mother-in-law, or the mother of his father-in-law that they are incapable of having children or they refused (only minors may refuse).

Bet: How do they exempt their rivals?  If his daughter or one of all of these inappropriate relations was married to his brother, and he (the dead brother) had another wife, and he died, just as his daughter is patur, so too her rival is patur.  If the rival of his sister went and married another brother of his, and he had another wife and he died, just as the rival of his (the living brother’s) daughter is patur, so too the rival of her rival is patur, even if there are a hundred (brothers, and this happens with all but one who is still alive).  How is it that if they (the forbidden wives) died (etc.), their rivals are permitted?  His daughter or one of these forbidden relationships was married to his brother, and he had another wife, his daughter died or got divorce, and after that his brother died, her rival is allowed.  And all (those who would be forbidden as an adult and) who could refuse but didn’t refuse, her rival can have chalitza but not yibum.

Gimmel: Six forbidden relations are stricter than these, and since they are married to others, their rivals are mutar, his mother, the wife of his father, his father’s sister, his sister from his father, the wife of the brother of his father, and the wife of his brother from his father (i.e. the woman is married to two of his brothers).

Daled: Beit Shamay allows the rivals (of the prohibited women) to the brothers (for yibum or chalitza), and Beit Hillel prohibits.  If they did chalitza, Beit Shamay makes invalid for marrying kohanim (who may not marry a chalitza), and Beit Hillel makes valid (for their chalitza was invalid).  If they did yibum, Beit Shamay validates and Beit Hillel invalidates.  Even though these (Beit Hillel) prohibit (yibum to rivals) and these (Beit Shamay) allow, these (Beit Shamay) invalidate (for marriage after such a yibum) and these (Beit Hillel) validate, Beit Shamay did not refrain from marrying the women of Beit Hillel, and Beit Hillel did not refrain from marrying the women of Beit Shamay.  All (matters of) tahor and tame (by vessels) that these would make tahor and these would make tame they did not refrain from making teharot based on them (they would trust that the other group would only lend them vessels which the borrowers themselves would consider tahor, even though the lender might not agree with the other’s views).

Perek Bet

Aleph: How is (the case of) the wife of his brother who was not in his world?  Two brothers, one of them died, a brother was born to them, and afterwards the second did yibum for the wife of his brother, and he died (childless also).  The first is exempt because she is the wife of a brother who was not in his world, and the second because she is her rival.  If he (the second brother) made her a ma’amar (contracted marriage but did not consummate it), the second (wife) gets chalitza but not yibum.

Bet: Two brothers and one of them died, and the second did yibum for the wife of his brother, sand afterwards a son was born to them, and he (the second brother) died, the first is exempt because she is the wife of a brother who was not in his world, and the second because she is her rival.  If he (the second brother) made her a ma’amar, the second gets chalitza but not yibum.  Rabi Shimon says, he does yibum for whichever one he wants, or does chalitza for whichever one he wants.

Gimmel: they said a general rule in doing yibum, all who is assur because of inappropriate relations is not given chalitza or yibum.  If her issur is an issur of mitzva or an issur of kdusha (explained in the next mishna), she gets chalitza and not yibum.  Her sister who is her sister-in-law may have chalitza or yibum.

Daled: Issur mitzva, secondary (inappropriate relations, such as his grandmother or granddaughter-in-law) from the words of the scribes (early sages).  Issur of kedusha (sanctification), a widow to the kohen gadol, and a divorcee or chalutza (one who got chalitza) to a lay kohen, a mamzer (bastard) or netina (a nation which deceived Yehoshua) to a yisra’el, and a daughter of a yisra’el to a natin or a mamzer.

Hay: One who has any sort of brother (including a mamzer) requires the wife of his brother to have yibum, and is (considered the same as) his brother in every matter, excluding one who has (a brother who is) from a (Cana’ani) maidservant or from a non-Jew (making the brother not Jewish).  One who has a son from any source he (the son) exempts the wife of his father from yibum, and he (the son) is chayav on hitting him (the father) and cursing him, and is his son in every matter, except for one he has from a maidservant or from a non-Jew.

Vav: One who married one of two sisters and doesn’t know which one he married, he gives a get (divorce paper) to each.  If he died, and he has one brother, he does chalitza for both.  If he had two (brothers) one does chalitza and one does yibum.  If they went ahead (before consulting the court) and got married, they do not take them from their hands (they do not divorce).

Zayin: Two who married two sisters, and neither knows which one he married, each one gives two gittin.  If they died and each has a brother, each does chalitza for both.  One has one (brother) and one has two, the single does chalitza for both, and the two, one does chalitza and one does yibum.  If they went ahead and got married, they so not take them from their hands.  If they each have two (brothers), one brother of each does chalitza for one, and the other brother of each does yibum for the chalutza of this one (his brother).  If two went ahead and did chalitza, the two of them will not do yibum, rather one does chalitza and one does yibum.  If they went ahead and got married, they do not take them from their hands.

Chet: The mitzva is on the eldest to do yibum, and if the younger did it first, he merited.  One accused of (being the son of) a maidservant and she was released, or about a non-Jew and she converted, behold this one may not marry, and if he married, the do not take from his hands.  One who is accused of (sleeping with) the wife of a man, they take her out from his hand, and even though he married, they remove.

Tet: One who brings a get from overseas and says, it was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence, he (the messenger) may not marry his wife (the one the get was written for).  (If the messenger testifies about the husband that) he died, I killed him, or we killed him, he may not marry his wife.  Rabi Yehuda says, (if he says) I killed him, his wife may not get married, we killed him, his wife may get married.

Yud: A sage who prohibited a woman to her husband based on a vow (which she made to derive no pleasure from him, that the husband did not deny, and the sage found no loophole in, so she divorced him), this one (the sage) may not marry her (we are afraid he will intentionally make them divorce so he can marry her).  One who refused or had chalitza in his presence he may marry her, since he is a court.  And all who (in the above cases were prohibited) had wives and they died, may marry them (the previously prohibited women, since they already had wives at the time of the ruling).  And all (of the prohibited women) who married others and got divorced or became widow, they are allowed to marry them (the previously prohibited men).  And all of them (the women) are mutar to the sons and the brothers (of the prohibited men).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Four brothers, two of them married two sisters, and those married to the sisters died, behold these (women) get chalitza and not yibum, and if they went ahead and married, they exit (the marriage).  Rabi Eliezer says, Beit Shamay says, they stand (married), and Beit Hillel says, they exit (from the marriage).

Bet: If one of them was assur to one from an issur erva (inappropriate relations), he is assur to her and mutar to her sister, and the other one (brother) is assur to both of them (but he does chalitza).  (If the erva is) an issur of mitzva or an issur of kdusha, she gets chalitza but not yibum.

Gimmel: If one of them was assur to this (brother) an issur erva, and the other was assur to this (the other brother) an issur erva, the one who is assur to this one (of the brothers) is mutar to that one (the other brother), and the one who is assur to this (the other brother) is mutar to that.  And this is what they said, her sister who is her sister-in-law, either gets chalitza or yibum.

Daled: Three brothers, two are married to two sisters, a women and her daughter, a woman and her daughter’s daughter, or a woman and her son’s daughter, behold these get chalitza and not yibum, and Rabi Shimon exempts (from even chalitza).  If one of them was assur to him (the living brother) from an issur erva, he is assur with her but mutar with her sister.  If it’s an issur mitzva or an issur kdusha, she gets chalitza but not yibum.

Hay: Three brothers, two of them are married to two sisters, and the third is unmarried.  One of those married to the sisters died, and the unmarried one married her by a ma’amar (monetarily or by document without consummating the marriage) and then the other died, Beit Shamay says, his wife is with him and that one will be exempt because of (the fact that she is) the sister of his wife.  Beit Hillel says, he removes his wife with a get (because she is forbidden as the sister of a zkuka, one who needs yibum) and chalitza, and the sister of his brother with chalitza.  This is what they said, woe to him on his wife and woe to him on his brother’s wife.

Vav: Three brothers, two of them are married to two sisters, and one of them is married to an unrelated woman.  One of those married to the sisters died, and the one married to an unrelated woman married his wife (of the dead brother), and died.  This first is exempt (from yibum with the third brother) because of the sister of his wife, and the second because of her rival.  If he made her a contractual marriage and died, the unrelated wife gets chalitza but not yibum.  Three brothers, two of them married two sisters, and one of them is married to an unrelated woman, the one married to an unrelated woman died, and one of the others married his wife and died.  The first is exempt because of the sister of his wife, and the second is exempt because of her rival.  If he made her a contractual marriage and died, the unrelated wife gets chalitza but not yibum.

Zayin: There are three brothers, two are married to two sisters and the third is married to an unrelated woman.  One of those married to the sisters died, the one married to an unrelated woman married his (the dead brother’s) wife, the wife of the second died (where the wife is the other sister), and then the one married to the unrelated woman died, behold this one (the living sister) is assur to him (the only living brother) forever, since she was assur to him for one hour (when the first brother died, she was assur as the sister of his wife).  Three brothers, two are married to two sister and the third is married to an unrelated woman.  One of those married to the sisters divorced his wife, the one married to an unrelated woman died, the divorcer married her, and died, this is what they said, and all who died or were divorced their rivals are mutar (she was never a rival of the living brother’s sister).

Chet: And all who had marriage or divorce in doubt, behold these are rivals who get chalitza but not yibum.  How is there a doubtful marriage?  If he threw her the marriage contract (while eight amot from her) and it’s a doubt if it is closer to him or closer to her, this is a doubtful marriage.  How is there a doubtful divorce?  He wrote it in his handwriting and does not have witnesses, there are witnesses but no date on it, or it has a date but there is only one witness, this is a doubtful divorce.

Tet: Three brothers married to three unrelated women, one of them died and the second made her a ma’amar (contractual marriage), and he died, she gets chalitza but not yibum, as it says, “and one of them died… her yevama (husband’s brother, who has to do yibum for her) will come upon her.”  For upon her is the necessity of one brother, and not that upon her is the necessity of two brothers (since both brothers had at least contractual marriages with her but not children, she would need yibum for each of the other brothers, which we learn is not necessary, and therefore her rival is exempt as well).  Rabi Shimon says, he marries whichever one he wants and does chalitza for the other.  Two brothers married two sisters, and one of them died, and after that the wife of the second died, behold this one is assur to him forever, since she was assur to him for an hour.

Yud: Two who married two women, and at the time they brought them into the chupa (a canopy used for performing marriage) they switched (the wife) of that for of that, they are chayav because of the wife of a man.  If they were brothers, (they are assur as) the wife of brothers.  And if they were sisters, the wife to her sister.  And if they were nidda (impure due to menstruation), because of nidda (for nidda women may not be able to be married).  And they separate for three months lest they are pregnant, and if they were minors not fit to give birth, they return them immediately.  And if they were kohanim, they are pasul from truma.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who does chalitza to his sister-in-law and she was found pregnant (by her dead husband) and gives birth, when the child is viable (will probably be born and not miscarried) he is mutar to her relatives (for it is as if chalitza never happened), she is mutar to his relatives, and she is not pasul for kehuna (for kohanim cannot marry a chalutza).  If the child is not viable, he is assur to her relatives (for the chalitza is still valid), she is assur to his relatives, and she is pasul for the kehuna.

Bet: One who marries his sister-in-law and she was found pregnant and gives birth, when the child is viable he will exit (the marriage), and they are chayav a korban (chatat for unintentionally transgressing a lo ta’ase).  And if the child is not viable, it (the marriage) will stand.  It is a doubt whether it (the baby born) is nine (months) old by the first (husband) or seven by the last, he exits, and the child is valid, and they are chayav a dependant asham (which is brought on a doubt of transgression).

Gimmel: One who is waiting for her brother in law to whom property fell (she inherited property), Beit Hillel and Beit Shamay agree that she sells it or gives it away and it stands.  If shed died, what should they do with her ktuba (the value promised to her if her husband dies) and the property which comes in and goes out with her (her nichsei melog, things which were hers throughout marriage, but the husband receives the benefit from)?  Beit Shamay says, the heirs of the husband (who died) split with the heirs of the father (her father).  Beit Hillel says, the property (nichsei tzon barzel, which the wife brings into the marriage, but the husband owns and is responsible for) is for them (both parties), the ktuba belongs to the heirs of the husband, and the property which comes in and out with her belongs to the heirs of the father.

Daled: If he married her, behold she is like his wife in all things, except that her ktuba is (taken from) the property of the first husband (who died).

Hay: It is a great mitzva to do yibum.  If he doesn’t want to, they go to all the brothers (to find one).  If they didn’t want to, they return to the oldest and say, the mitzva is on you, either do chalitza or do yibum!

Vav: If he made it (his decision) dependant on a minor (brother) until he grows up, on an adult until he comes from overseas, on a deaf-dumb, or on a mentally infirm person, they do not listen to him, rather they say to him, the mitzva is on you, either do chalitza or do yibum!

Zayin: One who does chalitza for his sister-in-law, behold he is like one of the brothers for the portion (of the dead brother, meaning that we do not punish him for doing chalitza).  And if there is a father, the property (of the dead brother) is of the father.  One who married his sister-in-law earned the property of his brother.  Rabi Yehuda says, either way, if there is a father, the property is of the father.  One who does chalitza for his sister-in-law, he is assur to her relatives, and she is assur to his relatives.  He is assur to her mother, her mother’s mother, her father’s mother, her daughter, the daughter of her daughter, the daughter of her son, and her sister as long as she is extant, but his (the one who did chalitza) brothers are mutar (to these women).  And she is assur to his father, his father’s father, his son, his son’s son, his brother, and the son of his brother.  One is mutar to the relative of a rival to one who he did chalitza with, but he is assur in the rival of the relative of the one who he did chalitza with.

Chet: One who did chalitza for his sister-in-law, his brother married her sister, and he died, she gets chalitza but not yibum.  And so too one who divorces his wife, and his brother married her sister, and he died, behold this one is patur from chalitza and yibum.

Tet: A woman waiting for yibum, and his brother (of the man she is waiting for) married her sister, in the name of Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira they said, they say to him, wait until your older brother does the deed.  If his brother did chalitza for her or married her, he (the younger brother) may marry his wife.  If the sister-in-law (waiting for yibum) dies, he may marry his wife.  If the one to do yibum died, he (the younger brother) should exit fro his wife with a get.  And the wife of his brother with chalitza.

Yud: The yevama (sister-in-law awaiting yibum) does not do chalitza or yibum until she has three months (after the loss of her husband).  And so too all other women may not be engaged or marry until they have three months (after their marriage ended), whether virgins or married (with consecration), whether divorcee or widow, whether married or engaged.  Rabi Yehuda says, the married may become engaged and the engaged may marry, except for the engaged or married in Yehuda, for he is haughty with her (and if we don’t allow them to marry, he might come to sleep with her before they marry).  Rabi Yossi says, all women may get married except for the widow because of the mourning.

Yud Aleph: Four brothers married four women and they (the four brothers) died, if the eldest (of the still living brothers) wanted to do yibum for all of them, he has the right.  One who was married to two woman and died, the sleeping with or chalitza for one of them exempts her rival.  If one was valid and one was invalid, if he does chalitza, he does chalitza to the invalid, and if he wanted to do yibum, he does yibum for the valid.

Yud Bet: One who re-marries his divorced wife, marries the woman he did chalitza for, and marries a relative of the women he did chalitza for, he must exit and the child is a mamzer according to Rabi Akiva.  Chachamim say, the child is not a mamzer.  And they admit in the case of the relative of his ex-wife the child is a mamzer.

Yud Gimmel: What is a mamzer?  All close relatives which fall under, “he may not come (sleep with)” according to Rabi Akiva.  Shimon the Timni says, all who he is chayav karet in the hands of Heaven, and the halacha is like him.  Rabi Yehoshua says, all who one is chayav death from the court.  Rabi Shimon ben Azay said, I found a scroll of relationships in Yerushalayim and it was written in it, so-and-so is a mamzer from the wife of a man (a child of adultery), upholding the opinion of Rabi Yehoshua.  If his wife died, he is mutar in her sister, if he divorced her and she died, he is mutar in her sister, if he married another (unrelated woman) and she died, he is mutar in her sister, he did yibum and she died, he is mutar in her sister, or if he did chalitza and she died, he is mutar in her sister.

Perek Hay

Aleph: Raban Gamliel says (in cases where two wives of one brother who died come to their brother and law), there is no (validity to a second) get after (he already gave) a get, no contractual marriage after a contractual marriage, no relations after relations, and no chalitza after chalitza.  And Chachamim say, there is a get after a get, and contractual marriage after contractual marriage, but no relations after relations and no chalitza after chalitza.

Bet: How?  If he made a contractual marriage for his sister-in-law and gave her a get, she needs chalitza from him (for he still needs to do yibum).  If he made a contractual marriage and chalitza, she needs a get from him.  If he made a contractual marriage and consummated, behold, this is like the mitzva.

Gimmel: If he gave a get and made a contractual marriage, she needs a get (the first one was meaningless) and chalitza.  If he gave a get and consummated, she needs a get and chalitza.  If he gave a get and did chalitza, there is nothing after chalitza.  If he did chalitza, made a contractual marriage, gave a get, and had relations, or had relations, made a contractual marriage, gave a get, and did chalitza, there is nothing after chalitza.  (This applies) whether it is one yevama (sister-in-law) to one yavam (living brother) or two Yevamot to one yavam.

Daled: How?  He made a contractual marriage for this one, and a contractual marriage for that one, they need two gittin and (one needs) chalitza.  A contractual marriage for this one and a get for that, she (the one married) needs a get and chalitza.  A contractual marriage for this one and relations, they need two gittin and (the one he had relations with needs) chalitza.  A contractual marriage for this, and chalitza for that, the first needs a get.  A get for this one and a get for that, they (each) need from him chalitza.  A get for this and relations for that, she (the one who he had relations with) needs a get and chalitza.  Get for this and a contractual marriage for that, she (the one who got a contractual marriage) needs a get and (one of them needs) chalitza.  A get for this and did chalitza for that, there is nothing (needed, and therefore valid) after chalitza.

Hay: He did chalitza and did chalitza or did chalitza and made a contractual marriage, gave a get and had relations, or he had relations and had relations, had relations and made a contractual marriage, gave a get and did chalitza, there is nothing after chalitza.  (These apply) whether one yavam for two yevamot or two yevamin or one yevama.

Vav: He did chalitza, a contractual marriage, gave a get, and had relations or had relations, made a contractual marriage, gave a get, and did chalitza, there is nothing after chalitza, whether at the beginning, the middle, or the end.  And he had relations with her, when it is at the beginning, there is nothing (necessary even for another yevama) after it.  If it’s in the middle or at the end, there is something after it (the relations were inappropriate, and therefore she still requires chalitza).  Rabi Nechemia says, whether relations or chalitza, whether at the beginning, middle, or end, there is nothing after them.

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who has sex with his yevama whether accidentally, intentionally, if forced, willingly, even if he is accidental (he doesn’t have intention) and she is intentionally, he is intentionally and she is accidental, he is forced and she isn’t forced, or she is forced and he isn’t forced, whether (the act was) partial or completed, he acquired her.  And there is no difference between sex and sex (this phrase is explained as meaning between natural ways of sex and unnatural ones).

Bet: And so too one who has sex with one of all the inappropriate relations which are in the torah or if they are pasul, such as a widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or a chalutza to a lay kohen, a mamzer or netina to a yisra’el, or the bat of a yisra’el to a mamzer or natin, she is pasul (to any further kohen), and there is not difference between sex and sex.

Gimmel: A widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalutza to a lay kohen, from engagement they may not eat truma.  Rabi Elazar and Rabi Shimon validate.  If they became a widow or a divorcee, from marriage they were pasul and from engagement they are valid.

Daled: A kohen gadol may not marry a widow, whether a widow from engagement or a widow from marriage.  And he may not marry a bogeret (a woman twelve years, six months, and one day old, i.e. six months after puberty).  Rabi Elazar and Rabi Shimon validate a bogeret.  He may not marry one who was hit (penetrated) with wood.  He engaged a widow and he was appointed to be the kohen gadol, he may marry her.  And there was a story with Yehoshua ben Gamla who engaged Marta bat Beitos, the king appointed him as kohen gadol, and he married her.  One waiting for yibum who fell before (was waiting for) a lay kohen and he was appointed to be the kohen gadol, even though he made her a contractual marriage, behold he will not marry.  A kohen gadol whose brother died does chalitza but not yibum.

Hay: A lay kohen may not marry a barren woman unless he (already) has a wife and children.  Rabi Yehuda says, even if he has a wife and children, he may not marry a barren woman, for she (is like) a whore (two him, for she cannot have children) as is said in the torah.  And Chachamim say, ‘whore’ is nothing but a convert and a freedwoman and one who had sex in the way of a whore.

Vav: A person may not abstain from being fruitful and multiplying (having children) unless he has children.  Beit Shamay says, two males.  Beit Hillel says, a male and a female, as it says, “male and female He created them.”  If he married a woman and waited with her ten years and she didn’t give birth, he may not abstain.  If he divorced her, she may marry another.  And the second (husband) may wait with her ten years.  And if she miscarried, he counts from the time she miscarried.  The man is commanded in being fruitful and multiplying, but not the woman.  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, on both of them it says, “and Hashem blessed them and said to them… be fruitful and multiply.”

Perek Zayin

Aleph: A widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalitza to a lay kohen, and she brought in for him (to the marriage) (nichsei) melog slaves and tzon barzel slaves the melog slaves (who are not at all the husband’s property) may not eat truma, and the tzon barzel slaves (who the husband is responsible for) may.  And these are melog slaves, if they died, they died for her (she loses the value) and if they increased (in number) they increased for her (she benefits).  Even though he is responsible for their food, they may not eat truma.  And these are tzon barzel slaves, if they died, they died for him, and if they increased, they increased for him.  Since he is chayav in their responsibilities, behold these eat truma.

Bet: The daughter of a yisra’el who married a kohen and she brought in slaves for him whether melog slaves or tzon barzel slaves, they may eat truma.  And the daughter of a kohen who married a yisra’el and brought in for him slaves whether melog slaves or tzon barzel slaves, behold these will not eat truma.

Gimmel: The daughter of a yisra’el who married a kohen and he died and left her pregnant, the slaves do not eat truma because of the part of the baby (for he is an heir) for the baby makes pasul and does not (allow to) feed (slaves with truma, since he is unborn, so it is as if the mother has no children and therefore reverts to being a bat yisra’el), according to Rabi Yossi.  They said to him, after you testified to us about the daughter of a yisra’el to a kohen, even a bat kohen to a kohen, and he died and left her pregnant, the slaves may not eat truma, because of the part of the baby.

Daled: The (unborn) baby, yavam, fiancée, deaf-dumb, and one nine years and one day old (after which sex is legally valid), invalidate and don’t allow to eat.  (Other cases with this ruling are) if it’s a doubt whether he is nine years and one day old or not, or a doubt whether two hairs have issued forth (two pubic hairs are a sign of puberty) or not.  If the house fell on him and on the daughter of his brother (who was his wife) and it isn’t known who died first, her rival gets chalitza but not yibum (because there is a doubt if it is allowed or not).

Hay: A rapist, a seducer, and a mentally infirm person, they don’t invalidate and they don’t feed.  And if they are not fit to come into yisra’el (i.e. a mamzer) behold these invalidate.  How?  A yisra’el who has sex with the daughter of a kohen, she may eat truma.  If she got pregnant, she may not eat truma (of the unborn baby invalidates).  If she had an abortion, she may eat.  A kohen who has sex with the daughter of a yisra’el may not eat truma.  If she got pregnant, she may not eat.  If she gave birth, she may eat.  It is found that the strength of the son is greater than the strength of the father.  A slave invalidates (the daughter of a kohen from eating truma) by having sex, but does not invalidate based on children.  How so?  The daughter of a yisra’el to a kohen, the daughter of a kohen to a yisra’el, she gave birth to a son from him, the son went and had sex with a maidservant, and she had a son from him, behold he is a slave.  If the mother of her father was a (case of a) bat yisra’el to a kohen, she may not eat truma, a bat kohen to a yisra’el, she may eat truma.  A mamzer invalidates and feeds.  How?  A bat yisra’el to a kohen, and a bat kohen to a yisra’el, a daughter was born to her, and the daughter went and married a slave or a non-Jew, behold it is a mamzer.  If the mother of her mother was a bat yisra’el to a kohen, she may eat truma, a bat kohen to a yisra’el, she may not eat truma.

Vav: A kohen gadol, there are times he invalidates.  How?  A bat kohen to a yisra’el, a daughter was born to her, the daughter went and married a kohen, and a son was born to her, behold this one is fit to be a kohen gadol standing and serving on the mizbe’ach, he feeds his mother and invalidates his mother’s mother (even if his mother died, for she could return to her family if not for him, the son), and this (the grandmother) says, (let there) not (be many) like my son (grandson) the kohen gadol, for he invalidates me from truma.

Perek Chet

Aleph: One who is uncircumcised and all those who are tame may not eat truma, but their wives and slaves may eat truma.  A petzua daka (one with crushed testicles) and a krut shafcha (one who was castrated) they and their slaves may eat, but their wives may not.  And if she didn’t know her (sleep with her) from when he became a petzua daka or a krut shafcha (they were already married and then he became one of these), then they may eat.

Bet: What is a petzua daka?  All whose testicles were crushed, even (if only) one of them (was crushed).  And a krut shafcha (what is it)?  All whose penis was severed.  And if even a hair is left of the crown (top of the penis), he is valid (to do temple service).  A petzua daka and a krut shafcha are allowed (to marry) a convert or a freedwoman, and aren’t assur except to come in the congregation (of Yisra’el) as it says, “a petzua daka and krut shafcha shall not come into the congregation of Hashem.”

Gimmel: An Amoni and Mo’avi (people of the nations of Ammon and Mo’av) are assur, and their issur is an eternal issur, but their females are mutar immediately.  A Mitzri (Egyptian) and an Edomi aren’t assur except for (up to) the third generation, whether males or females.  Rabi Shimon allows the females immediately.  Rabi Shimon says, it’s a kal vechomer in the matters, just as in a place where the males are assur forever the females are allowed immediately, in a place where the males were only assur until the third generation, shouldn’t it be that we allow females immediately?  They said to him, if it’s halacha, we’ll accept it, and if it’s an inference we have an answer (the pasuk gives a reason for Ammon and Moav which does not apply to women, so a kal vechomer is invalid).  He said to them, no, I am stating a halacha.  Mamzerim and netinin are assur, and their issur is an eternal issur whether male or female.

Daled: Rabi Yehoshua said, I heard that a eunuch does chalitza, and they do chalitza for his wife and that (where are cases where) a eunuch does not do chalitza and they do not do chalitza for his wife, and I can’t explain it.  Rabi Akiva said, I will explain it, a man eunuch (made a eunuch by man) does chalitza and they do chalitza for his wife, since he had a time of validity (before he was a eunuch).  A sun eunuch (a eunuch since birth) does not do chalitza and they do not do chalitza for his wife since he didn’t have a time of validity.  Rabi Eliezer says, not so, rather a sun eunuch does chalitza and they do chalitza for his wife, for he has a cure.  A man eunuch does not do chalitza and they do not do chalitza for his wife for he has no cure.  Rabi Yehoshua ben Bteira testified about ben Megusat who was a man eunuch in Yerushalayim and they did yibum for his wife, upholding the opinion of Rabi Akiva.

Hay: A (sun) eunuch does not do chalitza or yibum.  And so too a barren woman does not get chalitza or yibum.  A eunuch who did chalitza for his yevama does not make her pasul (to marry a kohen).  If he had sex with her, he made her pasul, for it is sex in the way of a whore.  And so too a barren woman who the brothers did chalitza for her, she isn’t pasul.  If they had sex with her, she is pasul, for this is sex in the way of a whore.

Vav: A kohen who was a sun eunuch who married a bat yisra’el, feeds her (she may eat) truma.  Rabi Yossi and Rabi Shimon say, an androgynous priest who married a bat yisra’el feeds her truma.  Rabi Yehuda says, a tumtum who was torn (skin, revealing the sexual organs he should have had) and was found to be a male does not do chalitza, for he is like a eunuch.  And androgynous marries (a woman), but is not married (by a man).  Rabi Eliezer says, (a man who has sex with) an androgynous is chayav stoning as if he were a man.

Perek Tet

Aleph: There are those who are mutar for their husbands and assur to their yevamim (brothers-in-law), mutar to their yevamim and assur to their husbands, mutar to both, and (those who are) assur to both.  And these are mutar to their husbands but assur to their yevamim, a lay kohen who married a widow and he has a brother who is the kohen gadol, a chalal (one who lost kehuna due to his father marrying a woman assur to kohanim) who married a valid woman (so she is now assur to kohanim) and he has a valid brother, a yisra’el who married a bat yisra’el and he has a brother who is a mamzer, a mamzer who married a mamzeret and he has a yisra’el brother, (these are) mutar to their husbands and assur to their yevamim.

Bet: And these are mutar to their yevamim and assur to their husbands, a kohen gadol who betrothed a widow (if he married her she is assur to all kohanim) and he has a brother who is a lay kohen, a valid (kohen) who married a chalala (woman whose father, a kohen, married someone assur to kohanim) and he has a brother who is a chalal, a yisra’el who married a mamzeret, and he has a brother who is a mamzer, a mamzer who marries a bat yisra’el and he has a brother who is a yisra’el, (they are) mutar to their yevamim and assur to their husbands.  Assur to both, a kohen gadol who married a widow and he has a brother who is a kohen gadol or a lay kohen, a valid (kohen) who married a chalala who has a brother who is valid, a yisra’el who married a mamzeret who has a brother who is a yisra’el, a mamzer who married a bat yisra’el who has a brother who is a mamzer, are assur to both.  An all other women are muter to their husbands and yevamim.

Gimmel: Secondaries from the words of the scribes (women who are assur due to a secondary, derabanan issur), a secondary for her husband and not a secondary to her yavam, is assur to her husband and mutar to her yavam.  A secondary to her yavam and not a secondary to her husband is assur to her yavam and mutar to her husband.  A secondary to both is assur to both.  She has (receives) no ktuba, no benefits (payment for what the husband gained from her nichsei tzon barzel), no nourishment (a stipend a husband normally gives his wife and leaves for when he dies), no depreciation (payment for wear to nichsel melog), the child is valid (even to be a kohen), and they force him to exit (the marriage).  A widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalutza to a lay kohen, a mamzeret or netina to a yisra’el, a bat yisra’el to a natin or mamzer, they have a ktuba.

Daled: A bat yisra’el betrothed to a kohen, one who is pregnant by a kohen, one waiting for yibum from a kohen, and so too a bat kohen to a yisra’el, they may not eat truma.  A bat yisra’el betrothed to a levi, pregnant by a levi, waiting for yibum from a levi, and so too a bat levi to a yisra’el, they may not eat ma’aser.  A bat levi betrothed by a kohen, pregnant by a kohen, waiting for yibum by a kohen, and so too a bat kohen to a levi, she may not eat truma or ma’aser.

Hay: A at yisra’el who married a kohen may eat truma.  If he died and she has a son by him, she may eat truma.  If she married a levi, she may eat ma’aser.  Is he died and she has a son by him, she may eat ma’aser.  If she married a yisra’el, she may not eat truma or ma’aser.  If he died, and she has a son by him, she may not eat truma or ma’aser.  If (if she is a bat levi and) her son from a yisra’el died, she may eat ma’aser.  If (she is a bat kohen and) her son from a levi died, she may eat truma.  If (she is a  bat yisra’el and) her son from a kohen died, she may not eat truma or ma’aser.

Vav: A bat kohen who married a yisra’el may not eat truma.  If he died and she has a son by him she may not eat truma.  If she married a levi, she may eat ma’aser.  If he died and she has a son by him, she may eat ma’aser.  Is she married a kohen, she may eat truma.  If he died and she has a son by him, she may eat truma.  If her son from a kohen died, she may not eat truma.  If her son from a levi died, she may not eat ma’aser.  If her son from a yisra’el died, she returns to her father’s house, and on this it is said, “and she shall return to the house of her father like her youth, from the bread of her father she shall eat.”

Perek Yud

Aleph: A woman whose husband went overseas, they came and told her, your husband died, and she married.  Then her husband came, she exits from both, she needs a get from both, and she doesn’t get her ktuba, benefit, nourishment, or depreciation on either.  If she took (any of the above) she returns it.  A child is a mamzer from either one.  Neither one can become tame for her (of he is a kohen) and neither one has a right in something she finds, the work of her hands, or to nullify her vows.  If she was a bat yisra’el, she is pasul from kehuna, a bat levi, (she is pasul) from ma’aser, and a bat kohen from truma.  And neither (husband’s sons) inherit the ktuba.  And if they (the husbands) died neither’s brother does chalitza or yibum.  Rabi Yossi says, her ktuba (comes from) the property of the first.  Rabi Eliezer says, the first has a right to what she finds, the work of her hands, and to nullify her vows.  Rabi Shimon says, sex with or chalitza from his (the first husband’s) brothers exempts her rival, and a child from her isn’t a mamzer.  And if she married without right (from the court) she is allowed to return to him (the first husband).

Bet: If she married based on the court (allowing her), she exits and is patur from a korban (she would normally bring a chatat).  If she married not based on the court, she exits and is chayav a korban.  The power of the court is greater, for it can exempt her from a korban.  If a court allowed her to marry and she went and acted improperly (married an improper person she is chayav a korban, for they only allowed her to marry (properly).

Gimmel: A woman whose husband and son went overseas, they came and told her, your husband died and afterwards your son died (so since she had a son she doesn’t need yibum), and she married.  Afterwards, they told her, the reverse happened (the son died first so she needs yibum), she exits and (any) child (of the) first and last (husbands) is a mamzer.  They said to her, your son died and then your husband died, and afterwards they told her, the reverse happened, she exits, and the first and last child is a mamzer.  If they told her, your husband died, and she married, and then they came and told her, he was (in actuality) alive but he died, she exits and the child of the first is a mamzer, but the last is not a mamzer.  They said to her, your husband died and she was engaged, and after that her husband came, he is allowed to return to him.  Even though the last one gave her a get, he didn’t make her pasul from kohanim.  Rabi Elazar ben Mattia expounded this, “and a woman divorced from her husband,” and not from a man who isn’t her husband.

Daled: One whose wife went overseas and then they came and told him, your wife died, he married her sister and after that his wife came back, he is allowed to return to her.  He is allowed to the relatives of the second, and she (the second wife) is allowed to his relatives.  And if the first died, he is allowed for the second.  They said to him, your wife died and he married her sister, then afterwards they said to him, she was living but she died, the child of the first is a mamzer, and the last is not a mamzer.  Rabi Yossi says, all who are pasul because of others, are pasul in their own hands, and all who aren’t pasul because of others, aren’t pasul in their own hand (if two brothers marry two sisters, any combination where one makes the wife of the other pasul, he also makes his wife pasul).

Hay: They (witnesses) said to him, your wife died, and he married her sister from her father, she died, and he married her sister (of the new wife) from her mother, she died, and he married her sister from her father, and she died and he married her sister from her mother, and they were all found alive, he is allowed to the first, third, and fifth, and their rivals are patur (from yibum), and he is assur to the second and fourth and sex with either of them does not exempt their rivals.  And if he had sex with the second after the first died, he is allowed to the second and fourth and exempts their rivals, and is assur to the third and fifth and sex with either of them does not exempt his rivals.

Vav: (A boy) nine years and one day old, he invalidates his brothers (if he makes an act of yibum such as a contractual marriage) and the brothers invalidate him, except that he invalidated only (if her act is) first, and they invalidate if their act is at first or at the end (even though they would be invalid to her, they also invalidate their brother).  How?  One who is nine years and one day old who has sex with his yevama invalidated his brothers.  If he brothers had sex with her, they made a contractual marriage for her, they gave a get, or they did chalitza, they made her invalid to him.

Zayin: One who is nine years and on day old who has sex with his yevama, and afterwards his brother who is nine years and one day old has sex with her, he (the second) invalidated her (to the first).  Rabi Shimon says he didn’t invalidate.

Chet: One who is nine years and on day old who has sex with his yevama and afterwards had sex with her rival, he invalidated himself.  Rabi Shimon says, he didn’t invalidate.  One who is nine years and on day old who has sex with his yevama and died, she does chalitza but not yibum.  If he married a woman and died behold she is patur.

Tet: One who is nine years and on day old who has sex with his yevama, and when he grew up (to maturity) he married another woman and died, if he didn’t have sex with the first once since he grew up, the first does chalitza and not yibum, and the second can do chalitza or yibum.  Rabi Shimon says, he can do yibum to whichever he wants, and does chalitza for the second.  (All of these cases are) whether he’s nine years and one day old or twenty years old, if he didn’t have two (pubic) hairs.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: One may marry (the relatives of) a woman (who he) raped or seduced.  One who rapes or seduces a married woman is chayav (to punishment based on the situation).  One may marry a woman his father raped or seduced or (a woman) his son raped or seduced.  Rabi Yehuda prohibits (a woman) his father raped or seduced (for one may not take a woman his father has slept with).

Bet: A convert whose sons converted with her, they do not do chalitza or yibum (for they are not related by the father) even if the first one (son) was not conceived in kdusha (while she was not Jewish) and born in kdusha (after she converted) and the second one was conceived and born in kdusha.  So too the sons of a maidservant whose sons were released with her.

Gimmel: Five women whose children were mixed up, the mixed up children grew up, married women, and died.  Four (out of the five’s brothers, none of whom were mixed up) do chalitza for one, and one does yibum for her.  He and three others do chalitza for another (wife) and another, and one does yibum for her (etc).  We find four chalitzot and a yibum for each.

Daled: A woman whose child was mixed up with that of her daughter-in-law, the mixed up children grew up, married women, and died.  The children of the daughter-in-law do not do chalitza or yibum, for they are a doubt of the wife of his brother or the wife of the wife of his father’s brother, and the sons of the older (the grandmother) either do chalitza or yibum, for it is a doubt of the wife of his brother or the wife of the son of his brother.  If the valid ones died, the sons of those mixed up for (the wives of) the sons of the older do chalitza but not yibum, for it is a doubt of the wife of his brother or the wife of the brother of his father, and (for the wives of) the sons on the daughter-in-law) they may either do chalitza or yibum.

Hay: A kohenet whose child was mixed up with her maidservant’s, behold these eat truma, take a portion from the threshing floor (finished agricultural products as truma), may not become tame for the dead, and do not marry women whether valid (because they me be a slave) or invalid (since they may be a kohen).  When the mixed up grow up, they free each other and marry women valid for kohanim and do not become tame for the dead, but if they do not get lashes.  They do not eat truma, but if they do, they do not pay principal plus a fifth.  They do not get a portion from the threshing floor, (and if they did) they sell the truma and the money is theirs.  They do not get a portion of the holy things of the Beit hamikdash, they do not give them holy foods, they do not take their things (which would be given to a kohen) out of their hands, and they are patur from the shank bone, the cheeks, and the maw (parts of an offering given to a kohen), their firstborn animals are put out to pasture until they become blemished, and they put upon them the stringencies of kohanim and the stringencies of yisra’elim.

Vav: A woman who did not wait three months after her husband (divorced her or died), married, and gave birth, and it’s not known whether it was a nine month old for the first or a seven month old for the second, and she has sons from the first and the second, they do chalitza (if the doubtful brother dies) but not yibum.  And so too he does chalitza and not yibum.  If he had brothers from the first and brothers from the second who aren’t from the same mother, he does chalitza or yibum, and them, one does chalitza and one does yibum.

Zayin: If one was a yisra’el and one was a kohen, he marries a woman fit for a kohen; does not become tame for the dead, and if he became tame he does not get lashes; he does not eat truma, and if he did he does not pay principal and chomesh; he does not get a portion from the threshing floor, and (if he did) he sells the truma and the money is his; he does not get a portion of the holy things of the Beit hamikdash; they do not give them holy foods; they do not his things out of his hands, and he are patur from the shank bone, the cheeks, and the maw; his firstborn animals are put out to pasture until they become blemished; and they put upon him the stringencies of kohanim and the stringencies of yisra’elim.  If they (the possible fathers) were both kohanim, he grieves for them and they grieve for him, he does not become tame for them and they do not become tame for him, and he does not inherit from them but they inherit from him.  And he is patur on hitting and cursing either one.  He goes up for the watch of either one but he does not take a share.  If they were both in one watch, he takes one portion.

Perek Yud Bet

Aleph: The way of chalitza is with three judges, even if the three of them are lay people.  If she did chalitza on his (leather) shoe (which is done by loosening the shoe) if on a cloth shoe, her chalitza is pasul.  A sandal with a leather backing, it’s kosher, if it doesn’t have a leather backing it’s pasul.  (If the straps on the sandal were all) below the knee, her chalitza is kosher, if above the knee her chalitza is pasul.

Bet: If she did chalitza on a sandal which isn’t his, or a wooden sandal, or the left sandal on the right (foot) her chalitza is valid.  If she did chalitza on a (shoe which is too) big which he can walk with or a small (shoe) which covers most of his foot, her chalitza is valid.  If she did chalitza at night, her chalitza is valid, and Rabi Eliezer makes it pasul.  On the left (foot) her chalitza is pasul, and Rabi Eliezer makes it valid.

Gimmel: If she loosened and spat (she must spit before him) but didn’t declare (certain psukim) her chalitza is valid.  If she declared and spat but didn’t loosen her chalitza is pasul.  If she loosened and declared but didn’t spit, Rabi Eliezer says her chalitza is pasul.  Rabi Akiva says, her chalitza is valid.  Rabi Eliezer says, “like this it shall be done,” every thing which is an act hinders (the proper performance).  Rabi Akiva said to him, from there you bring a proof?  “Like this it shall be done to the man,” anything which is done to the man (loosening, but spitting is not done to him).

Daled: A deaf-dumb (man) who got chalitza or a deaf-dumb (woman) who did chalitza, and one who does chalitza to a minor, her chalitza is pasul.  A minor who did chalitza should do chalitza when she grows up, and if she didn’t do chalitza, her chalitza is pasul (and she must do it again).

Hay: If she did chalitza before two or three (people as a court) and one of them was found to be a relative or pasul, her chalitza is pasul.  Rabi Shimon and Rabi Yochanan the sandalmaker validate.  And once one did chalitza between him and her (with no court) in prison and the matter came before Rabbi Akiva and he validated it.

Vav: The way of chalitza, he and his yevama come to the court and they give advice logical for him as it says, “and the elders of the town call to him and speak to him.” And she says, “my yavam refuses to establish for his brother a name in Yisra’el, he did not agree to do yibum for me.”  And he says, “I didn’t want to take her.”  And they would say it in the holy words (the original text).  “And he yevama came before him in sight of the elders and she loosened his shoe from on his foot and spat before him,” the spit is seen to the judges.  “And she will answer and say, like this will be done to a man who will not build the house of his brother.”  They would read until there.  And when Rabi Hurkanos rehearsed under the terebinth (a tree) in Kfar Etam and finished the whole section, the adopted to finish the whole section.  “And his name will be called in Yisra’el the house of the loosened shoe,” it is the way for the judges (to call this out) but not for the students.  Rabi Yehuda says, it is the way for all of those who are standing there to say, the shoe is loosened, the shoe is loosened, the shoe is loosened.

Perek Yud Gimmel

Aleph: Beit Shamay says, only those who have been (only) engaged may refuse (a girl whose father died and she was contracted to engagement may, upon reaching adulthood, refuse the engagement).  And Beit Hillel says, engaged and married.  Beit Shamay says, a husband, but not a yavam (may be refused).  Beit Hillel says, a husband and a yavam.  Beit Shamay says, (she may only refuse) in his presence.  Beit Hillel says, in his presence or not in his presence.  Beit Shamay says, in court.  Beit Hillel says, in court or out of court.  Beit Hillel said to Beit Shamay, she may refuse when still a minor, even four or five times (different husbands).  Beit Shamay said to them, the girls of Yisra’el are not ownerless, rather she refuses and waits until she grows up and she’ll refuse and get married (to end the refusals, which happen without a get).

Bet: Which is a minor who has to refuse?  All who her mother and brother married with to her knowledge, if they married her without her knowledge, she does not need to refuse.  Rabi Chanina ben Antigonus says, any girl who can’t guard her kiddushin (money or a document given to her) does not need to refuse.  Rabi Eliezer says, the act of a minor is nothing rather (she is as) one who was seduced.  (If she was) a bat yisra’el (contracted to) a kohen she may not eat truma, and a bat kohen to a yisra’el, she may eat truma.

Gimmel: Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, any hindrance (on the girl’s rights) which is (stems) from the husband, it is as if she is his wife (those rights are hindered).  And any hindrance which is not from the husband, it is as if she is not his wife.

Daled: One who refuses a man, he is allowed to (marry) her relatives, she is allowed to his relatives, and he didn’t make her pasul from kehuna (marrying a kohen).  If he gave her a get, he is assur from her relatives, she is assur from his relatives, and he made her pasul from kehuna.  If he gave her a get and took her back, she refused, she married another, and she became a widow or divorced, she is permitted to return to him (the first husband).  If she refused and he took her back, he gave her a get, she married another, and she became a widow or divorced, she is forbidden to return to him.  This is the general rule, a get after refusal, she is forbidden to return to him, refusal after get, she is permitted to return to him.

Hay: One who refuses a man, marries another and he divorces her, (she was married) to another and she refused him, to another and he divorced her, and to another and she refused him, all who she exited from with a get she is assur to return to him, (all who she exited) with refusal, she is mutar to return to him.

Vav: One who divorces a woman and takes her back, she is mutar to the yavam (though she had been assur to him when she was divorced from his brother), and Rabi Eliezer forbids.  And so too one who divorces an orphan and takes her back, she is mutar to the yavam, and Rabi Eliezer forbids.  A minor whose father married her (to a man) and he divorced her, she is like an orphan (even) during the life of the father.  If he takes her back, everyone agrees she is assur to the yavam.

Zayin: Two brothers married to two minor, orphan sisters and the husband of one of them died, she is exempt because of (the prohibition against) the wife’s sister.  And so too with two deaf-dumb women.  (If the sisters were) and adult and a minor and the husband of the minor dies, the minor is exempt because of the sister of the wife.  If the husband of the adult dies, Rabi Eliezer says, they instruct the minor to refuse him.  Raban Gamliel says, if she refused him, she refused him, and is not, she’ll wait until she grows up ad then she’ll be exempt because of the sister of the wife.  Rabi Yehoshua says, woe to him on his wife and woe to him on the wife of his brother, he divorces his wife by a get (we don’t like having refusal done), and the wife of his brother with chalitza.

Chet: One who was married to two minor orphans and died, having sex with or doing chalitza for one of them exempts her rival, and so too with two deaf-dumb women.  A minor and a deaf-dumb woman (neither of which is a fully valid marriage), having sex with one of them does not exempt her rival.  A woman of sound senses (not deaf-dumb) and a deaf-dumb woman, having sex with the woman of sound senses exempts the deaf-dumb, but having sex with the deaf-dumb does not exempt the one of sound senses.  An adult and a minor, having sex with the adult exempts the minor, but having sex with the minor does not exempt the adult.

Tet: One who was married to two minor orphans and died, if the yavam had sex with the first one and returned and had sex with the second, or his brother had sex with the second, he didn’t make the first pasul (from marrying him), and so too with deaf-dumb women.  A minor and a deaf-dumb woman, if the yavam had sex with the minor and returned and had sex with the deaf-dumb, or his brother had sex with the deaf-dumb, he did not pasul the minor.  If the yavam had sex with the deaf-dumb and returned and had sex with the minor or his brother had sex with the minor, he made the deaf-dumb pasul.

Yud: A woman of sound senses and a deaf-dumb woman, if the yavam had sex with the woman of sound senses and returned and had sex with the deaf-dumb, or his brother had sex with the deaf-dumb, he did not pasul the woman of sound sense.  If the yavam had sex with the deaf-dumb and returned and had sex with the one of sound senses, or his brother had sex with the one of sound senses, he made the deaf-dumb pasul.

Yud Aleph: An adult and a minor, if the yavam had sex with the adult and returned and had sex with the minor, or his brother had sex with the minor, he did not pasul the adult.  If the yavam had sex with the minor and returned and had sex with the adult, or his brother had sex with the adult, he made the minor pasul.  Rabi Elazar says, they instruct the minor to refuse him.

Yud Bet: A minor yavam who has sex with a minor yevama, they grow up together (before he divorces her).  If he has sex with an adult yevama, she (waits for him to) grow up.  A yevama who said within thirty days (of marriage), he did not have sex with me, they force him to do chalitza for her (we believe her), after thirty days, they ask him to do chalitza for her (they assume that they have had sex).  And if he admits, even after twelve months, they force him to do chalitza for her.

Yud Gimmel: One who vows (against deriving) pleasure from her yavam, (if she made the vow) when her husband was alive (and therefore she did not see this vow as conflicting with the mitzva of yibum), they force him to do chalitza for her, (if) after her husband’s death, they ask him to do chalitza for her.  And if she intended for such, even if (it was) when her husband was alive, they ask him to do chalitza for her.

Perek Yud Daled

Aleph: A deaf-dumb who married a woman of sound senses and a man of sound senses who married a deaf-dumb, if he wants, he exits, and if he wants, he keeps, for just as he (the deaf-dumb) marries with signs, so too he can remove with signs.  A man of sound senses who married a woman of sound senses and she became a deaf dumb, if he wants he may exit, and if he wants he may keep.  If she became mentally infirm, he may not exit.  If he became a deaf-dumb or mentally infirm, he may never send her away.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri said, why can a woman who became a deaf-dumb be removed, but a man who became deaf-dumb may not remove?  They said to him, a man divorcing is not the same as a woman divorcing, for she is removed willingly or unwillingly, and he only sends away willingly.

Bet: Rabi Yochanan ben Gudgeda testified about a deaf-dumb woman whose father married her (off) that she may exit based on a get.  They said to him, also this one is like the ones like her (the case you brought is like the one in the previous mishna, and the opinion is against yours).

Gimmel: Two deaf-dumb brothers married to two deaf-dumb sisters, or to two sisters of sound senses, or to two sisters one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses.  Or two deaf-dumb sister married to two brothers of sound senses, or to two deaf-dumb brothers, or to two brothers one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses, behold these are patur from chalitza and from yibum.  And if they were unrelated, they may marry (by yibum) and if they want to remove, they remove (by get after yibum).

Daled: Two brothers one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses married to two sisters of sound senses, a deaf-dumb the husband of a woman of sound senses, what does the man of sound senses, husband of a woman with sound senses do?  She is exempt because of the sister of the wife.  The man of sound senses, husband of a woman with sound senses dies, what does the deaf-dumb husband of the woman with sound senses do?  He exits from his wife with a get and the wife of his brother is assur forever (to anyone, for he should do chalitza for her, but cannot).

Hay: Two brothers of sound senses married to two sisters, one deaf-dumb and one a woman of sound senses, the man of sound senses married to the deaf-dumb died, what does the man of sound senses married to the woman of sound senses do?  She is exempt because of the sister of his wife.  The man of sound senses, husband of the woman of sound senses dies, what does the man of sound senses, husband of the deaf-dumb do?  He exits his wife with a get the wife of his brother with chalitza.

Vav: Two brothers, one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses married to two sisters, one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses.  The deaf-dumb husband of the deaf-dumb died, what should the one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses do?  She is exempt because of the sister of his wife.  The one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses dies.  What should the deaf-dumb husband of the deaf-dumb do?  He exits his wife with a get and the wife of his brother is assur forever.

Zayin: Two brothers, one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses married to two unrelated women of sound senses.  The deaf-dumb husband of the one of sound senses died, what should the one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses do?  He either does chalitza or yibum.  The one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses dies.  What should the deaf-dumb husband of the one of sound senses do?  He marries and never removes.

Chet: Two brothers of sound senses married to two unrelated women, one of sound senses and one deaf-dumb.  The one of sound senses husband of the deaf-dumb died, what should the one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses do?  He marries, and if he wants to exit he can.  The one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses dies.  What should the one deaf-dumb husband of the deaf-dumb do?  He does either chalitza or yibum.

Tet: Two brothers, one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses married to two unrelated women one deaf-dumb and one of sound senses.  The deaf-dumb husband of the deaf-dumb died, what should the one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses do?  He marries, and if he wants to exit he can.  The one of sound senses husband of the one of sound senses dies.  What should the deaf-dumb husband of the deaf-dumb do?  He marries and never removes.

Perek Tet Vav

Aleph: A woman who went overseas with her husband and there is peace between him and her and peace in the world, and she comes and says, my husband died, she’ll marry.  (If she says,) my husband died (and had no children) she gets yibum.  If there is peace between him and her but war in the world, or there is discord between him and her but peace in the world, and she comes and says, my husband died, she is not believed.  Rabi Yehuda says, she is never believed unless she comes crying and with torn clothing.  They said to him, either way she may marry.

Bet: Beit Hillel says, we did not hear (a ruling that we trust the woman) except when she comes from the harvest in that country (so it is verifiable) and it is like a case which happened (something plausible).  Beit Shamay said to them, whether she comes from the harvest, the olives, the grapes, or another country, the Chachamim did not speak of harvest, but rather a happening (which happened while he was out harvesting, but is not necessarily a direct consequence thereof).  Beit Hillel returned and taught like Beit Shamay.

Gimmel: Beit Shamay says, she may get married and takes her ktuba.  Beit Hillel says, she may marry but not take her ktuba.  Beit Shamay said to them, you allowed the strict (risk of an) inappropriate relationship, but you won’t allow the lenient money?  Beit Hillel said to them, we found that the brothers do not enter the inheritance (divide up her husband’s inheritance) based on her words.  Beit Shamay said to them, and don’t we learn from the scroll of her ktuba that he wrote for her, that if she marries another she takes what is written for her.  And Beit Hillel returned and taught like Beit Shamay.

Daled: All are believed to testify for her (that her husband died) except for her mother-in-law, her mother-in-law’s daughter, her rival, her sister in law, and the daughter of her husband.  What is the difference between get and death (for these may testify that he gave her a get)?  For the writing (the document) proves (that they are telling the truth.  One witness says, he died, and she married, and (then) one witness said, he didn’t die, behold she doesn’t exit.  One witness says, he died, and two witnesses said, she didn’t die, even though she married, she exits.  Two said, he died, and one says, he didn’t die, even if she didn’t marry, she may marry.

Hay: One woman said, he died, and one woman said, he didn’t die (and they were both married to him).  The one who said, he died marries and takes her ktuba, and the one who said, he didn’t die doesn’t marry and doesn’t take her ktuba.  One says, he died, and one said he was killed, Rabi Meir says, since they are denying each other, they do not marry.  Rabi Yehuda and Rabi Shimon say, since they agree that he is no longer alive, they may marry.  A witness says, he died, and a witness said, he didn’t die, a wife says he died, and a wife says, he didn’t die, behold she may not marry.

Vav: A woman who went with her husband overseas and came back and says, my husband died, she marries and takes her ktuba, and her rival is assur (to marry, for her testimony is not valid for her rival).  If she (the rival) was a bat yisra’el (married) to a kohen, she may eat truma according to Rabi Tarfon.  Rabi Akiva says, this is not a way to remove her from transgression until she is assur to marry and assur to eat truma.

Zayin: She said, my husband died and then my father-in-law died, she marries and takes her ktuba, but her mother-in-law is assur (to marry).  If she was a bat yisra’el to a kohen, she may eat truma.  Rabi Akiva says, this is not a way to remove her from transgression until she is assur to marry and assur to eat truma.  He betrothed one of five women, he does not know which one he betrothed, and each one says, he betrothed me.  He gives a get to each and puts a ktuba between them (to split) and goes away, according to Rabi Tarfon.  Rabi Akiva says, this is not the way to remove her from transgression until he gives a get and a ktuba to each.  He stole from one of five, doesn’t know which one he stole from, and each one says, he stole from me.  He puts the stolen object between them and goes away, according to Rabi Tarfon.  Rabi Akiva says, this is not the way to remove him from transgression until he pays what he stole to each of them.

Chet: A woman who went with her husband overseas and her son with them, and she came and said, my husband died and then my son, she is believed (since she remained as she was when she left, having no need for yibum).  (If she says,) my son died and them my husband, she is not believed (because she made herself a need for yibum).  But they are suspicious of her words, and she does chalitza and not yibum.

Tet: (A woman went overseas with her husband, came back, and said,) it was given to me (I gave birth to) a son overseas, and she said, my son died and then my husband died, she is believed.  (She said,) my husband died and then my son died, she isn’t believed.  And they are suspicious of her words, and she does chalitza bit not yibum.

Yud: (A woman went overseas with her husband, came back, and said,) it was given to me a yavam (brother-in-law on the husband’s side) overseas, my husband died and then my yavam died, (or) my yavam (died) and then my husband, she is believed.  If she, her husband, and her yavam went overseas, and she said, my husband died and then my yavam, my yavam and then my husband, she is not believed, for a woman is not believed to say, my yavam died such that she will get married, and (we do) not (believe her when she says) my sister died such that she will enter into his(her sister’s husband’s) house.  And a man is not believed to say, my brother died, such that he will do yibum for his wife, and not (if he says), my wife died, such that he may marry her sister.

Perek Tet Zayin

Aleph: A woman whose husband and rival went overseas, and they told her, your husband died, she may not marry or get yibum, until she knows if her rival is pregnant (if she is, she may marry but not do yibum, and if she is not, she must do yibum and may not marry).  If she has a mother-in-law, she does not suspect (that her mother-in-law gave birth overseas and now she has someone with whom to do yibum).  If her mother-in-law left full (pregnant), she does suspect.  Rabi Yehoshua says, she does not suspect.

Bet: Two yevamot (married to two brothers who had no other brothers), one says, my husband died, and one says, my husband died, they may not marry because of the other one’s husband (for he may be alive and need to do yibum).  If one has witnesses and one doesn’t have witnesses, the one who has witnesses is assur, and the one who doesn’t have witnesses is mutar (to marry others).  If one has sons and one doesn’t have sons, the one who has sons is mutar (for she doesn’t need yibum), and the one who doesn’t have sons is assur.  If they got yibum (from other brothers who are alive) and the yevamim die (leaving no living brothers), that are prohibited from marrying.  Rabi Elazar says, since they were allowed to the yevamim, they are allowed to everyone (since they did yibum, we assumed their husbands were in fact dead).

Gimmel: One only testifies (that someone died when they saw their) face with the nose, even if there are signs (like height or size) on his body and his clothes (for it may be someone else).  They only testify once (they saw) his soul depart, even if they saw him cut (apart), crucified, or being eaten by an animal.  They only testify (about having seen a person dead) up to three days (after death, because after that it looks different).  Rabi Yehuda ben Bava says, not all people, places, and times are the same (in the rate of change of appearance).

Daled: If he fell into water, whether it (the water) has (a visible) end (in all directions) or it has not end, his wife is assur (from marrying, for he may have gotten out).  Rabi Meir said, once there was one who fell into a large pit and came up after three days.  Rabi Yossi says, once a blind person went to immerse in a cave and his guide went after him, and they were there long enough for their souls to depart (they were assumed drowned) and they (allowed to) marry their wives.  And there was another case in Asya (a place) with one they lowered into the sea, and all that was raised into their hands was his leg, the Chachamim said, from the knee up (his wife) may marry (it was assumed fatal so he would not have gotten out of the sea).  From the knee down, she may not marry.

Hay: Even if he heard woman say, so-and-so died, it is enough (that the man may go testify that he died).  Rabi Yehuda says, even if he heard from children saying, behold we are going to eulogize and bury so-and-so.  Whether he intends (to testify by saying this) or doesn’t intend.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bava says, for a yisra’el, until he intends, for a goy, if he intends, his testimony isn’t testimony.

Vav: One may testify (even if they only saw) by the light of a candle and by the light of the moon, and they may marry even based on an unsourced voice (the one testifying does not know who said that so-and-so died, but heard it).  There was a case of one who stood on top of a mountain and said, so-and-so the son of so-and-so from such-and-such a place died.  They went (to the mountain) and didn’t find anyone there, but they married his wife.  And there was another case in Tzalmon with one who said, I so-and-so the son of so-and-so was bitten by a snake and behold I am dying, and they went and didn’t recognize hi, but they married his wife.

Zayin: Rabi Akiva said, when I went down to Neharda’a to make a leap year I found Nechemia a man of the house of Dli, and he said to me, I heard that they do not marry a woman in Israel based on one witness, except for Rabi Yehuda ben Bava.  I said to him, these words are correct.  He said to me, tell them in my name, you know that the country is overrun with troops (so the man could not travel to testify) I received from the elder Raban Gamliel that you marry a woman based on one witness.  And when I came and related the words before Raban Gamliel he was happy for my words and said, I found a friend for Rabi Yehuda ben Bava.  During the conversation Raban Gamliel remembered that people were killed in Tel Arza, and the elder Raban Gamliel married their wives based on one witness, and they established to marry based on one witness.  And they established to marry (based on) a witness from the saying of another witness, from a slave, from a woman, and from a maidservant.  Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Yehoshua say, we do not marry a woman based on one witness.  Rabi Akiva says, not based on a woman, based on a slave, based on a maidservant, or based on relatives.  They said to him, there was a case where some levi’im went to Tzo’ar the city of dates  and one of them got sick on the way, they brought him to an inn, and on their way back they said to the innkeeper, where is our friend?  She said to them, he died and I buried him, and they married his wife.  They said to him, and shouldn’t a kohenet be (trusted) like the innkeeper?  He said to them, when the innkeeper is believed, the innkeeper brought out his staff, his bag, and the safer torah which was in his hands.

Mesechet Ketubot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: A virgin is married on Wednesday and a widow on Thursday, for the courts are open twice a week in cities, on Monday and Thursday, for if he had a claim about virginity he could go to court early.

Bet: A virgin, her ktuba is two hundred (zuz, owed to her if the husband dies or they get divorced) and a widow is a maneh (one hundred).  A virgin widow and one divorced or chalutza from engagement, their ktuba is two hundred, and they may have a claim about virginity.  A convert, captive, or maidservant who was redeemed, converted, or freed, less than three years and one day old, their ktuba is two hundred and they have a claim about virginity.

Gimmel: An adult (man) who has sex with a minor, a minor (boy) who has sex with an adult, and one who was hit (penetrated) with wood, their ktuba is two hundred according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, one who was hit with wood her ktuba is a maneh.

Daled: A virgin widow, divorcee, or chalutza from marriage, her ktuba is a maneh, and there is no claim about virginity.  A convert, a captive, or maidservant who was redeemed, converted, or freed, who was more than three years and one day old, her ktuba is a maneh and they don’t have a claim about virginity.

Hay: One who eats by his father-in-law in Judea (before the wedding it was customary to eat by the father-in-law and be alone with his fiancée such that he would learn to love her) without witnesses, he cannot claim a claim about virginity because he was alone with her.  Whether the widow is a (bat) yisra’el or a widow is a (bat) kohen, her ktuba is a maneh.  The court for (issues pertaining specifically to) the kohanim would collect for a virgin four hundred zuz and the Chachamim did not prevent them.

Vav: One who married a woman and did not find her to be a virgin, after I was betrothed I was raped (so I deserve my ktuba), and your field was flooded (she gives a parable meaning it happens that you were unlucky).  And that one (the husband) says, not so, it was before I betrothed you, and my taking was taking in error.  Raban Gamliel and Rabi Eliezer say, she is believed.  Rabi Yehoshua says, we do not live from her mouth (we don’t trust her), rather, behold she is presumed to have had sex before she got engaged, and she misled him, (and we believe this) until she brings proof for her words.

Zayin: She says, I was struck with wood, and he said, not so, rather you were trodden (slept with) by a man.  Raban Gamliel and Rabi Eliezer say, she is believed.  Rabi Yehoshua says, we do not live from her mouth, rather, behold she is presumed to have had sex with a man until she brings proof for her words.

Chet: They saw her (a single woman) talking to one in the shuk (alone and secluded) and they said to her, what is the nature of this man?  (She says) so-and-so is a kohen.  Raban Gamliel and Rabi Eliezer say, she is believed.  Rabi Yehoshua says, we do not live from her mouth (we don’t trust her), rather, behold she is presumed to have had sex with a natin or mamzer (making her invalid) until she brings proof for her words.

Tet: She was pregnant, and they said to her, what is the nature of the fetus?  (She says) it is from so-and-so and he is a kohen.  Raban Gamliel and Rabi Eliezer say, she is believed.  Rabi Yehoshua says, we do not live from her mouth (we don’t trust her), rather, behold she is presumed to be pregnant from a natin or mamzer until she brings proof for her words.

Yud: Rabi Yossi said, there was a case with a girl who went to draw water from the spring and she was raped, Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri said, if (having sex with) a majority of them men of the city (does not prevent one from) marrying a kohen, behold she may marry a kohen.

Perek Bet

Aleph: A woman who became a widow or divorced she says, I married as a virgin (though she does not have the ktuba to prove it), and he (the husband who divorced her) says, not so, I married you as a widow.  If there are witnesses that she went out with a hinuma (a type of veil) and with an uncovered head (a certain hairdo, both of which are characteristics of virgins getting married) her ktuba is two hundred.  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, even if they handed out parched grain (a custom in his community at the wedding of a virgin).

Bet: And Rabi Yehoshua admits (to Raban Gamliel, despite rulings in cases in the previous perek) by one who says to his friend, this field was your father’s and I bought it from him, that he is believed for the mouth that made it assur (by saying it was originally his father’s) was the mouth that made it mutar (by saying I bought it, if he were lying, he could have made a better lie).  And if there are witnesses that it is his (the other man’s) father’s, and (then) he says, I bought it from him, he is not believed.

Gimmel: Witnesses (called to testify about a document they signed) who said, this is our handwriting, but we were forced, we were minors we were pasul, behold they are believed.  And if there are witnesses that it is their handwriting, or they handwriting came out (was verified) from another place, they are not believed.

Daled: One says, this is my handwriting and this is my friend’s handwriting and one says, this is my handwriting and this is my friend’s handwriting, they are believed.  One says, this is my handwriting and one says, this is my handwriting, another needs to combine with them according to Rabi.  Chachamim say, they do not need another to combine with them, rather one is believed to say, this is my handwriting.

Hay: A woman who said, I was the wife of a man and I am divorced, she is believed, for the mouth with made assur is the mouth which made patur.  And if there are witnesses that she was the wife of a man, and she says, I am divorced, we do not believe her.  If she said, I was taken captive and I am pure (was not raped in captivity), she is believed.  If there are witnesses that she was taken captive and she says, I am pure, she is not believed.  And if after she married the witnesses come, behold she does not exit.

Vav: Two women who were taken captive, one says, I was taken captive and am pure, and one says, I was taken captive and a pure, they are not believed (for each woman is also in effect testifying that the other was taken captive).  When they testify about each other, behold they are believed.

Zayin: And so too two men, one says, I am a kohen, and one says, I am a kohen, they are not believed (for they testify only about themselves, so there is only one witness).  When they testify about each other, they are believed.

Chet: Rabi Yehuda says, they do not elevate to kehuna based on one (witness).  Rabi Elazar said, when?  In a place where there are objectors (to his kehuna we need two witnesses), but in a place where there are no objectors, we raise hit to kehuna based on one witness.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabi Shimon the son of the sgan, we raise to kehuna based on one witness.

Tet: A woman who was imprisoned by non-Jews, if (she was imprisoned) because of money, she is mutar to her husband, for capital (cases), she is assur to her husband (for she might sleep with someone who promises to save her).  A city conquered by siege, any kohenet who was in it (the city) is pasul.  And if they have witnesses (that she was not raped), even a slave, even a maidservant, behold these are believed.  And a person is not believed about himself.  Rabi Zecharia the son of the butcher says, (if a man swears) by the Beit Hamikdash, her (my wife’s) hand did not move from my hand from when the non-Jews entered Yerushalayim until they left.  They said to him, a person does not testify about himself.

Yud: And these are believed to testify when they are adults about something they saw while minors.  A person is trusted to sat, this is my father’s handwriting, this is the handwriting of my Rabbi, this is the handwriting of my brother, I remember when so-and-so went out with a hinuma and her head bare (signs she was a virgin when married), so-and-so left the house of learning to immerse (in order) to eat truma (and therefore is a kohen), he would take a share (of truma) with us from the threshing floor, this place is a Beit Hapras (a tame area where a grave was ploughed over), and up until here we would come on Shabbat.  But a person is not believed to say, so-and-so had a path (through another’s field) here, or so-and-so had a ma’amad and a misped (standing and bemoaning, two parts of a funeral procession) here.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: These are young women who have a fine (for raping, for only virgins incur a fine), one who has sex with a mamzeret, a netina, a kutit, a convert, (a woman who was) a captive, or a maidservant who was redeemed, converted, or freed (the past three cases) less than three years and one day old.  One who has sex with his sister, his father’s sister, his mother’s sister, his wife’s sister, his brother’s wife, his father’s brother’s wife, and a nidda, they have a fine, even though they get karet, (for) they do not have (a punishment of) death by the court.

Bet: And these don’t have a fine, one who has sex with a convert, a (woman who was a) captive, or a maidservant who was redeemed, converted, or freed, (and all these) more than three years and one day old.  Rabi Yehuda says, a captive who was redeemed, she retains her purity even though she was an adult.  One who has sex with his daughter, his daughter’s daughter, his son’s daughter, his wife’s daughter, her (his wife’s) son’s daughter, her daughter’s daughter, they have no fine, since they make him chayav by his life, for his death is by the court.  And all who are chayav by their lives do not pay money, as it says, “and if there is no disaster (fatality) he shall be punished.”

Gimmel: A young girl who was betrothed and divorced, Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, she has no fine.  Rabi Akiva says, she has a fine, and her fine is hers (not her fathers).

Daled: A seducer gives three things (payments) and the rapist four, the seducer gives (restitution for), embarrassment, stigma, and fine, and the rapist adds on it for he pays distress.  What is the difference between a rapist and a seducer?  The rapist pays distress and the seducer does not pay distress, the rapist pays immediately and the seducer pays when he exits (the marriage, for may marry the woman he seduces), and a rapist drinks from his clay pot (he must marry the woman forever) and the seducer, if he wants to exit, he exits.

Hay: How does he drink from his clay pot (meaning even if it gets disgusting)?  Even if she is lame, even if she is blind, and even if she has boils (he must marry her forever).  If some sort of inappropriate relationship was found, or if she is not fit to have sex with a yisra’el, he is not allowed to keep her, as it says, “and for him she will be a wife,” a wife fit for him.

Vav: An orphan who was betrothed and then divorced, Rabi Elazar says, one who entices is patur, but the rapist is chayav.

Zayin: What is embarrassment?  All is upon the embarrassed and embarrasser.  Stigma?  We see her as if she were a maidservant being sold, how much she was worth, And how much she is worth (now).  The fine is equal in all people.  Anything which has a fixed amount from the torah is equal for everyone.

Chet: Everywhere where there is a sale (a father selling his daughter as a maidservant), there is no fine, and everywhere where there is a fine, there is no sale.  A minor girl who has a sale but not fine and a young woman has a fine but no sale.  A full-grown woman has no sale and no knas.

Tet: One who says, I seduced the daughter of such and such pays embarrassment and stigma based on himself  (his own admission), but he does not pay the fine.  One who says, I stole and slaughtered or sold, pays the principle based on himself and does not pay kefel restitution or the four or five restitutions.  My ox killed so-and-so or so-and-so’s ox, behold he pays based on himself.  My ox killed so-and-so’s slave, behold he does not pay because of himself (since what he pays is only a fine).  This is the general rule, all who pay more than what they damaged do not pay based on themselves.

Perek Daled

Aleph: A young woman who was seduced, her (payments for) embarrassment, stigma, and fine are for her father, and for distress is her catch.  Is she stood in judgment (sued) before the father died, behold they are the father’s.  If the father died, behold they are the brothers’ (as inheritance).  If she didn’t manage to sue before the father died, they are hers.  If she sued before she became an adult, they are the father’s.  If the father died, they are the brothers’.  If she didn’t manage to sue before she became an adult, they are hers.  Rabi Shimon says, if she didn’t manage to collect (the monies owed) before her father died, behold they are hers.  The work of her hands and things she finds, even if she did not collect (money for these things which belong to her father in life), and her father died, they belong to her brothers (the inheritors).

Bet: One who betroths his daughter (to a man), she got divorced, she was betrothed, and she became a widow, her ktuba is his (her father’s).  If he married her, she got divorced, married, and became a widow, her ktuba is hers.  Rabi Yehuda says, the first (ktuba she got from the divorce) is the father’s.  They said to him, from when she married her father has no right in her.

Gimmel: A convert whose daughter converted with her, and she had sex in the way of a whore, behold she (dies) by strangulation (even if she was betrothed and would normally get stoning), and she has neither the opening of her father’s house (from where she is led if she is stoned) or the hundred sela (normally paid to a woman’s father if her husband falsely denies her virginity).  If she was conceived not in kdusha (when her mother was not Jewish) and was born in kdusha (her mother converted during the pregnancy), behold, she is with stoning.  And she has neither the opening of her father’s house nor the hundred sela.  If her conception and birth was in kdusha, behold she is like a bat yisra’el for all things.  If she has a father, but she does not have the opening of her father’s house (as in if her father is homeless) or she has the opening of her father’s house but no father (if he died but she lives in the house), behold she is by stoning, it is not said, “the opening of her father’s house” except as a commandment (and not a prerequisite).

Daled: A father has a right with (regard to) his daughter’s betrothal by money, document, and sex, and has a right with her findings, the work of her hands, and annulling her vows.  He accepts her get (for her) but does not benefit (from melog property of hers) in her life (but he inherits it if she dies).  If she married, the husband is greater than him in that he benefits in her life, is chayav for her sustenance, her ransom, and her burial.  Rabi Yehuda says, even the poorest in yisra’el shall not do less (at her funeral) than two flutes and a wailing woman.

Hay: She is always in the authority of the father until she enters into the authority of her husband with marriage.  If the father handed her over to the messengers of the husband, behold she is under the authority of the husband.  If the father went with the messengers of the husband, or messengers of the father went with the messengers of the husband, behold she is under the authority of the father.  If the messengers of the father handed her over to the messengers of the husband, behold she is under the authority of the husband.

Vav: The father is not chayav in the nourishment of his daughter.  This is a midrash which Rabi Elazar ben Azarya expounded before the Chachamim in Kerem Beyavne, “the sons will inherit and the daughters will be (given stipends to be) nourished,” (talking about what is given after the father dies), just as the sons do not inherit after the death of the father, so too the daughter doesn’t get nourishment until after the death of their father.

Zayin: If he didn’t write her a ktuba, a virgin collects two hundred and a widow a maneh, because it is a condition of the court.  If he wrote for her a field worth a maneh instead of two hundred zuz and didn’t write for her all property which I have are responsible (for filling in the amount) of your ktuba, he is chayav, for it is a condition of the court.

Chet: If he didn’t write her, if you are taken captive I will ransom you and return you to me as my wife, and by a kohenet, I will return you to your town (for she is assur to a kohen), he’s chayav, for it is a condition of the court.

Tet: If she was taken captive, he is chayav to redeem her.  And if he says, here is her get and her ktuba let her ransom herself, he does not have the right.  If she was struck (with illness) he must help her recover.  If he said, here is her get and her ktuba, let her heal herself, he has the right.

Yud: If he didn’t write for her, male children you will have by me will inherit your ktuba in addition to what they share with their brothers (from other women), he’s chayav (to fulfill this condition) because it’s a condition of the court.

Yud Aleph: (If he writes) female children which you will have from me will live in my house and be nourished from my property until they are married to men, he is chayav, for it is a condition of the court.

Yud Bet: (If he wrote) you will sit in my house and be nourished from my property all the days you are a widow in my house, he’s chayav, for it is a condition of the court.  The people of Yerushalayim would write like this.  The people of the Galil would write like the people of Yerushalayim.  The people of Yehuda would write, (she would live in the house) until the heirs give her her ktuba.  That way, if the heirs want, they can give her her ktuba and dismiss her.

Perek Hay

Aleph: Even though they said that a virgin collects two hundred and a widow collects a maneh, if he wants to add even one hundred maneh, he may add.  If she was divorced whether from betrothal or marriage, she collects everything.  Rabi Elazar ben Azaria says, from marriage, she collects it all, from betrothal a virgin collects two hundred and a widow a maneh, for he only wrote it for her in order to marry her.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he wants (to write less) he writes a bill for two hundred and she writes, I received a maneh from you (even though he didn’t pay, she is forgoing one maneh), and for a widow, (we writes) a maneh and she writes, I received from you fifty zuz.  Rabi Meir says, anyone who reduces from two hundred for a virgin or a maneh for a widow, this is whorish intercourse.

Bet: They give a virgin twelve months from when her husband requested (engaged) her to provide (clothes and jewelry for the wedding) for herself.  And just as they give to the woman, so too they give for the man to provide (a wedding reception and the like) for himself.  And for a widow (for she already has clothes and jewelry) thirty days.  If the time came and they didn’t marry, she eats from his (e supports her) and from truma (if he is a kohen).  Rabi Tarfon says, he may give her all truma (though in marriage, when she is unclean he must give her chulin).  Rabi Akiva says, half chulin half truma (as in marriage).

Gimmel: A yavam (one who is doing yibum) does not feed (allow a woman to eat) truma (if he is a kohen).  If she did six months with her husband and six months with her yavam (if her husband died in the year from engagement to marriage), even all of them with her husband except one day with the yavam or all of them with the yavam except one day with the husband, she may not eat truma.  This (including the cases at the end of the previous mishna) is the first (early) mishna, a court after them said, a woman does not eat truma until she enters under the chupa (marriage canopy).

Daled: One who makes the work of his wife’s hands hekdesh, behold she makes and eats (from her profits, for it is not her husband’s right to make her work hekdesh).  The excess (for she owes him a certain quantity each year in exchange for maintenance, but if he doesn’t provide her with a living stipend, she keeps the surplus), Rabi Meir says (if the husband in this case makes the surplus hekdesh), it is hekdesh.  Rabi Yochanan the sandal maker says, it is chulin (for her use).

Hay: These are the works a woman does for her husband, she grind, bakes, launders, cooks, nurses her child, makes his bed, and works in wool.  If she brings in (to the marriage) one maidservant, she doesn’t grind, bake, or launder.  If two (maidservants), she doesn’t cook or nurse her son (in addition to the tasks she does not do if she brings in one).  Three, she does not make his bed or work in wool.  Four, she sits on a soft cushion (and is a woman of leisure).  Rabi Eliezer says, even if she brings in one hundred maidservants, he may force her to work in wool, for idleness leads to looseness.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, also one who vows against his wife doing work, he exits and gives her her ktuba, for idleness leads to insanity.

Vav: One who vows (against) his wife (meaning) having sex (with her), Beit Shamay says, two weeks (after which the husband must divorce her and pay her ktuba).  Beit Hillel says one week.  Students go out to learn torah without permission (of their wives) for thirty days.  Laborers, one week.  Conjugal rights (which a husband owes his wife) from the torah are, men of leisure every day, laborers twice a week, donkey drivers once a week, camel drivers once every thirty days, sailors once every six months, according to Rabi Eliezer.

Zayin: One who rebel against her husband (by refusing to have sex with him), they reduce her ktuba seven dinars each week.  Rabi Yehuda says, seven tarpeiks (half a dinar) each week.  How much does her reduce?  Until according to her ktuba (the entire worth).  Rabi Yossi says, he may go and reduce forever, for perhaps an inheritance will fall to her from some other place, and he will collect from there.  And so to one who rebels against his wife, they add to his ktuba three dinars a week.  Rabi Yehuda says, three tarpeiks.

Chet: One who provide for his wife using a third party may not reduce for her from two kabin of wheat (a week) or four kabin of barley.  Rabi Yossi said, he doesn’t grant her (twice the amount of) barley, only Rabi Yishma’el, for he lived close to Edom (where the barley was of inferior quality).  And he (in addition)gives her half a kav of beans, half a log of oil, a kav of dried figs or (the weight of) a maneh or pressed figs, and if he doesn’t have, he provides her produce from another place (of another variety).  And he gives her abed, mattress, and a mat.  And he gives her a cap for he head, a belt for her waist, shoes from festival to festival, and clothes of (a worth of) fifty zuz a year.  And one does not give her new in the days of the sun  (summer) or worn out in the days of rain (winter), rather he gives her clothes of fifty zuz in the winter and she wears the worn out ones in the summer, and the worn out ones are hers (to keep even when she gets new ones).

Tet: He gives her a ma’ah of silver for her needs, and she eats with him (at least) from Shabbat night to Shabbat night.  And what does she produce for him?  The weight of five sela of warp (longitudinal threads she must weave) in Yehuda, which are ten sela in the Galil (where a sela weighs half as much).  Or a weight of ten sela of woof (latitudinal threads which are thicker) in Yehuda, which are twenty sela in the Galil.  But if she was nursing, they would reduce the work of her hands an add to her maintenance.  What is this talking about?  The poor of Yisra’el, but in those who are honored (rich) all of her work and stipends) go according to his honor (her status is increased as his is).

Perek Vav

Aleph: The findings of a woman and the work of her hands is for her husband.  Her inheritance (which she inherits after they are married) he eats the fruits (benefits) when she is alive.  (Payments she gets for) her embarrassment and lost work (when someone injures her) are hers.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says, when they (the injuries) are hidden two parts (thirds of the payments) are for her, and one part is for him.  And when they are exposed, two parts are for him and one part for her.  His part, he takes immediately, and hers, land is purchased with them and he eats the fruit.

Bet: One who (wants to) provide money for his son-in-law (as a dowry), and his son-in-law died (so his daughter needs yibum), the Chachamim said, he can say (to the yavam), I wanted to give to your brother (his original son-in-law), but to you I don’t want to give.

Gimmel: If she (the wife) agreed to bring him (the husband, as a dowry) one thousand dinars, he provides accordingly (writes the amount of property in the ktuba of) fifteen maneh (fifteen hundred dinar, or one and a half times what she brings because he benefits from what she brings).  And opposite an appraisal (of objects she brings into marriage at the time of marriage, when it was customary for appraisers to add a fifth) he provides (the principal) less a fifth.  If it is appraised at a maneh (at some other time), and worth a maneh, he only has a maneh.  If it was appraised at a maneh, she brings (money of) thirty-one sela and one dinar (one hundred twenty-five dinars).  If at four hundred, she brings five hundred dinar.  What the husband provides, he provides less a fifth.

Daled: If she agreed to bring in money, a sela of silver (four dinars) is made (in his writing of the ktuba) six dinars.  The groom accepts upon himself ten dinars for (money for her) chest (of perfumes and cosmetics) for each maneh (she brings in to the marriage).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, everything is according to the custom of the place.

Hay: One who marries off his daughter simply (without specifying how much he will give towards the wedding) may not do less than fifty zuz.  If he (the father) stipulated to marry her unclothed (i.e. not giving her money for a dress) the husband may not say, when I will bring her into my home, I will cover her with my clothing, but clothes her when she is still in her father’s house.  And so too one who marries an orphan, he may not give her less than fifty zuz.  If he has (money) in his pocket, he supports her based on her honor.

Vav: An orphan whose mother or brother married her off with her knowledge, and they wrote for her (stipulations for a dowry of) one hundred, or fifty zuz, she can when she grows older take out from their hands what was fit to be given to her.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he (the father) married off his first daughter, it should be given to the second (who is married after the father’s death) as was given to the first.  And Chachamim say, sometimes a man is poor and becomes rich, and sometimes or is rich and becomes, rather they evaluate the property and give it to her.

Zayin: One who deposits money for his daughter (by a trustee) and she says, I trust my husband for me, the trustee does what he was assigned (to do with what was) in his hands (to follow the father and not the daughter) according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, and if she has nothing but a field and she wants to sell it, behold it is sold from now.  What is this talking about?  In an adult, but with a minor, the act of a minor is nothing.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who makes a vow (against) his wife benefiting from him (or his property) if it is under thirty days, he establishes a guardian, more than this (if she does not agree to have the guardian) he exits (the marriage) and gives her her ktuba.  Rabi Yehuda says, by a (woman married to a) yisra’el, one month he stays (and established a guardian and may remain married) but two (months, meaning any more than one month) he exits and gives her ktuba, and by a kohenet, with two he may stay (because he may not remarry her after he divorces her, so we give him extra time to find a way out), and the third, he exits and gives her ktuba.

Bet: One who vows (that) his wife will not taste one of all the types of produce will exit and give her ktuba.  Rabi Yehuda says, by a yisra’el, one day he stays, two he exits and gives her ktuba, and by a kohenet, two (days) he stays, three he exits and gives her ktuba.

Gimmel: One who vows his wife will not make (herself) up with one of all the kinds (of make-up) will exit and give her ktuba.  Rabi Yossi says in poor women, (he exits when) he did not give a time limit, in rich women, (if the vow is still effective after) thirty days.

Daled: One who vows his wife will not go to her father’s house, when he is with her in the city (and she visits often), one month he stays, two he exits and gives her ktuba.  And when he (the father) is (living) in another city, one festival he stays, three, he exits and gives her ktuba.

Hay: One who vows his wife will not go to a house of mourning or a wedding, he exits and gives her ktuba, because he closes before her (for since she does not console or rejoice with others, they will not come to her).  And if he claimed, it is for a different reason, he has the right.  If he said to her (I will annul the vow) if you say to so-and-so what you told me or what I told you (either of which may be degrading) or you fill (a vessel with water) and pour on the trash (to appear foolish), he exits and gives her ktuba.

Vav: And these exit without their ktuba, one who transgresses the law of Moshe or a Jewish woman.  What is the law of Moshe?  She feeds him what is not me’usar, she sleeps with him while a nidda, she does not separate challa for him, and she swears but does not fulfill.  And what is the law of a Jewish woman?  She goes out with her head bare, she spins in the shuk (behaves inappropriately while doing business), and speaks with everyone.  Abba Shaul says, also one who curses his parents to his face.  Rabi Tarfon says, also a loudmouth.  What is a loudmouth?  When she speaks in her house and her neighbors hear her voice.

Zayin: One who betroths a woman on the condition that there are no vows (of hers that he allows to be binding) on her, and it is found that she has vows on her, she is not betrothed.  If he married her simply (without any further condition) and vows were found on her, she exits without her ktuba.  (If he betroths her) on condition that she has no blemishes, and blemishes were found on her, she is not betrothed.  If he married her simply and blemishes were found on her, she exits without her ktuba.  All blemishes which invalidate by kohanim invalidate by women.

Chet: If there were blemishes on her and she was still in her father’s house, the father needs to prove that these blemishes came about after she was betrothed, and it is (as if) his field was flooded (it was his bad luck).  If she entered the domain of the husband, the husband must prove that before she was betrothed she had these blemishes, and his acquiring (her) was a mistaken acquisition, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, what is this talking about?  In blemishes which are hidden, but with exposed blemishes, he cannot claim (that he was mistaken in taking her).  And if there is a bathhouse in that city, even hidden blemishes he cannot claim about, for he may check her through her relatives (before taking her).

Tet: A man (upon) whom blemishes came about (and the wife wants a get), they do not force him to exit.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, what is this talking about?  In small blemishes, but in large blemishes, they force him to exits (if she wants to).

Yud: And these we force to exit, one afflicted with leprosy, one with a certain disgusting nasal growth, one who collects dog excrement (for tanning hides), one who mines copper (whose skin is affected), and a tanner (for he smells), whether they had it before they married or the came about after they married.  And about all of them Rabbi Meir said, even if he stipulated with her (that she could accept these) she can say, I thought I could accept (these defects) but now I can’t accept.  Chachamim say, (when he had them before marriage) she must accept (even) against her (current) will except one who is afflicted with leprosy, for she weakens him (sexual relations are bad for him, and therefore we do not let her stay married to him).  There was a case in Tzidon with a tanner who died and he had a brother who was a tanner, the Chachamim said, she (the wife) may say (to the brother who needs to do yibum or chalitza for her), I could accept your brother, but you I cannot accept (and therefore he must do yibum).

Perek Chet

Aleph: A woman to whom property fell (though inheritance) before she was betrothed, Beit Shamay and Beit Hillel agree that she may sell it or give it away and it stands (her husband has no claim in it and cannot stop her).  If they fell to her after she was betrothed, Beit Shamay says, she may sell it, and Beit Hillel says, she may not sell it.  And both agree that if she sold it or gave it away, it stands.  Rabi Yehuda said, they said before Raban Gamliel since he merited (to have) the woman doesn’t he merit the property?  He said to them, we are embarrassed (unsure a ruling like this) on the new (property which she gets while married) and you want us to roll it (the ruling) onto the old (property which she got before marriage).  If they fell to her after she married, both agree that if she sold it or gave it away, the husband may take it from the hand of the takers.  If (she got the property) before she married, and (then) she married, Raban Gamliel says, if she sold it or gave it away, it stands.  Rabi Chanina ben Akavia said, they said before Raban Gamliel since he merited the woman doesn’t he merit the property?  He said to them, we are embarrassed on the new and you want us to roll it onto the old.

Bet: Rabi Shimon separates between (certain) properties and (certain other) properties, property which is known to the husband she may not sell, and if she sold it or gave it away, it is invalid.  (Properties) which aren’t known to the husband, she may not sell, and if she sold it or gave it away, it stands.

Gimmel: Money fell to her, land should be purchased with it and he eats the fruit (benefits from it).  Fruit which is detached from the land (which fell to her), land should be bought with them and he eats the fruits.  Those connected to the ground, Rabi Meir says, they evaluate how much it (the land) is worth with the fruits, and how much it is worth without the fruit, and the excess, land should be purchased with it and he eats the fruit.  And the Chachamim say, those connected to the land are his, and those separated from it are hers, and land should be bought with them and he eats the fruit.

Daled: Rabi Shimon says, a place (case) where he is more powerful when marrying her (he benefits from the property) he is less powerful when divorcing her, and a place where he is less powerful when marrying her (he does not benefit from the property) he is more powerful when divorcing her.  (For example) fruits attached to the ground, when he marries her are his, and when he divorces her are hers (for the property came into the marriage through her) and those separated from the ground (with which land was bought) when he marries her are hers and when he divorces her are his (since her receives the benefits of this property, and the detached fruits were benefits arising during marriage).

Hay: Old slaves and maidservants fell to her, they should be sold and land should be purchased with it, and he eats the fruits.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, they should not be sold, for they are the pride of the father’s house (they have gotten old with the father).  If old olive (trees) and vines fell to her, they should be sold for wood and land should be bought with it, and he eats the fruits.  Rabi Yehuda says, they should not be sold, for they are the pride of the father’s house (they are prized crops).  One who spends money on the property of his wife, if he spent a lot and ate a little or (spent) a little and ate a lot, what he spent he spent, and what he ate he ate.  If he spent but did not eat, he swears how much he spent and takes (that much).

Vav: One who is waiting for her brother in law to whom property fell (she inherited property), Beit Hillel and Beit Shamay agree that she sells it or gives it away and it stands.  If shed died, what should they do with her ktuba (the value promised to her if her husband dies) and the property which comes in and goes out with her (her nichsei melog, things which were hers throughout marriage, but the husband receives the benefit from)?  Beit Shamay says, the heirs of the husband (who died) split with the heirs of the father (her father).  Beit Hillel says, the property (nichsei tzon barzel, which the wife brings into the marriage, but the husband owns and is responsible for) is for them (both parties), the ktuba belongs to the heirs of the husband, and the property which comes in and out with her belongs to the heirs of the father.

Zayin: If his (the yavam’s) brother (her husband) left money, land should be bought with it, and he (the yavam) eats the fruit.  (If the brother left) fruits separated from the land, land should be bought with it and he eats the fruit.  If they are attached to the ground, Rabi Meir said, they assess how much the (the lands) are worth with the fruit and how much they are worth without the fruit and the excess, they should buy land with it and he eats the fruit.  And the Chachamim say, fruit connected to the ground is his and those separated from the ground, whoever comes first merits them, if he (the yavam) came first he merited, if she came first, land should be bought with it and he benefits.  If he married her, behold she is like his wife in all things except that her ktuba will be on the property of her first husband (if she gets her ktuba, it comes from the property of her first husband).

Chet: He (the yavam) may not say to her, behold your ktuba is resting on the table (the amount of your ktuba is yours and I am selling the rest of your first husband’s property), rather all (of the dead brother’s) property is responsible for her ktuba (the yavam may not sell it).  And so too a man may not say to his wife, behold your ktuba is resting on the table, rather all of his property is responsible for her ktuba.  If he (the yavam) divorced her, she only has (gets) her ktuba.  If he took her back, behold she is like all women, but she only gets her first ktuba (from her first husband).

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who writes for his wife (as a condition for marriage), I have no claim or rights in your property, behold he eats the fruits in her lifetime (for we assume he did not intend to void this right) and if she dies he inherits her (for he only renounced rights during her life).  If so, why did he write for her, I have no claim or rights in your property?  So that if she sold it or gave it away it stands.  If he wrote for her, I have no claim or right to your property and your fruits, behold he does not eat fruits during her lifetime, and if she dies, he inherits her.  Rabi Yehuda says, he always eats the benefits of her fruits, unless he writes, I have no claim or rights in your property, your fruits, or the benefits of your fruits forever.  If he wrote her, I have no claim or rights in your property, your fruits, or the benefits of your fruits in your life and in your death, he does not eat the fruits in her life, and if she dies, he does not inherit her.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, if she died, I will inherit he, for he made a condition (against) what was written in the torah (for the torah writes that a husband inherits from a wife) and all who make a condition on the torah, his condition is invalid.

Bet: One who died, and left a wife, a creditor, and inheritors, and he had a deposit or loan in the hands of another, Rabi Tarfon says, it (the money) will be given to the weakest (poorest) of them.  Rabi Akiva said, we do not have compassion in judgment.  Rather, it is given to his inheritors, for all of them need a swear and the inheritors do not need a swear.

Gimmel: If he left fruit detached from the ground, whoever comes first merits it.  If a woman merited more than her ktuba or a creditor more than he was over, the leftover, Rabi Tarfon says, it will be given to the weakest (poorest) of them.  Rabi Akiva said, we do not have compassion in judgment.  Rather, it is given to his inheritors, for all of them need a swear and the inheritors do not need a swear.

Daled: One who sets his wife as a storeowner, or he appointed her a trustee (of his estate), behold this one can make her swear (that she is conducting business properly) whenever he wants.  Rabi Eliezer says, even on her spindle and on her dough (he may force her to swear honesty in spinning and cooking).

Hay: If he wrote for her, I have no vow or oath upon you (he may not impose either upon her) he cannot impose an oath, but he may impose an oath on her heirs (make them swear about financial matter dealing with her ktuba) and those who come with her permission (if she sold her ktuba).  I have no vow or oath upon you, your inheritors, or people who come with your permission, he may not impose an oat on her, on her heirs, or on people coming with her permission.  But his heirs may impose an oath on her, her heirs, and people coming with her permission.  I, my heirs, and people coming with my permission) have no vow or oath upon you, your inheritors, or people who come with your permission, he, his heirs, and those coming with his permission may not impose an oath on her, on her heirs, or on people coming with her permission.

Vav: If she went from her husband’s grave to her father’s house, or she returned to the house of her father in law and she was not made a trustee, the heirs may not impose an oath upon her.  And if she was made a trustee, the heirs may impose a swear on her for the future, but they do not impose a swear upon her about the past.

Zayin: One who impairs her ktuba (she admits that part was already paid) may not collect except by an oath.  If one witness testifies that she was paid, she only collects by an oath.  (If her claim will be paid) from the property of orphans, or from mortgaged property, and if he is not before her, she may only collect by oath.

Chet: What is a woman who impairs her ktuba?  Her ktuba was a thousand zuz, and he said to her, you got your ktuba, ad she says, I only got a maneh, she does not collect except by oath.  How does one witness testify that she collected?  Her ktuba was a thousand zuz and he said, you got it, she said, I didn’t get it, and then one witness testifies that she collected, she does not collect except by oath.  How from mortgaged property?  He sold his property to others, and she collects from the buyers she does not collect except by oath.  How from the property of orphans?  He died and left his things to orphans, and she collects from the orphans, she does not collect except by oath.  And how not before him?  He went overseas and she collects not before him, she does not collect except by oath.  Rabi Shimon says, whenever she claims her ktuba, the heirs make her swear, and if she does not claim her ktuba, the heirs may not make her swear (about her business dealings in life).

Tet: If she brings out a get but not a ktuba, she collects her ktuba (for the normal amount paid).  (If she brings) a ktuba but not a get and she says, I lost my get, and he (the husband) says, I lost my receipt (that I paid the ktuba), and so too a creditor who took out a bill of a loan but no a prozbul, behold these do not collect.  Raban Shimon Ben Gamliel says, from the time of danger (when people were afraid to keep religious documents because of persecution) and on, a woman collects her ktuba without a get and a creditor collects without a prozbul.  If she has two gittin and two ktubot, she collects two ktubot.  (If she has) two ktubot and one get, a ktuba and two gittin, or a ktuba, a get, and (witness of) his death, she only collects one ktuba, for one who divorces his wife and takes her back based on the first ktuba he takes her back.  A minor whose father married him (off) her (his wife’s) ktuba is valid for it was made for this (it took into account that he was a minor at the time, but would extend to when he was an adult).  A convert who converted with his wife, her ktuba is valid for based on this he kept her.

Perek Yud

Aleph: One who was married to two women and died, the first comes before the second (in collecting her ktuba) and the heirs of the first come before the heirs of the second (if the widows died and their heirs will collect their ktubot).  If he married the first, he died, and then he married the second and he died, the second and her heirs come before the heirs of the first.

Bet: One who was married to two women and they died, and then he died, and the orphans want their mothers’ ktubot, but there is only there (enough money for) the two ktubot (and there will be no more for inheritance) they split equally (as inheritance rather than ktubot).  If there was one dinar in excess, each one takes the ktuba of their mother.  If the orphans said, we raise (the value of) our father’s property by one dinar, they do not listen to them, rather they asses the property in court.

Gimmel: If there was prospective property (i.e. inheritance from the father’s father which would now fall to the orphans) are not like possessed (property).  Rabi Shimon says, even property which has a mortgage on it, it is nothing until there is property with a mortgage (of value) more than the two ktubot by one dinar.

Daled: One who was married to three women and died, and the ktuba of one is a maneh, of one is two hundred (zuz) and of one is three hundred, and there is only a maneh, they divide equally.  If there were two hundred, the one of a maneh takes fifty and the ones of two hundred and three hundred take three gold (each gold dinar is worth twenty five regular dinarim, so they each take seventy- five).  If there were three hundred, the one of the maneh takers fifty, of two hundred takes a maneh, and of three hundred, six gold.  And so too three who put it into a fund, if (the money) decreased or increased, they split it like this.

Hay: One who was married to four women and died, the first precedes the second, the second precedes the third, and the third precedes the fourth.  The first swears to the second (that she has not already collected part of her ktuba), the second to the third, the third to the fourth, and the fourth collects without an oath.  Ben Nanas says, and so because she is the last she benefits?  Also she does not collect except with an oath.  If they all went out (divorced) on one day, all who come before her friend even one hour merit (the right to collect first).  And thus they would write (on gittin) in Yerushalayim the time.  If they were all exiting at one time, and there is only one maneh there, they split it evenly.

Vav: One who was married to two women, sold his field, and the first wrote to the buyer, I have no claim or rights with you (she gives up the right to collect her ktuba from that property), the second (wife) may take out from the buyer, the first (may take) from the second (since she precedes her) and the buyer from the first (since she has no claim against him), and they return in circles until there is a compromise between them.  So too with a creditor, and so too with a woman creditor.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: A widow is maintained (given a stipend) from the (inherited) property of the orphans, the work of her hands if theirs, and they are not chayav to bury her.  Her heirs, who inherit her ktuba, are chayav to bury her.

Bet: A widow, whether from engagement (her husband died when they were engaged) or marriage, may sell (things from her husband’s estate to fund her maintenance or ktuba) without the (approval of the) court.  Rabi Shimon says, from marriage, she sells without the court, from engagement, she may not sell except with the court, because she does not get maintenance, and all who don’t have maintenance may not sell except with the court.

Gimmel: If she sold her ktuba or part of it, pledged her ktuba or part of it, or gave to someone else her ktuba or a part of it, she may not sell (property of her husband’s to finance) the rest except with the court.  And Chachamim say, she may sell even four or five times (and collect her ktuba in pieces), and sell for maintenance without the court and write (in the bill of sale), I sold for maintenance.  And a divorcee may only sell with the court.

Daled: A widow whose ktuba was worth two hundred (zuz), and she sold (property from her husband’s estate) worth a maneh for two hundred or worth two hundred for a maneh, she has received her ktuba (for in the first case she earned the full amount, and in the second case she took the full amount from the orphans).  If her ktuba was worth a maneh and she sold worth a maneh and a dinar for a maneh, her sale is invalid (for the orphans may claim she took one dinar too much from them), even if she says, I will return a dinar to them, it is invalid (for she would not be getting her full ktuba, the heirs can object).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, her sale always stands, until (her loss is so great that she doesn’t) leave there a field the size of nine kabim and a garden the size of half a kav, and according to Rabi Akiva a quarter (of a kav).  If her ktuba was four hundred zuz, and she sold to this one for a maneh, this one for a maneh, and the last one worth a maneh and a dinar, the (sale to) the last is invalid, and of all of them (the first three), their sale stands.

Hay: An assessment of judges who diminished by a sixth or increased by a sixth (a concept called ona’ah of selling for an unfair price), their sale is invalid.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, their sale is valid.  If so, why is the power of the court greater (that they can sell despite ona’ah)?  But if they made a letter of inspection (publicly declared the sale) even if they sold (property) worth a maneh for two hundred or worth two hundred for a maneh, their sale is valid.

Vav: One who refuses (an orphan girl who refuses a contracted marriage when she becomes an adult), a secondary (women who are assur due to a secondary, derabanan issur), and an aylonit (barren woman), she has no ktuba, no fruits (payment for what the husband gained from her nichsei tzon barzel), no maintenance, and no depreciation (payment for wear to nichsel melog).  And if from the outset he married her (knowing) she was an aylonit, she has a ktuba.  A widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalutza to a lay kohen, a mamzeret or netina to a yisra’el, or a bat yisra’el to a natin or a mamzer, she has a ktuba.

Perek Yud Bet

Aleph: One who marries a woman and she stipulated with him that he would maintain her daughter for five years, he is chayav to maintain her for five years.  If she married another, and she stipulated with him that he would maintain her daughter for five years, his is chayav to maintain her for five years, and the first may not say, when she comes to me I will maintain her, rather he sands her her maintenance to the place that her mother is.  And so too both of them may not say, behold, we will maintain her like one (together, splitting the costs), rather one maintains her and one gives her money of maintenance.

Bet: If she married, the husband gives her maintenance and the give her the money of maintenance.  If they (the mother’s husbands) died, the daughters are maintained from the free property (not anything which was sold but the husbands) and she (the mother) is maintained (even) from mortgaged property, because she is like a creditor.  The prudent ones would write (to the woman), on condition that I will maintain your daughter for five years as long as you are with me.

Gimmel: A widow who said, I do not want to move from the house of my husband (and forgo his property), the heirs may not say to herm go to your father’s house and we will maintain you, rather they maintain her in her husband’s house and they give her a place to live according to her honor (the respect due to her).  If she says, I don’t want to move from my father’s house, the heirs may say to her, if you ware by us, you have maintenance, but if you are not by us, you don’t have maintenance.  If she claimed (she wanted to be in her father’s house) because she is young and they are young (they are not her children, and are of similar age, so it might tarnish her reputation to live with them), they maintain her while she is in her father’s house.

Daled: The whole time she is in her father’s house, she may collect her ktuba for up to twenty-five years, for in twenty-five years she will do favors (give gifts financed by the heirs) corresponding to (the worth of) her ktuba, according to Rabi Meir who said it in the name of Raban Shimon ben Gamliel.  And the Chachamim say, as long as she is in her husband’s house, she may forever collect her ktuba, as long as she is in her father’s house, she may collect her ktuba for twenty-five years.  If she died, her heirs may call in her ktuba for twenty-five years.

Perek Yud Gimmel

Aleph: There were two judges of decrees in Yerushalayim, Admon and Chanan ben Avishalom.  Chanan says two things and Admon says seven (things which are disputed).  One who went overseas and his wife claims maintenance, Chanan says, she swears in the end (when she claims her ktuba) and she does not swear in the beginning (when she claims maintenance).  The sons of the kohanim gedolim disagree with him, and said, she swears in the beginning and the end.  Rabi Dosa Ben Harkinas said like their words.  Raban Yochanan ben Zakai said, Chanan said well, she does not swear except at the end.

Bet: One who went overseas, and one stood up (voluntarily) and supported his wife, Chanan says, he lost his money.  The sons of the kohanim gedolim disagreed with him and said, he swears how much he spent and takes it.  Rabi Dosa Ben Harkinas said like their words.  Raban Yochanan ben Zakai said, Chanan said well, he rested his money on the horn of a deer (meaning he placed it on something hard to catch back and therefore renounced it).

Gimmel: Admon says seven, one who died and left sons and daughters, when the property is great, the sons inherit and the daughters are maintained, when the property is little, the daughters are maintained and the sons frequent the openings (beg).  Admon says, because I am a male I lost?  Raban Gamliel says, I see the words (agree with the opinion) of Admon.

Daled: One who claims from his friends jugs of oil, and he admitted jars, Admon says, since he admitted to part of the claim, he must swear, and the Chachamim say, this is not an admission of the type of the claim.  Raban Gamliel says, I see the words of Admon.

Hay: One who stipulated (to give) money to his son-in-law, and he extended his leg (went bankrupt) she must sit (in her father’s house) until her hair gets white (if the groom does not agree to marry her without the dowry).  Admon says, she could say, if I stipulated upon myself, I would sit until my hair turns white, but now that my father stipulated for me, what should I do?  Either marry or divorce.  Raban Gamliel says, I see the words of Admon.

Vav: One who contests (the ownership of) a field, and he (the one making the claim) signed it (the bill of sale) as a witness (but claims that the field was stolen from him by the seller to the current resident of the field), he (the one who is claiming the field was originally his) may say, the second (who he is claiming from) is comfortable for me, and the first (who allegedly stole the field) is harder than him (so I am dealing with the current resident), and the Chachamim say, he lost his right.  If he made a sign (boundaries) for another (adjacent field which he sold, excluding the field he is currently claiming) he lost his right.

Zayin: One who went overseas and the path of his field (through other people’s fields) was lost, Admon says, he may go the shortest one (way he can find to cut through their fields even without permission), and the Chachamim say, he can buy a path for a hundred maneh, or let him fly in the air (the neighbors have a right to deny him passage).

Chet: One who brings out a bill of debt on his friend and the other one brings out (a bill stating that) he (the borrower) sold him (the lender) the field, Admon says, he can say, if I were in debt to you, you should have collected what is yours when you sold me the field (not pay but agree that my debt is forgiven).  Chachamim say, this one was prudent that he sold him the land, because he can take it as a pledge (the lender can now take the field back and for sure has the money).

Tet: Two who brought out bills of debt on each other, Admon says, (one can say) if I owed you, why did you borrow from me?  Chachamim say, each one collects his bill of debt.

Yud: There are three lands (regarding the topic of) marriage, Yehuda, Transjordan, and the Galil.  (A husband) may not compel (his wife) to move from town to town (which are in different lands) or from city to city, but in the same land (the husband may) move from town to town or city to city, but not from town to city or city to town.  He may take out from a bad dwelling to a good dwelling, but not from a good dwelling to a bad dwelling.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, not even from a bad dwelling to a good dwelling, for a good dwelling tests (the health, for she has to keep up the house).

Yud Aleph: All can bring (their family forcefully) to the land of Israel, but none may (force to) leave.  All may bring to Yerushalayim, but none may leave.  (Allowing to force their family applies) to men and women.  If he married a woman in Israel and divorced her in Israel, he gives her (for her ktuba) the money (currency) of Israel.  If he married a woman in Israel and divorced her in Cappadocia (a place, where the currency was worth more), he gives her the money of Israel.  If he married a woman in Cappadocia and divorced her in Israel, he gives her the money of Israel.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, he gives her from the money of Cappadocia.  If he married a woman in Cappadocia and divorced her in Cappadocia, he gives her the money of Cappadocia.

Mesechet Nedarim

Perek Aleph

Aleph:  All substitute words for vows (swears which declare an object to be like a forbidden object, removing the right to any benefit from the taker of the vow) are like vows, and (substitute words for) bans are like bans, oaths (swears which prohibit a certain action or thing) are like oaths, and nezirut is like nezirut.  One who says to his friend, I am vowed against you, I am separated from you, or I am distanced from you, for I will not eat of yours and I will not taste of yours, he’s assur.  I am excommunicated from you, Rabi Akiva was inclined to be stringent with this.  (If he said) like the vows of the wicked, he made a vow by nazir, korban (declaring an animal a korban), and oath.  Like the vows of the scrupulous, he said nothing (for the scrupulous do not take vows).  Like their (the scrupulous) donations, he made a vow by nazir and korban.

Bet: One who says to his friend, ‘konam’, ‘konach’, (or) ‘konas’, behold these are substitutes for korban.  ‘Cherek’, ‘cherech’, ‘cheref’, behold these are substitutes for cherem.  ‘Nazik’, ‘nazi’ach’, ‘paziach’, behold these are substitutes for nezirut.  ‘Shvuta’, ‘shkuka’, a vow by mota (mota is the substitute) these are substitutes for shvua.

Gimmel: One who says, not chulin I will not eat by you (your food will be as not chulin to me, or, your food will be as) not kosher, not allowed, tahor, tame, notar, or pigul, it’s assur. (If he says your food is) like imra (a lamb to be slaughtered), like sheds (which hold korbanot), like wood (for the mizbe’ach), like fires, like the mizbe’ach, like the sanctuary, like Yerushalayim, or if he made a vow by one of all of the tools of the mizbe’ach, even though he didn’t mention a korban, behold he vowed with a korban.  Rabi Yehuda says, one who said ‘Yerushalayim’ didn’t say anything.

Daled: One who says, korban, olah, chatat, toda, or shlamim that I won’t eat of yours, he’s assur, and Rabi Yehuda allows.  Hakorban, kekorban, korban that I will eat of yours, he’s assur.  Lakorban I will not eat of yours, Rabi Meir prohibits.  One who says to his friend, konam my mouth that speaks with you (he must use an object to prohibit, here using it to prohibit speaking to his friend), my hand doing with you, my foot walking with you, he’s assur.

Perek Bet

Aleph: And these are untying (unbinding) chulin that I shall eat of yours (your food shall be like chulin), like pork, like avoda zara, like perforated skins (of animals, which was involved in some practices of avoda zara), like nevelot, like trefot, like skatzim, like remasim, like Aaron’s challa (separated challa given to the kohanim), or like his (the kohanim’s) truma, it’s unbound (for these items are forbidden from the torah, which a person cannot make assur).  One who says to his wife, behold you are to me like my mother (whom I cannot have sex with) they open him an opening from another place (find him a loophole with some other wording), so that things as such (prohibiting his wife from sex) will not be treated with levity.  (If a person says) konam that I don’t sleep, that I don’t speak, that I don’t walk, and one who says to his wife, konam that I do not have sex with you, behold this is (bound by the pasuk), “and he shall not violate his word.”  An oath that he doesn’t sleep, that he doesn’t speak, that he doesn’t walk, he’s assur.

Bet: (If one says) korban I won’t eat of yours (based on the wording it does not affect what he does eat), korban I will eat of yours (which may be taken as an oath by the life of the korban), not a korban I won’t eat of yours (again, this does not affect what he eats), he’s mutar.  An oath that I won’t eat of yours, an oath that I will eat of yours (meaning in context let there be an oath upon me if I eat of yours), and not an oath that I won’t eat of yours (seen as a double negative), he’s assur.  This is a stringency in oaths (the latter cases) over vows (the prior cases).  And a stringency in vows over oaths how?  If he said, konam the sukka I am making (I will not do the mitzva of sukka), the lulav I am taking, the tfillin I am laying, in vows he is assur and in oaths he is mutar, for one may not take an oath to transgress a mitzva.

Gimmel: There is a vow in a vow, and there is no oath in an oath.  How?  If he said, behold I am a nazir if I eat, behold I am a nazir if I eat, and he ate, he is chayav on each one.  An oath that I will not eat, and oath that I will not eat, and he ate, he is only chayav one.

Daled: Unspecified vows are made stringent, and their explanation (if they are explained by the taker, their interpretation) is lenient.  How?  If he said, behold this is on me like salted meat, (or) like libation wine, if (he specified afterwards that) he vowed of heaven, it’s assur, if he vowed of avoda zara, mutar, and if unspecified assur.  Behold it is on me like cherem, if like cherem of heaven, assur, if like cherem of the kohanim (for this is generally used only for property already belonging to kohanim), patur, and if unspecified, assur.  Behold it is on me like ma’aser, if he vowed like ma’aser behema, assur, if of the threshing floor, mutar (for it is already permitted), and if unspecified, assur.  Behold it is on me like truma, if he vowed like truma of the chamber (money for the beit Hamikdash), assur, if like that of the threshing floor, mutar (for that is prohibited, and he cannot make his food prohibited like truma), if unspecified, assur, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, unspecified truma in Yehuda is assur, in the Galil, mutar, for the people of the Galil do not know of the truma of the chamber.  Unspecified charamim, in Yehuda are mutar and in the Galil assur, for the people of the Galil for not know of the cherem of the kohanim.

Hay: If he vowed with cherem and he said, I didn’t vow except with the net (cherem) of the sea; with korban and he said, I didn’t vow except with the offerings (korbanot) of the kings; behold my bones are korban (saying his friend could not benefit from him), and he says, I didn’t swear except with the bone I set aside to swear with it (he intended to make a misleading vow); and, konam my wife benefits from me, and he says I didn’t vow except with my first wife who I divorced, on all of these they do not ask them (to explain themselves).  And if they asked, they punish them and are stringent with them according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, they open them an opening (loophole) from somewhere else, and teach them so that they should not act with levity regarding vows.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Four vows the Chachamim untied, vows of urging, vows of exaggeration, vows in error, and vows which are forced.  Vows of urging, how?  One was selling an object, and said, konam that I don’t lower (the price below) a sela (four dinarim) for you, and that one says, konam I don’t raise for you above a shekel (two dinarim), they both want for three dinarim.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, also one who wants to vow for his friend that he will eat with him.  (the mishna teaches another law,) if he says, any vow I will swear is void, as long as he remembers it at the time of the vow.

Bet: Vows of exaggeration, he said, konam if I didn’t see on this path like (the number of) those exiting Egypt, if I didn’t see a snake (thick) as the beam of an olive press (neither of which is fathomably true). Vows in error, if I ate and if I drank, and he remembered that he ate and drank, if I eat and if I drink, and he forgot and ate and drank.  He said, konam my wife benefiting me, for she stole from my pocket, for she hit my son, and he found out that she didn’t hit and she didn’t steal.  He saw them eating (his) figs and said, behold they are upon you like korban, and he found (when he got closer and could recognize them) that they were his father and brother, and there were others with them, Beit Shamay says, they are mutar, and those with them are assur.  Beit Hillel says, both are mutar.

Gimmel: Vows which are forced, his friend made him vow he would eat by him, and he (the forced taker of the vow) got sick, or his son got sick, or a river hindered him, behold, there are vows which are forced.

Daled: One may vow to murderers, thieves, and tax collectors that it (some property) is truma, even if it isn’t truma, that it is of the house of the king, even though they are not of the house of the king.  Beit Shamay says, one may make any vow, except an oath (shvua).  Beit Hillel says, (one may vow) even with an oath. Beit Shamay says, he will not open (offer) to him a vow, and Beit Hillel says, he may even open for him.  Beit Shamay says, when he forces him to swear, and Beit Hillel says even when he doesn’t make him swear.  How?  They said to him, say, konam my wife benefits from me, and he said, konam my wife and children benefit from me, Beit Shamay says his wife is mutar and his children are assur, and Beit Hillel says both are mutar.

Hay: (If one says) behold these plants are korban if they aren’t knocked down (he says this on a windy day when he fears they will be knocked down), this cloak is korban if it doesn’t burn (when he fears it will burn), he must redeem (buy a korban for its value, for we do not feel this was a vow made in error).  Behold these plants are korban until they are knocked down, this cloak is korban until it burns, he doesn’t have to redeem them.

Vav: One who vows against (benefiting from) seafarers is mutar in land dwellers (even if they go sailing, if they do not normally do such, they are mutar).  From land dwellers, he is assur from seafarers, for seafarers are included in land dwellers, and not from one who goes from Ako to Yafo (a short journey) but one whose way is to sail (far distances away from land).

Zayin: One who swears against those who see the sun is assur even by the blind, for he didn’t have intention other than those who the sun sees (all people).

Chet: One who vows against the black headed (referring to black hair) is assur by the bald and the white haired, and is mutar by women and children, for one does not call black headed except for men.

Tet: One who vows against yilodim (referring to people who have been born) is mutar by the noladim (those who will be born in the future), from the noladim is assur from yilodim, Rabi Meir permits (the one who vows against noladim) also (to) yilodim.  Chachamim say, this one didn’t intend except for these whose way it is to give birth.

Yud: One who vows against those who rest on Shabbat is assur by a yisra’el and assur by a kuti.  From those who eat garlic (as a custom on Friday nights) is assur by a yisra’el and assur by a kuti.  From those who go up to Yerushalayim, is assur by a yisra’el and mutar by a kuti.

Yud Aleph: Konam that I do not benefit from the children of Noach is mutar by a yisra’el and assur by the nations of the world.  That I do not benefit from the offspring of Avraham, is assur by a yisra’el and mutar by the nations of the world.  That I do not benefit from a yisra’el, buys for more and sells for less (than market price, for he is not benefiting).  That yisra’elim do not benefit from me he buys for less and sells for more if they listen to him (will trade with him).  That I do not benefit from them and them from me, he benefits a non-Jew.  Konam that I do not benefit from the uncircumcised, he is mutar by the uncircumcised of yisra’el and assur by the circumcised of the nations, for uncircumcised is not used except for as a name for non-Jews, as it says, “for all the [other] nations are uncircumcised and all the house of yisra’el is uncircumcised in the heart,” and it says, “and this uncircumcised Philistine will be,” and, “lest the daughters of the Philistines be happy, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice.”  Rabi Elazar ben Azarya says, disgusted is the foreskin, for the wicked are disparaged for it, as it says, “for all the [other] nations are uncircumcised.”  Rabi Yishma’el says, (brit) mila is great (in importance), for thirteen covenants were sealed on it.  Rabi Yossi says, mila is great for pushes off the more stringent Shabbat.  Rabi Yehoshua ben Karcha says, mila is great for Moshe the tzaddik was not spared for it (for not performing it) for even an hour.  Rabi Nechemia says, mila is great for it pushes off divine afflictions (while one may not cut off tzara’at, if there is on a foreskin, one may still cut off the foreskin).  Rabi says, mila is great for all of the mitzvot which Avraham our father did, he was not called complete until he was circumcised, as it says, “walk yourself before me and be complete.”  Another thing, mila is great for were it not for it, Hashem would not have created His world, as it says, “so said Hashem, if it is not my covenant day and night, the laws of heavens and earth I would not have put.

Perek Daled

Aleph: There is nothing between one who is vowed against benefit from his friend and one who is vowed against food from him other than the treading of the foot (entering his property) and vessels in which food is not made.  One who is vowed against the food of his friend, may not borrow from him a fine sieve, a coarse sieve, a millstone, and an oven, but he may lend him a robe, ring, cloak, earrings, and anything with which they do not make food.  A place where they rent things like that (non-food vessels), it’s assur (for him to borrow them).

Bet: One who is vows against benefiting from his friend may pay his shekel (for the census), repay his debt, and return him a lost item.  In a place where they take money for such an act, the benefit (money he would normally get) shall fall to hekdesh.

Gimmel: And he may separate his truma and ma’asrot with his knowledge, and may offer for him the birds of zavin, the birds of zavot, the birds of a woman who gave birth, chata’ot, and ashamot, may teach him midrash, halachot, and agadot, but may not teach him the text, but he may teach his sons and daughters text.  He may maintain his wife and children, even though he (the one he vowed again) is chayav in their maintenance.  But he may not maintain his animals, whether tame or tahor (species).  Rabi Eliezer says, he may maintain the tame, but he may not maintain the tahor.  They said to him, what is the difference between tame and tahor?  He said to them, for the tahor, its soul if for heaven and its body is his, and the tam, its soul and its body is for heaven.  They said to him, even the tame its soul is for heaven and its body is his, for if he wants, he can sell it to non-Jews or feed it to dogs.

Daled: One who vowed against benefiting from his friend and comes in to visit him, he stands but does not sit.  And he may heal him a healing for his life (he may save his life) but not a healing for (the man to benefit by getting) money (when he is healed from a non life-threatening condition).  He may bathe with him in a large pool but not a small one (or his entering would cause the water to rise).  He may sleep with him in a bed.  Rabi Yehuda says, during the summer, but not in the winter, because he makes him benefit (by warming him).  And he may recline with him on a bed and eat with him on the table, but not from a serving tray (for he may leave the best portion), but he may eat with him from the serving plate which goes back (where the leftover food after all have eaten as much as they want goes back to the host).  He may not eat with him from the food bowl which is before the workers (for if he eats less, the other will get more), and he may not make a furrow together (connected, for he will be loosening the earth at the ends) according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, he may make it far from the other (not next to each other while working).

Hay: One who vowed against benefiting from his friend before shvi’it does not go down into his field and may not eat from the overhanging (outside of the field’s limits), but on shvi’it, he does not go down into his field, but he may eat from the overhanging.  If he vowed against food from him before shvi’it, he may go down into his field, but not eat the produce, and on shvi’it, he goes down and eats.

Vav: One who vowed against benefiting from his friend may not lend him and may not borrow from him, may not loan him and may not borrow from him, and may not sell to him and may not buy from him.  He said to him, lend me your cow, he said back, she isn’t free.  He said, konam my field that if I will ever plow with it, if his way was to plow, he’s assur, and all people are mutar (to plow his field with that cow), and if it isn’t his way to blow, he and all people are assur.

Zayin: One who vowed against benefiting from his friend and he has nothing to eat, he goes to the storekeeper and says, so-and-so is prevented by vow by benefiting me, and I don’t know what to do.  He (the shopkeeper) give him and comes and takes (money) from that one (the friend).  If he had to build his house, to put up his wall, to harvest his field, he goes to the workers and says, so-and-so is prevented by vow from me benefiting, and I don’t know what to do. They do with him, and they come and take money from the other.

Chet: They were walking on the road and he has nothing to eat, he may give the other as a gift, and that one is mutar in it.  If there is no other with them, he leaves it on a rock or on a fence and says, behold I relinquish this to anyone who wants it, and that one takes and eats, and Rabi Yossi forbids (this).

Perek Hay

Aleph: Partners (in owning a courtyard) who vowed against benefiting from each other are prohibited from entering the courtyard.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, each may enter his part.  And both of them are forbidden from setting up a millstone or oven there and from raising chickens there (things the other has the legal right to object to).  If one of them vowed against benefit from his friend, he may not enter the courtyard.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, he can say to him, I enter into mine, and I don’t enter into yours.  And they force the one who swears to sell his field.

Bet: If one from the shuk (a random other person) vowed against benefit from one of them, he may not enter the courtyard.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, he can say to him (the won he is vowed against) I am entering into your friend’s, I will not enter into yours.

Gimmel: One who vowed against pleasure from his friend and he has a rented bathhouse or olive press in the city, if he (the one who he vowed against) has ownership in them, he (the one who vowed) is assur (from deriving benefit from them).  If he doesn’t have ownership in them, he is mutar.  One who says to his friend, konam that I will enter your house and (konam) you field that I (may) buy, if he (the one who he vowed against) died or sold it (the house or the field) to another, he is mutar.  Konam to this house that I enter, to this field that I buy, if he died or sold it to another, assur.

Daled: (If one says to his friend) behold I am cherem upon you, the one who is vowed on is (the friend) assur (from deriving benefit of the maker of the statement).  Behold you are cherem upon me, assur.  Behold I am (cherem) one you and you on me, they are both assur.  And they are both mutar in things of the returnees from Bavel (infrastructure set up in that time to be used by all Jews), and assur in a thing of that city (since they both have rights in it).

Hay: And what is a thing of the returnees from Bavel?  For example the temple mount and its courtyards and a (certain) well in the middle of the road.  And what is something of that city?  For example, the open space (used for town meetings), the bathhouse, the shul, the aron kodesh (for the torahs), and the books.  And the one who writes (off) his part for the nasi (leader, this is a loophole for people who vow against benefit from others).  Rabi Yehuda says, whether he writes it to the nasi or to a layman.  What is the difference between writing to the nasi and writing to a layman?  That one who writes to the nasi does not need to merit it (unlike a layman, the nasi can acquire without making an act of acquisition).  Chachamim say, both need to merit, they only spoke of the nasi because of the present (the prevalent case in the present).  Rabi Yehuda says, the people of the Galil do not need to write, for their forefathers already wrote for them (that common property belongs to the nasi).

Vav: One who vowed against benefiting from his friend and has nothing to eat, he (the one vowed against) gives to another as a gift and that one is mutar in it.  There was a case with one in Beit Choron whose father was vowed against benefit from him, and (the son) he was marrying off his son, and he said to his friend, behold, the courtyard and the meal are given to you as a gift, and they aren’t before you except so that my father can come and eat a meal with us. He said to him, if they are mine, behold they are hekdesh for heaven.  He said to him, I didn’t give you mine such that you should make them hekdesh for heaven.  He said to him, you only gave me yours so that you and your father would eat and drink, and like one another, and there will be sin hung on his head (he will end up breaking his vow).  And when the thing came before the Chachamim they said, any gift which is not (intended as such) if he made it hekdesh, it isn’t hekdesh, it isn’t a gift.

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who vows against things that are cooked is permitted my things roasted and overcooked (based on the principle that we interpret vows based on common usage of the word).  If he said, konam in cooked food which I taste, he is prohibited from things made in a pot soft (with sauce) and allowed with thick, and he is allowed a soft-boiled egg and a harmutza gourd (a bitter gourd which is cooked in ashes).

Bet: One who vows against things which are made in a pot isn’t assur except by thing which are made in a boiling pot.  If he said, konam that which goes down into a pot that I will not taste, he is assur from all things cooked in a pot.

Gimmel: (If one declared himself assur) from pickled thing, he is only assur from pickled vegetables.  Pickled that I will not taste, he is assur in all things pickled.  From the over-boiled, he is only assur from the over-boiled of meat.  Over-boiled that I will not taste, he is assur from all things over-boiled.  From the roasted, he is only assur from roasted meat, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Roasted that I will not taste, he is assur from all things roasted.  From the salted, he is only assur from the salted fish.  Salted that I will not taste, he is assur by all things salted.

Daled: (If one declared himself assur from) fish, fishes which I taste, he is assur by them, whether big or small, whether salted or unsalted, whether raw or cooked, and is mutar in hashed tarit (a certain premade fish dish) and fish brine.  One who vowed against tzachana (a mixture of hashed fish) is assur by hashed tarit, and allowed by fish-brine and muryas (pickled fish liquid).  One who vowed against hashed tarit is assur by fish-brine and muryas.

Hay: One who vows against milk is permitted to whey, and Rabi Yossi forbids.  From whey, is permitted to milk.  Abba Shaul says, one who vows against cheese is assur in it, whether salted or unsalted.

Vav: One who vows against meat is permitted to broth and jelly (things stuck to the sides of the pot), and Rabi Yehuda forbids.  Rabi Yehuda says, there was a case where Rabi Tarfon forbade me from eggs which were cooked with it (meat).  They said to him, it is so.  When?  When he said, this meat is (forbidden) upon me, for one who vowed against a thing and it mixed with another, if there is enough to impart flavor, it’s assur.

Zayin: One who vows against wine is permitted to a cooked dish which has the flavor of wine.  If he said, konam this wine that I will not taste, and it fell into a cooked dish, if there is enough to impart flavor, behold it is assur.  One who vows against grapes is permitted to wine.  From olives, is permitted to oil.  If he said, konam olives and grapes that I will not taste, he is assur by them and that which goes out from them.

Chet: One who vows against dates is permitted by date honey.  From autumn grapes is permitted by autumn grape vinegar.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says, anything which the name of the outcome is called on it (with the name of the original) and one takes a vow against him is prohibited even from what comes out of it, and Chachamim permit.

Tet: One who vows against is permitted by apple wine.  From oil is permitted by sesame oil.  From honey is permitted by date honey.  From vinegar is permitted in the vinegar of autumn grapes.  From leeks is permitted by scallions.  From vegetables is permitted by wild vegetables, since they have an associate (supporting) name.

Yud: From cabbage is assur from asparagus, from asparagus is mutar by cabbage.  From grits is assur from pottage, and Rabi Yossi allows, from pottage is mutar by grits.  From pottage, he’s assur by garlic (which was put in the pottage) and Rabi Yossi allows, from garlic, he’s mutar by pottage.  From lentils, he is assur from ashishin (cakes made of boiled lentils and honey), and Rabi Yossi allows, from ashishin he is mutar by lentils.  Wheat, wheat that I do not taste, he is assur from them whether flour or bread.  Grits, grits, that I do not taste, he is assur by them, whether raw or cooked.  Rabi Yehuda says, konam grits or wheat that I do not taste, he is allowed to chew them raw.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who vows against herbs is mutar by gourds, and Rabi Akiva forbids.  They said to Rabi Akiva, and doesn’t a person say to his messenger, buy me herbs and he (the messenger) says, I didn’t find except gourds?  He said to this, it is indeed so.  Would he perhaps say to him, I didn’t find except legumes?  Rather gourds are included in herbs, and legumes are not included in herbs.  And he is assur by moist Egyptian bean and mutar by dry.

Bet: One who vows against grain is assur by dry Egyptian bean according to Rabi Akiva.  Chachamim say, he is only assur by the five types (of grain, wheat, barley, oat, spelt, and rye).  Rabi Meir says, one who vows against produce is only assur by the five types (of grain) but one who vows against grain is assur by all, and is mutar by the fruits of trees and vegetables.

Gimmel: One who vows against clothing is mutar by a sack, a curtain, and a blanket.  If he says, konam wool comes upon me, he is mutar to cover himself with wool shearings (which are unrefined).  (Konam) flax comes upon me, he is allowed to cover himself with flax stalks.  Rabi Yehuda says, all is according to the one who takes the vow, if one was laden (with objects to carry) and sweaty, his odor was strong, and he said, konam wool and linen come upon me, he is allowed to cover himself, and assur to roll them up behind him (to add them to his load, for that was seemingly the purpose of his vow).

Daled: One who vows against (entering) the house is allowed in the upper story (an addition on top of the roof, not actually part of the original structure) according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, the upper story is included in house.  One who vows against the upper structure is mutar by the house.

Hay: One who vows against the bed is mutar by a small couch according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, a small couch is included in bed.  One who vows against a small couch is mutar by a bed.  One who vows against a city may enter the city limits, and are assur by the extension of (a small area around) the city.  But one who vows against the house is assur from the doorframe in.

Vav: Konam these fruits on me, konam them on my mouth, konam them to my mouth, he is assur by things exchanged for them and their growth.  That I will not eat and I will not taste, he is mutar by things exchanged for them and their growth, in a thing (species) where the seed decomposes.  But in a thing where the seed does not decompose, even the growth of its growth is assur.

Zayin: One who says to his wife, konam the work of your hands on me, konam them on my mouth, konam them to my mouth, he is assur by things exchanged for them and their growth.  That I will not eat and I will not taste, he is mutar by things exchanged for them and their growth, in a thing where the seed decomposes.  But in a thing where the seed does not decompose, even the growth of its growth is assur.

Chet: (Konam) that you benefit from me until Pesach if you go to your father’s house before the festival, if she went before Pesach, she is assur from deriving benefit until Pesach.  After Pesach, he (is assur to give he benefit based on the pasuk), “and he shall not violate his word.”  That you will benefit from me until the festival if you go to your father’s house before Pesach, and she went before Pesach, she is assur from deriving benefit until the festival, and they is allowed to go after Pesach.

Perek Chet

Aleph: (If a person said,) konam wine that I taste today, he is only assur until it become dark.  (If he said) this week, he is assur the whole week and Shabbat (is counted with the week) which passed (meaning Shabbat is deemed the end of the week).  This month, he is assur the whole month, and Rosh Chodesh is for that which will come (counts as the beginning of a new month).  This year, he is assur the whole year, and Rosh Hashana is for that which will come.  This cycle-week (seven years, one yovel cycle), he is assur the whole cycle-week, and shvi’it is with the passed.  And if he said, one day, one week, one month, one year, one cycle-week he is assur from day to day (exactly that amount of time from the time he vowed).

Bet: Until Pesach, he is assur until it comes.  Until it (Pesach comes, he is chayav until it goes out.  Until before Pesach, Rabi Meir says, he’s assur until it comes.  Rabi Yossi says, he’s assur until it goes out.

Gimmel: Until harvest, until grape harvest, until olive harvest, he isn’t assur except until it comes.  This is the general rule, anything that its time is set and he said until it comes, he is assur until it comes, and if he said until it is, he is assur until it goes out.  Anything which its time isn’t set, whether he said until it is or until it comes he isn’t assur except for until it comes.

Daled: Until summer, until it is summer, (lasts) until the nation begins to bring in baskets (of figs from harvest).  Until summer passes, until people fold up their fig knives (signifying the end of the harvest).  Until the harvest, until the nation begins to harvest the harvest of wheat, but not the harvest of barley.  All goes according to the place of his vow.  If he was on a mountain (the vow goes according to) the mountain, and if in a valley, by the valley.

Hay: Until the rains, until there are rains, until the second revia (periods of rainfall) falls.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, until the time of the revai comes (even if rain does not fall).  Until the rains stop, until all of Nisan has been (passed) according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, until Pesach passes.  Konam wine that I will not taste this year, and the year was made a leap year, he is assur during the year and its leap year addition.  Until the beginning of Adar, until the beginning of the first Adar.  Until the end of Adar, until the end of the first Adar.  Rabi Yehuda says, konam wine that I will not taste until it is Pesach, he isn’t assur except until the night of Pesach, for he did not intend this (in a fashion) other that until the time that it is the way of people to drink wine.

Vav: He said, konam meat that I will not taste until it is the fast, he isn’t assur except  until the night of the fast, for he did not intend this other than until the time that it is the way of people to eat meat.  Rabi Yossi his (Rabi Yehuda’s) son says, konam garlic that I will not taste until it is Shabbat, he isn’t assur except until Shabbat night, for he didn’t intend this other than until the time that it is the way of people to eat garlic.

Zayin: One who says to his fried, konam that I will benefit from you if you don’t come and take for your children a kor of wheat and two barrels of wine, behold this one (the one vowed against) may nullify the vow of that (the one making the vow) without the agreement of a wise person and say to him you didn’t say anything except for my honor (my honor was your intention), and this (me not taking) is my honor.  And so too he may say to his friend, konam that you do not benefit from me if you do not come and give my children a kor of wheat and two barrels of wine.  Rabi Meir says, he is assur until he gives.  Chachamim say, also this one can nullify the vow of that one without the agreement of a wise person and say, behold I am as if I received.  They urged him (some person) to marry his sister’s daughter and he says, konam she ever benefits from me, and so too one who was divorcing his wife and said, konam my wife ever benefits from me, behold they are mutar to benefit from him, for he didn’t mean this except for the issue of marriage.  He was urging his friend to eat by him and (the one urged) said, konam I will come into your house, that I will taste a drop of cold water by you, his is mutar to enter his house and to drink cold water from him, for he didn’t intend this except for the issue of eating and drinking.

Perek Tet

Aleph: Rabi Eliezer says, we open for a person (a loophole in a vow) with the honor of his father and his mother (we let him go back by saying he would not have wished to impact them with his vow), and Chachamim prohibit.  Rabi Tzadok said, rather than opening for him with the honor of his father and his mother, we should open for him with the honor of the Omnipresent (Hashem).  If so, there are no vows (they could all be opened up).  And the Chachamim agree with Rabi Eliezer that in a thing that is between him and his father and his mother, that they open for him with honor of his father and his mother.

Bet: And furthermore Rabi Eliezer said, they can open for him with an arising circumstance (which had he known about he would not have vowed), and Chachamim prohibit.  How?  Konam that I don’t benefit from so-and-so, and he (so-and-so) became a scribe, or that he was going to marry off his son soon (and the taker of the vow would have liked to attend the wedding), and he said, if I know that he would become a scribe or was marrying off his son soon, I wouldn’t have vowed.  Konam this house that I will not enter, and it became a shul, he said, if I knew it was going to become a shul, I wouldn’t have vowed, Rabi Eliezer unbinds, and Chachamim forbid.

Gimmel: Rabi Meir says, there are things which are like arising circumstances, and they arte unlike arising circumstances, and Chachamim do not agree with him.  How?  He said, konam that I will not marry so-and-so for her father is bad, and they said to him, he died, or he repented. (Or) konam this house that I will not enter for the dog inside it is bad, or there is a snake in it, and they told him, the dog died or the snake was killed, behold this is like an arising circumstance (because he did not foresee them) and not like an arising circumstance (for there was an implied condition in his vow), and Chachamim do not agree with him (Rabi Akiva).

Daled: And furthermore Rabi Meir said, they open for him from what is written in the torah, and they say to him, if you know you were transgressing “you shall not take revenge,” “you shall not bear a grudge,” “you shall not hate your brother (fellow Jew) in your heart,” “and you should love your fellow as yourself,” or, “and your brother shall live with you,” (for if you vow against another person benefiting from you) perhaps he will become poor and you won’t be able to support him, and he said, if I had known that, I wouldn’t have vowed, behold this is unbound.

Hay: They open for a person with the ktuba of his wife.  There was a case with one who vowed against benefit from his wife, and he ktuba was four hundred dinarim, the case came before Rabi Akiva, and he made the man pay his wife the ktuba.  He said to him, Rabbi, my father left eight hundred dinarim and my brother took four hundred and I took four hundred, isn’t it enough for her that she will take two hundred and I will take two hundred?  Rabi Akiva said to him, even if you have to sell the hair on your head, you must give her her ktuba.  He said to him, if I had known it was such I wouldn’t have made a vow, and Rabi Akiva unbound him.

Vav: They open (a vow against some food) with Yom Tov and Shabbat (make the food mutar on them).  At first they would say, those days are mutar, and all the rest of the days (of the time of the vow) are assur, until Rabi Akiva came and taught that a vow which part of it was unbound, the whole thing is unbound.

Zayin: How?  He said, konam that I will not benefit from all of you, if he is unbound from one, he is unbound from all of them.  (If he said,) that I will not benefit from this one and that one (etc.) if he was unbound by the first, they are all unbound, if the last one is unbound, the last is unbound and they are all assur, if a middle one was unbound, him and down (in the chain) are unbound, and from him up is assur.  That I will not benefit from this a korban, and from that a korban, they need an exemption for each.

Chet: Konam wine that I taste, since wine if bad for the bowels.  They said to him, and isn’t old wine good for the bowels?  He was unbound from old wine, and he was unbound not only old wine, but from all wine.  Konam onion that I will not taste, for onion is bad for the heart.  They said to him, isn’t wild onion good for the heart?  He is unbound in wild onion, and not only in wild onion, rather in all onions.  There once was a case and Rabi Meir unbound him by all onions.

Tet: They open for a person with the honor of himself and the honor of his children.  (If one makes a vow to divorce his wife,) they say to him, if you knew that tomorrow, they would say about you, this is the custom of so-and-so, he divorces his wives (would you still divorce her?).  And on your daughters they would say, they are the daughters of divorcees, what was seen in the mothers of these in order to get divorced?  And he said, if I knew that, I would not have vowed, behold  he is unbound.

Yud: Konam that I will not marry so-and-so who is ugly, and behold she is beautiful, black (dark skinned) and behold she is white, short, and behold she is tall, he is allowed by her.  Not because she was ugly and become beautiful, black and became white, short and became tall, rather because the vow was wrong.  And there was a case who vowed against benefiting form the daughter of his sister, and they brought her into the house of Rabi Yishma’el and made her beautiful.  Rabi Yishma’el said to him, my son, did you vow against this one?  And he said, no, and Rabi Yishma’el unbound him.  At the same time, Rabi Yishma’el cried and said, the girls of yisra’el are beautiful, it is only that poverty makes them ugly.  When Rabi Yishma’el died, the daughters of yisra’el raised a lament and said, daughters of yisra’el cry over Rabi Yishma’el.  And so too it says about Shaul, “daughters of yisra’el cry over Shaul.”

Perek Yud

Aleph: An engaged woman, her father and her husband may annul her vows.  If the father annulled and the husband didn’t or the husband annulled and the father didn’t, it isn’t annulled, and there is no need to say (that is stands) if one of them upholds it.

Bet: If the father died, the right does not fall to the husband.  If the husband died, the right falls to the father.  In this the power of the father is greater than the power of the husband.  In another thing the power of the husband is greater than the power of the father, for the husband may annul from a bogeret (adult) and the father cannot annul from a bogeret.

Gimmel: If she vowed and she is engaged, she got divorced that day, engaged (again) that day, even a hundred times, her father and her last husband annul her vows.  This is the general rule, whoever has not gone out into her own authority (by becoming a bogeret or married) for even one hour, her husband and her last husband annul her vows.

Daled: The way of scholars, before his daughter leaves from him (his house) he tells her, all the vows you vowed in my house behold they are annulled.  And so too a husband until she enters his domain her, he says to her, all vows which you vowed before you enter my authority behold they are annulled, for when she enters into his authority, he cannot annul (her vows made prior to marriage).

Hay: A bogeret who waited twelve months and a widow thirty days (their respective periods of engagement), Rabi Eliezer says, since her husband is chayav in he maintenance, he may annul.  Chachamim say, the husband cannot annul until she enters into his domain.

Vav: One waiting for yibum whether for one yavam or two yevamim, Rabi Eliezer says, he (either yavam) may annul.  Rabi Yehoshua says, (if she is waiting) for one, but not for two.  Rabi Eliezer said, just as a woman who he acquired for himself he annuls her vows, a woman who heaven acquired for him he should not annul her vows?  Rabi Akiva said to him, no, if you say it by a woman who he acquired for himself, that no others have rights to her, would you say it by a woman who heaven acquired for him, and that there are others who have rights to her.  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, Akiva, your words are by two yevamim, what do you respond on one yavam?  He said to him, the yevama is not completely of the yavam’s the way an engaged (woman) is completely for her husband.

Zayin: One who says to his wife, all vows which you vow from now until I come from such-and-such a place are upstanding, he didn’t say anything.  Behold they are annulled, Rabi Eliezer says, they are annulled, and Chachamim say they are not annulled.  Rabi Eliezer said, if he annulled vows which come to be binding, can he not annul vows which have not come to be binding?  They said to him, behold he says, “he husband may uphold it or her husband may annul it,” that which can be confirmed, can be annulled, if it cannot become confirmed, it cannot be annulled.

Chet: Annulling of vows (can happen) the whole day.  There is in this (instruction) to be lenient and to be stringent.  How?  If she vowed on Shabbat night, he may annul Shabbat night and on Shabbat day until it darkens.  If she vowed while it was darkening, he may annul until it gets dark, for if it got dark and he didn’t annul, he cannot annul.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: And these are the vows which he may annul, things which have self-denial, if I wash, if I don’t wash, if I will wear jewelry, if I won’t wear jewelry.  Rabi Yossi said, these are not vows of self-denial.

Bet: And what are vows of self-denial?  If she said, konam the produce of the world upon me, behold he can annul this.  The produce of this country on me, he will bring for her from another country.  The produce of a (certain) storekeeper upon me, he cannot annul.  And if her support was only from him, behold this he may annul according to Rabi Yossi.

Gimmel: Konam that I do not benefit from the creations, he cannot annul, and she may benefit from leket, shichicha, and pe’ah.  Konam kohanim and levi’im benefit from me, they take against his will.  These kohanim and these levi’im benefit from me, other take.

Daled: Konam that I do not do for my father (my work is prohibited to him), and for your father, and for my brother, and for your brother, he cannot annul.  That I do not do for you, he doesn’t need to annul.  Rabi Akiva says, he annuls, lest she do more than what is fit for (owed to) him.  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri says, he annuls, perhaps he will divorce her and she will be forbidden to him (since her handiwork is already forbidden to him). 

Hay: If he wife vowed and he thought his daughter vowed, or his daughter vowed and he thought his wife vowed; she vowed by nazir and he thought she vowed by korban, or she vowed by korban and he thought she vowed by nazir; or she vowed against figs and he thought she vowed against grapes, or she vowed against grapes and he thought she vowed against figs, behold he must go back an annul (again).

Vav: If she said, konam these figs and grapes that I will not taste, if he upheld for figs, he upheld it all.  If he annulled for figs, it isn’t annulled until he annuls grapes also.  If she said, konam figs that I will not taste, and grapes that I will not taste, behold these are two vows.

Zayin: (If one does not revoke his wife’s vow, but later said,) I know that there are vows, but I don’t (didn’t) know (when the vow was taken) that there is annulment, he may annul.  I know that there is annulment, but I don’t know that this is a vow, Rabi Meir says, he may not annul, and Chachamim say, he annuls.

Chet: One who vowed against benefiting from his son-in-law, and he wants to give his daughter money, he says to her, behold this money is given to you as a gift, as long as your husband has no right in it, only what you give and take for your mouth.

Tet: “And the vow of a widow or divorcee (…) will be upheld upon her.”  How?  If she said, behold I am a nezira after thirty days, even if she married within thirty days, he cannot annul.  If she vowed and she is in the domain of the husband, he may annul for her.  How?  Behold I am a nezira after thirty days, even though she became a widow or divorcee, within the thirty, behold (if he husband annulled it) it is annulled.  If she vowed on that day, she divorced that day, and he returned her (to marriage) that day, he cannot annul.  This is the general rule, all who went out to their own authority for (even) one hour, he cannot annul.

Yud: Nine girls whose vows stand, a bogeret who is an orphan, a na’ara (young girl who became a bogeret (before the vow came to fruition) and she’s an orphan, a na’ara who didn’t become a bogeret who is an orphan, a bogeret whose father died, a na’ara become a bogeret and her father died, a na’ara who didn’t become a bogeret whose father died, a na’ara whose father died and since he died she became a bogeret, a bogeret and (even if) her father is alive, and a na’ara who becomes a bogeret and her father is alive.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one who marries off his daughter who is a minor and she became a widow or divorced, and she returned to him (he cannot annul her vows even though) she is still a na’ara.

Yud Aleph: Konam that I (a woman) do not benefit from my father, or from your father if I do for your mouth (work for you), (or) that I do not benefit from you if I do for the mouth or my father or the mouth of your father, behold this he may annul.  

Yud Bet: At first they would say, three woman exit (their marriages) and take their ktuba, the one who says I am tame to you (if she admits she is not fit to marry him), there is heaven between me and you (we cannot be together because Hashem has made this not work i.e. via impotence), I am removed from the Jews (by vow).  They returned saying, so that a woman does not place her eyes with one (lust after someone) and ruin her (marriage with her) husband.  Rather, one who says, I am tame to you must bring proof of her words, heaven is between me and you they plead (with her), and I am removed from the Jews, he may revoke his part (the part of the vow that forbids him), she may sleep with him, and she will be removed from the Jews.

Mesechet Nazir

Perek Aleph

Aleph: All substitutes for nezirut are like nezirut.  One who says, ehey (like eheye, I will be), behold this is a nazir.  Or, ehey nave, (he’s a nazir).  Nazik, nazi’ach, pazia’ch, behold he is a nazir.  Behold I am like this, behold I am curling (my hair), behold I am letting my hair grow, behold it is on me to grow my hair, behold these are a nazir.  Behold upon me are birds (a bird korban is brought by a nazir who becomes tame). Rabi Meir says, nazir.  Chachamim say, not a nazir.

Bet: Behold I am a nazir from the (grape) seeds, from the (grape) skins, from shaving, and from tuma, behold this is a nazir, and all the details of nezirut are upon him.  Behold I am like Shimshon (a biblical figure who was a nazir from birth), like the son of Manoach, like the husband of Dlila, like the one who uprooted the doors of Aza, like the one who the Plishtim gouged out his eyes (all referring to Shimshon), behold this is a Shimshon nazir.  What is the difference between an eternal nazir and a Shimshon nazir?  An eternal nazir, if his hair became heavy he may lighten it with a razor and bring three animals (an olah, chatat, and shlamim), and if he became tame he brings a korban for tuma (two birds for a chatat and olah and a lamb as an asham).  A Shimshon nazir if his hair gets heavy, he may not lighten it, and if he became tame he does not bring a korban tuma.

Gimmel: Unspecified nezirut (a vow in which he did not specify a time) is thirty days.  If he said, behold I am a nazir for one large, a nazir for one small, even (if he declared himself a nazir) from now until the end of the world (none of which actually specify time), he is a nazir for thirty days.  Behold I am a nazir and one day, behold I am a nazir and one hour, behold I am a nazir one and a half, behold he is a nazir for two (thirty day periods).  Behold I am a nazir thirty days and one hour, he is a nazir thirty-one days, that they do not make nezirut for hours.

Daled: Behold I am a nazir like the hair on my head, like the dust of the earth, or like the sand of the sea, behold he is a nazir forever, and he shaves once every thirty days (to signify the beginning of a new period of nezirut).  Rabi says, this one does not shave once every thirty days.  And who is it that shaves once every thirty days?  One who says, behold nezirut is upon me like the hair on my heads, like the dust of the earth, or like the sand of the sea.

Hay: Behold I am a nazir a houseful, or a basketful, they check him, if he said, one large I made a nazir, he is a nazir for thirty days.  If he said I made a nazir unspecified, they see the basket as if it were filled with mustard seed, and he is a nazir all his days.

Vav: I am a nazir from here to such-and-such a place, they evaluate how many days (the journey is) from here to such-and-such a place.  If it is less than thirty days, he is a nazir fro thirty days.  If not, he is a nazir like the number of days.

Zayin: Behold I am a nazir like the number of the days of the sun (one solar year) he counts his nezirut (thirty day periods) like the number of the days of the sun.  Rabi Yehuda said, there was a case, and when he completed (all of them) he died.

Perek Bet

Aleph: (If one said,) behold I am a nazir from dried figs and fig cake (which are not forbidden to a nazir), Beit Shamay says nazir, and Beit Hillel says not nazir.  Rabi Yehuda says, even when Beit Shamay said, they didn’t say except for one who says, behold they are upon me like a korban  (intends to use nazir in the sense korban is used in).

Bet: If he said, this cow said, I am a nezira if I stand (as if this is the reason the cow is crouching), this door said I am a nazir if I open (the reason the door is not opening), Beit Shamay he is a Nazir (if he manages to make the cow stand or door open), Beit Hillel says, he is not a nazir.  Rabi Yehuda said, also when Beit Shamay said, they didn’t say except when one says, behold this cow is upon me like a korban if it stands (he intended to forbid himself from the cow if he could not make it stand).

Gimmel: They mixed him a cup (of wine) and he said, behold I am a nazir from it, behold he is a nazir.  There was a case with a woman who was drunk, and they mixed her a cup, and she said, behold I am a nezira from it.  Chachamim said, she only intended to say, behold it is upon me like korban.

Daled: Behold I am a nazir on condition that I will drink wine and become tame for the dead, behold he is a nazir and is assur by all of them.  I know that there is such a thing as nezirut, but I didn’t know that a nazir is prohibited from wine, behold he is prohibited, and Rabi Shimon permits.  I know that a nazir is assur by wine but I thought that the Chachamim would unbind me for I can’t live without wine, or because I bury the dead, behold he is unbound, and Rabi Yehuda forbids.

Hay: Behold I am a nazir and the (korbanot offered with the) shaving of a nazir (at the end of his nezirut) are upon me (when some other nazir shaves).  And his friend heard him and said, and it is upon me to shave a nazir.  If they were shrewd, they would shave each other, and if not, they shave other nezirim.

Vav: Behold it is upon me to shave half a nazir, and his friend heard and said, and I (too) shaving half a nazir is upon me, this one shaves a whole nazir, and this one shaves a whole nazir according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, this one shaves half a nazir (pays for half of the korbanot) and this one pays half a nazir.

Zayin: Behold I am a nazir when I have a son, and a son was born to him, behold he is a nazir.  If a daughter, tumtum (person of indeterminate gender) or androgynous (person having characteristics of both genders) was born to him, he is not a nazir.  (If he said) when I see that I will have a child, even is a daughter, tumtum, or androgynous was born to him, behold he is a nazir.

Chet: If his wife miscarried, he is not a nazir.  Rabi Shimon says, he should say, if it was (destined to be) viable (were it not for the miscarriage), I am a nazir by obligation, and if not, I am an optional nazir.  If she gave birth again, behold he is a nazir.  Rabi Shimon says, he should say, if the first was viable, the first (nezirut) was obligatory and this is optional, and if not the first was optional and this is obligatory.

Tet: Behold I am a nazir and a nazir when I have a son, he began to count his and then he had a son, he completes his, and then counts for his son.  Behold I am a nazir when I have a son and a nazir (now), he started to count his and then a son was born to him, he lays his to the side and starts to count that of his son, and afterwards completes his.

Yud: Behold I am a nazir when I have a son, and a nazir for a hundred days.  If a son was born to him up to seventy (days in), he didn’t lose anything (he may pick up after the nezirut for his son).  After seventy, he blocks off the seventy (does not count them in fulfilling his vow), for there is no shaving (to mark the end of nezirut) for less than thirty days.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One who says, behold I am a nazir shaves the thirty-first day, and if he shaved on the thirtieth, he’s yotze.  (If he said) behold I am a nazir for thirty days, if he shaved the thirtieth day, he’s not yotze.

Bet: One who made two nazir vows shaves for the first on the thirty-first day (to end his first nezirut) and the second on the sixty-first day.  And if he shaved the first on the thirtieth day, he shaves the second on the sixtieth.  And if he shaved on the fifty-ninth day, he’s yotze.  And this is the testimony that Rabi Papis testified, one who made two nazir vows, that if he shaves for the first on the thirtieth day, he shaves the second on the sixtieth day, and if on the fifty-ninth day, he’s yotze, for the thirtieth day is counted in the number (of the second nezirut).

Gimmel: One who said, behold I am a nazir, if he became tame on the thirtieth day, it blocks everything.  Rabi Eliezer says, it doesn’t block except seven.  Behold I am a nazir for thirty days, if he became tame on the thirtieth day, it blocks everything.

Daled: Behold I am a nazir for one hundred days, if he became tame on the hundredth day, it blocks everything.  Rabi Eliezer says, it does not block except thirty.  If he became tam on the hundred-first day, it blocks thirty days.  Rabi Eliezer says, it doesn’t block except seven.

Hay: One who became a nazir and he is in a graveyard, even if he was there thirty days, they do not go up for him (are included) in the count, and he does not bring a korban of tuma.  If he went out and came in, they go up for him in the count and he brings a korban of tuma.  Rabi Eliezer says, not (if he was in the graveyard) the first days, as it says, “and the first days will fall out (not be counted),” until he has first days (the count only begins when he has days where he observes his vow).

Vav: One who vowed in many neziriyot, and he completed his neziriyot, and afterwards came to the land (Israel, where his vow can actually be fulfilled) Beit Shamay says, he is a nazir for thirty days, and Beit Hillel says, he is a nazir from the beginning (fulfills all of his vows).  There was a case with Helene the queen that he son went off to war, and she said, if my son comes from war in peace, I will be a nezira for seven years.  He son came back from war, she was a nezira for seven years, and at the end of her nezirut, she made aliya to Israel, and Beit Hillel instructed her that she should be a nezira another seven years.  And at the end of the seven years she became tame, and if was found that she was a nezira for twenty-one years.  Rabi Yehuda said, she wasn’t a nezira except for fourteen years.

Zayin: One who had two groups of witnesses testifying about him, one testifying that he vowed two (thirty day periods) and one testifying that he vowed five, Beit Shamay says, the testimony is divided and there is no nezirut, and Beit Hillel says, two are included in five, he should be a nazir two.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who said, behold I am a nazir and his friend herd and said, me too. (If another said) me too, they are all nezirim.  If the first was unbound, they are all unbound, if the last one is unbound, the last one is unbound and they (the rest) are all bound.  If he said, behold I am a nazir and his friend heard and said, my mouth is like his mouth and my hair is like his hair, behold he is a nazir.  Behold I am a nazir and his wife heard and said, me too, he can annul hers and his stands.  Behold I am a nezira and her husband heard and said, me too, he cannot annul.

Bet: (If a man said) behold I am a nazir (and to his wife he said) and you?  And she said, amen, he can annul hers, and his stands.  Behold I am a nezira, and you?  And he said, amen, he cannot annul hers.

Gimmel: A woman who vowed to be a nazir, drank wine, and became tame for the dead, behold she absorbs (is lashed) forty.  If her husband annulled for her, and she didn’t know that her husband had annulled fro her, and she drank wine and became tame for the dead, she does not absorb forty.  Rabi Yehuda says, if she does not absorb forty, she absorbs makat mardut (rabbinical lashes which are given based on what the person can take).

Daled: A woman who made a cow to be a nazir and she separated her animals (set aside the animals needed for her korban), and afterwards her husband annulled, if the animal was his, it goes out and grazes with the flock.  And if the animal was hers, the (animal designated for a) chatat dies (it is starved to death), the olah is brought as an olah, and the shlamim is brought as a shlamim, are eaten in one day, and do not need bread (for normally a nazir’s shlamim is brought with bread).  If she had unspecified money (she did not specify which of her korbanot for nezirut they would go to), they fall in as a donation.  If she had specified money, money for a chatat is thrown into the Dead Sea (to destroy it) and they do not benefit from it and it is not me’ila, the money for the olah, will be brought as an olah (purchase an animal to be an olah) and there is me’ila by them, and the money for shlamim, they will be brought as shlamim, they are eaten for one day, and do not need bread.

Hay: If one of the bloods (of her korbanot) was (already) thrown one her (behalf), he cannot revoke.  Rabi Akiva says, even if one of the animals was slaughtered for her, he cannot annul.  What is this talking about?  The tiglachat (shaving korban the set of which she brings at the end of nezirut) for tahara (which allows her to wine making it not a depriving vow so her husband cannot revoke it).  But in the tiglachat of tuma (if she became tame during nezirut she brings the same korbanot), he may annul, for he can say, I do not want a disgraced woman (for she must start her nezirut again, and he may object to her being a nazir).  Rabi says, even in the tiglachat of tahara he may annul, for he can say, I do not want a shaven woman (for she must shave at then end of nezirut, which is repulsive).

Vav: A man vows his son a nazir, but a woman does not vow her son a nazir.  How?  He (the son) shaved or his relative shaved him (showing that) he denied or his relatives denied.  If he had a separated animal, the chatat dies, the olah is brought as an olah.  And the shlamim is brought as a shlamim, eaten for one day, and does not need bread.  If he had unspecified money, they fall in with a donation.  Separated money, the money for the chatat go to the Dead Sea they don’t benefit from theme and there is no me’ila by them, the money for the olah they bring an olah and there is me’ila with them, and the money for shlamim, they bring shlamim, are eaten for one day, and do not need bread.

Zayin: A man may shave for his father’s nezirut, but a woman may not shave for her father’s nezirut.  How?  One whose father was a nazir and he separated unspecified money for his nezirut and died and (the son) said, behold I am a nazir on condition that I will shave with the money of my father,  Rabi Yossi said, behold these fall in with a donation, this one does not shave for the nezirut of his father.  Who shaves for the nezirut of his father?  One who he and his father vowed to be nezirim and his father set aside unspecified money for his nezirut and died, this one shaves for his father’s nezirut.

Perek Hay

Aleph: Beit Shamay says, hekdesh made in error is hekdesh, and Beit Hillel says it isn’t hekdesh.  How?  He said, the black ox that comes out of my house first is hekdesh and a white one came out, Beit Shamay says it’s hekdesh, and Beit Hillel says it isn’t hekdesh.

Bet: The golden dinar that comes up to my hand first, behold it is hekdesh, and a silver one came up, Beit Shamay says it’s hekdesh and Beit Hillel says it isn’t hekdesh.  The barrel of wine that will come up to my hand first, behold it is hekdesh, and one of oil came up, Beit Shamay says, hekdesh, and beit Hillel says, it isn’t hekdesh.

Gimmel: One who vowed to be a nazir and asked a sage (to find an out) and (the sage) bound him, he counts (his term of nezirut) from the time he vowed.  If he asked as sage and he unbound him, if he had a separated animal, it goes out and grazes with the flock.  Beit Hillel said to Beit Shamay, don’t you agree with this that is hekdesh in error, that it goes out to graze with the flock (meaning it isn’t hekdesh)?  Beit Shamay said to them, don’t you admit (by ma’aser behema, where every tenth animal is made ma’aser) by one who erred and made the ninth (animal in line) the tenth (for the animals were counted by passing through a small gate and being marked every ten), the tenth the ninth, and eleventh the tenth, that it is hekdesh (even though it was the wring animal)?  Beit Hillel said to them, it was not the rod (used to designate the tenth which made them hekdesh.  And what if he erred and rested the rod on the eighth or on the twelfth, did he perhaps do something?  Rather the pasuk that made the tenth hekdesh made the ninth and the eleventh hekdesh (they are not hekdesh because they were made hekdesh in error, but rather because a pasuk comes to include them).

Daled: One who made a vow to be a nazir and went to bring his animal (as a korban) and found it was stolen, if before his animals were stolen he became a nazir, behold he is a nazir, but if after his animals were stolen he became a nazir, he isn’t a nazir.  And this is a mistake that Nachum Hamadi made, when nezirim came from outside Israel and found the Beit Hamikdash destroyed, Nachum Hamadi, if you knew the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed would you have become nezirim?  They said, no, and Nachum Hamadi unbound them.  And when the thing came to the Chachamim they said to him, all who became nezirim before the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed are nezirim, and (those who became nezirim) from when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, are not nezirim.

Hay: They (six people) were going on their way, and one came toward them.  One of them said, behold I am a nazir if this is so-and-so; one said, behold I am a nazir if this is not so-and-so; (one said,) behold I am a nazir that one of you (the first two) is a nazir; (behold I am a nazir) if not one of you (the first two) is a nazir; that both of you are nezirim; that you are nezirim.  Beit Shamay says, they are all nezirim (for he holds that this was a vow made with an erroneous condition is invalid).  Beit Hillel says, one is not a nazir unless his words were fulfilled.  Rabi Tarfon says, not one of them is a nazir (for none of their vows were sure at the time they were made).

Vav: If he (the person coming towards them) turned around, he (any of them) is not a nazir.  Rabi Shimon says, he should say, if it was like my words, behold I am an obligatory nazir, and if not, behold I am an optional nazir.

Zayin: One (group of nine people) who saw a koy (an animal which has characteristics of both chayot and behemot) and said, behold I am a nazir that (if) this is a chaya (wild animal), (another one says) behold I am a nazir that this isn’t a chaya, behold I am a nazir that this is a behema (domesticated animal), behold I am a nazir that this isn’t a behema, behold I am a nazir tat this is a chaya and a behema, behold I am a nazir that this is neither a chaya nor a behema, behold I am a nazir that one of you is a nazir, behold I am a nazir that not one of you is a nazir, behold I am a nazir that you are all nezirim, behold they are all nezirim.

Perek Vav

Aleph: Three types are assur to a nazir, tuma, shaving, and that which comes from the vine.  All that comes from the vine (juice, seeds, flesh, etc.) combines together, he isn’t chayav until he eats a kzayit from the grapes, and the first mishna (taught) until he drinks a revi’it of wine.  Rabi Akiva says, even if he soaked his bread in wine and there is enough in it to combine to a kzayit he’s chayav.

Bet: He is chayav on wine by itself (if he has a kzayit of only wine), on grapes by themselves, on chartzanim by themselves, and on zagim by themselves.  Rabi Elazar ben Azarya says, he isn’t chayav until he eats two chartzanim and their zagim.  Which are chartzanim and which are zagim?  The chartzanim are the external (skins) and the zagim are the internal (seeds) according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, so that you don’t mistake (them), like the zug (bell) of the behema, the outer (skin) is a zug, and the inner (part of a bell)is an inbal.

Gimmel: Unspecified nezirut is thirty days.  If he shaved or bandits shaved him, it blocks thirty days (make them not count).  A nazir who shaved whether with scissors or a razor or plucked out anything, he’s chayav.  A nazir may rub or scratch (his hair), but he may not comb.  Rabi Yishma’el says, he may not rub with earth, because it  (causes) the hair (to) fall out.

Daled: A nazir who was drinking wine the whole day is only chayav one.  If they said to him, don’t drink, don’t drink, and he drinks, he is chayav on each one (warning).  If he was shaving the whole day, he is only chayav one.  If they said to him, don’t shave, don’t shave, and he shaves, he is chayav on each one.  If he was becoming tame for the dead all day, he is only chayav one.  If they said to him, do not become tame, do not become tame, and he became tame, he is chayav on each one.

Hay: Three types are assur to a nazir, tuma, shaving, and that which comes from the vine.  There is stringency by tuma and shaving from (compared to) what comes from the vine, for tuma and shaving block (make days already kept not count) and what comes from the vine does not block.  There is stringency by what comes from the vine from tuma and shaving, for what comes from the vine isn’t unbound from its general rule, and tuma and shaving are unbound from their general rules in shaving for a mitzva (if one got tzara’at he shaves after he is healed) and in a met mitzva (an abandoned corpse).  And there is a stringency of tuma over shaving, for tuma blocks all (of the time he has had as a nazir) and requires a korban, and shaving only blocks thirty days and one is not chayav a korban on it.

Vav: Tiglachat of tuma (a nazir must shave if he becomes tame), how?  He would sprinkle (waters of the red heifer) on the third and seventh (days of his uncleanliness), shaves on the seventh, and brings his korbanot on the eighth.  If he shaves on the eighth, he brings his korbanot that day, according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Tarfon said to him, what is the difference between this and a metzora (who would bring the korbanot on the ninth day if he shaved on the eighth)?  He said to him, this, his tahara is dependant on his days, and a metzora his tahara is dependant on his shaving, and he doesn’t bring a korban unless it was after sunset.

Zayin: Tiglachat of tahara (a nazir shaves when he completes his period of nezirut), how?  He would bring three animals, a chatat, an olah, and a shlamim, and he slaughters the shlamim and (after) shaves for them (for the brining of korbanot), according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Eliezer says, he wouldn’t shave except for (after) the chatat, for the chatat always comes first.  And if he shaved for (any) one of the three, he’s yotze.

Chet: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, if he brought three animals and didn’t specify (which animal was for which korban), that which is fir for a chatat will be brought as a chatat, (the one fit) for an olah will be brought as an olah, and for a shlamim will be brought as a shlamim.  He would take the hair of his head (he had grown as a) nazir, and through it under the pot (which the shlamim was being cooked in).  And if he shaved in the country (meaning outside the Beit Hamikdash), he would (bring) his hair (and throw it) under the pot.  What is this talking about?  By tiglachat of tahara, bit on tiglachat of tuma, he would not throw it under the pot.  Rabi Meir says, all throw under the pit, except for the tame who is only in the country.

Tet: If he was cooking the shlamim or over-boiling it, the kohen takes the cooked forearm from the ram, one loaf of matza from the basket (part of the shlamim), one wafer of matza, and puts on the hands of the nazir and waves them, and afterward the nazir is allowed to drink wine and become tame for the dead.  Rabi Shimon says, since on of the bloods was thrown on him he is allowed to drink wine and become tame for the dead.

Yud: If he shaved (based) on the zevach (offering) and it was found to be invalid, his tiglachat is invalid, and his zvachim do not count for him (for his time was blocked by his shaving).  If he shaved on a chatat which was not for its (the chatat’s) sake, and afterwards he brought the other korbanot for their sake, his tiglachat is invalid and his zvachim didn’t count.  If he shaved on the olah or shlamim which weren’t for their sakes, and afterwards brought his korbanot for their sakes, his tiglachat is invalid and his zvachim don’t count.  Rabi Shimon says, that zevach (offered for the wrong sake) does not count for him, but his other zvachim count for him.  And if he shaved on the three of them and one of them was found kosher, his shaving is kosher and he must bring the rest of the zvachim.

Yud Aleph: One who one of the bloods was thrown on him and he became tame, Rabi Eliezer says, it blocks everything.  Chachamim say, he brings the rest of the korbanot and becomes tahor.  They said to him, there was a case with Miriam Hatarmodit who one of the bloods was thrown on her, and they came and told her about her daughter who was in danger, and she went and found (her daughter) was dead, and the Chachamim said, she must bring the rest of her korbanot and become tahor.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: A kohen gadol and a nazir do not become tame for their relatives, but they become tame for a met mitzva (an abandoned corpse).  If they were going on their way and found a met mitzva Rabi Eliezer says, the kohen gadol should become tame and the nazir should not.  Chachamim say, the nazir should become tame and the kohen gadol should not.  Rabi Eliezer said to them, the kohen should become tame, for he does not bring a korban on his tuma (becoming tame), and the nazir should not become tame, for he brings a korban on his tuma.  They said to him, the nazir should become tame, for his kdusha is not and eternal kdusha, and the kohen gadol should not become tame, for his kdusha is an eternal kdusha.

Bet: For which (types of) tumot does the nazir shave?  For a corpse, for a kzayit from a corpse, for a kzayit of netzel (some sort of decomposed corpse matter), for a ladleful of rotten (corpse), for a spinal column, on a skull, on an organ from the living, on an organ from the living that has a sufficient amount of flesh (to be potentially functioning), on half a kav of bones, on half a log of blood, on touching them, on carrying them, and on making a tent with them.  On these the nazir shaves, sprinkles on the third and fifth, it blocks the prior days, and he doesn’t start to count until he becomes tame and brings his korban.

Gimmel: But on schachot (tree branches which cover both a person and a corpse), pra’ot (things protruding from a fence which cover a person and a corpse), a beit paras (the area around a plowed up grave), the land of (other) nations (lands outside of Israel which require the person to take on more nezirut when he returns), golel (stone places upon a tomb), dofek (the frame of a movable tomb), a revi’it of blood, a tent (which he touched covered a corpse), a rova of bones, vessels which touched the corpse, the days of his counting (towards purity when a metzora), and the days of his confirmed tzara’at, for these a nazir does not shave, he is sprinkled the third and seventh, it does not block the previous, he begins counting immediately, and he has no korban.  They really said, the days of a zav and a zava, and the days of quarantine of metzora, behold these are counted for him (in his period of nezirut).

Daled: Rabi Eliezer said n the name of Rabi Yehoshua, all tuma from the dead which a nazir shaves for it, one is chayav on bringing it into the Beit Hamikdash, and all tuma from the dead which a nazir does not shave for, one is not chayav on bring it into the Beit Hamikdash.  Rabi Meir said, this (things Rabi Yehoshua says one is not chayav for) is no more lenient than sheretz (a class of animals, which do not interrupt nezirut but one is chayav for bringing into the Beit Hamikdash).  Rabi Akiva said, I judged before Rabi Eliezer, just as a bone the size of (a grain of) barley which does not make a person tame in a tent, the nazir shaves for touching it or carrying it, a revi’it of blood which makes a person tame in a tent, shouldn’t it be that a nazir shaves for touching it or carrying it?  He said to me, what is this Akiva, we do not judge here from a kal vechomer.  And when I (Rabi Akiva) came and retold these things before Rabi Yehoshua he said to me, you said well, but this is how they said the halacha.

Perek Chet

Aleph: Two nezirim to whom one said, I saw one of you became tame, and I don’t know which of you it was, they shave and bring a korban tuma and a korban tahara, and say, if I am the tame, the korban tuma is mine and the korban tahara is yours, and if I am the tahor, the korban tahara is mine and the korban tuma is yours.  And they count thirty days and bring a korban tahara and say, if I am the tame, the korban tuma is mine, the korban tahara is yours, and this korban is my tahara, and if I am the tahor, the korban tahara is mine, the korban tuma is yours, and this is your tahara.  If one of them died, Rabi Yehoshua said, he asks one from the shuk (a random person) that she shall vow opposite him as a nazir and says, if I was tame, behold you are immediately a nazir (so you can use the korban we bring in thirty days), and if I was tahor, behold you are a nazir after thirty days (for I will use the korban we bring in thirty days).  They count thirty days and bring a korban of tuma and a korban of tahara and say, if I am the one who became tame, the korban of tuma is mine and the korban of tahara is yours, and if I am he who is tahor, the korban tahara is mine and the korban tuma is doubtful.  And they count thirty days and bring a korban tahara and say, if I am the tame, the korban tuma is mine, the korban tahara is yours, and this korban is my tahara, and if I am the tahor, the korban tahara is mine, the korban tuma is yours, and this is your tahara.  Ben Zoma said to him, and who would listen to him that she he vow opposite him to be a nazir?  Rather, he brings a chatat of the fowl and an olah of the animal and says, if I was tame, the chatat is obligatory and the olah is optional, and if I was tahor, the olah is obligatory and the chatat was is a doubt.  And they count thirty days, and he brings a korban of tahara and says, if I was tame, the first olah was optional and this one is obligatory, and if I was tahor, the first olah was obligatory and this one is one is optional, and this is the rest of my korban.  Rabi Yehoshua said, we find this one brings korbanot in halves (piecemeal).  But the Chachamim agreed with Ben Zoma.

Bet: A nazir who was doubtfully tame and doubtfully a metzora muchlat (declared nazir), he eats of the holies after sixty days, and drinks wine and becomes tame for the dead after one hundred and twenty days, for shaving for the nega (affliction, meaning tzara’at) pushes off the shaving of the nazir when it is certain, but when it is a doubt it does not push off (and to resolve all the possibilities, we must have the nezirim shave several times, hence the longer periods until the nezirim return to normal).

Perek Tet

Aleph: Non-Jews do not have nezirut.  Women and slaves have nezirut.  There is a stringency by women over slaves, for one may force his slave (to violate his nezirut), and he may not force his wife.  There is a stringency by slaves over women, for he may annul the vows of his wife, but he may not annul the vows of his slave.  If he annulled his wife’s, he annulled it forever.  If he annulled his slave’s (not but annulling but by forcing him to break it), and he went free, he completes his nezirut (despite having broken it).  If he passed from before him (the slave ran away), Rabi Meir says, he may not drink (wine, even if his master made him break his vow), and Rabi Yossi says he may drink.

Bet: A nazir who shaved and he became aware that he was tame, if it is a know tuma (one which is clear to people) it blocks (his count, causing him to start his vow again), but if it is a tuma of the depths (an unknown grave was found after he became tame by it) it does not block.  If it is before he shaved, either way it blocks.  How?  He went down to immerse in a cave and (afterwards) found a corpse floating in the cave, (even if we are not sure if he touched it) he’s tame.  If it was found sunken into the floor of the cave and he went down to cool himself, (even though he is not careful while cooling himself, he is tahor.  If he went down (to the cave where a body was found sunken in) to become tahor from tumat met, he’s tame, for one who is assumed tame (stays) tame, and one who is assumed tahor is tahor, and the thing has what to stand on (it has logical basis).

Gimmel: One who finds a corpse for the first time (reveals a grave) and it is in its usual manner (the way Jews are generally buried) he may take (and place in a cemetery) it and its tvusa (the ground under it which absorbed all of its fluids), and if he found two he may take them and their tvusot.  If he found three (at which point we fear they may be a whole cemetery and not just isolated graves as before), if there is between them (the bodies) from four amot to eight (more shows that they were put near each other by chance and less shows that they were hastily buried together, not a formal graveyard) behold this is a graveyard, and he checks from here (the site of the corpses) and further twenty amot.  If he found one by the end of twenty amot, he checks there and twenty amot further.  And the thing has on what to stand (logical reason), for if he found it originally, he would take it and its tvusa (which we see would have been wrong).

Daled: All doubt by afflictions (tzara’at) is tahor until he is confirmed tame, once he is confirmed tame, his doubt (such as if there is a doubt about whether he has a new instance of tzara’at) is tame.  In seven ways they check a zav (to see if his emission was caused by something external) before he has confirmed ziva, food (certain foods or eating to much), drink, carrying (a heavy load), jumping, illness, sight (if he saw a woman), and thought (about women), once he is confirmed in his ziva they do not check him.  Things beyond his control, his doubt, and his seminal discharge, it has what to stand on (we judge based on precedent).  One who hits his friend and his (friend’s) state neared death, it (his health) became lighter (better) than what it was, and afterward it worsened and he died, he’s chayav (for killing his friend).  Rabi Nechemia says, patur, for it has what to stand on (he was getting better, so we can say it is not the hitting which killed the friend).

Hay: Shmu’el was a nazir, like the words of Rabi Nehoray, as it says, “and a ‘morah’ shall not come upon his head.”  It says by Shimshon, “and a ‘morah’,”  and it says by Shmu’el, “and a ‘morah.”  Just as morah is said by Shimshon, a nazir, so too the word is said by Shmu’el, a nazir.  Rabi Yossi said, and isn’t morah only (fear) of flesh and blood (people)?  Rabi Nehoray said to him, and isn’t it already said, “and Shmu’el said, how can I go, if Shaul hears he will kill me,” for there was already fear of flesh and blood upon him (so the pasuk must refer to a razor).

Mesechet Sotah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: One who warns his wife (not to be alone with a certain man, and if she is she becomes a sota, or suspected of adultery), Rabi Eliezer says, he warns her before two (witnesses) and he makes her drink (the sota water, which will curse her if she did commit adultery) on the mouth (testimony) of one (who says he saw her seclude herself with the man) or himself.  Rabi Yehoshua says, he warns her before two and makes her drink before two.

Bet: How does he warn her?  He says to her before two, do not speak with so-and-so, and she spoke with him, she is still mutar to her house (husband) and mutar to eat truma (if she is married to a kohen, while a sota she may not eat truma).  If she goes in with him to a secluded place, and she waited with him enough (time) to become tame (defiled), she is assur to her house and to eat truma.  And if he (her husband) died, she gets chalitza and not yibum.

Gimmel: And these are assur from eating truma, one who says, I am tame to you; witnesses came and said she was tame; one who says, I will not drink (the sota waters); one that the husband does not wish to make drink; and one who had sex with her on the way (to have her drink after she was warned and secluded herself).How does he do to (act towards) her?  He brings her to the court which is in that place, and they give him two scholars, for perhaps he will have sex with her on the way.  Rabi Yehuda says, her husband is trusted with her.

Daled: They would bring he to the great court in Yerushalayim (when she was going to drink) and intimidate her the way they intimidate the witnesses for a capital case, and tell her, my daughter, wine does much (causes sin), levity makes much, childlessness makes much (immorality), and bad neighbors make a lot, do for His great name which is written in holiness (confess instead of going through with this), so that it is not erased on the water (the name of Hashem is written on a piece of parchment and erased in water to make the sota water).  And they say before her things that she and all of her family, her father’s house, do not deserve to hear (things about precedent for confession).

Hay: If she said, I am tame, she breaks her ktuba (forfeits all rights to it) and goes (there are no witnesses, so she is not put to death).  And if she said, I am tahor, they bring her up to the eastern gate which faces the entrance of the Nikanor gate, for there they give drink to the sotot, make the yoldot (those who have just given birth) tahor, and make the metzora’im tahor.  The kohen would grab her clothes, if they rip, they rip and if they are tattered, they are tattered (he need not worry about ruining her clothes), until he uncovers her heart (bosom) and undoes her hair (all to embarrass her into confessing).  Rabi Yehuda says, if her heart was beautiful, he would not uncover it, and if her hair was nice, he would not undo it.

Vav: If she was wearing white, he would clothe her in black.  If she had on her gold jewelry, chains, nose-rings, and rings, they take them off of her in order to embarrass her.  And then he brings an Egyptian rope (of palm leaves) over her breasts (so her clothing will stay up).  And all who want to see her come and see, except for her slaves and maidservants, because she is familiar with them (which would make her more likely to continue pleading innocence).  And all women are allowed to see her, as it says, “and all the women will be taught and they will not do like her lewdness.”

Zayin: With the measure a person measures, with it they measure for him (judgment from Hashem comes exactly according to what a person deserves).  She decorated herself with sin, Hashem embarrassed her.  She revealed herself for sin, Hashem reveled on her (for anyone could come and see her).  With her thigh she started the sin, and after that the stomach, therefore she will be punished with the thigh first and then the stomach.  And the rest of the body does not escape.

Chet: Shimshon went after his eyes, therefore the Plishtim gouged out his eyes, as it says, “and the Plishtim grabbed him and gouged out his eyes.”  Avshalom had pride from his hair, therefore he was hung by his hair.  And because he had sex with ten concubines of his father, ten spears were thrust into him, as it says, “and ten people, bearers of the vessels (weapons) of Yo’av, encircled him.” And because he stole three hearts (deceived), his father’s heart, the heat of the court, and the hear of yisra’el, as it says, “and Avshalom stole the heart of the people of Israel,” therefore three darts were thrust into him, as it says, “and he took three darts in his hand and he thrust them into the heart of Avshalom.”

Tet: And so too for the issue of good.  Miriam waited for Moshe one hour, as it says, “and his sister guarded from afar,” therefore yisra’el waited for her seven days in the desert, as it says, “and the nation did not travel until Miriam was collected back.”  Yosef merited to bury his father, and there was not one of his brothers greater than him, as it is written, “and Yosef went up to bury his father… and went up with him also chariots also horsemen.”  Who is greater than Yosef, for none other than Moshe dealt with him (his burial).  Moshe merited in the bones of Yosef, and there is not greater than him in yisra’el, as is says, “and Moshe took the bones of Yosef with him.”  Who is greater than Moshe, for none other than Hashem dealt with him, as it says, “and He buried him in the valley.”  Not on Moshe alone did they say this, rather on all of the righteous, as it says, “and your righteousness shall go before you and the glory of Hashem will gather you in.”

Perek Bet

Aleph: He (the husband) would bring her mincha (for he brought a korban for her when she was going to drink) in an Egyptian basket and put it on her hands in order to tire her.  All of the menachot their beginning and end was in service vessels, and this, its beginning is in an Egyptian basket and its end in a service vessel.  All the menachot need oil and frankincense (in addition to flour) and this does not need oil or frankincense.  All of the menachot are from flour, and this comes from barley.  The omer mincha, even though it comes from barley, it comes sifted, and this comes as meal.  Raban Gamliel says, just as her act is the act of an animal, so too her korban is the food of an animal.

Bet: He would bring a new earthenware bowl, and put half a log of water into it from the sink.  Rabi Yehuda says, a revi’it.  Just as he (Rabi Yehuda) diminishes (the amount of) writing he diminishes water.  He went into the sanctuary and turned right, and there was a place one amah by one amah with a marble flagstone (disconnected from the others) with a ring was fastened on it, and when he would raise it (by pulling the ring), he would take dust from under it and put (into the water, for dust from the Beit Hamikdash was part of the water), such that it would be seen on the water, as it says, “and from the dust which will be on the floor of the mishkan the kohen will take and put on the water.”

Gimmel: He came to write the scroll, from where (in the parsha of sota in Bamidbar hay) does he write?  From, “if a man has not lain etc.” “and you because you drank instead of your husband.”  And he does not write, “and the kohen makes the woman swear.”  And he writes, “Hashem will give to you for a curse and an oath,” “and these cursing waters will come in your bowels and make your stomach swell and your thigh fall away.”  And he does not write, “and the woman shall say, amen, amen.”  Rabi Yossi says, he wouldn’t stop (for the psukim they said to omit).  Rabi Yehuda says, all of this he does not write except, “Hashem will give to you for a curse and an oath etc.” “and these cursing waters will come in your bowels etc.” And he does not write, and the woman shall say, amen, amen.”

Daled: He does not write on a tablet, on paper, or on inadequate parchment, rather on parchment, as it says, “in the book.”  And he does not write with gum-based ink, calcanthum, and not with anything which marks down except with ink, as it says, “and he shall erase (dissolve),” a writing that can erase.

Hay: On what does she say amen amen?  Amen on the curse, amen on the oath.  Amen from this man, and amen from that man, amen that I did not commit adultery while engaged, married, waiting for yibum, or consummated.  Amen that I didn’t become tame, and if I became tame, let them come to me (the curses).  Rabi Meir says, amen that I did not become tame, amen that I will not become tame.

Vav: All is equal that he does not make a condition with her (force her to swear about) before she gets engaged (as an extension of her swear about sota), and not after she will get married.  If she secluded (herself with a man) afterwards and she became tame and afterwards she returned, he cannot make a condition with her.  This is the general rule, wherever she (could have) had sex and she wouldn’t be assur to him, he could not make a condition with her.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: He would take her mincha from the Egyptian basket, put it into a service vessel, and put it in her hands.  And the kohen would place his hand under hers and wave it.

Bet: He waved and brought it, took a handful and burned it and the rest is fed to the kohanim.  He would have her drink, and afterwards offer the mincha.  Rabi Shimon says, he would bring her mincha and they have her drink, as it says, “and after he has the woman drink the water.”  If he had her drink and then brought the mincha, it’s valid.

Gimmel: If before the scroll was erased she said, I will not drink, he scroll is hidden (for it is holy), her mincha is scattered on the ashes (which were in a heap from korbanot), and her scroll is not valid to have any other sota drink with it.  If after the scroll was erased, she said, I am tame, the water is spilled out and her mincha is spread on the ashes.  If the scroll was erased and she said, I will not drink, they force her and make her drink against her will.

Daled: If she doesn’t manage to drink (much water) and her face becomes yellow, her eyes bulge, and she fills with veins (they are seen through her skin because of the swelling) they say, take her out, take her out, so that she does not make the courtyard tame.  If she had merit, it would suspend (the disfigurement) for her.  There is merit which suspends for one year, there is merit which lasts for two years, and there is merit which lasts for three years.  From here ben Azay says, a man is chayav to teach his daughter torah, so if she drinks, she will know her merit suspends for her.  Rabi Eliezer says, one who teaches his daughter torah, it is as if he taught her triviality.  Rabi Yehoshua says, a woman prefers on kav (as a standard of living) and cohabiting (with her husband) than nine kavim and abstinence (a woman prefers a lower standard of living and being married, for as the gemara in Mesechet Kiddushin teaches, women long for marriage).  He would say, a mentally unsound righteous person, a cunning wicked person, an abstinent woman, and the lashes of the Pharisees (those Pharisees who are false in their religion and inflict torture), these ruin the world.

Hay: Rabi Shimon says, merit does not suspend the bitter waters (those of the sota).  And if you say, merit suspends for the cursing waters, you weaken (the gravity of) the water before all women who drink and slander all the tahor women who drank, for people say, they are tame, rather it (their punishment) was suspended for them because of merit.  Rabi says, merit suspends the cursing waters, but she does not give birth and does not improve, rather she wastes away and goes on, and in the end she dies in that death.

Vav: If he mincha became tame before it was made kodesh in a (service) vessel, behold it is like all the menachot and it shall be redeemed.  And if from when it became kodesh in the vessel, behold it is like all of the menachot and shall be burnt.  And these are (those) that their menachot are burnt, one who says, I am tame to you; if witnesses come on her that she is tame, one who says, I will not drink; and one whose husband does not want to make her drink; and that her husband had sex with her on the way.  And all those married to kohanim, their mincha’ot are burnt.

Zayin: A bat yisra’el who married a kohen, her mincha is burnt.  And a kohenet who married a yisra’el, he mincha is eaten.  What is the difference between a kohen and a kohenet?  The mincha of a kohenet is eaten, and the mincha of a kohen is (never) eaten.  A kohenet may become a chalal (if she has sex with one forbidden to her, she loses her status) and a kohen can never become a chalal (unless he is born one).  A kohenet can become tame for the dead, and a kohen cannot become tame for the dead.  A kohen eats the holy of holies (korbanot which are of the highest level) and a kohenet does not eat the holy of holies.

Chet: What is the difference between a man and a woman?  A man loosens his hair and tears his clothes (when he is a metzora) and a woman does not loosen her hair or tear her clothes.  A man may vow his son a nazir, and a woman may not vow her daughter a nezira.  A man can shave on account of his father’s nezirut, and a woman may not shave on account of her father’s nezirut.  A man may sell his daughter, and a woman does not sell her daughter.  A man may marry (off) his daughter, but a woman cannot marry her daughter.  A man is stoned naked, and a woman is not stoned naked,  A man is hung (after stoning) and a woman is not hung.  A man is sold for his theft, and a woman is not sold for her theft.

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who is engaged or waiting for a yavam does not drink and does not take her ktuba, as it says, “that a woman will drink under (due to) her husband,” which excludes a person who is engaged and one who is waiting for a yavam.  A widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalutza to a lay kohen, a mamzeret and a netina to a yisra’el, and a bat yisra’el to a mamzer or natin, they do not drink and do not take their ktuba.

Bet: And these do not drink and do not take their ktuba, one who says, I am tame; that witnesses came and testified that she was tame; and one who says, I am not drinking.  If her husband said, I am not making her drink; and that her husband had sex with her on the way, she takes her ktuba and does not drink.  If their (any woman who were going to drink) husbands died before they drank, Beit Shamay says, they take their ktuba and do not drink, and Beit Hillel says, they don’t drink and they don’t collect their ktuba.

Gimmel: A woman pregnant by his friend (her first husband) or nursing his friend, she does not drink and she does not take her ktuba according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, he may separate from her and take her back after some time (that of the nursing period).  An aylonit (barren woman) and an old woman who are not fit to give birth, they do not drink and they do not take their ktuba.  Rabi Eliezer says, he may marry another wife and be fruitful and multiply by her.  And all the other women, either they drink, or they don’t collect their ktuba.

Daled: The wife of a kohen drinks and is mutar to her husband.  The wife of a eunuch drinks.  They may warn for all inappropriate relations (even against secluding with her father), except for a minor, or from one who is not a man (an animal, here the warning is meaningless and she will not be forced to drink). 

Hay: And these are those who the court warns, one whose husband became deaf, became mentally infirm, or was in jail.  They (the court) said this not to make her drink, but to make her invalid from her ktuba.  Rabi Yossi says, even to make her drink, for when her husband gets out of prison, he will make her drink.

Perek Hay

Aleph: Just as the waters check her, so too the water checks him (the man she was with will get the same punishment if she drinks), as it says, “and they (the waster) shall enter,” “and they shall enter” (the repetition of the word three times is used to learn this).  Just as she is assur to her husband, so too she is assur to the one who had sex with her, as it says, “she became tame,” “and she became tame,” according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Yehoshua said, Zachariah ben Hakatzav would (also) expound like this.  Rabi says, two times it is said in the section, “if she became tame,” “she became tame,” one for her husband and one for the man she had sex with.

Bet: On that day (which refers to the day Rabi Elazar ben Azariah was appointed in place of Raban Gamliel and many halachic disputes were solved) Rabi Akiva expounded, “and any earthenware vessel that one of them (a sheretz) shall fall into, all which is in it will become tame.”  It doesn’t say (“tame”,) will be tame, but rather (“yitma”) will make other things tame.  This teaches on a loaf of second (of tuma, which touched something which touched the sheretz) that it makes the third (food it touches) tame.  Rabi Yehoshua said, who will uncover dust from your eyes (if only you were still alive) Rabi Yochanan ben Zakai?  For you would say, another generation is destined to make the loaf that is third tahor, for there is no pasuk in the torah which makes it tame, and didn’t Rabi Akiva your student bring for it a pasuk from the torah that it is tame, as it says, “all that is within it will become tame.”

Gimmel: On that day Rabi Akiva expounded, “and you shall measure outside the city its eastern end two thousand amot, etc.” and another pasuk  says, “from the wall of the city and outward a thousand amot around.  It cannot say a thousand amot, for it already said two thousand amot, and it cannot say two thousand amot, for it already said a thousand amot, how is it?  One thousand amot is the open space and two thousand amot is the bounds for Shabbat (in which one may walk).  Rabi Eliezer the son of Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, one thousand amot is the open space and two thousand amot is the fields and vineyards (referring to the cities of the levi’im, for the space around them was for them to have fields).

Daled: On that day Rabi Akiva expounded, “then Moshe and Bnei Yisra’el sand this song to Hashem and they said saying.”  There is not need to say, “saying,” so what does, “saying” come to teach us?  It teaches us that Yisra’el would answer after Moshe on everything, as we read Hallel, therefore it says, “saying.”  Rabi Nechemia says, like when they read shma (aloud) and not like when they read Hallel.

Hay: On that day Rabi Yehoshua ben Hurkanos expounded, Iyov did not worship Hashem except out of love, as it says, “they may kill me, in Him (lo) I will trust.”  And still the thing is doubted, I will trust him (if lo is with a vav), or I will not trust him (if lo is with an aleph)?  It comes to teach us (from the pasuk,) “until I die I will not pass my wholesomeness from me,” it teaches that he did out of love (as opposed to fear).  Rabi Yehoshua said, who will uncover the dust from your eyes Raban Yochanan ben Zakai?  For you would expound all your days that Iyov only worshipped Hashem out of fear, as it says, “a man complete and straight, god-fearing, and shunning wicked,” and didn’t Yehoshua the student of your student teach that out of love he did it?

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who warned his wife and she secluded herself (with the man he warned her against), even if he heard from a flying bird (meaning a traditionally unreliable source, as opposed to witnesses in which case he brings her to drink), he must exit (the marriage) and give her her ktuba, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Rabi Yehoshua says, until they argue, those who spin by the moon (if there are no witnesses, he requires it to be common gossip, because then it is improper for him to be married to her).

Bet: If one witness said, I saw that she became tame (defiled), she wouldn’t drink (because we believe this witness).  And not only that, even a slave or a maidservant, behold they are believed to make her invalid from her ktuba (a sota).  Her mother-in-law, her mother-in-law’s daughter, her rival (wife), her sister-in-law, and her husband’s daughter (from another wife), behold they are believed (if they say they saw her become tame, even though we generally think these women want her to be sent away), but not to make her invalid from her ktuba, but to make her not drink.

Gimmel: It would have been logical (to say,) just as the first testimony (that she secluded herself with the man) which does not make her assur (to her husband) eternally is not enacted with less than two (witnesses), (so too) the last testimony (that she was defiled) which makes her assur eternally, isn’t it logical that it will not be enacted with less than two?  (A pasuk) comes to teach us, “and there is no witness by her,” any testimony which there is by here (will make her invalid).  (There is) a kal vechomer for the first testimony from here, just as the last testimony, which makes her invalid eternally, is enacted with one witness, so too the first testimony, which does not make her assur eternally, isn’t it logical that it should be enacted with one witness?  It comes to teach us, “for he found in her a thing of nakedness,” and later he says, “based on two witnesses… a thing shall be enacted.”  Just as later it is based on two witnesses, also here based on two witnesses.

Daled: If one witness says, she became tame, and one witness says, she didn’t become tame, (or) one woman says she became tam, and a woman says, she didn’t become tame, she would drink.  One says, she became tame and two witnesses say, she didn’t become tame, she would drink.  Two said, she became tame, and one said, she didn’t become tame, she wouldn’t drink (and would be assumed tame).

Perek Zayin

Aleph: These are said in any language, the paragraph of sota (when the woman is being informed, it is done in a language she understands, not necessarily Hebrew), confession of ma’aser (a declaration made when one makes sure his house is free of ma’asrot), reading of shma, shmone esre, the blessing on food (said after the meal), the oath of testimony, and the oath of a deposit (that a guard did not misuse it).

Bet: And these are said (only) in the holy language (Hebrew), the reading for bikurim (which is said when the first fruits are brought to the Beit Hamikdash), chalitza (when a man denies his late brother’s wife levirate marriage), blessing and curses (which were recited from the torah by the levi’im), the blessing of the kohen gadol (on Yom Hakippurim), the paragraph of the king (read at hakhel), the paragraph of egla arufa (which the sages read when they kill a calf in repentance for an unknown corpse found), and the one (kohen) anointed for battle when he speaks to the nation (to encourage them).

Gimmel: The reading for the bikurim (first fruits), how (do we know it needs to be said in Hebrew)?  “And you shall answer and say before Hashem your God,” (referring to the blessings and curses) and there it says, “and the levi’im shall answer and say” (referring to the bikurim).  Just as the answering there is in Hebrew, so too here (it is said) in Hebrew. 

Daled: (The formula said when performing) chalitza how?  “And she shall answer and say,” (referring to chalitza) and there it says, “and the levi’im shall answer and say.”  Just as answering there is in Hebrew, so too here it is in Hebrew.  Rabi Yehuda says, “and she shall answer and say like this,” (the like this teaches us that it is only valid) when she says it in Hebrew.

Hay: Blessings and curses how?  Since the children of Israel crossed the Jordan (when coming into Eretz yisra’el with Yehoshua) and they came to Mount Grizim and Mount Eval which were in Shomron on the side of Shchem, which is next to Eloney More, as it says, “are they not across the Jordan etc.” and there it says, “and Avraham passed in the land, until the place of Shchem until the place of Elon More,” just as the Elon More said there is Shchem, so too the Elon More which is said here is Shchem.  Six tribes went up to the top of Mount Grizim and six tribes went up to the top of Mount Eval, and the kohanim and levi’im and the ark were standing down in the middle, the kohanim encircling the ark, and the levi’im (encircling) the kohanim, and all of yisra’el from here and there, as it says, “and all of yisra’el and its elders, its officers, and its judges are sanding on here and here (either side) of the ark etc.”  they turned to face Mount Grizim and opened with a blessing, blessed is the man who shall not make a statue and a molten image, and these and these (on both sides) say amen.  They turned to face Mount Eval and opened with a curse, “cursed is the man who shall make a statue or a molten image,” and these and these answer amen, until they finished the blessings and curses.  And afterwards they brought the stones and plastered it with plaster, and they wrote on it all the words of the torah in seventy languages, as it says, “well clarified,” and they took the stones and came and slept in their places (in Gilgal).

Vav: The blessing of the kohanim how?  In the country they say it as three blessings, and in the Beit Hamikdash one blessing.  In the Beit Hamikdash he says the name (of Hashem) as it is written, and in the country with a nickname.  In the country the kohanim raise their hands opposite their shoulders, and in the Beit Hamikdash on top of their heads, except for the kohen gadol who does not raise his hands above the tzitz (golden head plate of the kohen gadol).  Rabi Yehuda says, also the kohen gadol raises his hands above the tzitz, as it says, “and Aaron raised his hands to the nation and he blessed them.”

Zayin: The blessings of the kohen gadol (on Yom Hakippurim), how?  The chazzan (cantor) of the synagogue takes the sefer torah and gives it to the had of the synagogue, and the head of the synagogue gives it to the sgan (deputy kohen gadol), and the sgan gives it to the kohen gadol, and the kohen gadol stands, accepts, and reads standing, and reads, “after the death,” and, “but on the tenth day.”  And he rolls the torah, rests it on his lap, and says, more than what I have read to you is written here.  “And on the tenth,” which is in Bamidbar, he reads by heart, and he blesses on it eight blessings, on the torah, on the service, on the thanksgiving, on the pardon for sin, on the Beit Hamikdash, on Yisra’el, on the kohanim, and on the rest of the prayers.

Chet: The paragraph of the king (read for hakhel), how?  Motzei the first Yom Tov of Sukkot, on the eighth (year) motzei shvi’it, they make him a wooden stage in the courtyard, and he sits on it, as it says, “after seven years on the festival etc.”  The chazzan of the synagogue takes the sefer torah and gives it to the had of the synagogue, and the head of the synagogue gives it to the sgan, and the sgan gives it to the kohen gadol, the kohen gadol gives it to the king, and the king stands, accepts it, reads, and sits.  Agripas the king stood, accepted, and read standing, and the Chachamim praised him.  And when they reached, “you cannot put upon yourself a foreign man,” (which Agripas was) his eyes filled with tears They said to him, do not be afraid, Agripas, you are our brother, you are our brother, you are our brother.  And he reads from the beginning of, “these are the things,” until, “shma,” and “shma,” “and it shall be if you listen (the second paragraph of shma),” “tithe shall you tithe,” “when you have finished tithing,” the paragraph of the king, and the blessings and the curses, until he finishes the paragraph.  The blessings which the kohen gadol blesses, the king blesses, except for that he puts that of festivals instead of forgiveness of sin.

Perek Chet

Aleph: The one (kohen) anointed for (addressing the nation before) war, when he speaks to the nation, he would speak in Hebrew, as it says, “and it will be when you come close to war and the kohen will approach,” this is the kohen anointed for war.  “And he shall speak to the nation,” in Hebrew.  “And he shall say to them, hear Israel, you are getting close today to a war with your enemies,” and not on you brothers.  Not Yehuda against Shimon, not Shimon against Binyamin, for if they (your brothers) shall fall into your hands, you should have mercy on them, as it says, “and the people rose up who were mentioned by name, and the took captives and all of their naked they clothed from the spoils, and they dressed them, gave them shoes, fed them, gave them to drink, anointed them, carried the weak on donkeys, and brought them to Yericho the city of palms by their brothers, and they (the warriors) returned to Shomron.”  Against your enemies you are going, for if they fall into your hand, you do not have mercy on them.  “Let not your hearts be soft, do not be afraid and do not be alarmed etc.” Let not you’re your heart become soft, from the neighing of horses and the sharpening of swords.  Do not be afraid, from the clanging of shields and the large number of soldiers.  Do not be alarmed, from the sounds of the horns.  Do not be frightened, from the sound of the shouting.  “because Hashem your God is walking with you,” they come for the winning of flesh and blood and you come for the winning of Hashem.  The Plishtim came for the winning of Goliat, and what was their end?  In the end, he fell by the sword, and they fell with him.  The children of Ammon came for the winning of Shovach, what was his and?  In the end he fell by the sword, and they fell with him.  And you, you are not like that.  “Because Hashem your God who goes with you to fight for you etc.” this is the camp of the ark.

Bet: “And the officers should speak to the nation saying, who is the man who ha built a new house and has not dedicated it, he shall go and settle his house etc.”  Whether he built a house for straw, cattle, wood, or storage, whether he built, bought, inherited, or received as a gift (he leaves from war).  “And who is the man who planted a vineyard and did not redeem it.”  Whether he planted a vineyard, planted five food trees, even of five types, whether he planted, made runners, or grafted, whether he bought, inherited, or got as a gift.  “And who is the man who engaged a woman,” whether he engaged a virgin, a widow, or even one waiting for yibum, even if he head his brother died in war (and he will need to do yibum), he returns and comes to her (his wife).  All of these hear the words of the kohen while at the battlefront and they return and provide water and food and fix the roads (do safer work for the general welfare).

Gimmel: And these do not return, one who builds a gate-house (for a guard), a portico (covered deck), or a patio, one who plants four food trees or five serak (non fruit-bearing) trees, one who takes back one he divorced, a widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalitza to a lay kohen, a mamzeret or a netina to a yisra’el, a bat yisra’el to a mamzer or natin, he would not return.  Rabi Yehuda says, also one who builds a house on its ruins (rebuilds), he would not return.  Rabi Eliezer says, also one who builds a house of brick in Shomron (where this type of house could not resist wear and was not permanent), he would not return.

Daled: And these do not move from their place (at home), one who built a house and dedicated it, planted a vineyard and redeemed it, married his fiancée, and marries his yevama, as it says, “he shall be clean for his house one year.”  For his house, this is his house.  He shall be, this is his vineyard.  And he shall make his wife happy, this is his wife.  Which he took, to include his yevama.  These do not provide water and food, and do not fix the roads.

Hay: “And the officers shall add on in saying to the nation and say, who is the man who is afraid and soft of heart he shall go and return to his home.”  Rabi Akiva says, who is afraid and soft of heart, like its meaning, for he cannot stand in the rigors of war and see a drawn sword.  Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, afraid and soft of heart, this is one who fears because of the sins in his hand, therefore the torah placed him with all of these (who go back) for he returns because of them (he will not be embarrassed, for people may think he is returning for the other reasons).  Rabi Yossi says, a widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or chalitza to a lay kohen, a mamzeret or a netina to a yisra’el, a bat yisra’el to a mamzer or natin, behold he is afraid and soft of heart.

Vav: “And it was when the officers finished speaking to the nation, and the officers of the army would count the heads of the nation.”  And at the back of the nation they would station guards before them and others behind them, and iron axes in their hands, and anyone who wants to return (after those who were told to leave) he (the guard) has the right to strike his legs, for the beginning of defeat is deserting, as it says, “Yisra’el fled from before the Plishtim and a great battering was in the nation.”  And there it says, “and the people of Yisra’el fled from the Plishtim and the slain fell down etc.”

Zayin: What is this talking about?  In an optional war (i.e. to take more land), but in a commanded war (i.e. to conquer Israel) all must go, even a groom from his room and a bride from her wedding canopy.  Rabi Yehuda says, what is this talking about?  In a commanded war, but in an obligatory war (i.e. defense) all go out, even a groom from his room and a bride from her wedding canopy.

Perek Tet

Aleph: Egla arufa (when the sages kill a calf in repentance for an unknown corpse found), in Hebrew, as it says, “if a corpse is found on the ground… and the elders shall go out and judge it,” three from the great court which was in Yerushalayim.  Rabi Yehuda says, five, as it says, “your elders,” two, and, “your judges,” two, and there is no balanced court, they add to it one.

Bet: If it is found buried in a heap, hanging in a tree, or floating on the face of the water, they would not break (the calf’s neck), as it says, “on the ground,” and not buried in a heap, “fallen,” and not hanging from a tree, “in the field,” and not floating on the face of the water.  If it was found close to a border, a town which is mostly non-Jews, or a town which does not have a court, they would not break.  They do not measure (the closest city is the source of the calf which has its neck broken) except from a city which has a court.  If it was found equidistant between two cities, they both bring two calves, according to Rabi Eliezer.  And Yerushalayim does not bring an calf.

Gimmel: If his head was found in one place and his body in another, the carry the head to near the body, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Rabi Akiva says, the body to the head.

Daled: From where would they measure?  Rabi Eliezer says, from his navel.  Rabi Akiva says, from his nose.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, from the place where he was made a corpse (killed), from his neck.

Hay: The elders of Israel became exempt, and left.  The elders of that city would bring, “the calf of cattle which was not work and which did not pull a yoke.”  And a blemish does not invalidate it.  And they lower it to Eitan Valley.  And Eitan is like its meaning, hard (for the rocks were hard there).  Even if it is not hard, it is valid.  And they break it with a hatchet from behind.  And in its place, it is assur to sow and to work (the land), and it is permitted to comb flax there or to chisel stones.

Vav: The elders of that city wash their hands with water in the place of the breaking of the calf’s neck and say, “our hands did not spill this blood and our eyes did not see.”  And did it come up in our minds (did we even think) that the elders of the court are killers?  Rather, that he (the one who died) did not come before us and we sent him away without food, and we did not see him and leave him (to go out to the wilderness) without escort.  And the kohanim say, “atone for your nation Yisra’el which you have redeemed, Hashem, and do not put innocent blood in the midst of your nation Yisra’el.”  They didn’t need to say, “and the blood shall be forgiven for them,” rather the holy spirit (prophecy) informs them, when you do like this (this process), the blood will be forgiven for them.

Zayin: If the killer is found before the calf has its neck broken, it goes out and grazes with the herd.  If (the killer was found) after when the calf had its neck broken, it (the calf) should be buried in its place, for it came based on doubt in the first place, it atoned for its doubt and served its purpose.  If the calf had its neck broken and then the killer was found, behold he (the killer) is killed.

Chet: If one witness says, I saw the murderer, and one witness says, you didn’t see, (or) a woman says, I saw, and a woman says, you didn’t see, they would break the neck (for they could not trust that the murder was seen).  If one witness says, I saw and two witnesses say, you didn’t see, they would break the neck.  If two say, we saw, and one says to them, you didn’t see, they would not break the neck (we believe the two).

Tet: When the killers became many, egla arufa was cancelled.  From when Elazar ben Dinai came, and he was called Tchina ben Prisha (he took on an alias), they returned to call him son of the murderer (for he became a known assassin).  When adulterers became many, they stopped the bitter waters (of sota), and Raban Yochanan ben Zakai stopped them, as it says, “I will not remember on your daughters if they become harlots and on your daughters-in-law if they commit adultery, for they etc.” (hinting that if the men are not good enough the waters will not test).  From when Yossi ben Yoezer a person of Tzrar and Yossi ben Yochanan a man of Yerushalayim died, the clusters (referring to people who were exceptional in their torah study and accomplishments) ceased, as is says, “there is no cluster to eat, the first-fruit of which my soul desires.”

Yud: Yochanan the kohen gadol abolished the confession of ma’aser (confirming that one had given it).  He also annulled the me’orerim (levi’im who recited a certain pasuk which he found problematic) and the nokfim (those who stunned animals before korbanot).  Until his days there was a hammer for striking in Yerushalayim.  And in his days, they did not need to ask about dmai (for he proclaimed that only trumat ma’aser and ma’aser sheni had to be taken from dmai, so people did not need to know what had been taken).

Yud Aleph: From when the Sanhedrin was abolished, the singing was cancelled from weddings, as it says, “with a song they shall not drink wine.”

Yud Bet: From when the early nevi’im died, the urim vetumim (jeweled golden breastplate with a parchment of holy writing folded inside it which could be consulted to get a message from Hashem) was voided.  From when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, the shamir (a creature used to cut through stone in making the Beit Hamikdash) and the nofet tzufim (a certain type of choice honey) ceased and the man of belief (in Hashem, for they now relied on only themselves) stopped, as it says, “save (us) Hashem for the pious has finished etc.”  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabi Yehoshua, from the day the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, there is no day on which there is no curse, the dew has not come down for blessing, and the flavor of fruits has been removed.  Rabi Yossi says, also the lushness of fruits has been removed.

Yud Gimmel: Rabi Shimon ben Elazar says, (the lack) of tahara (ritual purity) removed the taste and the smell (from produce).  Ma’asrot removed the lushness of grain.  Chachamim say, whorishness and witchcraft have removed it all.

Yud Daled: In the war of Vespasian they decreed about the diadems of grooms (that they were not allowed) and the tambourine (that it should not be used in festivals). In the war of Titus they decreed about the diadems of brides and that a person shall not teach his son in Greek.  In the last war (that which caused the destruction) they decreed that a bride should not go our with a canopy into the city.  And our rabbis allowed that a bride should go out under a canopy in the city.

Tet Vav: From when Rabi Meir died, the makers of parables were ended.  From when Ben Azay died, the diligent scholars ended.  From when Ben Zoma died, the expounders ended.  From when Rabi Yehoshua died, goodness left the world.  From when Raban Shimon ben Gamliel died, locust came and problems multiplied.  From when Rabi Elazar ben Azarya died, wealth left from the sages.  From when Rabi Akiva died, honor for the torah ended.  From when Rabi Chanina ben Dosa died, men of (good) deed ended.  From when Rabi Yossi Katnuta died, the pious ended, and why was his name called katnuta (small)?  For he was the smallest among the pious.  From when Raban Yochanan be Zakai died, the splendor of wisdom ended.  From when Raban Gamliel the elder died, honor for the torah ended and tahara and abstinence died.  From when Rabi Yishma’el ben Pavi died, the splendor of kehuna ended.  From when Rabi died, humility and fear of sin ended.  Rabi Pinchas ben Yair says, from when the Beit Hamikdash was destroyed, chaverim (those careful about the laws of purity and tithes) and free people were ashamed, they covered their heads, the men of deeds became lessened, and the men of the arm (might) and tongue triumphed, and there is no one who examines, and no one who asks, and no one who inquires (to step in and fix things).  On whom can we rest?  On our Father in heaven.  Rabi Eliezer Hagadol says, from the day the Beit hamikdash was destroyed, the scholars became like teachers, the teachers like cantors, the cantors like commoners, and the commoners lessened, and there is no one who asks.  On whom can we rest?  On our Father in heaven.  In the footsteps (right before the coming of) the mashiach insolence will increase, expensiveness will sore, the vine will give its fruit but wine will be expensive, the government will turn to heresy, and there is no rebuke, a committee house will be for immorality, the Galil will be destroyed, the Gavlen (Golan) will be barren, the people of the border will travel from city to city and not encamp, the wisdom of the scribes will rot, those who fear sin will be hated, and truth will be absent.  Children will humble elders, and elders will stand before children.  “Son will insult father, daughter will rise against mother, a daughter-in-law (against) her mother-in-law, the enemies of a man are the people of his house.”  The face of the generation is like the face of a dog, a son is not embarrassed from his father, and upon whom can we lean?  On our Father in heaven.  Rabi Pinchas ben Yair says, zealousness leads to cleanliness, cleanliness leads to tahara, tahara leads to abstinence, abstinence leads to holiness, holiness leads to humility, humility leads to fear of sin, fear of sin leads to piety, piety leads to holy spirit, holy spirit leads to the resurrection of the dead, and the resurrection of the dead comes at the hands of Eliyahu mentioned for good, amen.

Mesechet Gittin

Perek Aleph

Aleph: One who brings a get (refers to any legal document, but generally refers to a divorce document) from overseas must say, before me it was written and before me it was signed (for a get is signed by two witnesses).  Raban Gamliel says, also one who brings (a get) from Rakem and Chever (cities near Israel).  Rabi Eliezer says, even from Kfar Lodin (outside of Israel and close) to Lod (in Israel).  Chachamim say, he does not have to say, before me it was written and before me it was signed, unless he brings it from overseas (far away) or takes it (from Israel overseas).  And one who brings from country to country in the overseas countries must say, before we it was written and before me it was signed.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, even from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.

Bet: Rabi Yehuda says (outside of Israel is anywhere), from Rekem and eastward, and Rekem is like the east, from Ashkelon and southward, and Ashkelon is like the south, and from Akko northward, and Akko is like the north.  Rabi Meir says, Akko is like Israel for (the matter of) gittin.

Gimmel: One who brings a get in Israel does not have to say, before me it was written, and before me it was signed.    If there is an appeal about it, it will stand based on its signatories (the people who signed will confirm).  One who brings a get from overseas and cannot say, before me it was written and before me it was signed, if there are witnesses, it will stand by its signatories.

Daled: Whether the get of women (divorce documents) or (documents for the) release of slaves, the one who takes and the one who brings are the same (in their requirements).  (This is) one of the ways the women’s gittin and (the document) for the release of a slave are the same.

Hay: Any document which has a kuti witness is invalid, except for the gittin of women and to free a slave.  There was a case where they brought before Raban Gamliel at Kfar Otnay the get of a woman, and the witnesses were kutim, and he validated it.  All bills which come from the courts of non-Jews, even though their signatories are non-Jews, are valid, except for the gittin of women and the freeing of slaves.  Rabi Shimon says, also these are valid, they are not mentioned other than in a time where they are done by laymen (as opposed to the courts).

Vav: One who says (to a messenger), give this get to my wife and this bill of release to my slave, if he wants to return on both of them (before they are given), he may return, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, by the gittin of women, but not by the freeing of slaves, for one can merit for a person who is not before him (freeing the slave on his behalf) but one does not obligate for another (the get) other than in his presence.  For if he wants not to maintain his slave, he has the right (meaning the slave is not losing any right by being freed) but not to maintain his wife, he is not permitted (and she is losing the right to maintenance by getting a get).  He (Rabi Meir) said to them (the Chachamim), behold, is he not invalidating the slave from eating truma just as he is invalidating the wife?  They said to him, because he (the slave) is his property.  One who says, give this get to my wife and this bill of release to my slave, and he died, they do not give after death.  (If one said) give a maneh to so-and-so, and he died, they give (the money to the person) after death.

Perek Bet

Aleph: One who brings a get from overseas and says, before me it was written, but not before me it was signed; (he says,) before me it was signed, but not, before me it was written; before me all of it was written and before me half of it was signed (only one witness); or, before me half of it was written and before me it was signed, it is invalid.  If one (person) says, before me it was written, and one (other person) says, before me it was signed, it is invalid.  If two say, before us it was written and one says, before me it was signed, it is invalid, and Rabi Yehuda validates.  If one says, before me it was written and two say, before us it was signed, it is valid.

Bet: If it was written during the day (the date of which appears on the get) and signed during the day, (written) during the night and signed during the night, during the night and signed during the day, it is valid (for all parts were done on the date written on the get).  During the day and signed at night (which constitutes the beginning of the next day), it’s invalid.  Rabi Shimon validates, for Rabi Shimon would say, all documents which are written during the day and signed at night arte invalid, except for the gittin of women.  

Gimmel: They may write (the document) with anything, with ink, with sam (a colored earth), with sikra (a red dye), gum resin, or calcanthum, with anything which marks (lastingly).  They may not write with liquids (food dyes), fruit juice, or with anything which does not last.  They may write on anything, on olive leaf; on a cow’s horn, and he gives her the cow; (even) on a slave’s hand, and he gives her the slave. Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, they may not write on something alive or on foods.

Daled: They may not write on something attached to the ground.  If he wrote it while (the object was) attached, he detached it (from the ground), signed it, and gave it to her, it’s valid.  Rabi Yehuda invalidates until its writing and signing are on something detached.  Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira says, they may not write on erased paper or on blotting paper because he can forge them (they are easy to erase unnoticeably), and the Chachamim validate.

Hay: All are valid to write a get, even one who is deaf-dumb, mentally infirm, or a minor.  A woman may write her own get, and a man may write his receipt (which the wife gives him upon receiving her ktuba), for the enactment of the get is only with its signing.  All are valid to deliver a get, except for a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, minor, blind person, and non-Jew.

Vav: If a minor received (a get to deliver) and he became an adult, a deaf-dumb person and he became of sound-senses, a blind person and he regained sight, a mentally infirm person he became competent, or he was a non-Jew and converted, it’s invalid.  But, if he was of sound senses, he became deaf-dumb, and returned to being of sound senses; a sighted person, he became blind, and became sighted again; or was competent, became mentally infirm, and then competent, he’s valid.  This is the general rule, all whose beginning and end is with knowledge (competence) is valid.

Zayin: Even a woman who isn’t believed to say (about a woman), her husband died (and she can remarry, these are women who have interests in seeing the woman getting divorced), are believed to bring her get, (they are) her mother-in-law, her mother-in-law’s daughter, her rival (another wife of her husband), her sister-in-law, and the daughter of her husband.  What is the difference between (bringing) a get and (testifying about) dying?  That the writing proves.  A woman herself may bring her get (to a court which will allow her to remarry), she only needs to say, before me it was signed.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Any get which is written which is not for the sake of a (specific) woman is invalid.  How?  If one was passing through the shuk and heard the voice of a scholar dictating (to students who were practicing writing gittin), a man so-and-so divorces (his wife) so-and-so, from such-and-such a place, and he said, that is my name and that is the name of my wife, it’s invalid to get divorced with.  Even more than that, he wrote it to divorce his wife and he changed his mind, someone from his town found him and said, my name is like your name and my wife’s name is like your wife’s name, it is invalid to get divorced with it.  Even more than that, if he had two wives and their names were the same, if he wrote it to divorce the older one, he may not divorce the younger one with it.  Even more than that, if he said to the scribe, write it for whichever one I want to marry, it is invalid to get divorced with it.

Bet: One who writes the texts of gittin (standard part which is the same for every get) must leave space for the man, space for the woman, and space for the date.  (If he wrote the texts for) loan documents, he must leave space for the lender, space for the borrower, space for the (amount of) money, and space for the date.  Bills of purchase, he must leave space for the buyer, space for the seller, space for the money, place for the field (to designate which field is being sold), and place for the date, because of the decree (that scribes could write these blank documents in order to make it easier for them).  Rabi Yehuda invalidate them all.  Rabi Elazar validates them all except for gittin of women, for it says, “and he shall write for her,” (meaning) for her sake.

Gimmel: One who is delivering a get and lost it, if he found it immediately, it’s valid, and if not, it’s invalid (we fear it might be another get with the same names).  If he finds it in a small bag, case (in which he was carrying it), or he recognizes it, it’s valid.  One who brings a get and he left him (the husband who gave the get), old or sick he gives it to her assuming he is alive.  A bet yisra’el who is married to married to a kohen, and he husband went overseas, she eats truma based on the precedent that he is alive.  One who sends a chatat from overseas they offer it with the precedent that he is alive.

Daled: Three things Rabi Eliezer ben Parta said before the Chachamim and they enacted his words.  About a city which is under siege, a ship which is being torn apart in the sea, and on one who is going to be tried (in court in a capital case), that they have precedent for being alive.  But a city which was captured by besiegers, a ship which was lost at sea, and one going out to be killed, they put upon him the stringencies of the living and the stringencies of the dead, a bat yisra’el (married) to a kohen and a bat kohen to a yisra’el, she may not eat truma.

Hay: One who delivers a get in Israel (meaning he does not have to testify to his presence at the making of the get) and becomes sick, behold he sends it in the hand of another.  And if he (the husband) said to him, take such-and-such an object from her for me, he may not send it in another’s hand, for it is not his wish to have his deposit in the hand of another. 

Vav: One who delivers a get from overseas and becomes sick, the court makes (a second messenger) and delivers it, and he (the one who got sick) says before them, before me it was written and before me it was signed  And the second messenger does not have to say, before me it was written and before me it was signed, rather he says, I am the messenger of the court.

Zayin: One who lends money to a kohen, a levi, or a poor person, such that (on condition that) they would keep their part (the tithes due to them in order to exempt him from having to separate later), he separates based on them with precedent that they are alive, and he does not have to worry that the kohen or levi died or the poor person became rich.  If they died, he gets authorization (to retain his tithes).  If he lent in court, he does not need authorization from the heirs.

Chet: One who sets down (aside) produce to separate from them truma and ma’asrot, (or) money to separate from them ma’aser sheni, he separates from them with precedent that they (the things he already separated) exist.  If they were lost, behold he worries from time to time (re-evaluates every day), according to Rabi Elazar ben Shamu’a.  Rabi Yehuda says, at three points they check the wine (from a truma and ma’aser perspective), at the east wind on motzei Sukkot, when the blossom falls (from the wine), and at the time the water enters the unripe grapes (when they start to moisten).

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who sends a get to his wife (with an agent) and he met up with the messenger (by chance) or he sent a messenger after him and said to him, the get which I sent you is annulled, behold it is annulled.  If he reached his wife first, or he sent a messenger to her and said to her, the get which I sent you is annulled, behold it is annulled.  If it is after the get got to her hand, he cannot still annul it.

Bet: At first, (the husband) would make a court in a different place (not with the wife or messenger) and annul it, but Raban Gamliel the Elder decreed that they would not do such, for the sake of public interest (for example, if the woman does not find out about this provisional court, she may marry and her children will be mamzerim).  At first, he would change his name and her name, the name of his city and the name of her city (when writing the get if they were called something different in the place he was writing the get), but Raban Gamliel the Elder established that he would write, the man so-and-so and all names he has, the woman so-and-so and all names she has, because of public interest.

Gimmel: A widow does not collect from the property of orphans except with an oath (that she has not yet collected anything).  If they refrained from making her take an oath, Raban Gamliel the Elder established that she can vow to the orphans on anything (which was considered less serious than an oath), and she collects her ktuba.  The witnesses (of the get being given) sign the get because of the public interest.  Hillel instituted pruzbol (a document which causes loans to last throughout shvi’it) because of the public interest.

Daled: A slave who was taken captive and redeemed (by a third party), if for the sake of (his being) a slave, he is a slave.  If for the sake of a freedman, he will not be a slave.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, either way, he is a slave.  A slave whose master made him a mortgage to another and (then) freed him, based on the letter of law the slave is not obligated (to the lender) at all.  But, because of the public interest, they force his master (meaning the lender) to make him a freedman, and he (the slave) writes a document for his worth (which replaces him as the mortgage).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, he does not write, rather the one who freed him (the borrower).

Hay: One who is half slave half freedman works for his master one day and himself one day, according to Beit Hillel.  Beit Shamay said to them, you fixed it for the master, but for him you haven’t fixed it, he cannot marry a maidservant for he is already half a freedman, and he cannot marry a free woman, for he is already half a slave, should he refrain (from getting married)?  And behold, wasn’t the world only created for being fruitful and multiplying, as it says, “not wasteful did He create it, to be inhabited He fashioned it.”  Rather, for the purpose of the public interest, they force his master and make him a freedman, and he rights a bill for half of his value.  Beit Hillel returned to agree with the opinion of Beit Shamay.

Vav: One who sells his slave to a non-Jew or to outside of Israel, he (the slave) goes free (because if he has a Jewish owner he may do certain mitzvot).  One does not (have to) redeem captives for more than their value for the public interest (so that people will not learn that it is profitable to kidnap).  And they do not help captives escape for the public interest (so future captives will not be held cruelly).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, because of a decree for captives (the other captives who are being held).  And one does not buy holy books, tfillin, or mezuzot from non-Jews for more than their value, because of the public interest.

Zayin: One exits from (his marriage with) his wife because of a bad name (people believe her to have committed adultery), he may not return (to being married with her).  Because of a vow (which he does not approve of, so he divorces her), he may not return.  Rabi Yehuda says, any vow which is known to the masses, he may not return, but one which is not known to the masses, he may return.  Rabi Meir says, any vow which requires examination from a sage (and cannot simply be annulled by her husband) he may not take her back, but that which does not require examination by a sage he may return.  Rabi Eliezer says, they didn’t forbid this except because of that (they only made the prohibition by the vow that requires examination because of the case of the vow which does not need examination, meaning that that case should also be prohibited).  Rabi Yossi bar Yehuda said, there was a case in Tzidan where one who said to his wide, konam if I don’t divorce you, and he divorced her, and the Chachamim allowed him to return her, because of the public interest.

Chet: One who exits from his wife because (she is) an aylonit (one who is barren), Rabi Yehuda says, he may not return.  Chachamim say, he may return.  If she married another and had children from him, and she claims he ktuba (from the first husband, for an aylonit, which she now clearly isn’t, is not entitled to her ktuba), Rabi Yehuda said, they say to her, your silence is better for you than your speech (for your husband may say he would not have divorced you if he know you were not an aylonit, which could create problems).

Tet: One who sells himself and his children to a non-Jew, they do not redeem him, but they redeem his children after the death of the father.  One who sells his field to non-Jew and a Jew returned and bought it from him, the buyer brings bikurim (even though the produce grew while in the non-Jew’s possession) because of the public interest (so people will realize that land retains its kdusha and will work to buy it back).

Perek Hay

Aleph: Those who are damaged (their claim) is assessed (collected) on idit (choice lands), one who is owed one beynonit (land of intermediate quality), and the ktuba of a woman with ziburit (poor quality land).  Rabi Meir says, also the ktuba of a woman with beynonit.

Bet: One does not pay back a claim with mortgaged property (which a third party creditor now possesses) when there is free property, even if they (the free property) are ziburit (despite the fact that the person is entitled to idit).  One does not pay back a claim from the property of orphans except with ziburit.

Gimmel: One does not take out for consumed land (if one bought land which was stolen and the original owner claimed back the land, the one who bought and planted the land claims money for the produce he planted from the thief who sold him the land), improvement of the land (in the same case as above, the buyer claims monies for any improvement made to the property from the original owner), or for maintenance of the wife and daughters (paid by the heirs to the wife and daughters of a dead man) from mortgaged property, because of the public interest (because the person cannot know exactly how much to leave unmortgaged, we do not want those who take things as a mortgage to have fear of losing their property).  And one who finds a lost thing does not swear (that he returned it) because of the public interest (for in the future people will not bother to deal with lost items).

Daled: Orphans who relied on a homeowner or their father appointed a guardian for them, he must tithe their produce.  A guardian who the father of the orphans appointed must swear (that he did not take any property from the estate).  If the court appointed him, he doesn’t swear (for unlike one appointed by the father, he is unpaid, and would not take the job if he had to swear).  Abba Shaul says, it’s the opposite (one appointed by the father is doing it as a kindness to the father, whereas one appointed by the court becomes known as a trustworthy, so he will not hesitate to take the oath).  One who makes (truma) tame, mixes (truma and chulin), or libates (uses wine of avoda zara) accidentally, he is patur (from paying for the loss of usable truma), if intentionally, chayav.  Kohanim who intentionally make pigul (a sacrifice which was intended to be eaten after the allowed time) in the Beit Hamikdash is chayav.

Hay: Rabi Nechunya ben Gudgeda testified about a deaf-dumb woman whose father married her off, that she exits (the marriage) with a get (which she, and not her father, receives), and about a minor bat yisra’el who married a kohen, that she eats truma.  And if she died, her husband inherits her.  And (he testified) about a stolen beam which is built into the palace, that he (the thief) must give its value (and not the beam itself) because of the decree for the repenters (for if thieves have to demolish buildings to return things, they will not return as readily), and about a stolen chatat (a stolen animal used for a chatat), that the public is unaware of, that it does atone, because of the sake of the mizbe’ach (so people are not over careful when bringing korbanot).

Vav: There was no sikrikon (a non-Jew who threatens to kill someone if they do not hand over their land) in Yehuda in the killed of the war (with Titus, for, since there was a decree to kill every Jew, the turnover of land was thought permanent).  From those killed in the war an on, there was sikrikon.  How?  If one bought from a sikrikon and then bought from a homeowner, his sale is null (for the homeowner may have sold figuring he could get it back).  But if he bought from the owner and the bought from the sikrikon, his sale is valid (for the homeowner signed over property independent of the sikrikon).  If one bought from a man and then from the wife, his sale is null (for she may say that she only wanted to sell to please her husband).  If (he bought) from the wife and then from the man, it is valid (for the claim is invalid).  This is the original mishna.  A court after them said, one who buys from a sikrikon gives the owners a fourth.  When?  When they can’t (afford to) buy it.  But if they can buy it, they take precedent over all other people.  Rabi convinced the court and they counted (votes, meaning ruled) that if it sat before the sikrikon twelve months, whoever comes first to buy merits, but he gives the owners a fourth.

Zayin: One who is deaf-dumb may hint and is hinted to (communicate), and Ben Bteira says, he may speak with lips and read lips for (transactions involving only) objects (and not land).  Children (six or seven years old), their purchase is a purchase and their sale is a sale by objects.

Chet: And these are things they said because of the ways of peacefulness, a kohen reads (gets an aliya from the torah) first, a levi after him, and after him a yisra’el because of the ways of peacefulness.  They make an eruv (combined property which allows all owners of parts of a courtyard to carry in the courtyard on Shabbat) in an old house (where they have always done it) because of the ways of peacefulness.  A pit which is closest to a water canal is filled first because of the ways of peacefulness.  Traps for animals, fowl, and fish (taking them or their contents) is treated as theft because of the ways of peacefulness.  Rabi Yossi says, this is actual theft.  The findings of a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, and minor (which technically do not belong to them) have theft because of the ways of peacefulness.  Rabi Yossi says, this is actual theft.  A poor person who beats the top of an olive tree (to harvest the olives), whatever is beneath him is theft, because of the ways of peacefulness.  Rabi Yossi says, this is actual theft.  One does not prevent a non-Jew from leket, shichicha, or pe’ah because of the ways of peacefulness.

Tet: A woman may lend her friend who is suspect by shvi’it a sifter, a sieve, a hand-mill, or an oven.  But she may not sift or grind with her.  The wife of a chaver (one who is careful by tithes and tahara) may lend to the wife of an am ha’aretz a sifter or a sieve, and she may separate, grind, or sift with her, but once she has poured water, she can’t touch it, for you don’t help those who are engaged in transgression.  And this was all said because of the ways peacefulness.  One may encourage non-Jews on shvi’it (as in, say good luck), but not a Jew.  And you greet people, out of the ways of peacefulness.

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who says, receive this get for my wife, or, bring this get to my wife, if he wants to retract (withdraw the giving of the get) he may retract (by getting the get back from the agent before it reaches his wife).  A woman who said, receive my get for me, if he wants to return, he may not return (for she consented, so even though it is to her detriment, the messenger acts as her).  Therefore, if the husband said to him, I don’t want you to receive for her, rather go and give it to her, if he wants to retract, he can retract.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, even one (a wife) who says, take for me my get (and deliver it, but not receive it), if he wants to retract, he cannot retract.

Bet: A woman who said, receive my get for me, needs two sets of witnesses, two (witnesses) who say, before us she said (to receive it on her behalf) and two who say, before us he accepted and tore up (the get, this is an explanation of why she does not have the get, for if she has the get, no witnesses are necessary).  Even if the first (pair) is the second, or one of the first and one of the second (both come) with one who combines with (each of) them (i.e. is part of both sets of witnesses).  An engaged young girl, she and her father accept her get.  Rabi Yehuda said, two hands (people) cannot merit as one, rather only her father accepts her get.  And all who cannot keep their own get (i.e. a minor), she cannot be divorced.

Gimmel: A minor (who is capable of keeping, and therefore receiving a get) who said, receive my get fro me, it is not a get until the get reaches her hands.  Therefore, if the husband wanted to retract, he may retract, for a minor does not make an agent.  But if her father said to him (the agent) go and receive my daughter’s get for her, if he (the husband) wanted to retract, he cannot retract.  One who says, give this get to my wife in such-and-such a place, and he gave it to her in a different place, it is invalid.  (If he said to the agent,) behold she is in such-and-such a place, if he gave it to her in a different place, it is valid.  A woman who said, receive my get for me in such-and-such a place, and he received it in another place, it is invalid, and Rabi Eliezer validates it.  (If she said) being me the get from such-and-such a place, and he brought it from another place, it is valid.

Daled: (If a woman who was married to a kohen said to an agent,) bring me my get, she eats truma until the get reaches her hands.  (If she said to the agent,) accept my get for me, she is immediately forbidden to eat truma.  Accept my get from such-and-such a place, she may eat truma until the get gets to that place, and Rabi Eliezer forbids immediately.

Hay: One who says (to two people, so they can be witnesses for the get), write a get and give it to my wife, divorce her, write a letter and give it to her, behold these should write and give (a get).  (If he said,) get rid of her, support her, do to her like the law, do to her as is fit, he didn’t say anything.  Originally they would say, one who is going out in chains and says, write a get for my wife (but does not say to give it), behold they write and give.  They returned to say, also one who goes on a sea voyage or one who goes out on a caravan.  Rabi Shimon Shezuri says, also one who is in danger (from illness).

Vav: One who was throw into a pit and said, anyone who hears my voice should write a get for my wife, behold they write and give.  A healthy person who said, write a get for my wife, he wanted to joke about her (and not give the get).  There was a case with a healthy person who said, write a get for my wife, and he went up on a roof, fell, and died.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, the Chachamim said, if he felon his own, this is  get, but if the wind blew him off, it is not a get.

Zayin: If he said to two, give a get to my wife, or to three, write a get and give it to my wife, behold they should write and give.  If he said to three, give a get to my wife, they tell other to write, because he (the husband) made them a court, according to Rabi Meir.  And this law Rabi Chanina a man of Ono brought up from prison (from Rabi Akiva, who was in prison), I have a tradition that one who says to three, give a get to my wife, that they tell others and write it, for he made them a court.  Rabi Yossi said, we said to the messenger (Rabi Chanina), we also have a tradition that even if he said to the great court in Yerushalayim, give a get to my wife, they shall learn (to write a get, for they do not tell others to carry out such functions), write, and give.  If he said to ten, write a get for my wife, one writes and two sign.  (If he said) all of you write, one writes and they all sign.  Therefore, if one of them died, behold the get is void.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who had kuryakos (a mental disorder) and said, write a get for my wife, he didn’t say anything.  If he said, write a get for my wife, he had kuryakos, and he returned (to his sanity) and said, do not write (the get), his last words are nothing (for he was of sound mind when he first asked for the get).  If he became mute, and they said to him, should we write a get for your wife?  He nodded his head, they check him three times, if he said about (something which has the proper response of) no, no, and on yes, yes, behold they write and give.

Bet: If they said to him (a man), shall we write a get for your wife, and he said, write.  They told the scribe and he wrote, and (they told) the witnesses and they signed.  Even though they wrote it, signed it, and gave it to her, or he (the husband) went back (to the people he told to write the get) and gave it to her, behold the get is void, until he (directly) says to the scribe, write, and to the witnesses, sign.

Gimmel: (One who says to his wife,) this is your get if I die, this is your get if I die from this illness (I have now), this is your get after death , he didn’t say anything (because he cannot give a get posthumously).  (If he said) from today if I die, or from now if I die, behold it is a get (because it becomes effective retroactively).  From today and after death, it is a get and not a get (we are not sure if it a get), if he dies, she does chalitza and not yibum (because the brother would not need to marry her if they were divorced).  This is your get from today if I die from this illness, and he got up, walked in the shuk, got sick, and died, they evaluate him, if he died from the first illness, it is a get, and if no, it is not a get.

Daled: She may not be alone with him except before witnesses (after she receives her get), even a slave or even a maidservant, except for her maidservant, for her heart is course with her maidservant (she is familiar with her maidservant and she doesn’t mind what she sees).  What is she in those days (when she has the get on condition but her husband has not died)?  Rabi Yehuda says, like a man’s wife (married) for everything.  Rabi Yossi says, divorced and not divorced (we are not sure).

Hay: (If a man said to his wife,) behold this is your get on the condition that you give me two-hundred zuz, behold she is divorced (from when she receives the get) and she has to give (the money to fulfill the condition).  (If he says,) on the condition that you give me (two hundred zuz) from now until thirty days, if she gave him within thirty days, she is divorced, and if not, she is not divorced.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, there was a case in Tzidan with one who said to his wife, behold this is your get on condition that you give me my cloak, and his cloak got lost, the Chachamim said, she gives him its value.

Vav: (If a man said to his wife,) behold this is your get on condition you serve my father or on condition that you nurse my son (and he doesn’t specify a time), (for) how much  (time) does she nurse him?  Two years.  Rabi Yehuda says, eighteen months,.  If the son died or the father died, behold, it is a get.  (If he said,) behold this is your get on condition that you serve my father for two years or on condition that you nurse my son for two years, if the son died, the father died, or the father said, I don’t want you to serve me, without anger (she did not anger him) it is not a get.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, like this it is a get.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said a general rule, any hindrance which is not from her, behold it is a get.

Zayin: (If a man said to his wife,) behold this is your get if I don’t come (back) from here until thirty days, and he was going from Yehuda to the Galil (and he made another condition that if he reached the Galil the get would take effect).  If he reached Antipatras (a city on the border of the Galil, but still in Yehuda) and returned (within the thirty days), his condition is null (and the get is invalid).  (If he said,) behold this is your get if I don’t come (back) from here until thirty days, and he was going from Yehuda to the Galil (with the same added condition as before).  He made it to Kfar Otnaya (on the border, but actually in the Galil), his condition is null.  Behold this is your get if I don’t come from here until thirty days, and he was going overseas.  He reached Akko and returned, his condition is null.  Behold this is your get if I pass away from your face (not see you) thirty days.  If he was going and coming, going and coming, since he was not with her, behold it is a get.

Chet: Behold this is your get if I do not come from here until thirty days, and he died with twelve months, it is not a get.  Behold this is your get from now if I don’t come from here until twelve months, and he died within twelve months, behold this is a get.

Tet: (If he said to two people,) if I do not come from here until twelve months write a get and give it to my wife, if they wrote the get within twelve months and gave after twelve months, it is not a get.  Write a get and give it to my wife if I don’t come from here until twelve months, if they wrote within twelve months and gave after twelve months, it is not a get.  Rabi Yossi says, like this it is a get.  If they wrote after twelvemonths, gave after twelve months, and he died, if the get came before the death, behold it is a get.  If the death came before the get, it isn’t a get.  And if it’s not known (which came first) this is what is said, she is divorced and not divorced.

Perek Chet

Aleph: One who throws a get to his wife and she is in her house or in her courtyard, behold she is divorced.  If he threw it to her inside his house, or inside his courtyard, even if he is with her in bed, she is not married.  (If he threw it) into her breast (on her) or in her possession, behold she is divorced.

Bet: If he said to her, take this bill of debt, or if she finds it (the get) behind him, and she reads it and behold it is her get, it is not a get, until he tells her, this is your get.  If he put it in her hand but she is sleeping (and) she wakes up, reads it, and behold it is her get, it is not her get until he tells her, this is your get.  If she was standing in the public domain and he threw it to her, if it is closer to her, she is divorced, if closer to him, she is not divorced.  Half by half (exactly in the middle), she is divorced and not divorced.

Gimmel: And so too for the issue of engagement.  And so too for the issue of debts, if his creditor said to him, throw me my debt, and he threw it to him, if it is closer to the lender, the borrower merited in it.  If it was closer to the borrower, the borrower is (still) chayav (to pay the loan).  Half on half, (exactly in between), the two of them split it. If she was standing on top of a roof, and he threw it to her (the get), since it got to the air of the roof, behold she is divorced.  If he is on top and she is on bottom, and he threw it to her, since it went out from the domain of the roof, (even) if it was erased or burned, behold she is divorced.

Daled: Beit Shamay says, he may exempt (divorce) his wife with an old get, and Beit Hillel forbid.  What is an old get?  All which he was alone with her since its writing for her.

Hay: If he wrote (the date on) it in the name of (using the years of a king) a government which isn’t honest (referring to Rome), the name of the government of Madai, the name of the government of Greece, (in the name of) the building of the Beit Hamikdash, or the destruction of the Beit Hamikdash, (or if) he was in the east and wrote, in the west, or was in the best and wrote, in the east, (and she remarried), she exits this and that (marriage), she needs a get from this and that, she does not get a ktuba, fruits (payment for what the husband gained from her nichsei tzon barzel), no maintenance, and no depreciation (payment for wear to nichsel melog), not from this one or that.  If she took from this or that, she must return.  And the offspring is a mamzer from this and that. And neither this one nor that one become tame for her (if they are kohanim), and this one and that do not have a right in her findings, the work of her hands (the things she produces), or in annulling her vows.  If she was a bat yisra’el, she is pasul from (marrying into) the kehuna, a bet levi from ma’aser, and a bat kohen from truma (for no male is giving them these things).  And the heirs of this and the heirs of that do not inherit her ktuba.  And if they died, the brother of this one and the brother of that one do chalitza (for the wife) but not yibum.  If he changed his name or her name, the name of his town or the name of her town, she exits from this and that and all of these things are (done) with her.

Vav: All inappropriate relations (relatives who exempt their rivals from yibum and chalitza) who said, their rivals are permitted (to marry), these rival went and married.  These (the relatives) were found ayloniyot (barren, meaning the marriage was void, and the rivals did in fact need yibum or chalitza), she (the rival) exits from this and that, and all of these ways (in which we remove her rights) areupon her.

Zayin: One who marries his yevama (freeing her rival) and her rival went and married, and this one, (the original) was found to be n aylonit (meaning the rival had no right to marry another man), she (the rival) must leave this one and that one, and all of there ways are upon her.

Chet: A scribe wrote a get for a woman and a receipt (which she gives to her husband when she receives her ktuba) for a woman, and he made a mistake and gave the get to the woman and the receipt to the man (even though he should have done the opposite so the woman and the man could exchange).  They gave (the documents) to each other (thinking they were the proper documents), and after some time (during which she remarried) behold (they discover) that the get come out of the hand of the man (he has the get) and the receipt comes out of the hand of the woman (she has the receipt), she exits from this and that (leaves both marriages), and all of these ways (the punishments mentioned before) are upon her.  Rabi Eliezer says, if it comes out immediately (before she’s married), this is not a get, if (it comes out) after time, behold it is a get, we do not give the first (husband) power to lose the right of the second (to be married to her).  If he wrote to divorce his wife and changed his mind, Beit Shamay says, he made her pasul from kohanim, and Beit Hillel says, even if he gave it to her on condition and the condition was not done, she is not pasul from kohanim.

Tet: One who divorces his wife and she stays the night with him at an inn (where they were seen to be alone), Beit Shamay says, she does not need a second get from him (for if they had relations, that would be engagement, which needs a get), and Beit Hillel says, she needs from him a second get.  When?  When they were divorced from marriage, and that agree that when they were divorced from engagement that she does not need a second get from him, for his heart is not coarse before her (he is not uncaring about her opinion, and won’t have relations with her).  If he married her with (based on) a get kere’ach (it was instituted that a get would be written a few lines at a time and then sewn closed, and if there are not signatures on each sewn fold, it is called a bald get, get kere’ach, and is invalid), she exits from this and that, and all of these ways are upon her.

Yud: A get kere’ach may be completed (the unsigned folds may be signed) by anyone according to Ben Nanas.  Rabi Akiva says, only relatives fit to testify elsewhere complete it (in addition to non-relatives).  And which is a get kere’ach?  All whose ties (folded portions) are more than its witnesses.

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who divorces his wife and says to her, behold you are allowed to everyone except to so-and-so, Rabi Eliezer allows (her to marry, for he considers this a complete get and the condition invalid) and Chachamim forbid (her to marry, for by retaining control with the condition, he made the get incomplete).  What should he do?  He should take it (the get) from her and return and give it to her, and say to her, behold you are allowed to everyone.  But if he wrote it (the condition) in it (the text of the get), even if he went back and erased it, it is invalid.

Bet: (If a man said to his wife while divorcing her), behold you are allowed to everyone except to my father and your father, to my brother and your brother, to a slave, a non-Jew, and to all who she cannot be engaged to, it is valid.  (If he said,) behold you are allowed to everyone, except (if you are) a widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee and a chalutza to a lay kohen, a mamzeret and a netina to a yisra’el, a bat yisra’el to a mamzer and a natin, and to all who she has engagement even in transgression, it is invalid.

Gimmel: The body (text) of a get (says), behold you are allowed to everyone.  Rabi Yehuda says (the body is), and this shall be for you from me, a book of divorce, a letter of release, and a document of exemption, to go and marry any man you want.  The body of a document of release, behold you are a freedwoman, behold you are for yourself.

Daled: Three gittin are invalid, but if she married, the children are valid (and not mamzerim), a get in his (the husband’s) handwriting with no witnesses on it (for the Chachamim do not hold like Rabi Meir that his handwriting is like witnesses), if it has witnesses but no date, or if it has a date but only one witness, behold these three gittin are invalid, but if she married the children are valid.  Rabi Eliezer says, even if there are not witnesses but he gave it to her in front of witnesses, it is valid, and she collects (her ktuba even) from mortgaged property (meaning the get is fully valid), for the witnesses do not sign on the get except form (only for) the public interest.

Hay: Two who sent two identical gittin and they got mixed up, he gives both to this on and both to that one, therefore, if one of them got lost, behold the other is invalid (for it cannot know for sure that we gave either given wife a get).  Five who wrote a joint get (for all of their wives), the man so-and-so divorces so-and-so, and so-and-so (divorces) so-and-so (etc.), and the witnesses are below, they are all valid and they give to each one.  If there was a tofes (standard text) for each one and the witnesses were below, the one the witnesses are read with (the last get) is valid (but the others aren’t).

Vav: Two gittin which were written one next to the other, and two Ivri witnesses (who would sign their names in Hebrew) come from under this one to under that one (their names under the right get and their fathers’ names under the left get), or two Greek witnesses come (who write left to right) come from under this one to under that one (their names under the left and their fathers’ names under the right get), the one which the witnesses (their names) are first read with them is valid.  If one witness is an Ivri an one is Greek and they come under this one to under that one, they are both invalid.

Zayin: If he left part of the get and wrote it on a second paper, and the witnesses are below (the end of the get), it is valid.  If the witnesses signed at the top of the page, on the side, or on the other side in a simple get (unfolded) it is invalid.  If he put the beginning of this one next to the beginning of that one (wrote a get from the middle of the page up and then from the middle down), and the witnesses are in the middle, they are both invalid.  If the end of this is next to the end of this, and the witnesses are in the middle, that which the witnesses are read with it is valid.  If the beginning of this is next to the end of that, and the witnesses are in the middle, that which the witnesses are read with is valid.

Chet: A get which is written Ivrit (in Hebrew) and its witnesses are Greek, or in Greek and its witnesses are Ivrim, one of the witnesses is Ivri and on Greek, the sofer wrote and (acted as) a witness, it is valid.  So-and-so is a witness (without his father’s name) it is valid.  The son of so-and so (without specifying their first names).  So-and-so the son of so-and-so, and he did not write, a witness, he is valid.  And this is how those who were clean in thought in Yerushalauim would do.  If his husband or wife wrote it, it is a vslid.  A forced get, by a yisra’el it is valid, but by goyim it is invalid.  And with non-Jews they beat them and say to them, do what the Jews tell you, and it’s valid.

Tet: If a rumor went out in the town that she was engaged, behold she is engaged, divorced, if (there is a tumor that) she is divorces, behold she is divorced, as long as there is no reason to question (the rumor).  What is a plausible reason to question?  The man so-and-so divorced his wife on condition, he threw her her engagement and it’s a doubt whether it was closer to her or closer to him, this is a plausible reason to doubt.

Yud: Beit Shamay says, a man may not divorce his wife unless there is something inappropriate (with her), as it says, “if he found in her an inappropriate thing.”  Beit Hillel says, even if she spoils his dish (of food), as it says, “if he found in her an inappropriate thing.”  Rabi Akiva says, even if he found another who is more pleasant than her, as it says, “and it will be is she does not find favor in his eyes.

Mesechet Kiddushin

Perek Aleph

Aleph: A woman is acquired (betrothed) in three ways, and she acquires herself (regains independence) in two ways.  She is acquired with money, a document, or relations.  With money – Beit Shamay says, with a dinar or with (things which are) worth a dinar.  Beit Hillel says, with a pruta, or worth a pruta.  And how much is a pruta?  One of eight (an eighth) of an Italian issar (which makes a pruta worth 1/192 of a dinar).  And she acquires herself with a get (divorce document) or with the death of her husband.  A yevama (one whose husband died without having children, so she has a child with her husband’s brother) is acquired (by the yavam, the husband’s brother) with (only) relations.  And she acquires herself with chalitza (a process which signifies a rejection of yibum) and with the death of the yavam.

Bet: An Ivri (Jewish) slave is acquired with money and with a document.  And he acquires himself with years (six years if he was sold by the court), yovel (all Ivri slaves are automatically released on the fiftieth year of the yovel cycle), or by a monetary reduction (he can pay part of what he owes to reduce his term of service).  An Ivri handmaid is greater than him in that she acquires herself with signs (of puberty, after which she goes free).  One who is pierced (in the ear to symbolize that he does not wish to leave his master after his term) is acquired by piercing.  And he (the pierced) acquires himself by yovel and the death of the master.

Gimmel: A Cana’ani slave s acquired with money, a document, and chazaka (if he already does tasks for the owner).  And he acquires himself with money at the hands of others (others pay), and with a document on his own hands (if the master releases him) according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, with money on his own hands, and with a document at the hands of others, as long as the money is that of others.

Daled: A large animal (cattle) is acquired with mesira (handing over, for other forms such as raising are not practical), and a small one (flock) with hagba’a (raising) according to Rabi Meir and Rabi Elazar.  Chachamim say, a small animal is acquired (even) by meshicha (pulling to another place).

Hay: Property which has security (referring to land for it is security on loans) is acquired with money, a document, and with chazaka (making an act of ownership).  And those which do not have security, they are not acquired except with meshicha.  Property which does not have security is acquired with property which has security (if they are acquired together, one may acquire with) money, a document, and chazaka.  And property which does not have security (make a) requirement for a swear about property which has security (we do not usually make swears about land, but if we are already swearing about non-land, we add a swear for land.

Vav: All which is made the money of the other (evaluated as fit to be traded for some other thing), since he (the seller) merited this, he owes this (the object being traded for) as a chaliphin (trade).  How?  He traded an ox for a cow, or a donkey for an ox, because this one (the seller) merited, he owes this as a trade.  The higher right (treasury of the Beit Hamikdash acquires necessary objects) with money, and the layman’s right (title he has  he acquires) with chazaka.  What he says to the high (right) is like what he hands over to the layman (declaring something for the Beit Hamikdash is like handing it over).

Zayin: All mitzvot of the son (which deal which the son and the responsibility falls) on the father, men are chayav and women are patur.  And all mitzvot of the father on the son, whether men or women, they are chayav.  And all mizvot ase shehazman grama (positive commandments which have a set time), men are chayav and women are patur.  And all positive mitzvot which do not have defined time, whether men or women, they are chayav.  And al negative commandments, whether there is a set time or there is no set time, whether men or women they are chayav, except for, “do not destroy (the corners of your beard, which women do not do,” “you shall not round (the corners of your hair),” and, “do not become tame for the dead (for male kohanim only).”

Chet: Leaning (on a korban), waving, bringing near (adding things to a mincha), taking up handfuls (of a mincha), smoking (of incense), pinching of necks (of bird offerings), sprinkling (blood), and accepting (collecting the blood of a sacrifice), are done with men and not with women, except for the mincha of a sota and a nezira, for they wave.

Tet: Any mitzva which is dependant on the land, isn’t done except in the land (of Israel), and (a mitzva) which is not dependant on the land is done whether in the land or outside of the land, except from orla and kilayim (which while dependant on the land are done outside Israel).  Rabi Eliezer says, also from chadash (grain which there has not been a Pesach since its harvesting, making it assur).

Yud: All who do one mitzva is rewarded and they lengthen his days (life) and he inherits the land (the World to Come).  And all who do not do one mitzva, they do not reward him, they do not lengthen his days, and he does not inherit the land.  All who have (knowledge) in the torah, the mishna, and the ways of the world (proper actions), he does not sin quickly, as it says, “and the string is tripled, it does not quickly disconnect.”  And all who are not in the torah, not mishna, and not the ways of the world, he is not one of those of the settlement (settled community, and derives no benefit from them).

Perek Bet

Aleph: A man betroths by him and his messenger.  A woman is betrothed by her and her messenger.  A man betroths his daughter when she is a young girl by him or by his messenger.  One who says to a woman, become betrothed with me by this date (the fruit), be betrothed to me by this (some random object), if one of them is worth a pruta, she is betrothed, and if not, she is not betrothed.  (If he says it) with this, with this, and with this, if there is the worth of a pruta (together) in all of them, she is betrothed, and if not, she is not betrothed.  If she eats them one by one, she is not betrothed, until one of them is worth a pruta.

Bet: Be betrothed to me in this cup of wine, and it was found that it was honey, of honey and it was found to be of wine; with this silver dinar, and it was found (to be of) the golden dinar, of gold and it was found of silver.  On condition that I am rich and he is found out as poor, poor and he was found to be rich, she is not betrothed.  Rabi Shimon says, mistake is not to be praised, she is married.

Gimmel: (If one engages a woman) on condition that I (the one engaging) am a kohen, and he was found to be a levi, a levi and he was found to be a kohen, a natin and he was found to be a mamzer, a mamzer and he was found to be a natin, a city dweller and he was found to be the resident of a village, the resident of a village and he was found to be a city dweller, on condition that my house is near a bathhouse and it was found to be far, far and it was found to be near, on condition that I have a a daughter or maidservant who is a grown up and he doesn’t, I don’t have and he does, on condition that I don’t have children and he has, or that I have and he doesn’t, and in all of them even though she said, in my heart had (intention) to become engaged to him despite that (regardless of the condition he made), she is not engaged.  And so to she who deceived him (is not engaged).

Daled: One who says to his messenger, go out and engage for me such-and-such a girl in such-and-such a place, and he went and engaged her in another place, she is not engaged.  (If he said,) behold she is in such-and-such a place, and he engaged her in another place, behold this one is engaged.

Hay: One who engages a woman on condition that there are no vows on her, and vows were found on her, she is not engaged.  If he married her without condition and there were vows found on her, she exits (the marriage) without a ktuba.  On condition that she has no blemishes, and blemishes were found on her, she is not engaged.  If he married her without condition and blemishes were found on her, she exits without a ktuba.  All blemishes which make a kohen invalid (from service) make a woman invalid.

Vav: One who engages two women with (objects of a total) value of a pruta, or one woman with less than the value of a pruta, even if he sent gifts afterwards, she is not engaged, for (only) because of the first engagement did he send (the gifts).  And so too with a minor who engaged (as a minor and then sent gifts as an adult).

Zayin: One who engages a woman and her daughter, or a woman and her sister together, they are not engaged.  There was a case with five women, among them two sisters, one (man) gathered a large basket of figs, it was theirs, and it was shvi’it, and he said, behold you are all engaged to me by this basket.  One of them accepted on behalf of all of them, and the Chachamim said, the sisters are not engaged.

Chet: One (a kohen) who engages with his portion (of a sacrifice), whether of the most holy (korbanot) or minor holy things, she is not engaged.  With ma’aser sheni, whether by accident or intentionally, he did not engage her, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, by accident he did not engage, intentionally he engaged.  An with hekdesh, he intentionally he engaged, and accidentally he did not engage, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, accidentally he engaged, intentionally he did not engage.

Tet: One who engages with orla (fruit from the first three years of a tree which is forbidden), kilay hakerem (mixed seeds from a vineyard), an ox to be stoned, an egla arufa, the birds of a metzora (which he brings at the end of his term), the hair of a nazir (which he burns at the end of his term), the redeemed of a donkey (firstborn which has been redeemed from automatic dedication to the Beit Hamikdash) meat and milk, or everyday meat slaughtered in the sanctuary, she is not engaged.  If he sold them and engaged with their money, she is engaged.

Yud: One who is engaged with trumot, ma’asrot, gifts (to the poor of leket, shichicha, and pe’ah), the water of chatat (made from the ashes of a red heifer), or the ashes of a chatat (the red heifer), behold she is engaged, even a yisra’el.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One who says to his friend, go and betroth me such-and-such a woman, and he went and betrothed her for himself, she is betrothed.  And so too one who says to a woman, behold you are betrothed to me after thirty days, and another one came and betrothed her within thirty days, she is betrothed to the second.  A bat yisra’el to a kohen (if he was the second), she may eat truma.  (If one betroths) from now until thirty days, and another came and betrothed her within thirty days, she is betrothed and not betrothed (it is a doubt).  A bat yisra’el to a kohen or a bat kohen to a yisra’el, she may not eat truma.

Bet: One who says to a woman, behold you are betrothed to me on condition that I give you two hundred zuz, she is engaged and he will give.  On condition that I will give you (two hundred zuz) from here until thirty days, if he gave her within thirty days, she is betrothed, and if not, she is not betrothed.  On condition that I have two hundred zuz, behold she is betrothed and he has.  On condition that that I will show you two hundred zuz, behold this on is engaged and he will show her.  And if he showed her on the table (if he is a moneychanger, it is the money of others), she is not betrothed.

Gimmel: (If one engages a woman) on condition that I have a bet kor (enough land to sow a kor, 30 se’ah, of seeds), behold this one is betrothed if this one has.  On condition that I have in such-and-such a place, if he has in that place, she is betrothed, and if not, she is not betrothed.  On condition that I will show you a beit kor of earth, behold she is betrothed if he shows.  And if he showed her in a valley (which is not his), she is not betrothed.

Daled: Rabi Meir says, all conditions which aren’t like the conditions of bnei gad and bnei reuven (when they wanted to settle across the Jordan), are not conditions, as it says, “and Moshe said to them, if bnei gad and bnei reuven cross (to help conquer Israel they will get the land they want),” and it is written, “and if they do not cross armed,” (showing that a condition needs to be made with both the positive and negative actions explained)  Rabi  Chanania ben Gamliel says, he had to say this (the second condition) for without this, there was reason (to believe that the consequence for not crossing would be losing all rights to land (whereas Moshe says they get land in Israel).

Hay: One who betrothed a woman and said, I thought she was a kohenet, and behold she is a levi’a, a levi’a and behold she is a kohenet, poor and behold she is rich, or rich and behold she is poor, behold she is betrothed because she did not deceive him.  One who says to a woman, behold you are betrothed to me after I convert, after you convert, after I am freed (from slavery), after you are freed, after your husband dies, after your sister dies (he was married to her sister and therefore forbidden to marry the woman), or after your yavam does chalitza for you, she is not betrothed.  And so too one who says to his friend, if your wife gives birth to a girl, behold she is betrothed to me, she is not betrothed.  If the wife of his friend was pregnant and the pregnancy was known, his words stand, and if she gives birth to a girl, she is betrothed.

Vav: One who says to a woman, behold you are betrothed to me on condition that I speak on your behalf to the governor, or I do for you like a laborer (work for you).  If he spoke about her to the governor or did for her like a laborer, she is betrothed, and if not, she is not betrothed.  On condition that (my) father wants (us to be engaged), if the father wants, she’s betrothed, and if not, she is not betrothed.  If the father died, behold she is betrothed.  If the son died, they instruct the father to say that he doesn’t want.

Zayin: (If a man says,) I betrothed my daughter but I don’t know who I betrothed her to, and one comes and says, I betrothed her, he is believed.  If one said, I betrothed her, and one said, I betrothed her, they both give a get, but if they want, one gives a get and one marries (her).

Chet: (If a man says,) I betrothed my daughter I betrothed her and divorced her while she was a minor, and behold she is a minor, he is believed.  I betrothed her and divorced her while she is a minor, and behold she is an adult, he is not believed.  She was taken captive (making her assur to a kohen) and I redeemed her, whether she was a minor or an adult, he is not believed.  One who said at the time of his death, I have sons (meaning his wife does not need yibum), he is believed.  (If a dying person said,) I have brothers (and it is clear that he had no sons, and therefore his wife needs yibum), he is not believed.  One who betroths his daughter without specifying (which daughter), the bogrot (adults) aren’t included (in the possible spouses).

Tet: One who has two sets of daughters from two wives and said, I betrothed my older daughter, and I do not know if it was the older of the older (daughters, the first born), the older of the younger (third born), or the younger of the older (second), for she is older than the older of younger (third), all of them are assur (to marry unless they get a get), except for the younger of the younger (fourth), according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, all of them are allowed, except for the older of the older (first).  (If the man says,) I betrothed my younger daughter, and I do not know if is the younger of the younger (fourth), the younger of the older (second), or the older of the younger (third), for she is younger than the younger of the older (second), all of them are assur except the older of the older (first), according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, all of the are permitted except the younger of the younger (fourth).

Yud: One who says to a woman, I betrothed you, and she says, you didn’t betroth me, he is assur to her relatives and she is mutar to his relatives.  If she says, you betrothed me, and he says, I didn’t betroth you, he is mutar to her relatives, but she is assur to his relatives.  (If a man says,) I betrothed you, and she says, you didn’t betroth other than my daughter, he is assur to the relatives of the older (mother) and the older is mutar to his relatives, he is mutar to the relatives of the younger (the daughter) and the younger is mutar to his relatives.

Yud Aleph: (If a man says,) I betrothed your daughter, and she says, you didn’t betroth other than me, he is assur to the relatives of the younger and the younger is mutar to his relatives, he is mutar to the relatives of the older, and the older is assur to his relatives.  

Yud Bet: Any place there is kiddushin (betrothal) and no transgression (in the marriage), the children go after the male (the father’s lineage).  And which is it?  This is a kohenet, a levi’a, and a yisra’elit who married a kohen, to a levi, and to a yisra’el.  And every place where there is kiddushin and there is transgression (the marriage is invalid), the offspring go after the blemished (who makes the marriage invalid).  And which is it?  A widow to a kohen gadol, a divorcee or a chalutza to a lay kohen, a mamzer or netina to a yisra’el, or the bat of a yisra’el to a mamzer or natin.  And all who do not have kiddushin for him (it is invalid), but she has kiddushin for others (she could get kiddushin, but there is something wrong with it being with this man), this is a mamzer.  And which is it?  This is one who has relations with any of the inappropriate relations which is in the torah.  And all who do not have kiddushin for him and does not have kiddushin for others (meaning they are forbidden to everyone), the offspring is like her.  And which is it?  This is the offspring of a maidservant and a non-Jew.

Yud Gimmel: Rabi Tarfon says, mamzerim can become pure.  How?  A mamzer who married a maidservant, the offspring is a slave.  If he was freed, the son is found to be a freedman (and passes on pure lineage).  Rabi Eliezer says, behold, this is a mamzer slave.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Ten relations (types of lineage) came up from Bavel (in the time of Ezra to rebuild the Beit Hamikdash), kohanim, levi’im, yisra’elim, chalalim (people whose kohen forefathers married a divorcee or chalutza), gerim (converts), charurim (freedmen), mamzerim, netinim, shtukim, and asufim (the last two will be explained in the next mishna).  Kohanim, levi’im, and yisra’elim are mutar to marry each other.  Levi’im, yisra’elim, chalalim, gerim, and charurim are allowed to marry each other.  Gerim, charurim, mamzerim, netinim, shtukim, and asufim are all married to marry each other.

Bet: And which are shtukim?  Anyone who knows his mother (her lineage) and does not know his father (his lineage).  (Which are) asufim?  All who is taken from the shuk (adopted) ans sors not know is father or his mother.  Abba Shaul would call the shtukim bdukim.

Gimmel: All who are assur to come into the congregation (from marrying any of the above forms of Jews, mamzerim, netinim, shtukim, and asufim) are mutar to marry each other, and Rabi Yehuda prohibits.  Rabi Eleizer says, their certain (a mamzer and natin) with their certain is mutar, but their certain with a doubt (explained below), doubt with a certain, or doubt with a doubt is assur.  And which are the doubt?  A shatuk, asuf, and kuti.

Daled: One (a kohen) who marries a woman who is a kohenet must check (to ensure that her lineage is proper) after her four mothers (four women who make up her lineage) which are eight (for their mothers are checked as well), her mother, her mother’s mother, the mother of the father of her mother (he woman’s great grandmother) and her mother (great great grandmother), her (the woman’s) father’s mother and her mother (the woman’s great grandmother), and the mother of the father of her father (the woman’s great grandmother) and her mother.  For a levi’a and a yisra’el (to marry a kohen), they add upon he one more (generation to each woman listed).

Hay: They do not check from the mizbe’ach and up (if one of the fathers listed served as a kohen, then they do not check any lineage above him because his lineage was known to pure when he served), not from the duchan and up (a levi who sang on the platform in the Beit Hamikdash), and not from the Sanhedrin and up (even a yisra’el who was on the Sanhedrin).  And all whose forefathers were known to be public officers and organizers of charity, they marry into kehuna (marry a kohen) and do not need to be checked after.  Rabi Yossi says, also one who was signed as a witness in the record office of Yeshana of Tzippori (for the court there kept of record to make sure that only people with proper lineage would be witnesses).  Rabi Chanina ben Antigonus says, also one who was registered in the army of the king (David, for his army only included people of proper lineage).

Vav: The daughter of a male chalal is eternally pasul from the kehuna.  A yisra’el who married a chalala, his daughter is kasher to the kehuna.  A chalal who married a bat yisra’el, his daughter is pasul from the kehuna.  Rabi Yehuda says, the daughter of a male ger (convert) is like the daughter of a male chalal (pasul to the kehuna).

Zayin: Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, a yisra’el who married a giyoret (female convert), his daughter is kasher to the kehuna, and a ger who married a bat yisra’el, his daughter is kasher to the kehuna.  But, a ger who married a giyoret, his daughter is pasul to the kehuna.  Whether a ger or whether a freedman, even until ten generations, (they are pasul) until their mother is from yisra’el.  Rabi Yossi says, also a ger who married a giyoret, his daughter is kasher to the kehuna.

Chet: One who says, this son of mine is a mamzer, he is not believed.  And even if both of them (the man and the pregnant woman) say about the fetus which is in her womb, he is a mamzer, they are not believed.  Rabi Yehuda says, they are believed.

Tet: One who gave his agent the right to betroth his daughter (to a man while she is still a minor), and he (the father) went to betroth her (to a different man).  If his came first, his kiddushin is kiddushin, but if that of the agent came first, his (the agent’s) kiddushin is kiddushin.  If it is not known (who came first), they both (both of the men who were going to betroth her) give a get, and if they want, one gives a get and one marries.  And so too a woman who gave her agent the right to (accept) betrothal, and (then) she (the woman) went and betrothed herself.  If hers came first, her kiddushin is kiddushin, but if that of the agent came first, his kiddushin is kiddushin.  If it is not known, they both give her a get.  And if they want, one gives her a get and one marries.

Yud: One who he and his wife went overseas, and he comes (with) his wife and his children and says, the wife I went overseas with, behold this is she, and these are her children, he does not need to bring proof, not on the wife and not on the children.  (If he says,) she died and these are her children, he brings proof about the children, but he does not bring proof about the wife (that she was of proper lineage, for that was done before the marriage).

Yud Aleph: (If a man comes from overseas and says,) I married this woman overseas, behold this is she, and these are her children, he brings proof about the wife and does not need to bring proof about the children.  (If he says,) she died and these are her children, he must bring proof about the wife and the children.

Yud Bet: One may not be alone with two women, but one woman may be alone with two men (for a man would engage in relations in front of another woman, but not another man).  Rabi Shimon says, also one man may be alone with two women when his wife is with him, and he may sleep with them in an inn, since his wife guards him.  One may be alone with his mother or with his daughter, and he may sleep with them close by (naked), but if they have grown up (either a grown man with his mother or a man with his grown daughter), this one sleeps in her clothes and this one sleeps in his clothes.

Yud Gimmel: A man who has never married may not be a teacher, and a woman may not be a teacher (for each may come to be alone with a person of the opposite gender).  Rabi Eliezer says, also one who does not have a wife (even if he has been married before) may not be a teacher.

Yud Daled: Rabi Yehuda says, a man who has never married may not tend cattle, and two men who have never been married may not sleep in one cloak, and the Chachamim permit.  All who have (business) dealings with women may not be alone with women.  And a man may not teach his son a trade (which includes dealings) with women.  Rabi Meir says, a man must always teach his son a trade which is clean and easy and pray for the One who wealth and possessions are His, for there is no craft where there is no poverty and wealth, that there is no poverty from the trade, and no richness from the trade (meaning every trade has people who are rich and people who are poor), rather everything is according to his merit.  Rabi Shimon ben Elazar says, have you ever seen an animal or fowl which have a trade?  They are provided for without trouble, and weren’t they created to serve me?  I was created to serve my Master, so isn’t is logical that I will be provided for without trouble?  Rather I have made my actions bad and I have forfeited my sustenance.  Abba Gurin a man of Tzadin says in the name of Abba Guria, a man may not teach his son (to be a) donkey-driver, camel-driver, barber, sailor, shepherd, or storekeeper, for their craft is the craft of robbers (each tends towards inappropriate dealings).  Rabi Yehuda says in his name, donkey-drivers, most of them are wicked, camel drivers many of them are proper, sailors, most of them are pious, the best of the doctors (goes to) gehinom (hell), and the most proper of the butchers is partners with Amalek.  Rabi Nehorai says, I leave my craft in this world and I don’t teach my son other than torah, for a person eats from his salary in this world, and the principle lasts for him for the world to come, and the rest of all of the professions are not like this.  When a person comes to the hands of sickness, the hands of old age, or to the hands of troubles, and he cannot engage in his work, he dies in hunger.  But torah is not like this, rather it guards him from evil in his youth, and gives him a future and hope in his old age.  In his youth, what does he say?  “And those who wait for Hashem will renew their strength.”  In his old age what does he say?  “They shall string bring forth with age.”  And so too he says about Avraham our father, upon him may there be peace, “and Avraham was old… and Hashem blessed Avraham with everything.  We found that Avraham did all the torah, in its entirety, before it was given, as it says, “since Avraham heard My voice and kept My keepings, My commandments, My laws, and My statutes.”

Seder Nezikin

Mesechet Bava Kamma

Perek Aleph

Aleph: The four categories of damages (are), the ox, the hole, the maveh (animal which eats crops), and the fire.  The ox is not like the maveh, and not like the maveh is like the ox (the mishna is explaining that each category is different).  And this and that, which have in them (the damage) the spirit of life are not like the fire which does not have the spirit of life.  And this and that (the three mentioned categories), the way of which is to go and damage, are not like the pit, for its way is not to go and damage.  The side that is similar in them (all four categories) is that their way is to damage and one must guard them.  And when they damage, the damager is chayav to pay restitution for the damage with the best of the land (idit lands).

Bet: All which I (any person) is obligated in guarding it, I caused its damage.  If I caused part of its damage, I became chayav in the restitution as if I caused all of the damage.  Objects which do not have me’ila (misappropriation of holy property), property of the people of the covenant (Jews), property which is designated (to owners), and in any place, except for the domain designated for the damager, a domain (shared by) the damaged and the damager, and when he damaged, the damager is chayav to pay restitution with the best of the land.

Gimmel: We assess the money (meaning all damage is assessed and then the net is paid), monetary value (is paid from property also), (damages are paid after a ruling) before a court, and based on witnesses who are free men and people of the covenant, and women are included in the (laws of) damage.  And the damaged and the damager (sometimes share) the restitution (sometimes the damager only pays part).

Daled: Five are tam (simple, the status an ox has if unwarned) and five are mu’ad (forewarned).  An animal is not mu’ad (without any warning) not for goring, not for its body (banging into things), not for biting, not for lying (on something), and not for kicking.  The tooth is mu’ad for something that is fit for it (to eat), the foot is mu’ad to break something while walking, a mu’ad ox (who has done one action three times), an ox who has damaged in the domain of the damaged (even if it has never been warned is considered mu’ad), and a person (who is held to a higher standard).  The wolf, the lion, the bear, the tiger, the panther, ad the snake, behold they are mu’ad.  Rabi Eliezer says, when they are those of culture (domesticated), they are not mu’ad, but the snake is always mu’ad.  What is the difference between tam an mu’ad?  Only that the tam pays half the damage from itself (the damaging ox is sold and the money is used to pay back), and the mu’ad pays the full damage from the best lands.

Perek Bet

Aleph: How is the foot mu’ad to break while walking?  An animal is mu’ad to walk in its normal manner and break, (but) if it kicked or bits sprayed from under its foot and broke vessels, he pays half the damage.  If it stepped on the vessel and broke it, and it fell onto another vessel and broke that, one the first he pays the full damage and on the last he pays half damage.  Chickens are mu’ad to go in their normal manner and to break.  If a cord was tied on its foot, or it was scratching and breaking vessels (because it made them hit something hard and break) he pays half the damage.

Bet: How is the tooth mu’ad to eat that which is fit for it?  An animal is mu’ad to eat fruits and vegetables.  If it ate clothes or vessels, he pays half damage.  What is this talking about?  On the property of the damaged, but in the public domain, he is exempt, but if it benefited, he pays what it benefited.  How does he pay what it benefited?  If it ate from the open square, he pays what is benefited (the money he saved by not having to feed the animal), from the sides of the open square, he pays what it damaged, from the storefront, he pays what it benefited, from inside the store, he pays what it damaged.

Gimmel: The dog and the kid that jumped from the top of the roof (where animals would sometimes be kept) and broke vessels, he pays the full damage, since they are mu’ad (they are known to jump off sometimes).  A dog who took a cake, went to a pile of grain, ate the cake, and lit the pile of grain, for the cake he pays the full damage, and on the pile of grain he pays half the damage.

Daled: Which is a tam and which is a mu’ad (by goring)?  Mu’ad (is) all who they testified about it (goring on) three days, and tam is when he returns from it (goring) for three days, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Meir says, mu’ad, that they testified about it three times, and tam, any which the children pet it and it does not gore.

Hay: An ox which damages in the domain of the damaged (which is considered mu’ad), how?  It gored, pushed, bit, lay down, or kicked in the public domain, he (the owner) pays half the damage, (if it damaged) in the domain of the damaged, Rabi Tarfon says, he pays the full damage, and Chachamim say half the damage.  Rabi Tarfon said to them, just as in the place it (the torah) made lenient by tooth and foot (eating or walking on something) when in the public domain and he is patur, and it made strict in the domain of the damaged where he pays the full damage, isn’t it logical that we are strict on it (the types of damage he pays half damage for in the public domain) in the domain of the damaged that he should pay the full damage?  They said to him, it is sufficient for what we infer to be like (in terms of payment) what we inferred from, just as in the public domain he pays half the damage, so too in the domain of the damaged he pays half the damage.  He said to them, I will not infer (laws of) horn (goring) from horn, I will infer horn from foot (walking on something).  Just as a place where it was lenient on tooth and foot in the public domain (for the owner is exempt) it was strict about horn (he pays half damage), a place where it was stringent by tooth and foot in the domain of the damaged, isn’t is logical that we should be strict by horn?  They said to him, it is enough for what we infer to be like what we inferred from, just as in the public domain he pays half the damage, so too in the domain of the damaged he pays half the damage.

Vav: A person is always mu’ad, whether (he damaged) accidentally or intentionally, whether awake or asleep.  If he blinded the eye of his friend (unintentionally) or broke his vessels, he pays full damage (even for unintentional bodily damage, which generally incurs other payments).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One who puts down a jug in the public domain, and another comes and stumbles on it and breaks it, he is patur (for the owner was negligent in leaving it there).  And if he was damaged by it, the owner of the barrel is chayav for his damage.  If his jug broke in the public domain and one slipped on the water (that was in the jug), or he was struck by its shards, he (the owner) is chayav (to pay for the damage).  Rabi Yehuda says, if he intended (to keep the broken pieces or collect the water, it is still his and is like a pit) he is chayav, but if he does not intend, he is patur.

Bet: One who pours water in the public domain, and one was damaged from them, he (the owner) is chayav for his damage.  One who conceals a thorn or glass, fences his fence with thorns, or a fence which fell into the public domain, and others were injured by them, he is chayav for their damage.

Gimmel: One who takes out his hay and straw to the public domain to manure them (make them into fertilizer), and another was damaged by them, he is chayav for his damage, and whoever comes first to them merits to take them (as a fine for endangering others).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, whoever deteriorates (leaves dung to become usable for fertilizing) in the public domain, and they damaged, they (the owners) are chayav to pay, and whoever comes first to them merits.  One who turns over dung into the public domain (to make an act of acquisition) and another was damaged by them, he is chayav for his damages.

Daled: Two potters who were walking one after another, the first stumbled and fell, and the second fell on the first, the firs is chayav in the damages of the second.

Hay: If this one (a person) came with his barrel, and that one (another person) came with his board, (they collided) and this one’s jug broke from the board of that one, he (the one with the board) is patur, for this one had a right to walk (there) and that one had a right to walk.  If the owner of the board was first and the owner of the barrel last (and they collided) and the barrel broke from the board, the owner of the board is patur, if the owner of the board stood (still, causing the owner of the barrel to bump into him), he’s chayav, but if the owner of the barrel said, stand (still), he’s patur.  If the owner of the barrel was first and the owner of the board was last, if the barrel broke on the board, he’s chayav, if the owner of the barrel stood, he’s patur, but if he said to the owner of the board, stand, he’s chayav.  And the same if this one comes with his (lighted) candle and that one comes with his flax (which burnt).

Vav: Two (people) who were walking in the public domain, one running and one walking or both running, and they damaged each other, they are both patur.

Zayin: One who splits wood in a private domain and damaged (someone) in the public domain, (split wood) in the public domain and damages in a private domain, in a private domain and damaged in another private domain, (the one cutting wood) is chayav.

Chet: Two tam oxen who wounded each other they pay half the excess of the damage (the one whose ox caused more damage pays half of the difference in damages).  If they are both mu’ad, they pay the full excess damage.  If one is tam and one ismu’ad, the (if the) mu’ad (caused more damage) to the tam, he pays the full excess damage, the tam to the mu’ad, he pays half the excess damage.  And so too two people who wounded each other, they pay the full excess damage.  A person and a mu’ad (ox) or a mu’ad and a person, he pays the full excess damage.  A person and a tam or a tam and a person, a person to a tam he pays the full excess damage, but a tam to a person he pays half the excess damage.  Rabi Akiva, also a tam who wounded a person, he pays the full excess damage.

Tet: An ox worth a maneh (one hundred zuz) which gored an ox worth two hundred (zuz), and the carcass is worthless, he (the one damaged) takes the ox.  An ox worth two hundred which gored an ox worth two hundred, and the carcass is worthless, Rabi Meir said, on this it was said, “and they shall sell the living ox and split its money.”  Rabi Yehuda said to him, and the halacha is like that, (but) you have upheld, “and they shall sell the living ox and split its money,” but you have not upheld, “and also the dead (ox) they shall split.”  And which (is the case which upholds both)?  This is an ox worth two hundred which gored an ox worth two hundred and the carcass is worth fifty zuz (the hide etc.), that this one takes half the (value of the) living and half the (value of) the dead, and that takes half the living and half the dead.

Yud: There is (a case where one is) chayav for the action of his ox and patur from his own action, or patur from the action of his ox and chayav for his action.  If his ox embarrassed (someone) he’s patur, but if he embarrassed, he is chayav.  If his ox blided the eye of his slave or knocked out his tooth, he is patur, but if he blinded the eye of his slave or knocked out his tooth, he’s chayav.  If his ox wounded his father or mother, he is chayav, but if he wounded his father or mother, he’s patur (since he incurs strangulation).  If his ox lit a pile of grain on Shabbat, he is chayav, but if he lit a stack of grain on Shabbat, he’s patur because he makes himself liable (to be punished) with his life (stoning for breaking Shabbat).

Yud Aleph: An ox which was chasing after another ox and was damaged (injured), this one says, your ox damaged, and this one says, not so, rather a rock hurt, the one who removes from his friend, upon him is the (burden of) proof.  If two (oxen) were chasing after one, this one (owner of one of the chasing oxen) says, your ox (the other one chasing) damaged (the ox being chased) and that one (the owner of the other chasing ox) says, your ox (owned by the first talker) damaged, they are both patur (because it is not known which one damaged).  If they both belonged to one person, they are both chayav (in a case where both are tam, the owner will only have to pay half of the lesser one, but the damages may be collected from either ox).  If one was large and one was small, the damaged says, the large one damaged, and the damager says, not so, rather the small one damaged or one was tam and on was mu’ad, and the damaged says, the mu’ad damaged, and the damager says, not so, rather the tam damaged, the one who removes from his friend, upon him is the proof.  If the damaged were two, one large and one small, and the damagers were two, one large and one small, the damaged says, the large damaged the large and the small damaged the small, and the damager says, not so, rather the small damaged the large and the large damaged the small, or one tam and one mu’ad, and the damaged says, the mu’ad damaged the large and the tam damaged the small, and the damager says, not so, rather the tam (damaged) the large and the mu’ad the small, the one who removes from his friend, upon him is the proof.

Perek Daled

Aleph: An ox (which was tam) which gored four or five oxen, one after another, pays for the last of them (for he pays from the body of the ox, so he only pays the last), and if there is leftover (from paying for the last), he returns to the one before it (he pays the second to last), and if there is leftover from that, he pays to the one before, and the last one, the last one profits (has precedence in payment) , according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Shimon says, an ox worth two hundred (zuz) which gored an ox worth two hundred, and the carcass is worthless, this takes a maneh and that takes a maneh.  If it went back and gored another ox worth two hundred, the last one takes a maneh and the one before it, this one takes fifty zuz and that one takes fifty zuz.  If it went back and gored another ox worth two hundred, the last one takes a maneh, the one before it fifty zuz, and the first two (involved), a golden dinar (twenty-five zuz each).

Bet: An ox which is mua’d for its kind (other oxen) and is not mu’ad for other kinds, is mu’ad for people but is and mu’ad for animals, or is mu’ad for small ones (people or animals) but not for large ones, that which it is mu’ad for he pays the full damage, and that which he is not mu’ad for he pays half the damage.  They said before Rabi Yehuda, behold if there is (an ox) mu’ad for Shabbat and not mu’ad for weekdays?  He said to them, on Shabbat he pays the full damage, and on weekdays he pays half the damage.  When is he tam?  When he return from it (goring) three days of Shabbat.

Gimmel: An ox of a Jew which gored an ox of hekdesh or an ox of hekdesh which gored an ox of a Jew, it is patur (for there is no damage liability where there is me’ila), as it says, “the ox of his friend,” and not an ox of hekdesh.  An ox of a Jew which gored the ox of a non-Jew, he is patur.  The ox of a non-Jew which gored the ox of a Jew, whether tam or mu’ad, he pays the full damage.

Daled: The ox of a person of sound senses which gored that f a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, or minor, he’s chayav.  And of a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, or minor, which gored the ox of a person of sound senses, he’s patur.  The ox of a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, or minor which gored, the court enacts for them a guardian, and they testify for them (about the case) in front of the guardian.  If the deaf-dumb became of sound senses, if the mentally infirm person became sane, or the minor grew up, it returns to being a tam, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, behold he is of his status.  An ox of the stadium (which was trained to gore) is not liable to death, as it says, “when it gores,” and not that they make it gore.

Hay: An ox which gored a person and he died, if it’s mu’ad he pays the value (of the person), and if tam, he is patur from the value, but this and that are liable to death, like this with a son and like this with a daughter (if they were killed).  If it gored a slave or a maidservant, he gives thirty sela, whether he (the slave) is worth a maneh or if he’s worth only one dinar.

Vav: An ox which was scratching on a wall and it (the wall) fell on a person, (the ox) intended to kill and animal and killed a person, (intended to kill) a non-Jew and killed a Jew, or an unviable child (which was born too early) but killed a viable child, it is patur.

Zayin: The ox of a woman, the ox of orphans, the ox of a guardian (for a person unable to take care of it), the ox of the desert (which has no owner), the ox of hekdesh, the ox of a convert who died and has no heirs, behold these are chayav death (if they kill a person).  Rabi Yehuda says, the ox of the wilderness, the ox of hekdesh, and the ox a convert who died (without heirs) are patur from death, since they do not have owners.

Chet: An ox which was going out to be stoned and its owner made it hekdesh, it is not made hekdesh.  If he slaughtered it (though it was going to be stoned) its meat is assur.  And if its owner made it hekdesh before its judgment was finished, it is made hekdesh, and if he slaughtered it, its meat is mutar.

Tet: If he gave it to an unpaid guardian, borrower, one (a guardian) who takes money, or a renter, they enter in place of the owners, a mu’ad pays the full damage and a tam pays half the damage.  If the owner tied it with its reins and locked (the opening) before it as is proper, and it went out and damages, whether tam or mu’ad he is chayav according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, a tam is chayav and a mu’ad is patur, as it says (regarding a mu’ad), “and should his owner not guard it,” and this one was guarded.  Rabi Eliezer says, it (a mu’ad ox) has no guarding except a knife (the owner must kill it).

Perek Hay

Aleph: An ox which gored a cow and a fetus was found by her side, and it was not known if before it was gored it gave birth or it gave birth form when (after) it was gored he pays half the damage for the cow and a fourth the damage for the child.  And so too for a cow which gored an ox and her child was found next to her, and it is not known if before it gored it gave birth or from when it gored it gave birth, he pays half of the damage from the (value of) cow and a quarter of the damage from the child.

Bet: A potter who brought his pots into the courtyard of the homeowner without permission and an animal of the homeowner’s broke them, he’s patur, but if it (an animal) was damaged by it, the owner of the pots is chayav.  But if he brought them in with permission, the owner of the courtyard is chayav.  If he brought his produce into the courtyard of a homeowner without permission and an animal of the homeowner’s ate them, he’s patur, but if it was damaged by them, the owner of the produce is chayav.  But if he brought them in with permission, the owner of the courtyard is chayav.

Gimmel: If he brought his ox into the courtyard of a homeowner without permission and an ox of the homeowner gored it or a dog of the homeowner’s bit it, he’s patur.  If it gored an ox of the homeowner, he’s chayav.  If he fell into his (the homeowner’s) pit and fouled his waters, he’s chayav.  If his father or his son were in it, he pays their value.  But if he brought it in with permission, the owner of the courtyard is chayav.  Rabi says, in all of them he isn’t chayav, unless he (the homeowner) accepted upon himself to guard (the object brought in).

Daled: An ox who intended (to gore) its friend (another ox) and hit a woman and she miscarried, he (the owner) is patur from the money (due because) of the child.  And a person who intended (to hit) his friend and hit a woman and she miscarried, he pays the money of the child.  How does he pay the money of the child?  They assess the woman how much she is worth until she gives birth and how much she is worth from when she gives birth.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, if so, from when the woman gives birth, her value increases (since there is a danger the woman will die in childbirth).  Rather, they asses the children how much they are worth, and he gives to the husband.  If she doesn’t have a husband, he gives to his (the husband’s) inheritors.  If she was a maidservant and she was freed or a convert, he is patur.

Hay: One who digs a hole in a private domain and opens it into the public domain, in the public domain and opens it in a private domain, or in a private domain and opens it in another private domain, he’s chayav (if someone is damaged by it).  One who digs a hole in the public domain and an ox or donkey falls into it and dies, (the one who dug the hole is) chayav.  Whether he digs a hole, ditch, cave, trenches, or wedged ditches, he’s chayav.  If so, why does it say a hole?  Just as a hole that it has enough to kill, ten tfachim (of depth), so too anything which has enough to kill, ten tfachim (makes one chayav).  If there were less than ten tfachim and an ox or donkey fell in and died, her’s patur, but if it was damaged in it, he’s chayav.

Vav: A hole of two partners, if the first passed it and didn’t cover it and the second (passed) and didn’t cover it, the second is chayav.  If the first covered it and the second one came, found it uncovered, and didn’t cover it, the second is chayav.  If he covered it properly and an ox or donkey fell into it and died, he’s patur.  If he didn’t cover it properly and an ox or donkey fell into it and died, he’s chayav.  If it (an ox) fell forward form (fear caused by) the sound of the digging (into the pit), he’s chayav, but if it fell backwards because of the sound of the digging (outside of the pit, but died), he’s patur.  If an ox and vessels fell in and they broke or a donkey and vessels and they tore, he is chayav for the animal and patur by the vessels.  If a deaf, mentally infirm, or minor ox fell into it, he’s chayav.  A son or a daughter, a slave or a maidservant, he’s patur.

Zayin: Whether an ox or any other animal for falling into a hole, for keeping away from Mount Sinai (Hashem commanded animals be kept away from the mountain), paying kefel (if one steals, they pay back double the worth, half of which is a fine called kefel), for returning lost objects, for unloading (the commandment to help an overburdened animal), for muzzling (one may not muzzle an animal while threshing), for kilayim (one may not husband different species or plow with a mixed team), and for Shabbat (animals are also commanded to be rested on Shabbat).  And so too a wild animal, fowl, and things of that sort.  If so, why does it say an ox or a donkey?  Only that the text spoke in the present (used common cases).

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who keeps a sheep in a temporary pen and locks before it properly, but it went out and damaged, he’s patur.  If he did not lock before it properly, and it went out and damaged, he’s chayav.  If it broke out at night (when we do not expect him to go find it) or if bandits broke it out and it went out and damaged, he’s patur.  If the bandits took it out, the bandits are chayav.

Bet: If he left it (the sheep) in the sun (where it might act unnaturally due to the heat), or he handed it over to a deaf-dumb, a mentally infirm person, or a minor (to guard), and it went out and damaged, he’s chayav (for he was negligent).  If he handed it over to a shepherd, the shepherd enters in his place.  If it fell into a garden (it was being guarded on a roof and fell into someone else’s garden) and benefited, he pays what it benefited (how much he saved by not having to feed it).  If it went down as is normal (it was going along normally and then went into someone’s garden) and damaged, he pays what it damaged.  How does he pay what it damaged?  They evaluate a beit se’ah (the area in which a se’ah of seed is sown) in that field how much it was worth, and how much it is worth (now that it has been damaged).  Rabi Shimon says, if it ate finished (ripe) fruit, he pays finished fruit, if (it ate) a se’ah (he pays) a se’ah, if two se’ah, two se’ah.

Gimmel: One who makes piles of grain in his friend’s field without permission and an animal of the owner of the field ate them, he (the owner of the animal) is patur.  But if it (the animal) was damaged by them, the owner of the pile of grain is chayav, but if he made piles of grain with permission, the owner of the field is chayav.

Daled: One who sends fire in the hand of a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, or minor, (and it ignites something) is patur in the laws of man (from payment) but is chayav in the laws of heaven.  If he sent in the hand of a person of sound senses, the person of sound senses is chayav.  If one brings the fire and (then) one brings the wood (which ultimately led to the fire damage) the one who brought the wood is chayav.  If one brings the wood and (then) one brings the fire, the one who brought the fire is chayav.  If another came and blew it ablaze, the one who blew it ablaze is chayav.  If the wind blew it ablaze, all are patur.  One who sends (forth) a blaze and it ate (burnt) wood, stones, or earth, he’s chayav, as it says, “if a fire goes forth and finds thorns, a pile of grain is eaten, the standing grain, or the field, the one who set the blaze shall pay (for) the (property which is) burnt.”  If it (the fire) passed (over) a fence four amot high, a public path, or a river, he’s patur.  One who lights within his (property), how far can the fire pass (before he becomes patur)?  Rabi Elazar ben Azaria says, we see it as if it is the middle of a beit kor.  Rabi Eliezer says, sixteen amot, like the way (length needed to declare) of the public domain.  Rabi Akiva says, fifty amah.  Rabi Shimon says, “the one who set the blaze shall pay the burnt,” all goes according to the fire.

Hay: One who lights a pile of grain and there were vessels in it and they lit, Rabi Yehuda says, he pays what was in it.  Chachamim say, he only pays a pile of wheat or barley (the value of the volume of the pile, as if the vessels were grain).  If a kid was tied to it or a slave was next to it and burned too, he’s chayav.  If a slave was tied to it or a kid was next to it, he’s patur (killing the slave incurs death and the animal could have escaped).  And the Chachamim admit to Rabi Yehuda with one who lights a building, that he pays everything that is in it, for it is the way of people (normal) to put things inside a building (and it is to be expected).

Vav: A spark which went out from under the hammer (of a blacksmith) and damaged, he’s chayav.  A camel which was loaded with flax, passed in the public domain, its flax entered into a shop, lit on the candle of the shopkeeper, and burned a building, the owner of the camel is chayav.  If the shopkeeper left his candle outside, the shopkeeper is chayav,  Rabi Yehuda says, in a light of Chanukka he is patur (for it is a mitzva to leave it where people can see it).

Perek Zayin

Aleph: The dealing (application) of kefel restitution (double the principle is paid when someone steals) is greater than the dealing of the restitution of four or five (which is used in specific cases listed below), for the dealing of kefel restitution is done whether with something which has the spirit of life or with something that does not have the spirit of life, but the dealing of restitution of four or five is only done with an ox or sheep, as it says, “if a man shall steal an ox or sheep and slaughter it or sell it etc. (he shall pay four for the ox and five for the sheep).”  One who steals after it was stolen (from the thief) does not pay the restitution of kefel, and one who slaughters or sells after the (first person) steals doesn’t pay the restitution of four or five.

Bet: If he stole based on (the testimony) two (witnesses) and slaughtered or sold based on them, or based on two others, he pays the restitution of four or five.  If he stole and sold on Shabbat; stole and sold to avoda zara (idolatry); stole and slaughtered on Yom Hakippurim; stole from his father’s (property), sold, and then his father died; or stole, slaughtered, and then made hekdesh, he pays the restitution of four or five.  If he stole and slaughtered for medicine or dogs, (stole,) slaughtered, and found to be a trefa (have internal tears making it not kosher), or slaughtered chulin (non-holy meat) in the courtyard (of the Beit Hamikdash), he pays restitution of four or five.  Rabi Shimon exempts (from the restitution) in these (last) two cases.

Gimmel: If he stole based on (the testimony) two (witnesses) and slaughtered or sold based on them, and they were found to be zomemim (conspiring witnesses falsifying testimony whose punishment is what they intended to have done to the other), they pay everything.  If he stole based on two and slaughtered or sold based on two others, and both were found to be zomemim, the first pay restitution of kefel and the last pay restitution of three.  If (only) the last were found to be zomemim, he pays restitution of kefel and they pay restitution of three.  If one of the last was found to be a zomem, the testimony of the other is null.  If one of the first was found to be a zomem, the all of the testimony is null, for is he did not steal it, there is no (way he could have done) slaughtering and no selling.

Daled: If he stole based on two and slaughtered or sold based on one witness, or based on himself (his own admission, which always exempts one from fines) he pays the restitution of kefel, and he does not pay the restitution of four and five.  If he stole and slaughtered on Shabbat; stole and slaughtered to avoda zara; stole from his father’s (property), his father died, and then sold; or stole, made hekdesh, and then, slaughtered or sold, he pays the restitution of kefel, but he does not par the restitution of four or five.  Rabi Shimon says, holy things (which he made holy) which he is chayav for their responsibility (must safeguard them), he pays the restitution of four or five, and those which his is not chayav for their responsibility, he’s patur.

Hay: If he sold less than one hundredth of it, had a partnership in (ownership of) it, slaughtered it and it spoiled (improper slaughtering) while in his hands, he pierced it (as a means of killing it), or let it loose (cut the wind pipe improperly), he pays the restitution of kefel, but does note pay the restitution of four or five.  If he stole it from the domain of the owners and slaughtered or sold it outside their domain, stole it from outside their domain and slaughtered or sold it in their domain, or stole and slaughtered or sold it outside of their domain, he pays the restitution of four or five, but if he stole and slaughtered or sold it in their domain, he is exempt (from the restitution of four or five.)

Vav: If he was pulling it and going out (of the domain of the owner in the process of stealing it) and it died in the property of the owners, he is patur (from kefel).  If he picked it up (an act of acquisition) of he took it out of the domain of the owners and it died, he’s chayav.  If he gave it for the first born of his son (to redeem his first born son), to his creditor, to an unpaid guardian, to a borrower, to one (a guardian) who takes money, or to a renter, and he (the one the thief turned it over to) was pulling it, but it died in the domain of the owners, he’s patur.  If he lifted it up or took it out from the domain of the owners and it died, he’s chayav.

Zayin: One may not raise a thin animal (flock) in Israel (for they eat crops which takes away from settling the land), but one may raise them in Syria and in the deserts in Israel.  One may not raise chickens in Yerushalayim, because of the holy (sacrifices, for they may peck at impure things and defile the sacrifices), and kohanim (may) not (raise chickens) in Israel, because of teharot (holy foods).  One may not raise pigs in any place.  One may not raise a god, unless it was tied by a chain.  One does not set a net for doves unless he was more than thirty ris away from settled areas (for he may be taking doves which belong to someone).

Perek Chet

Aleph: One who wounds his friend is chayav on it for five things, damage, pain, treatment, sitting (lost wages), and embarrassment.  For damage, how (do we assess it)?  If he blinded his eye, cut off his hand, or broke his foot, that see him a if he is a slave being sold in the shuk (market), and asses how much he was worth and how much he is worth (now with the wound). (How do we assess) pain?  If he burned him with a (hot) spit or nail, even on his fingernail in a place where he does not make a wound, we assess how much (money) a person like this would take to (agree to) be in that in pain like that.  Treatment?  If he hit him, he is obligated to treat him.  If growths came on it, if it is a result of the blow, he’s chayav, that which is not a result of the blow, he’s patur.  If it healed and then opened up, healed and then opened up, he is chayav to treat him.  Sitting?  We see him as if he is a guard of (a field of) squashes (and give him that wage) for he has already paid him for his hand and his foot (for that type of work can be done even by an amputee).  Embarrassment?  All is according to the one embarrassing and the one embarrassed.  If he embarrasses a naked person, embarrasses a blind person, or embarrasses on who is sleeping, he’s chayav, but a sleeping person who embarrassed is patur.  If he fell from the roof and damaged and embarrassed, he is chayav for the damage and patur for the embarrassment, as it says, “and she sent her hand and held on to is embarrassment,” he is not chayav for embarrassment until he intends for it.

Bet: This is a stringency by a person from an ox, that a person pays damage, pain, treatment, sitting, and embarrassment, and pays money for children if he causes a woman to miscarry), but an ox doesn’t pay except for damage and is patur from the money of children.

Gimmel: If one hits his father or his mother, and he did not wound them, or wounds his friend on Yom Hakippurim, he is chayav in all of them (the five payments).  One who wounds a Jewish slave is chayav in all of them except for sitting when he (the slave) is his (belongs to the damager, for the loss of work hurts the owner).  One who wounds a Cana’ani slave of others is chayav in all of them.  Rabi Yehuda says, slaves do not have embarrassment (for their status is too low).

Daled: A deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, or minor, hurting them is bad, and one who wounds them is chayav, and those (a deaf-dumb, mentally infirm person, or minor) who wounded others are patur.  A slave and a woman hurting them is bad, and one who wounds them is chayav, and those who wounded others are patur.  But they pay after time, if the woman got divorced or the slave got freed, they are chayav to pay.

Hay: One who hits his father or mother and wounded them or wounds his friend on Shabbat is patur from all of them since he is judged (punished) with his life (death). And one who wounds his own Cana’ani slave is patur in all of them.

Vav: One who hits his friend in the ear, gives him a sela (for embarrassment).  Rabi Yehuda says in the name of Rabi Yossi Hagelili a maneh.  If he struck him (with a flat hand), he gives him two hundred zuz.  With the back of his hand, he gives him four hundred zuz.  If he slit his ear, plucked his hear, spit and his spit got on him (the friend), removed his cloak from him, or uncovered the hair of a woman in the shuk, he gives four hundred zuz.  This is the general rule, all goes according to his honor.  Rabi Akiva said, even the poor people who are in yisra’el (Jews) we see them as if they are freedmen who went down from their property (impoverished noblemen) for they are the children of Avraham, Yitzchak, and Ya’akov.  And there was a case where one uncovered the head of a woman in the shuk, she came before Rabi Akiva, and he obligated him to pay her four hundred zuz.  He said to him, Rabi, give me time, and he gave him time.  He guarded (watched) her (when she was) standing at the opening of her courtyard, he broke a jug before her, and there was an issar’s worth of oil in it (a small amount), she uncovered her head, palmed it (got the oil on her hand), and rested her hand on her head (to oil her hair).  He stood (arranged) witnesses for (to testify about) her and came before Rabi Akiva.  He said, to this one I am giving four hundred zuz (she showed that she did not particularly care to have her head uncovered)?  He said to him, you have said nothing, (for) one who wounds himself, even though he has not right, he’s patur, but others who wounded him are chayav.  And one who cuts down his plants, even though he has no right, is patur, but others who cut down his plants are chayav.

Zayin: Even though he (one who wounds his friend) give him (compensation) he is not forgiven by him until he asks from him, as it says, “and now return the wife of etc. (a case where Avimelech had repented, but Hashem told him to go to Avraham to get cured).”  And from where (do we learn) that the one forgiving should not be cruel?  As it says, “and Avraham prayed to God and God healed Avimelech etc.”  One who says, blind my eye, cut off my hand, or break my foot (if the person does it), he’s chayav.  (If the person adds,) on condition that you are patur, he’s chayav.  Rip my clothes, break my jug, he’s chayav.  On condition that you are patur, he’s patur.  Do so to such-and-such a person, on condition that you are patur, he’s chayav whether to his person or his money.

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who steals wood and makes it into vessels, or wool and makes it into clothes, he pays according to the time of theft.  If he stole a pregnant cow and it gave birth, a loaded ewe (full of wool) and sheared it, he pays the money of a cow ready to give birth or a ewe ready to be shorn.  If he stole a cow and it got pregnant by him and gave birth, a ewe and it became loaded by him and he sheared it, he pays according to the time of theft.  This is the general rule, all thieves pay according to the time of theft.

Bet: If he stole an animal and it aged, or slaves and they aged, he pays according to the time of theft.  Rabi Meir says, by slaves he says to him, behold yours are before you (meaning he simply gives them back).  If he stole a coin and it cracked, fruit and it rotted, or wine and it turned (to vinegar), he pays according to the time of theft.  A coin and it became invalid, truma and it became tame, chametz (leavened bread) and Pesach passed (if it is owned by a Jew over Pesach it is assur to eat) or an animal and a transgression was done with it, it became invalid for the mizbe’ach, or it was going out to be stoned, he says to him, behold yours is before you.

Gimmel: If he gave (an item of his) to artisans to fix and they broke it, they (the artisans) are chayav to pay.  If he gave a carpenter a chest, an ark, or a tower (three types of boxes), to fix, and he broke them, he is chayav to pay.  And a builder who accepted upon himself to dismantle a wall and broke the stones or damaged (someone), he is chayav to pay.  If he was dismantling on this side and it fell on another side, he’s patur, but if it was a result of his striking, he’s chayav.

Daled: One who gives his wool to a dyer and the cauldron burned it, he gives him the money of the wool.  If he dyed it uglily, if the improvement (to the wool’s value) is more than the cost (of dying), he (the customer) gives (pays) him the cost, but if the cost if greater than the improvement, he pays (the value of) the improvement.  (if he gave the wool) to dye it red, and he dyed it black, (to dye it) black and he dyed it red, Rabi Meir says, he gives him the value of the wool.  Rabi Yehuda says, if the improvement is more than the cost, he gives him the cost, but if the cost is greater than the improvement, he gives him the improvement.

Hay: One who steals from his friend the worth of a pruta (the smallest coin) and swore to him (that he didn’t steal), he must follow after him (to repay the theft) even to Madai.  He may not give to his son and not to his messenger, but he may give to an agent (appointed by) the court.  But if he died, he returns to his heirs.

Vav: If he (a thief) gave him the principal but did not give him the chomesh (an extra fifth which is added when a person falsely denies a loan or theft), if he (the lender) forgave him the principal but did not forgive him on the chomesh, forgave him for this and that, except for less the worth of a pruta of the principal, he does not have to go after him.  If he gave him the chomesh but he did not give him the principal, he forgave him the chomesh but did not forgive him the principle, or forgave him on this and that except for the worth of a pruta of the principal, he needs to go after him.

Zayin: If he gave him the principal and swore for him about the chomesh (that he had paid it even though he had not), behold he pays chomesh on the chomesh, until the principle (upon which he is paying chomesh) less than the worth of a pruta.  And so too with a deposit (an object left to be guarded), as it says, “with a deposit, pledge, theft, if he oppressed his neighbor, or a lost object and he denied it and swore falsely,” behold this pays the principal, chomesh, and (brings a korban) asham.  (If one says to the other,) where is my deposit?  And he said to him, it was lost, (he said back), I make you swear (that it was lost, and therefore you don’t have to pay), and he said, amen.  (Then) witnesses testify that he ate it, he pays the principal.  If he admitted himself (that he lied) he pays the principal, chomesh, and an asham.

Chet: (If one said to the other,) where is my deposit?  (And he said back,) it was stolen, I make you swear, and he said, amen.  The witnesses testify that he stole it, he pays the restitution of kefel.  If he admitted himself, he pays the principal, chomesh, and an asham.

Tet: One who stole (from) his father, swore to him, and (his father) died, behold this one pays the principal and chomesh to his (father’s) sons (his brothers) or his (father’s) brothers (for he loses his inheritance as long as he has the stolen object).  And if he doesn’t want to (lose his inheritance) or he doesn’t have (enough to waive his inheritance), he borrows, (gives the object to his brothers,) and the lenders come and take (the object from the brothers to pay the loan).

Yud: One who says to his son, konam (expressing a vow against) if you benefit from what is mine,” if he died, he (his son) inherits from him.  (If the father made the vow valid) in his life and after his death, if he died, he (the son) will not inherit from him, and will return to his (the father’s) sons or his (the father’s) brothers.  But if he (the father) doesn’t have, he borrows, and the lenders come and collect.

Yud Aleph: One who steals from a convert and swears from him, and he died, behold this one pays the principal and chomesh to the kohanim and an asham to the mizbe’ach, as it says, “and if the person does not have a redeemer for the man (the thief) to return to him, the guilt (what needs to be paid) is returned to Hashem to the kohen, except for the ram of (Yom) Hakippurim by which he will atone for it.”  If he was brining the money and the asham (to Yerushalayim) and died, the money will be given to his sons, and the (animal designated for) the asham will graze until it develops a blemish, will be sold, and its money will fall into a donation (offering).

Yud Bet: If he gave the money to the people of the watch (the kohanim serving at that time and died, the heirs cannot take it out from their hands, as it says, “a man who shall give to the kohen, for him (the kohen) it shall be.”  If he gave the money to (the kohanim of the first watch, that of) Yehoyariv and the asham to (the kohanim of the second watch, that of) Yidaya, he’s yotze (fulfills his obligation).  If he gave the asham to Yehoyariv and the money to Yidaya, if the asham is still extant, the children on Yidaya will offer it, but is not, he must return and bring another asham, for one who brings (the payment for) his theft before his asham is yotze, but if he brought his asham before his theft, he’s not yotze.  If he gave the principal, but not the chomesh, the chomesh does not hinder (the asham).

Perek Yud

Aleph: One who steals and feeds his children of he put it down before them, they are exempt from paying.  And if it was a thing in which there was a mortgage (land) they are chayav to pay.  We do not change money from the till of customs takers, the pocket of (tax) collectors (for we assume it to be improperly taken) and we do not take charity from them.  But, he may take from (money he keeps in) his house or in the shuk (for his personal money is not necessarily stolen).

Bet: If tax customs collectors took his donkey and gave him a different donkey or bandits stole his clothes and gave him different clothes, behold they are his, since the owners gave up hope for (someone returning) them.  One who saves (something) from the river, from troops, or from bandits, if the owners gave up hope, behold they are his.  And so too a swarm of bees, if the owners gave up hope (of getting the bees back), behold they are his.  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka said, a woman or minor is believed to say, this swarm came out from here (and therefore this is the owner).  And he may walk inside the field of his friend to save his swarm.  If he damaged, he pays what he damaged, but he may not cut his branch (do any intentional damage) on condition that he will give him money.  Rabi Yishma’el the son of Rabi Yochanan ben Broka said, he may even cut and give the money.

Gimmel: One who recognizes his vessels and books in the hand of another, and report of theft went out in the city (was known), the buyer (one who now has the items) will swear to him how much he paid, and he will take (that amount and return the items).  And if not (the theft was not known in the city), we do not give him the power, for I can say he (the one claiming them) sold them to another and this one (who is now in possession) bought them from him.

Daled: If one comes with his barrel of wine and one comes with his jug of honey, the barrel of honey cracked, and that one pours out his wine and saves the honey in it (his barrel), that one (the one who came with wine) only has his wage (rent for the barrel and salary for his actions, but not money for the wine).  But if he said, I will save yours (the honey) if you give me the money of mine, he is chayav to give it to him.  If a river swept away his donkey and the donkey of his friend, if his is worth a mane and his friend’s is worth two hundred, and if he left his and saved that of his friend, he only has his salary.  But if he said to him, I will save yours if you give me the (the worth) of mine, he is chayav to give him.

Hay: One who steals a field from his friend, and violent people took it, if it is a blow on the area (including surrounding fields), he says to him, behold your field is before you.  But if it is a result of the thief, he is chayav to stand for him another field (in its place).  If a river flooded it, he says to him, behold your field is before you.

Vav: One who steals (from) his friend, borrowed from him, or took a deposit from him in a settled area, he may not return to him in the desert (where the thing has a better chance of being ruined).  (If he stipulates) on condition to go out to the desert, he may return to him in the desert.

Zayin: One who says to his friend, I stole from you, you lent me, or you deposited with me, and I do not know if I returned to you or I didn’t return to you, he is chayav to pay.  But, if he said to him, I do not know if I stole from you, if you lent me, or if you deposited with me, he is patur from paying.

Chet: One who steals a lamb from the flock, returned it, and it (later) died or was stolen, he is chayav for its responsibility.  If the owners did not know about its theft or its returning, and they counted the flock and it was full, he’s patur from paying (if it died or was stolen afterwards).

Tet: One does not buy from shepherds wool, milk, or kids, and not from watchmen of fruit fruit or wood (for we fear these are all stolen).  But, one buys from a woman wool clothing in Yehuda, linen clothes in the Galil, and calves in Sharon (for these are the common products of the area).  And all who say (to the buyer) to hide (what they buy) it is assur (to buy from them).  And one may buy chickens and eggs from any place.

Yud: Hackled wool which the washer takes out (stray strands which come out while preparing the wool) behold they are his, but (the threads) which the comber (of the wool takes out) behold they are of the homeowner.  The washer takes three threads and they are his, more than that, they are of the homeowner.  If they were black (threads) on white (clothes) the washer takes them all and they are his (for they make the garment worse).  A tailor who had leftover thread and there is enough to sew with it or (to sew) a patch which is three (fingers) by three, behold these are of the homeowner.  What the carpenter takes off with a plane, behold they are his, but with a hatchet, (they are) of the homeowner.  And if he did it by the homeowner in his domain), even the sawdust is of the homeowner.

Mesechet Bava Metzia

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Two are holding a cloak, this one says, I found it, and that one says, I found it.  This one says, it is all mine, and that one says, it is all mine.  This one should swear that he does not have any less than half in it, and that should swear that he does not have any less than half in it, and they split it.  This one says, it is all mine, and that one says, it is half mine, the one who says, it is all mine should swear that he has no less than tree parts (quarters) and the one who says it is half mine should swear that he does not have in it less than a quarter,.  This one takes three parts and that one takes a quarter.

Bet: If two were riding on an animal, or one was riding and one was leading, this one says, it is all mine and that one says, it is all mine, this one should swear that he does not have in it less than half and that one should swear that he does not have less than half in it, and they split it.  When they admit or they have witnesses, they split without a swear.

Gimmel: If he was riding on an animal and said to his friend, give it to me, and he (the friend) took it and said, I merited in it, he merited in it.  If from when he gave it to him he said, I merited in it first, he didn’t say anything.

Daled: If one saw the finding (ownerless property) and fell on it, and another came and held on it, the one who held on it merited it.  If one saw them (people on his property) running after a finding, after a broken (lame) deer, or after young birds which have not flown, and he said, my field acquired it for me, it merited for him.  If the deer was running as normal or if the young birds were flying and he said, my field merited for me, he didn’t say anything.

Hay: The finding of his minor son and daughter, the finding of his Cana’ani slave and maidservant, and the finding of his wife, behold they are his.  The finding of his adult son and daughter, the finding of his Jewish slave or maidservant, the finding of his wife who he divorced even though he did not give her her ktuba, behold these are theirs.

Vav: If he found bills of debt, if there is a deposit of property, he should not return, for the court would collect on them (and we fear the borrower may have already paid), but if there is deposit of property on it, he should return, for the could would not collect on them, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, whether like this or like that (in either case) he should not return, because the court will collect on them.

Zayin: If he found the gittin of women, the release of slaves, dispositions of property (such as a will), (bills) of gifts, or receipts (that a man has paid his ktuba), he should not return them, for I say, they were written and he changed his mind not to give them.

Chet: If he found letters of assessment (a court document assessing collateral given by a borrower, letters of food (a statement that a man undertakes the support of his wife’s daughter from a previous husband), documents of chalitza or denying (that a minor orphan girl refuses her betrothal upon becoming an adult), documents of arbitration (affirming that the parties have accepted arbitration), and all the doings of the court, behold this he should return.  If he found a small bag, case, roll of documents, or bundle of documents, behold these he should return (for they were probably on their way to be delivered).  And how many (together) is bundle of documents?  Three tied to each other.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, if (the bundle has documents which reflect) one borrowing from three, he returns to the borrower, if three borrowing from one, he returns to the lender.  If he found a document between his documents and he does not know its nature (who it should belong to, the borrower or lender), it will be left until Eliyahu comes.  If there are with them (his documents) notes of cancellation (of a loan), he should do what is in the note of cancellation.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Which findings are his, and which his he obligated to announce?  These findings are his, if he found scattered produce, scattered money, bunches (of grain) in the public domain, caked of pressed figs, loaves of a baker, strings of fish, pieces of meat, shearings of wool which come from their country (are all similar and unfinished), prepared bundles of flax, and tongues of purple wool, behold these are his, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, all which has a change (marking) he is obligated to return.  How?  If he found a cake with (a shard of) pottery in it, or a loaf and there is money in it.  Rabi Shimon ben Elazar says, all merchant’s vessels he is not required to announce.

Bet: And he is requited to announce, if he found produce in a vessel or a vessel just as it is (empty), money in a pocket (pouch) or a pouch just as it is, heaps of produce, heaps of money, three coins one on top of another, bundles in a private domain, loaves of a homeowner, shearings of wool from the house of the artisan (a workshop), jugs of wine, and jugs of oil, behold these he is obligated to announce.

Gimmel: If he found young birds tied behind a stone fence, behind a fence, or on (one of the) paths in the fields, behold he may not touch them.  If he found a vessel in the garbage, if it was covered, he may not touch it, if it is uncovered, he takes and announces.  If he found it in a pile of stones or an old wall, behold these are his.  If he found on a new wall, if from halfway out (on the outer half of the wall), it’s his, if from halfway in it is (property) of the homeowner.  If he rented it (the house) to others (so it may belong to several people), even within the house, behold these are his.

Daled: If he found in a store, behold these are his.  Between the counter and the storekeeper, (the finding is property) of the storekeeper, Before a moneychanger, behold it there are his, between the chair and the moneychanger, behold these are for the moneychanger.  One who buys produce from his friend of his friend sent him produce and he found money in them, behold these are his, but if they were bound, he takes and announces.

Hay: (In the torah it says you shall return your friend’s garment and anything that he lost, but) also his garment was included in (saying) all of these (things which are lost), why was it taken out?  To make a hekesh (conclusion drawn based on textual juxtaposition) from it, to say to you, just as a garment is particular for it has signs and those who wish to claim it, so too any thing which has signs and those who wish to claim it, he is obligated to announce.

Vav: And until when is he obligated to announce?  Until its neighbors (people who live near where it was found) know about it, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, three festivals, and after the last festival seven days, such that he may go to his house three (days), return three, and announce one day.

Zayin: If he (one coming to claim the object) said the object but did not say its signs, he does not give it to him.  And a (suspected) cheater, even if he gave its signs, he does not give to him, as it says, “until your brother asks for it,” (expounded to mean) until you ask of your brother, if he is a cheater is he is not a cheater.  Anything which works and eats, will work and eat (the finder must keep, for the owner wants that one to work), but a thing which does not work but eats, he may sell (and return the money).  As it says, “and you shall return it to him,” (meaning) see hoe you return it to him (in what manner is proper).  What will happen with the money?  Rabi Tarfon says, he may use them, therefore if the got lost, he is chayav for their responsibility (for he will have to give back any money he spends).  Rabi Akiva says, he may not use them, therefore if they got lost, he is not chayav for their responsibility.

Chet: If he found books, he must read from them once every thirty days (to keep them aired out properly), and if he does not know how to read, he rolls them.  But, if he will not learn from them for the first time (he may only review to ensure he does not ware it down) and another may not read after him (for two people might tear one scroll).  If he found clothing, he shakes it out once every thirty days and spread it out for its needs (to keep it aired out), but not for his honor (to decorate his house).  (If he found) vessels of silver or vessels of copper, he uses them for their needs, but not (enough) to wear them down.  Vessels of silver or vessels of gold, he may not touch them until Eliyahu comes (for they will not become degraded).  If he found a sack or a large basket, or any thing which it is not his (normal) way to take it (handle it) behold this does not take (for he may not take care of it properly).

Tet: What is something lost?  If he found a donkey or a cow grazing on the path, this is not something lost.  A donkey and its vessels (saddle and the like) are backward, or a cow running between the vineyards (in a vineyard, where it does not usually go), behold this is something lost.  If he returned it, it fled, he returned it, and it fled, even four or five times, he is obligated to return it, as it says, “return shall you return it.”  If he lost (the value of) a sela, he (the finder) may not say to him (the owner), give me a sela (which I lost in wages from dealing with your object, rather he gives him his wages as an unemployed worker.  If there is a court there, he (the finder) makes a condition (about being repaid) before the court, but if there is no court there, before who does he make a condition?  His (work) comes first (so he doesn’t have to deal with the lost object).

Yud: If he found it in a bard, he is not obligated to (care for) it, but if he found it in the public domain, he is obligated to it.  And if it was (in) a graveyard, he does not become tame for it.  If his father said, become tame, of he said to him (about any lost object), do not return it, he does not listen to him.  If he unloaded and loaded (a donkey he sees overburdened), unloaded and loaded, even four or five times, he is obligated (to help), as it says, “help shall you help.”  If he (the donkey’s owner) went and sat, and said, since it is a mitzva upon you, if you want to unload, unload, he (the one watching) is patur, for it says, “(you shall help) with him.”  If he (the owner) was elderly or sick, he (the watcher) is chayav.  It is a mitzva from the torah to unload, but not to load (he may take wages for reloading the animal).  Rabi Shimon says, also to load.  Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, if there was on it more than it could carry, he (the watcher) does not owe him (the service of helping the donkey), for it says, “under its burden,” its burden that it can stand with it.

Yud Aleph: His lost object and the lost object of his father (and he can only deal with one at a time), his lost object comes first.  His lost object and the lost object of his rabbi, his comes first.  The lost object of his father and the lost object of his rabbi, that of his rabbi comes first, for his father brought him into this world, and the rabbi who taught him knowledge brings him to the life of the next world, but if his father is wise, that of his father comes first.  If his father and his rabbi were carrying a burden, he lets down that of his rabbi and then lets down that of his father.  If his father and his rabbi were in captivity, he redeems his rabbi and then redeems his father, but if his father was wise, he redeems his father and then redeems his rabbi.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: One who deposits by his friend an animal or vessels and they were stolen or got lost, if he paid and didn’t want to swear (that he wasn’t negligent), for behold they said, an unpaid guardian swears and exits (without paying).  If the thief was found, he pays the restitution of kefel, if he slaughtered or sold, he pays the restitution of four or five.  To whom does he pay?  To he who the deposit (the loss) is by him (the guardian).  If he (the guardian) swore and didn’t want to pay, the thief was found, he pays the restitution of kefel, and if he slaughtered or sold he pays the restitution of four or five.  To whom does he pay?  To the (original) owner of the deposit.

Bet: One who rents a cow from his friend and he lent it to another, and it died in its normal fashion, the renter swears that it died in its normal fashion, and the borrower pays the renter.  Rabi Yossi said, how does this one make a profit with the cow of his friend?  Rather he returns the cow to the owners.

Gimmel: If he said to two, I stole a maneh from one of you, and I do not know which one of you, or, the father of one of you deposited by me a maneh, and I don’t know which one it is, he gives this one a maneh and that one a maneh, for he admitted from his own mouth.

Daled: Two who deposited by one, this one a maneh and that one two hundred (zuz), this one says, the two hundred was mine and that one says, the two hundred was mine, he gives this one a maneh and that one a maneh and the remainder will be left until Eliyahu comes.  Rabi Yossi said, if so, what did the cheater lose?  Rather, all of it is left until Eliyahu comes.

Hay: And so too two vessels, one is worth a maneh and one is worth a thousand zuz, this one says, the nicer is mine, and that one says, the nicer is mine, he gives the smaller to one of them, and from (sale of) the nicer he gives the money of the smaller to the other, and the rest is left until Eliyahu comes.  Rabi Yossi said, if so, what did the cheater lose?  Rather, everything is left until Eliyahu comes.

Vav: One who deposits by his friend, even if they are getting lost (wasting away) he may not touch them (sell them).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, they sell before a court, because it is like he is returning something lost to the owners.

Zayin: One who deposits produce by his friend (but is not sure how much to return), behold he may take from him losses (what is usually lost from produce).  For wehat and for rice (the amount lost is) nine half kabin for every kor, for barley and millet nine kabin for every kor, and for spelt and flaxseed three se’ah per kor, all is according to the measure (of grain) and all is according to the time (it is left with the guardian).  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri said, and what does it matter to the mice, don’t they eat from a lot (of food) and from a little?  Rather, he only takes out his losses from one kor alone.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it was a large measure, he does not take out his losses because it increases (for the grain is usually deposited when it will be dry and collected at a time it will be wet, so the volume increases).  

Chet: He may take out from him one sixth for wine (which was deposited but mixed with the guardian’s wine).  Rabi Yehuda says, a fifth.  He may take from him three log of oil from one hundred (if it was mixed), a log and a half for sediment (for that sinks to the bottom and is unusable) and a log and a half for absorption (by the barrels).  If it was refined oil, he may not take from him for sediment, and if the jars were old, he does not take for absorption.  Rabi Yehuda says, also one who sells refined oil to his friend the whole year, behold this one (accepts that he) gets one and a half of sediment for hundred.

Tet: One who deposits a barrel by his friend, the owners did not have a special place for it, and he moved it and it broke, if because of his hand (moving it) it broke and (he moved it) for his own need, he’s chayav.  If for it’s needs (for the good of the barrel), he’s patur.  If after he put it down it broke, whether (he moved it) for his needs or for its needs, he’s patur.  If the owners had a special place for it, and he moved it and it broke, whether in his hand or from when he put it down (if he moved it) for his needs, he’s chayva, but if for its needs, he’s patur.

Yud: If he deposited money by his friend, if he tied them and carried them over his back, gave them to his minor son or daughter, or locked before it improperly, he’s chayav, for it is not the way of the guardians.  But if he guarded them like the way of the guardians, he is patur.

Yud Aleph: One who deposits money by a moneychanger, if they are bound, he may not use them, therefore, if they got lost, he is not chayav in their responsibility (to replace them).  If they are unbound, he may use them, and therefore if they got lost, he is chayav in their responsibility.  If (he deposited) by the homeowner, whether bound or unbound, he may not use them, therefore if they got lost, he is not chayav in their responsibility.  A storekeeper is like a homeowner according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, the storekeeper is like a moneychanger.

Yud Bet: One who sends a hand (uses) a deposit, Beit Shamay says, he suffers its diminishment and appreciation (owes the owner whatever the change in value was).  Beit Hillel says, (he owes) like the time of taking (he always owes the original value).  Rabi Akiva says, like the time of its claim (by the one who deposited it, meaning he gets whatever it is now).  One who considers sending a hand on a deposit, Beit Shamay says, he’s chayav.  Beit Hillel says, he’s not chayav until he sends a hand in it, as it says, “if he did not send his hand in the work of his friend.”  How?  He tipped the barrel and took a revi’it from it, but it broke, he only pays a revi’it.  If the raised it (an act of acquisition) and took a revi’it from it and it broke, he pays the value of all of it.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Gold (coinage) acquires silver (coinage, meaning trading gold for silver automatically acquires the silver), but silver does not acquire gold (an act of acquisition must be made on gold which is traded for with silver).  Copper acquires silver, but silver does not acquire copper.  Worse money (which is not as easily useable, such as gold or copper) acquire better money (silver, which is usable everywhere) but better money does not acquire worse money (since the worse money is seen as a commodity, and giving a commodity acquires by obligating the other party to pay for it, but the better money is seen as a purchase, which is not binding).  An unminted coin acquires a coin, but a coin does not acquire an unminted coin.  Objects acquire a coin, but a coin does not acquire objects.  This is the general rule, all objects acquire each other (bartering is acquisition, but selling is not).

Bet: How (can we say that objects acquire but money does not)?  If he (a person) took from him (a vendor) produce, but didn’t give him money, he cannot return it (for his taking was an act of acquisition).  If he gave him money but didn’t take produce from him, he can return it.  But they said, He who punished the generation of the flood and the generation of the separation (Tower of Babel) we will punish those who do not stand on their word (return things they have given money for).  Rabi Shimon says, whoever has the money in his hand, he has the upper hand (if money has been given only the vendor can cancel the deal).

Gimmel: Ona’ah (cheating) is four silver (ma’ah) out of the twenty-four (ma’ah which are) in a sela, one sixth of the purchase.  Until when is he allowed to return (if he feels he was cheated)?  Until he can show to a merchant or relative (so he can see if he was cheated, but after that it is unreasonably long).  Rabi Tarfon instructed in Lod, ona’ah is eight silver (ma’ah) to a sela, a third of the purchase, and the inhabitants of Lod were happy (for they were experts at trading and would now be able to make more money).  He said to them, the whole day one is allowed to return.  They said to him, let Rabi Tarfon leave us in our place, and they went back to the words of the Chachamim.

Daled: Whether the buyer or the seller, they have (a right to return) ona’ah.  Just as ona’ah is for a layperson, so too it is for a merchant.  Rabi Yehuda says, there is no ona’ah for a merchant (he may not claim he was cheated, for he is an expert).  The one who was taken from (cheated), he has the upper hand.  If he wants he can say, give me the money, or, give me what you cheated me.

Hay: Hoe much may a sela be missing (in value due to wear) and it will not have ona’ah.  Rabi Meir says, four issar, an issar per dinar (a sela if four dinar).  Rabi Yehuda says, for pundyon (two issar), a pundyon per dinar.  Rabi Shimon says, eight pundyon, two pundyon per dinar.

Vav: Until when is he allowed to return?  In cities, until (he has enough time to) show to a moneychanger, and in villages, until the (upcoming) erev Shabbat.  If he (the one who gave the sela) recognizes it, even after twelve months he gets it (back) from him, and he (the one taking back) has nothing on him (is owed nothing) except resentment.  And he can give it for ma’aser sheni and not worry (about punishment) for there is only on him that he is a bad person.

Zayin: Ona’ah is four silver (for every sela), claiming is two silver (this is the minimum considered denying a claim, making one a modeh bemiktzat who must swear that he doesn’t owe the full amount), and admission (the part he admits) is (alteast) with a pruta (the smallest coin, on thirty-second of a ma’ah).  There are five (things which are contingent on the value of) prutot, (and) they are, admission is to the value of a pruta, a woman is betrothed with the value of a pruta, if one benefits from the value of a pruta of holy property it is me’ila, one who finds (something of) the value of a pruta must return it, and one who steals the value of a pruta and swears to him (the one he stole from) must go after him (to return it) even to Maday.

Chet: There are five (instances of one who must pay) chomesh (an extra fifth on the principal), (and) they are, one who eats truma (a portion removed for the kohanim), trumat ma’aser (a part remove by the levi’im for the kohanim) of dmai (food which we a doubtful of the tithing), challa (a part removed from doughs for kohanim), and bikurim (first fruits which must be brought to the Beit Hamikdash and then eaten), he adds chomesh; one who redeems his neta revai (the fourth year of produce since planting which must be brought to Yerushalayim) and his ma’aser sheni (a tithe which must be eaten in Yerushalayim, both of these may be redeemed such that the produce may be eaten and one spends the money in Yerushalayim), he adds chomesh; one who redeems from his hekdesh (if he decides he wants to use property he consecrated for holy use) he adds chomesh; and one who steals the value of a pruta from his friend but swears to him (that he did not steal), he adds chomesh (when he repays).

Tet: These things do not have ona’ah, slaves, documents (which function as bonds), lands, and consecrated property.  They do not have the restitution of kefel (if they are stolen), and not the restitution of four or five.  An unpaid guardian doesn’t swear (that he was negligent if they were ruined or lost in his care) and one who takes a salary (as a guardian) does not pay (if these were ruined or lost in his care).  Rabi Shimon says, holy things which he is obligated in their responsibility (if they cannot be brought he must provide a replacement) have ona’ah, and those which he is not obligated in their responsibility, they don’t have ona’ah.  Rabi Yehuda says, also one who sells a torah, animal, or pearls, they do not have ona’ah.  They said to him, they didn’t say (that there is no ona’ah) other than these (which were stated at the beginning of the mishna).

Yud: Just as ona’ah is in buying and selling, so too there is ona’ah in words.  One may not say to him (another person), how much is this object, if he does not want to buy.  If he (the one being talked to) was a person of repentance (who had repented from prior evil ways), one may not say to him remember your previous deeds.  If he is the child of converts, one may not say to him, remember the deeds of your forefathers, as it says, “and a convert you shall not wrong and you shall not pressure him.”

Yud Aleph: One may not mix fruits (of one field) with fruits (of another field if he markets them as coming from one field), even new (grain which cannot be eaten until Pesach passes) with new, and there is no need to say new with old.  In truth, by wine they allowed to mix hard (strong wine) with soft, because it improves it.  One may not mix the sediment from wine with (other) wine, but he gives him its sediment (with the wine it was part of).  One who mixed water with his wine, he may not sell it in a store unless he informs him (the customer), and not a merchant, even if he informs him, for it is nothing other than a way to cheat with it. (But) a place where they had a custom to put water in the wine, they may put (water in the wine).

Yud Bet: A merchant may take (grain) from five threshing floors and put into one storeroom, or from give winepresses and put into one barrel, as long as he does not intend to mix (poor quality with better quality to mask it).  Rabi Yehuda says, a storekeeper may not give out toasted grain or nuts to children such that they will be accustomed to come to him, but the Chachamim allow.  And he may not lower the price (so people will come to him and then raise it), but the Chachamim remember him favorably.  One may not sort barley (to remove impurities when selling it) according to Abba Shaul, and Chachamim allow.  But they admit that he may not sort (only) what is at the top of the storeroom (which is seen by customers) for it nothing but stealing the eye (deceiving the customer into thinking all the barley is sorted).  One may not give a deceiving appearance to a person, animal, or vessels (to try to get a higher price when selling them).

Perek Hay

Aleph: What is interest (a prohibition from the torah) and what is increase (a rabbinical extension)?  Which is interest, one who lends a sela (four dinar) for (a return of) five dinar, (lending) two se’ah of wheat for three, because it bites (from the borrower’s wealth).  What is increase, one who increases by produce.  How?  If one bought from him wheat with a golden dinar (twenty-five dinar) per kor (gave the money but did not get the produce), and that is the price, .  Wheat (increased in price and) stood at thirty dinar a kor.  He (the purchaser) said, give me my wheat, I want to buy wine with it.  He (the seller) said to him, behold your wheat are made upon me (cost me) thirty dinar a kor, behold, you can have wine by me with them (the money) and he has no wine (for while he owes him the amount of wheat he paid for, despite the loss, he is making it into credit for a different commodity and thereby avoiding his loss, which is not what the customer paid for).

Bet: One who lends his friend money, he may not live in his courtyard for free and he may not (even) rent from him for less, because this is interest.  A rental fee may be increased, but a price may not be increased.  How?  One who rents his courtyard to his friend and sys to him, if now you give me (the rent) it is for you ten sela for the year, but if you give (the rent) of the month on the month, it is a sela a month, that is mutar.  If he sold him his field, and he said to him, if you give me (the money) now, behold it is for you one thousand zuz, but if (when the grain gets) to the threshing floor, for twelve hundred zuz.

Gimmel If he sold him his field, gave him part of the money, and (the seller) said to him, when you want, bring the money and take your field (which you acquire retroactively from now), this is assur (for neither can use the field, because it would be interest either way).  If he lent him on (a mortgage of) his field and he (the lender) said to him if you do not give me from her until three years, behold it (the field) is his (the lender’s).  And Baytos ben Zonin would do like this with the consent of the Chachamim.

Daled: One may not set up with a shopkeeper for half the wage (sell to a shopkeeper at wholesale prices on condition that they split the profit), and he may not give money (to a shopkeeper) to buy with it produce to split the wage (for in both cases this money functions as half loan half investment, meaning that the investment is seen as interest), unless he gives him his wage as a worker (which would make him the manager of the investment and not benefiting from the loan).  One may not set up chickens (and eggs) for half (the profit to be made from the eggs hatching), one may not assess calves and foals for half (giving them to another to raise and then split the profit), unless he gives him wage for his toil and his food (to feed the animals).  But, one may receive calves and foals for half (the profit without an assessment, meaning there is no liability for the giver if they die) and raise them (calves) until they are a third (of their growth) and a donkey until it can carry burdens.

Hay: One may assess a cow and a donkey and whatever it does and eats for half (since it is doing work for the one raising, this is not seen as unfair interest).  In a place where they had a custom to divide the offspring (of animals when they are given to someone to raise) immediately, they divide, and a place where they have a custom to raise, they raise.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, they assess the calf with its mother and a foal with its mother.  And one may be mafriz (offer more than the asking price and use the extra as a loan to improve the land) on his field, and he does not have to worry because of interest.

Vav: One may not get tzon barzel (an agreement where one raising sheep accepts all responsibility for losses but splits profits) from a Jew, because it is interest.  But, one can accept tzon barzel from a non-Jew and borrow from them and lend to them with interest, and so too with a resident alien.  A Jew may lend (to another Jew) the money of a non-Jew (with interest to another Jew) with the knowledge of a non-Jew (where the non-Jew facilitates the transfer of a loan with interest to the non-Jew from one Jew to another) but not with the knowledge of a Jew (it there is no non-Jew with whom the loan is being transferred, i.e. if a loan to a non-Jew which has interest is being transferred directly between Jews).

Zayin: One may not make an agreement about produce until the price is put out (determined).  One the price comes out, they may make an agreement, even though this one does not have, the one does (if one of them does not have produce, he can simply use what he traded for to acquire it when the other asks for his purchase).  If he was the first of the harvesters, he may (only) make an agreement with him about a pile of grain, harvest-basket of grapes, vat of olives, clay lumps of a potter, and lime from when he sunk it in the kiln.  And he may make an agreement with him about manure all the days of the year.  Rabi Yossi says, one does not make an agreement about manure unless he had manure in a dung heap, and the Chachamim allow.  And one may make an agreement with him according to the highest market price (in the eyes of the buyer, referring to the cheapest price).  Rabi Yehuda says, even though he didn’t make an agreement with him for the highest market price, he can say to him, give me this much, or give me my money.

Chet: One may loan his tenant farmer wheat for (a return of) wheat for (use as) seed, but not for food (for one may not make a loan with a return of produce, for the price may change causing interest).  For Raban Gamliel would loan his sharecroppers wheat for what for seed, whether it was expensive and became cheap or was cheap and became expensive, he would take according to the cheap price (even if the wheat became cheaper he would only take what he gave), but not because the halacha is such, but rather because he wanted to be strict on himself.

Tet: A person may not say to his friend, lend me a kor of wheat, and I will give (back) you from the threshing floor (for if the price changes, there will be interest).  But he may say, lend me until my son comes, or, until I fink the key (so he can get to wheat which he has, meaning that the loan is intended to be for a short time), but Hillel forbade.  And so too Hillel would say, a woman may not loan a loaf to her friend until she makes money, for perhaps the price of wheat will rise and they will find themselves coming to interest.

Yud: A person may say to his friend, weed with me and I will weed with you, hoe with me and I will hoe with you, but he may not say to him, weed with me and I will hoe with you, hoe with me and I will weed with you.  All the days of the dry season are (considered) one (in length, so repaying a service from one day of the season to the other has no problem of interest) and all the days of the rainy season are one.  One may not say to him (his friend) plow with me in the dry season and I will plow with you in the rainy season.  Raban Gamliel says, there is interest which is (paid in) advance, and there is interest later.  How?  If one gave his eyes (wanted to) borrow from him (another person), was sending him (a gift), and said, so that you will lend me, this is interest in advance.  If one borrowed from someone, returned him money, was sending him, and said, for your money which was null (from your use) by me, behold this is interest later.  Rabi Shimon says, there is interest by words, one may not say to him (the lender), know that so-and-so came from such-and-such a place (and he would not have normally let the lender know).

Yud Aleph: And these transgress a lo ta’ase (negative commandment when there is a loan with interest), the lender, the borrower, the guarantor, and the witnesses.  The Chachamim also the scribe.  They transgress because of “do not give (a loan with interest),” because of, “do not take (interest) from him,” because of, “do not be to him like a creditor (with interest),” because of, “do not put upon him interest,” and because of, “and before a blind person you shall not put a stumbling block, and you shall fear from your God, I am Hashem.”

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who hires artisans, and they deceived one another (if one is working as a contractor and he offers less than what the one hiring offered and pockets the difference) they have nothing on one another except resentment.  If he hired a donkey driver or a potter to bring carriers and flutists for a bride (wedding) or a dead person (funeral), workers to take out his flax from soaking, and anything which will be lost (with time), and they returned from them (retracted), in a place where there is no person he may hire (others) on them (at their expense, for they defaulted) or he may deceive them (the original workers by promising higher wages but not following through).

Bet: One who hires artisans and they returned from them (retracted), their hand is on the bottom (they have the disadvantage, meaning he subtracts from their wage whatever he had to pay to complete the job).  If the homeowner returns on it, his hand is on the bottom.  Whoever changes (the terms) his hand is on the bottom, and whoever returns on it, his hand is on the bottom.

Gimmel: One who rents a donkey to lead it in the mountain and led it in the valley, (or rented it to walk) in the valley and led it on the mountain, even if this is ten mil (of walking) and that is ten mil, and it died, he is chayav (for even though it was the same distance he violated the terms of use).  One who rents a donkey and it got blinded or it was seized for public service, he says to him, behold what is yours is before you.  If it died or broke (was injured) he is obligated to stand up for him a donkey (replace it).  One who rents a donkey to lead it on the mountain and he led it in the valley and it slipped, he is patur (for the one who rented to him for the mountain assumed a risk of slipping), but if it overheated (which was not assumed with the mountain), he’s chayav.  (If he rented it) to lead it in the valley and he led it on the mountain, if it slipped, he’s chayav, but if it overheated, he’s patur, if as a result of the ascent, he’s chayav.

Daled: One who rented a cow to plow on the mountain and plowed in the valley, if the blade of the plow broke, he’s patur (for it breaks more easily on a mountain).  (If he rented to plow) in the valley and plowed on the mountain, if the blade of the plow broke, he’s chayav.  To thresh legumes and he threshed grain, he’s patur, to thresh grain and he threshed legumes, he’s chayav because legumes are slippery.  

Hay: One who rents a donkey to bring on it (load it with) wheat and he brought barley on it, he’s chayav (if something happens to the donkey for even if the weights are the same, the volumes are different).  (If he rented it to carry) produce but he brought hay on it, he’s chayav, because the volume is hard to load.  To bring a letech (a volume equal to half a kor) of wheat and brought a letech of barley (which is less dense), he’s patur.  And if he adds on its burden, he is chayav.  And how much must he add on his burden to be chayav?  Sumchus says in the name of Rabi Meir, a se’ah for a camel and three kabin for a donkey.

Vav: All artisans (who have something in their care) are (equivalent) to paid guardians.  And all (artisans) who said, take what is yours and bring money, (are like an) unpaid guardian.  (If one says,) guard for me (now) and I will guard for you (later), (he is considered) a paid guardian.  (If one says,) guard for me, and he (the guardian) said to him, put it down before me, (he is considered) an unpaid guardian.

Zayin: If one lent him on collateral (the lender is considered) a paid guardian (in matters of the collateral).  Rabi Yehuda says, if he lent him money, he is an unpaid guardian, if he lent him produce he is a paid guardian.  Abba Shaul says, a person is allowed to rent the collateral of a poor person set a price and go (using this money to reduce the debt), for he is like one who returns a lost article.

Chet: One who moves a barrel from place to place and it broke, whether he is an unpaid guardian or a paid guardian, he must swear (that he was not acting negligently).  Rabi Eliezer says, this and that (both) swear, but I wonder if this and that may swear (for the paid guardian should really be paying for it).

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who hired workers and told them to come early or stay late, in a place where it is not the custom to come early or stay late, he cannot force them.  In a place where it is the custom to feed (the workers), he must feed, or (if it is the custom) to provide with sweet (things while they are working), he must provide, everything is like the custom of the country.  There was a case with Rabi Yochanan ben Matia who said to his son, go and hire workers for us.  He went and set for the food, and when he came to his father, my son, even if you made for them like the feast of Shlomo in his time, you did not fulfill your obligation with them, for they are the children of Avraham, Yitzchak, and Ya’akov.  Rather, before they start their work, go out and say to them, (you work for me) on condition that you do not have on me (a right for anything) other than bread and beans alone.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, he didn’t have to say, everything is like the custom of the country.

Bet: And these (workers) eat (from what they work with, with rights) from the torah, one who does with that which is connected to the ground at the time of the finishing of the work, and with separated from the ground even before the work is finished, and with something which was grown from the ground.  And these (are workers) who do not eat, one who does with that which is connected to the ground when it is not done with its work, with that which is separated from the ground from after the work is done, and with a thing which is not grown from the ground.

Gimmel: (He may eat) if he was doing with his hands but not with his feet, his feet but not his hands, even (if the work was) with his shoulder, behold this one eats.  Rabi Yossi bar Yehuda says, (he may not eat) until he does with his hands and feet (which is connected to the prohibition of muzzling an ox, which works with hands and feet, while threshing).

Daled: If e was doing with figs, he may not eat grapes; with grapes, he may not eat figs.  But he may stop himself until he gets to the place of the nice (best fruit) and eat.  And all of them they didn’t say (they could eat) other than the time of work.  But, because of returning lost objects to the owners they said, the workers may eat on their way from row to row, and when returning from the winepress, and a donkey (can eat until) when it is being unpacked.

Hay: A worker with squash may eat, even for (the value of) a dinar, and dates, even for a dinar.  Rabi Eliezer Chisma says, a worker may not eat more than his salary, and the Chachamim allow.  But they teach a person that he should not be a glutton and close the door (to more work) before himself.

Vav: A person can stipulate for himself (to get extra money and not eat), for his adult on and daughter, for his adult slave and maidservant, and for his wife, because they have knowledge (they will understand that they can’t eat), but he may not stipulate for his minor son and daughter, minor slave and maidservant, or for his animals, for they do not have knowledge.

Zayin: One who hires workers to do in his neta revai (four-year-old crop which must be eaten in Yerushalayim), behold these may not eat.  If he didn’t inform them, he redeems and feeds them.  If his cakes (of figs) crumbled of his barrels (of wine) opened, behold these he (a worker) may not eat (for they were most likely not tithed).  If he didn’t inform them, he take ma’aser and feeds them.

Chet: The guardians of produce may eat from the ways (customs) of the country, but not from the torah.  There are four guardians, an unpaid guardian, borrower, one who takes a salary (paid guardian) and renter.  An unpaid guardian swears (that he was not negligent) about everything (and is exempt from paying), the borrower pays for everything, and the one who takes a salary and the renter swear about something broken, something taken captive, and something which died, and pay for something lost and something stolen.

Tet: One wolf (which eats a sheep) is not forced (circumstances beyond one’s control which the unpaid guardian, paid guardian, and renter swear for), but two wolves are forced.  Rabi Yehuda says, in a time of a pack of wolves even (if the damage is caused by only) one wolf (the damage) is forced.  Two dogs are not forced.  Yadua the Bavli says in the name of Rabi Meir, from one direction it is not forced, from two directions, it is forced.  Bandits, behold this is forced.  The lion, the bear, the tiger, the panther, and the snake, behold this is forced.  When?  When they come from themselves (of their own accord) but if he led them (the animals in his charge) to a place with hordes of animals or bandits, this is not forced.

Yud: If it (an animal) died in its (normal) way, behold this is forced.  If he afflicted it (by not giving it proper care) and it died, it is not forced.  If it went up to the top of cliffs and it fell, behold this is forced.  If he brought it up to the top of cliffs and it fell and died, it is not forced.  An unpaid guardian may make a condition that he is exempt from swearing, the borrower to be exempt from paying, and the one who takes a salary and renter to be exempt from swearing and from paying.

Yud Aleph: All who make a condition about (against) what is written in the torah, his condition is null.  And any condition which has an action at its beginning the condition is null (the deed takes place even if the condition is not met).  And any that he can fulfill it eventually and he made a condition about it from the beginning (something that may happen after the deed and he stipulated that it occur after) his condition is valid (the deed is invalid if the condition is not fulfilled).

Perek Chet

Aleph: One who borrowed a cow and asked (for the help of) the owner with it or hired its owner with it, or he asked the owners or hired them and afterwards borrowed the cow, and it died, he’s patur, as it says, “if its owner is with it he shall not pay.”  But if he borrowed the cow and then asked the owners or hired them and it died, he’s chayav, as it says, “if its owner is not with it, pay shall he pay.”

Bet: One who borrows a cow, if he borrowed it half the day and rented it the other half, borrowed it today and rented it for tomorrow, or rented one and borrowed one and it (a cow) died, the lender says, the borrowed one (in the last case) died, (in the second case) the day it was borrowed it died, or (in the first time) during the time it was borrowed it died, and that one (the renter) says, I don’t know, he’s chayav.  If the renter says, the rented one died, on the day it was rented it died, or during the time it was rented it died, and that one says, I don’t know, he’s patur.  If this one says borrowed and that one says rented, the renter must swear that the rented one died.  If this one says, I don’t know and that one says, I don’t know, they will split (the loss).

Gimmel: One who borrows a cow and he (the lender) sent it to him in the hand of his son, in the hand of his slave, or in the hand of his agent; or (he sent it) in the hand of the son, in the hand of the slave, or in the hand of the agent of the borrower, and it died, he’s patur.  If the borrower said to him, send it to me in the hand of my son, in the hand of my slave, or in the hand of my agent; or (send it) in the hand of your son, in the hand of your slave, or in the hand of your agent of the borrower said to him, behold I am sending it in the hand of my son, in the hand of my slave, or in the hand of my agent; or (I am sending it) in the hand of your son, in the hand of your slave, or in the hand of your agent; the borrower said, send it; he sent it; and it died, he’s chayav.  And so too at the time he returns it.

Daled: One who exchanges a cow for a donkey and it (the cow) gives birth, and so too one who sells his maidservant and she gives birth, this one says, (it gave birth) before I sold, and that one says, from the time I bought it, they split (the value of the child).  If one had two slaves, one large (an adult) and one small (a minor), and so too two fields, one large and one small, if the buyer says, I bought the large one, and that one says, I don’t know, he merited in the large one.  If the seller says, I sole the small one, and that one says, I don’t know, he doesn’t have other than the small.  If this one says large and that one says small, the seller must swear that he sold the small one.  If this one says, I don’t know and that one says, I don’t know, they split (the difference).

Hay: One who sells his olive trees for (the buyer to use as) wood, and they made less than a revi’it (of oil) per se’ah (of olives, meaning the olives were of poor quality), behold these are of the owner of the trees.  If they made a revi’it per se’ah, this one says, my olive trees grew it, and that one says, my land grew it, they split (the oil).  If a river washed out his olive trees and put them into the field of his friend (where they grew olives), this one says, my olive trees grew, and that one says, my land grew, they split it.

Vav: One who rents a house to his friend (for an unspecified amount of time), during the rainy season, he cannot send him out (evict him) from sukkot until Pesach (foe he will not be able to find a vacancy).  In the season of the sun (dry season), (he must give him) thirty days (of warning).  And in cities, whether in the dry season or to rainy season, twelve months.  And with stores, whether in towns or in citied, twelve months.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, a store of bakers or dyers, three years.

Zayin: One who rents a house to his friend, the owner is obligated in (ensuring that there is) a door, a bolt, a lock, and anything which is the making of an artisan, but a thing which is not the work of an artisan, the renter makes it.  The manure is (property) of the homeowner, and the renter does not have other than what comes out of the oven and the stove alone.

Chet: One who rents a house to his friend for a year, if the year became a leap year, if became a leap year for (in the favor of) the renter.  If he rented it to him by months, if the year became a leap year, it became a leap year for the owner.  There was a case in Tzippori with one who rented a bathhouse from his friend for twelve gold (dinar, each worth twenty-five dinar) for a year, a golden dinar a month, (and the year became a leap year) and the case came before Raban Shimon ben Gamliel and before Rabi Yossi, and they said, they split the leap month.

Tet: One who rents a house to his friend and it fell, he is obligated to set up for him a (new) house.  If it was small, he may not make it large, (if the house was) large, he may not make it small.  (If there was) one (house), he may not make it two, two, he may not make it one.  He may not subtract from the windows and he may not add to them, except with the knowledge (consent) of both of them.

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who receives a field from his friend (as a sharecropper who pays a part of the harvest), in a place where it was the custom to harvest, he harvest, to uproot (crops by hand) he uproots, to plow after (harvesting so weeds will die) he plows, all is according to the custom of the country.  Just as they divide the produce they divide the hay and stra, just as they divide the wine, they divide the prunings and the reeds (used as trellises), and both of them supply the reeds.

Bet: On who receives a field from his friend and it is an irrigated field or a field with trees, if the spring dried up or the trees were cut down, he may not deduct from his rent.  If he said, lease me this irrigated field or this field with trees, if the spring dried up or the trees were cut down, he reduces from his rent.

Gimmel: One who receives a field from his friend and let it lie fallow, they assess it how much it is fit to make and he (the renter) gives him (the owner), for so he writes to him (in the agreement) if I let it lie fallow and do not work it, I will pay based on the best (yield the field is fit to make).

Daled: One who receives a field from his friend and did not want to weed, and said to him (the owner) what does it matter to you, since I am giving you your rent.  They do not listen to him, since he (the owner) can say to him, tomorrow (some day) you will go out from me (give me back the field) and it will raise before me grasses (weeds).

Hay: One who receives a field from his friend and it did not make (produce, so the renter feels it is not worth the trouble), if there was enough to stand (make) a pile of grain, he is chayav to care for it (so he can pay the owner).  Rabi Yehuda says, what is the amount of a pile of grain?  Only if there is in it enough to drop (the amount used to sow the field).

Vav: One who receives a field from his friend and locusts ate it or it was blasted (by wind ruining the grain), if it is a blow on the district, he deducts from the rent, if it is not a blow on the district, he does not deduct from the rent (for he can say it was the luck of the renter).  Rabi Yehuda says, if he received it from him for money (rented as opposed to tenant or sharecropping) either way he does not deduct from the rent.

Zayin: One who receives a field from his friend for ten kor of wheat a year, if it was blighted, he may give from in it (for the ten kor), and if the wheat was good, he may not say to him, behold I will buy from the shuk, rather he gives him from it.

Chet: One who receives a field from his friend to sow barley may not sow it (with) wheat (for it takes more from the soil), (if he got it for) wheat he may sow it barley.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel forbids (even the second case).  (If he got it for) legumes, he may not sow it (with) grain, for grain, he may not sow it legumes.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel forbids.

Tet: One who receives a field from his friend for a few years may not sow it with flax (which takes a lot of nutrients and its roots last for seven years) and he does not have the beams of the sycamore (if there were sycamores, he may not take branches from them, for they take seven years to grow back).  If he received it from him for seven years, in the first year he may sow flax and he has the beams of sycamores.

Yud: One who receives a field from his friend for one week (seven years) for seven hundred zuz, the shvi’it (which falls during these years) is part of the count.  If he received it from him for seven years for seven hundred zuz, shvi’it is not part of the count.

Yud Aleph: One hired for (work during) the day collects (his wage) the whole night (if after that, the hirer is transgression on the prohibition of withholding wages).  One hired for the night collects the whole day.  One hired by collects all the (following) night and all the day.  One who is hired for a Shabbat (seven days), hired for a month, hired for a year, or hired for a week (seven years), if he went out (finished work) during the day, he collects the whole day, if he went out during the night, he collects the whole night and the whole day.

Yud Bet: Whether he hired a person, rented an animal, or rented vessels, he has (a responsibility) because (of the commandment) of, “in its day you shall give his wage.”  And he had because of, “you shall not let rest the work of a rented (entity) with you until the morning.”  When?  When he (the hired) claimed it from him.  If he didn’t claim it, he does not transgress on it.  If he ordered it (an equivalent of the wage) by a shopkeeper or by a moneychanger, he does not transgress upon it.  A hired worker, in his time he swears (he was not paid) and takes, if his time passed, he does not swear and take.  If there are witnesses that he (the hired) claimed it, behold this one swears and takes (even after his time has passed).  A resident alien has (transgression) because of, “in its day you shall give his wage,” but he does not have because of, “you shall not let rest the work of a rented (entity) with you until morning.”

Yud Gimmel: One who lends his friend may not take collateral from him except in court, and he may not enter his house to take his collateral, as it says, “outside you shall stand (and the borrower will bring out the pledge).”  If he (the borrower) had two vessels (sets of clothes) he takes on and leaves one, and he returns the pillow (which is used as collateral by one who only has one pillow) at night and the plow during the day.  But if he (the borrower) dies, he (the lender) does not return to his heirs (unless they pay back the loan).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, even to him he does not return except until thirty days, and from thirty days on he sells tem in court (to pay back the debt).  A widow, whether she is poor or rich, one may not take collateral from her, as it says, “and you may not make collateral the clothes of a widow.”  One who takes collateral from millstones transgresses a lo ta’ase (negative commandment) and is chayav for two vessels (the two millstones), as it says, “one may not make collateral from millstones or the upper millstone.”  Not millstones and the upper millstone alone did they say, rather anything with which he makes food for people, as it says, “because he makes a collateral of the man’s life.”

Perek Yud

Aleph: A house and an upper room of two (owners) which fell, the two of them split the wood, stones, and earth (which are still usable) and they see which stones are fit to break.  If one of them recognizes some of the stones, he takes them and they count as part of the calculation.

Bet: A house and an upper room of two, if the upper room was broken and the owner of the house did not want to fix it, behold the owner of the upper room goes down and lives below until he (the homeowner) fixes the upper room for him.  Rabi Yossi says, the lower (owner, of the house) gives the ceiling, and the upper (owner, of the room) gives the pavement (for the floor).

Gimmel: A house and an upper room of two which fell down, if the owner of the upper room told the owner of the house to build (the house back up) and he doesn’t want to build, behold the owner of the upper room builds the house and lives in it until he (the owner of the house) gives him his expenses (back).  Rabi Yehuda says, also this one who lives in his friend’s (property) must give him rent, rather the owner of the upper room builds the house and the upper room, puts a roof over the upper room, and sits (lives) in the house until he gives him his expenses.

Daled: And so too an olive press which is built in a rock (a hill), there is a garden on it, and it broke.  Behold the owner of the garden goes down and sows below until he makes arches for his olive press (to support the garden).  A wall or a tree which fell into the public domain and damaged, he is patur from paying.  If they gave him time to cut the tree or dismantle the wall, and they fell within the (allotted) time, he is patur, but after the time, he’s chayav.

Hay: One whose wall was next to his friend’s garden and it fell, he (the owner of the garden) said to him, clear away your stones, and he says, they are yours, we do not listen to him.  After he (the owner of the garden) agreed (to remove the stones) he (the owner of the wall) said to him, here is for your expenses, and I will take what is mine, we do not listen to him.  One who hires a worker to do with him in hay and straw, and said to him, give me my wage, and he said, take what you made for your wage, we do not listen to him.  Once he accepted upon himself, here is your wage and I will take what is mine, we do not listen to him.  One who takes out manure to the public domain, the one who takes out takes out, and the one who fertilizes (which can be anyone) fertilizes (may take the manure).  One may not soak mortar in the public domain, and one may not form bricks, but one may knead mortar in the public domain bur not bricks.  One who builds in the public domain, the one who brings stones brings, and (whoever) builds, build (anyone may take the stones), and if it damaged, he (the one who brought the stones) pays what it damaged.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, also he (the builder) may fix (materials for) his work within thirty days (of building and use the public domain).

Vav: Two gardens one above the other, and the vegetables are between them, Rabi Meir says, they are of the upper (garden).  Rabi Yehuda says, of the lower).  Rabi Meir said, if the upper wanted to take his earth, there would be no vegetable (that would grow) here.  Rabi Yehuda said, if the bottom wanted to fill in the garden, there is no vegetable here.  Rabi Meir said, since either one can stop each other, we see from where this vegetable grows.  Rabi Shimon says, all which the upper can stretch his hand and take, behold it it his, and the rest is of the bottom.

Mesechet Bava Batra

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Partners who wanted to make a divider in the courtyard build the wall in the middle.  In a place where they had a custom to build of unhewn stones, hewn stones, half-bricks, or bricks, they build, all is according to the custom of the district.  With unhewn stones, this one gives three tfachim and that one gives three tfachim (of width to the building of the wall).  With hewn stones, this one give two and a half tfachim and that one gives two and a half tfachim.  With half-bricks, this one gives two tfachim and that one gives two tfachim.   With bricks, this one gives a tefach and a half and that one gives a tefach and a half.  Therefore, if the wall fell, the place and the stones are (property) of both of them.

Bet: And so too with a garden, in a place where they have a custom to make a fence, they obligate him (to give the space and materials for a fence), but in valleys, a place where they had a custom not to make a fence, they cannot obligate him, rather if he (the abutting owner) wants to (make a fence) he goes into his (land), builds, and makes a marker on the outside (to signify that the fence is his alone).  Therefore, if the wall fell, the space and the stones are his.  If they did it with the knowledge of both of them, they build the wall in the middle and make a marker here and there (on both sides).  Therefore, if the wall fell, the space and the stones are (property) of both of them.

Gimmel: One who (has property which) surrounds his friend from three directions, and he made a fence on the first (side), on the second, and on the third, he (the one who made the fence) cannot obligate him.  Rabi Yossi said, if he stood and made a fence on the fourth, they roll in one him all of them (for now that the one surrounded benefits from having a walled in field we obligate him to take part in the building costs).

Daled: The wall of a courtyard which fell (which divided the property of two people) they obligate him (either of the owners) to build it up to (a height of) four amot.  The presumption that he (one of the owners) gave (money to the other) until he (the other owner) brings proof that he did not bring.  From four amot and up, they do not obligate him (to contribute).  If he mad another wall close to it, even if he did not put the roof on it (for he intended to use the two walls and a roof as a hut), they roll all of it onto him (force him to pay for the building above four amot as well).  There is a presumption that he didn’t give, until he brings proof that he gave.

Hay: They force him (one owner of a joint courtyard) to build a gatehouse and a door for the courtyard.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, not all courtyards are fit for gatehouses.  They force him (one who lives in a city) to build for a city a wall, two doors, and a bolt.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, not all cities are fit for a wall.  How much (time) must he be in a city and he’ll be like the people of the city?  Twelve months.  If he bought a place to live in it, behold he is like the people of the city immediately.

Vav: One may not divide a courtyard until there will be four amot for this and four amot for that (each), and not a field until there will be in it nine kabin for this and nine kabin for that.  Rabi Yehuda says, until there will be nine half kabin for this and nine half kabin for that.  And (the may not split) a garden until there will be in it a half kav for this and a half kav for that.  Rabi Akiva says, the space of a rova (each).  And (they may) not (split) a dining hall, not a compartment, not a dovecote (place doves rest), not a garment, not a bathhouse, and not an olive press until there is in them enough for this and enough for that (to get the usage he needs).  This is the general rule, all which he can divide and its name (still applies) on it (to the part each gets, meaning it is enough to be considered a usable object), they divide, and if not, they may not divide.  When?  When they do not both want (to divide it), but when they both want (to divide it) even with less than this they may divide.  And holy writing, even if both of them want, they may not divide.

Perek Bet

Aleph: A person may not dig a hole (to collect water) near the hole of his friend, and not a trench, not a cave, not a water channel, and not a washer’s pool, unless he distanced it from his friend’s wall (of the hole) by three tfachim, and he plasters it with lime (so it does not compromise the strength of his friend’s hole).  They distance (a hole with) olive peat, manure, salt, lime, and rocks from the wall of his friend (for these can ruin the water in the hole) by three tfachim and he plasters with lime (so it does not damage his friend’s hole).  They distance seeds, a plow, and urine from the wall by three tfachim.  And they distance (from a friend’s hole) millstones three (tfachim) from the bottom millstone which is four from the top millstone (for the vibration may cause ht hole to collapse), and an oven, three from the base which is four from the lip (of the oven).

Bet: A person may not stand an oven within the house, unless it has on top of it a height of four amot.  If he stands it in the upper room, there must be below it (a floor) of cement three tfachim (thick), and for a stove a tefach (of cement floor).  And it damaged, he pays what it damaged.  Rabi Shimon says, they did not say all of these measurements, rather if it damaged (with these measurements in place) he is exempt from paying.

Gimmel: A person may not open a store of a baker or dyer under the storage room of his friend, and not a cow barn (dairy).  Really, with wine (in the upper room) they permitted, but not a dairy (below, for that will affect even wine).  A store which is in a (jointly owned) courtyard, he (the other owner of the courtyard) can protest and say to him, I cannot sleep because of the noise of those who enter and the noise of those who leave (the shop) One who makes vessels goes out and sells in the shuk, but (if he makes the vessels in the joint courtyard) he (the other owner) cannot protest and say to him, I cannot sleep from the sound of the hammer, not from the sound of the millstones, and not from the sound of the children (if he runs a school).

Daled: One whose wall was close to his friend’s wall, he may not make another wall close to it unless he distanced from it by four amot (to leave room for pedestrians to walk through).  And (if he wishes to build a wall close to someone else’s) windows, (he must distance) above them, below them, and in front of them four amot.

Hay: One distances a ladder from a dovecote four amot, such that a marten will not jump (up the ladder to attack the doves), and (one distances) a wall from a gutter by four amot so that he may stand a latter (against the gutter to go clean it).  One distances a dovecote from the city fifty amot (so the doves of another person are not attracted to it, which would be stealing), and a person may not set up a dovecote in his (property) unless he has fifty amot in every direction.  Rabi Yehuda says, space for four kor, the full flight distance of a dove.  But if he bought it even (if it was on only) the space of a rova, behold it is in his holding.

Vav: A young bird which was found within fifty amot (of a dovecote) behold it is (property) of the owner of the dovecote.  (If it was found) outside of fifty amot, behold it is of its finder.  If it was found between two dovecotes, if it was closer to this, it is his, closer to that, it is his, half by half (exactly in the middle), the two of them split.

Zayin: One distances a tree from the town twenty-five amot, and by a carob and a sycamore fifty amot (because a city gets a public open area around it).  Abba Shaul says, any serak (non fruit-bearing) tree fifty amot.  If the city came first, he (a resident of the city) may cut it down (a tree which is planted too close) and he does not give its money (to the owner), but if the tree came first, he cuts it down and gives the money, if it was a dout if this cam first, a doubt if that came first, he cuts down and does not give the money.

Chet: One distances a set threshing floor from the city fifty amot.  A person may not make a set threshing floor in his (property) unless he has fifty amot in every direction, and he distances it from the planings of his friend or his plowed field so that it will not damage.

Tet: One distances nevelot (animals which died naturally), graves, and a tannery fifty amot from the city,  One may not make a tannery other than to the east of the city (so the odor will not be carried to the city, for odors carry best on the east wind).  Rabi Akiva says, he may make it in any direction except for west, and he distances it fifty amot.

Yud: One distances a soaking (area for flax) from vegetables, leek from onions, and mustard from bees.  Rabi Yossi allows with mustard.

Yud Aleph: One distances a tree from a hole (cistern) twenty-five amot, and with a carob and sycamore fifty amot, whether above (on a hill) or on the side (on flat ground).  If the hole came first, he cuts down and fives money, but if the tree came first, he may not cut down.  If it’s a doubt if this came first, a doubt if that cam first, he may not cut down.  Rabi Yossi says, even if the hole came before the tree he may not cut down, for this one is digging (a hole) in his (land) and this one is planting (a tree) in his 9there is no damage at the time of planting, only later).

Yud Bet: A person may not plant a tree near his friend’s field unless he distanced 9the tree) from it four amot, whether (he is planting) vines or any tree.  If there was a fence between, this one may come close to the fence on this side and that one may come close to the fence on that side.  If his roots went out into his friend’s (field) he (the friend) may lower them (cut them) up to three tfachim so that it does not hinder the plow.  If he was digging a hole, trench, or cave, he may cut and go down (continue digging) and the wood is his.

Yud Gimmel: A tree which is turning towards (growing over) his friend’s field, he (the friend) may cut it the full (height) of the handle on the plow, and a carob and sycamore according to a plumb line (if branches extend over his field, no matter how high, he may cut them).  An irrigated field, all trees are according to the plumb line.  Abba Shaul says, all serak trees are according to a plumb line.

Yud Daled: A tree which is turning towards the public domain one may cut down such that a camel may pass with its rider.  Rabi Yehuda says, all trees are according to the plumb line because of tuma (for this can make a person tame by being under a covering with a corpse).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Chazaka (taking ownership by making acts of possession for a certain length of time) on houses, holes, trenches, caves, dovecotes, bathhouses, olive presses, irrigated fields, slaves, and anything which makes common fruits (is continuously productive), their chazaka is three years from day to day (measured to the day).  A field which is not irrigated, its chazaka is three years, not day to day (three seasons is considered three years).  Rabi Yishma’el says, Three months in the first (year), thee months in the last (year), and twelve months in the middle (year, is sufficient for chazaka), behold eighteen months.  Rabi Akiva says, a month in the first, a month in the last, and twelve months in the middle, behold fourteen months.  Rabi Yishma’el said, what is this talking about?  In a white (grain) field, but in a field of trees, if he collected its produce, gathered its olives, and collected its figs, behold these are three years.

Bet: There are three lands (regions) for chazaka, Yehuda, Transjordan, and the Galil.  If he was in Yehuda and grasped (possession through chazaka) in the Galil, in the Galil and grasped in Yehuda, it is not chazaka, until it is with him in the region.  Rabi Yehuda said, they did not say three years other than so that it will be if he (the owner) is in Spain, one will grasp for a year, they will go and inform him for a year, and he will come back another (the next) year.

Gimmel: Any chazaka which does not have a claim with it is not a chazaka.  How?  If he (the owner) said to him, what are you doing in my (property)?  And he said to him, that a person never told me of this (that it was yours), it is not chazaka.  (If he responds,) that you sold it to me, you gave it to me as a gift, your father sold it to me, or your father gave it to me as a gift, behold this is chazaka.  And one who comes because of inheritance does not need a claim (for inheritance is his claim).  Artisans, partners, tenant farmers, and trustees do not have chazaka.  A man does not have chazaka by the property of his wife, not a woman in the property of her husband, not a father with the property of the son, nor the son with the property of the father.  What is this talking about?  With one who grasp, but when he gives as a gift, brothers who divide (something in their inheritance), one who grasps the property of a convert, and one who locked a gate and it broke any at all, behold this is chazaka.

Daled: If two (witnesses) were testifying that this one ate it (from a field) for three yeas and they were found to be zomemim, they pay him (the owner) all (the value of the field).  If two (testified) about the first (year), two about the second, and two on the third, (and they are found to be zomemim) they split (the entire cost) between them.  Three brothers (who are testifying) and one combines with them, behold these are three testimonies (for the brothers cannot testify together), but they are one testimony for becoming zomemim (they all have to be found as such for any of them to be punished).

Hay: These are things which have chazaka, and these are things which do not have chazaka, if he was working his animal in a courtyard, (he set up) an oven and a stove, millstones, a chicken coop, or he was putting his manure in the courtyard, this is not chazaka.  But, if he made a wall for a large animal that is ten tfachim (high), and so too for an oven, so too for a stove, so too for a mill, if he brought chickens into the house, or if he made a place for his manure deeper than three (tfachim) or taller than three, behold this is chazaka.

Vav: A gutter does not have chazaka (another person may move its downspout), but its place has chazaka (one cannot remove the gutter).  An Egyptian ladder (a type of small ladder) does not have chazaka (cause land it sits on to be owned by the owner of the ladder) but a Tzori (ladder) has chazaka (for it is large and attaches permanently).  An Egyptian window has no chazaka (over the land it sticks out onto), but a Tzori one does.  Which is an Egyptian window?  All which the head of a person cannot enter into it (from size restraints).  Rabi Yehuda says, if it has a frame, even if a person’s head cannot fit into it, this is chazaka.  A projection (from a wall into another person’s property) up to a tefach (and longer) has chazaka, and he (the owner of the land below) can protest.  Less than a tefach, it does not have chazaka, and he cannot protest.

Zayin: A person may not open his window into the courtyard of partners (we do not want others to see into his house).  If he bought a house in a different (adjoining) courtyard, he may not open it (make its opening to the public domain) with the courtyard of partners.  If he built an upper room on top of his house, he may not open it to the courtyard of partners, rather if he wants (to build an upper room), he builds a room within his house, he builds an upper room on top of his house, and opens it into his house.  A person may not open into the courtyard of partners an opening facing an opening or a window facing a window.  If it was small (a window facing another window), he may not make it big.  (If it was) one, he may not make it two.  But, he may open into the public domain an opening opposite an opening and a window opposite a window.  If it was small, he may make it big; one, he may make it two.

Chet: One may not make a cavity under the public domain, holes, trenches, and caves.  Rabi Eliezer allows, (but it must be strong enough) that a wagon can go loaded with stones (and it will stand).  One may not put out projections or balconies to the public domain, but if he wanted (this structure) he enters (goes back further) into his (property) and puts out (such that it stays in his property).  If he bought a courtyard and there were projections and balconies in it, behold this is in his chazaka (he may keep them there).

Perek Daled

Aleph: One who sells a house (without specifying which parts are being sold) has not sold the extension even if it opens into it (the house), not the (external) room which (has an opening) is within it (the house), and not a roof which has a railing higher than ten tfachim.  Rabi Yehuda says, if it (the entrance to the roof) has the form of a (separate) opening, even if it (the railing) is not taller than ten tfachim, it is not sold.

Bet: (If he sells a house without specifying, he has not sold) not a hole (cistern) and not a cellar.  And he must buy for himself (rights to) a path (that is on the property and leads to something not included in the sale) according to Rabi Akiva.  The Chachamim say, he does not need to buy himself a path.  And Rabi Akiva admits, when he (the seller) said to him, except for these (the listed things) he does not need to by a path.  If he (an owner) sold them (the excluded things) to another, Rabi Akiva says, he (the other) does not need to buy for himself the path, but the Chachamim say he needs to by for himself the path. 

Gimmel: One who sells a house sold a door but not they key (because it is portable), he sold the stationary mortar, but not portable ones, the lower millstone but the hopper (which collects flour), not an oven, and not a stove.  When he (the seller) said to him, (I am selling) it and everything within it, behold all of them are sold.

Daled: One who sold a courtyard, he sold houses, holes, trenches, and caves (in the courtyard), but not movable objects.  When he (the seller) said to him, (I am selling) it (the courtyard) and everything within it, behold all of them are sold.  Either way, he did not sell a bathhouse or olive press which is in it.  Rabi Eliezer says, one who sells a courtyard, he did not sell other than the air of the courtyard.

Hay: One who sells an olive press he sold the sea (a large vat), the pressing stone, and the virgins (support beans).  But, he did not sell the pressing logs, the wheel, or the beam.  And when he said to him, it and everything within it, behold all of them are sold.  Rabi Eliezer says, one who sells an olive press, he sold the beam.

Vav: One who sold a bathhouse did not sell the floorboards, benches, or the curtains.  When he said to him, it and everything in it, behold all of them are sold.  Either way, he did not sell the water cisterns and not the (fire) woodsheds.

Zayin: One who sells a city sold the houses, the holes, trenches, caves, bathhouses, dovecotes, olive presses, irrigated field, but not movable objects.  When he said to him, it and everything in it, even if there were animals and slaves in it, behold they are all sold.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, one who sold a city sold the guard (even if he did not sell slaves with the city).

Chet: One who sells a field sold the stones which are for its use (as a fence), the reeds in the vineyard which are for its use (as trellises), the produce which is connected to the ground, a reed fence which is less than the space of a rova, the guard hut which is not made with mortar (is makeshift), a carob which has not been grafted (onto another tree), and the virgin (young, untrimmed) sycamore.

Tet: But, he (one who sells a field) did not sell the stones which are not for its use, not the reeds in a vineyard which are not for its use, and not the produce which is separated from the ground.  When he said to him, it and everything which is in it, behold all of them are sold.  Either way, he did not sell a reed fence which is the space of a rova, not a guard hut which is made with mortar, not a grafted carob (which is now considered a significant entity), not a full grown sycamore, not a hole, not a winepress, not a dovecote, whether they (the last three) are destroyed (abandoned) or settled (in use).  And he must buy for himself (rights to) a path (that is on the property and leads to something not included in the sale) according to Rabi Akiva.  The Chachamim say, he does not need to.  And Rabi Akiva admits, when he (the seller) said to him, except for these (the listed things) he does not need to by a path.  If he (an owner) sold them (the excluded things) to another, Rabi Akiva says, he (the other) does not need to buy for himself the path, but the Chachamim say he needs to by for himself the path.  What is this (all the exceptions to sales) talking about?  With one who sells, but one who gives as a gift he gives all of them.  Brothers who divided (as an inheritance), the one who merited in the field merited in all of them.  One who grasps (makes a chazaka) on the property of a convert (who died without heirs), he grasped all of them.  One who makes a field hekdesh (property designated for temple use), he made them all hekdesh.  Rabi Shimon says, one who makes a field hekdesh, he did not makes hekdesh other than the grafted carob and the full grown sycamore.

Perek Hay

Aleph: One who sells a ship, he sold the mast the sail, the anchor, and the (things which) steer it, but not the slaves, not the sacks, and not the cargo.  But when he (the seller) said to him, it (the ship) and all which is in it, behold they are all sold.  If he sold a wagon, he did not sell the mules; if he sold the mules, he did not sell the wagon.  If he sold a yoke, he did not sell the cattle; if he sold the cattle, he did not sell the yoke.  Rabi Yehuda says, the money informs.  How?  He said to him, sell me your yoke fore two hundred zuz, the thing is known that a yoke is not (sold) for two hundred zuz (and animals are included).  But the Chachamim say, the money is not a proof.

Bet: One who sells a donkey, he did not sell its vessels (saddle etc.).  Nachum Hamadi says, he sold its vessels.  Rabi Yehuda says, sometimes they sell and sometimes they don’t sell.  How?  If the donkey was before him and its vessels were on it, and he (the buyer) said to him, sell me this donkey of yours, behold its vessels are sold.  (If one asked,) is that donkey yours (and asked to buy it), the vessels are not sold.

Gimmel: One who sells a donkey sold the foal (which it gave birth to).  If he sold a cow, he sis not sell its child.  If he sold a dung heap, he sold the manure in it.  If he sold a hole, he sold its water.  If he sold a beehive, he sold its bees.  If he sold a dovecote he sold the doves.  One who buys the fruits of a dovecote (doves that will be born) from his friend makes the first pair fly away (lets the seller keep a pair of young to ensure that the doves will stay there).  (If one brought) the fruits of a beehive, he takes (the first) three swarms and (then) alternates (so the hive will remain populated).  (If he buys) honeycombs, he leaves two honey comes (so the bees will stay).  Olive trees to cut down, he leaves two shoots (so the trees will renew).

Daled: One who acquires two trees in his friends’ field, behold this one did not acquire land.  Rabi Meir says, he acquired land.  If they grew, he may not trim.  And what comes up from the trunk is his, but from the roots is of the landowner’s.  And if they died, he does not have land.  If he acquires three trees, he acquired land.  If they grew, he may trim them, and what comes up from the trunk or from the roots is his.  And if they died, he has land.

Hay: One who sells the head of a large animal (cattle) did not sell the legs (for the animal is large, so each part has separate value); if he sold the legs, he did not sell the head.  If he sold the windpipe, he did not sell the liver; if he sold the liver, he did not sell the windpipe.  But, with a thin (animal, meaning sheep), if he sold the head, he sold the legs, but if he sold the legs, he did not sell the head.  If he sold the windpipe, he sold the liver, but if he sold the liver, he did not sell the windpipe.  

Vav: There are four measures (rules) by sellers.  If he sold him good wheat and they were found to be bad, the buyer can return on it (rescind).  (If he sold) bad (wheat) and they were found to be good, the seller can return on it.  If bad and they were found to be bad, good and they were found to be good, not (neither) one of them can return on it.  If (he intended to sell) dark wood and it was found to be white, white and it was found to be dark, olive wood and it was found to be of sycamore, of sycamore and it was found to be of olive, wine and it was found to be vinegar, or vinegar and it was found to be wine, both of them can return on them.

Zayin: One who sells produce to his friend, if he pulled (the produce toward him) but did not measure it, he acquired it; measured but didn’t pull, he did not acquire.  If he (the buyer) was of sound senses (clever), he rents its place (the place of the grain he has not yet acquired so as to make it his.  One who buys flax from his friend, behold he did not acquire until he takes it from place to place, and if it was connected to the ground and he picked any at all, he acquired.

Chet: One who sells wine and oil to his friend and they became more expensive or cheaper, if it (the price change) is until before the amount was filled, (the upper hand is) for the seller, if from when the measure was filled, for the buyer.  And if there was a middleman between them (who takes care of the measuring) and the barrel broke, it broke for the middleman (he must replace it).  And he (the seller) is obligated to drop for him three drops (allowing more time for the price to change).  If he (the buyer) turned it over (on its side) and let it drip (the bit which got on the outside of the barrel), behold it (the dripping) is (property) of the seller.  But a storekeeper (as opposed to a private salesman) is not required to drop three drops.  Rabi Yehuda says, erev Shabbat, if it got dark, he is exempt (from adding three drops).

Tet: One who sends his son to a shopkeeper with a pundyon (two issars) in his hand (to tell the shopkeeper what he wants but not to deliver the goods), he (the seller) measured for him with an issar (worth of oil) and gave him an issar (change), if the jar broke or he lost the issar, the shopkeeper is chayav (for he should have sent it with an adult).  Rabi Yehuda exempts, for for this purpose (we assume) he sent him (his son, to collect the goods).  And the Chachamim admit to Rabi Yehuda that when the jar is in the hand of the child and the shopkeeper measured into it, the shopkeeper is patur (for he brought a jar).

Yud: A wholesaler wipes his measures once every thirty days, and a homeowner (cleans his measures) once every twelve months.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, it is a switch of the things (the opposite is the case).  A shopkeeper wipes his measures twice a week, polishes his weights once a week, and wipes his scale for every weighing.

Yud Aleph: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, what is this talking about?  With moist (products).  But with dry (products) he does not need (to clean the scale).  One must overweigh for him (in the customer’s favor, up to) a tefach.  If he was weighing for him an eye in an eye (exactly), he gives him hi additions (adds to ensure he is not cheating), one in ten with moist, and one in twenty for dry.  A place where they had a custom to measure with a small (measurement) he may not measure with big, (if they have a custom to measure) with a big, he may not measure with small.  To smooth (the top of measures), he may not heap, to heap, he may not smooth (for the costumer may be unable to estimate them).

Perek Vav

Aleph: One who sells produce to his friend (who did not specify if they are to be eaten or sown) and they did not sprout, even flaxseed (which was generally sown), he is not obligated in their responsibility (to refund him).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, seeds of a garden which are not eaten, his is obligated in their responsibility.

Bet: One who sells produce to his friend, he (the buyer) accepts upon himself a rova of refuse per se’ah.  (If he buys) dates, he accepts upon him self ten wormy ones per hundred, a cellar of wine, he accepts upon himself ten sourish ones per hundred, and jars in the Sharon, he accepts upon himself ten brittle ones per hundred.

Gimmel: One who sells wine to his friend and it turns, he is not obligated in its responsibility, but if it is known that his wine is turning, behold this is a sale in error.  If he (the seller) said to him, I am selling you mulled wine, he is chayav to uphold it until Shavuot (if the wine turns before then, the seller must replace it).  And old (wine) from last year, and aged, from three years (ago).

Daled: One who sells space to his friend to build a house, and so too one who receives from his friend to build for him a wedding house for his son or a widow’s house for his daughter (a place for her to live after being widowed), he builds four amot by six, according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Yishma’el says, this is a barn for cattle (dairy), one who wants to make a dairy builds four amot by six, a small house is six by eight, a large is eight by ten, and a hall is ten by ten.  Its height is like half of its length and like half of its width.  A proof for the thing is the sanctuary (of the Beit Hamikdash).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, all is like the building of the sanctuary.

Hay: One who had a hole inside his friend’s house enters at a time when it is the way of people to enter and leaves at a time when it is the way of people to leave.  And he may not enter his animal and let it drink from his hole, rather he fills (a vessel) and lets it drink outside.  And this one (the owner of the hole) makes him a lock (so the homeowner does not steal from it), and that one (the homeowner) makes him a lock (so he cannot just come in whenever he wants).

Vav: One who had a garden within his friend’s garden enters at a time when it is the way of people to enter and leaves at a time that it is the way of people to leave.  He may not bring in merchants, and he may not enter it from another field (he may only go the path designated for him).  And the outer one (main owner) may sow the path (he does not have to leave it for the other).  If they (a court) gave him a path on the side (of the outer garden, but not through it) with the knowledge of both of them, he may enter at the time he wishes and leave at the time he wishes, he may bring merchants into it, he may not enter from a different field, and this and that (neither) do not have the right to sow it.

Zayin: One who a public path passed through his field, and he took it and gave them (a different path) from the side, what he gave he gave, but his (what he took) did not reach him.  A private path (rights given to one to cut through another’s field), is four amot (wide at a minimum).  A public path is sixteen amot, the road of the king has no measurement, and the road of the grave (a path traveled by a funeral party) had no measurement.  A place to stand (clearing sold to someone else) the judges of Tzippori said, it is the space of four kabin.

Chet: One who sells space to his friend for him to make a grave, and so too one who receives from his friend to make a grave, makes the inside of the cave (crypt) four amot by six, and opens into it eight cavities (for bodies) three from here (one six amah side), three from there (the other side) and two opposite them (the entrance on a four amah side).  And the cavities, their length is four amot, their height is seven (tfachim) and their width is six (tfachim).  Rabi Shimon says, he makes the inside of the crypt six amot by eight, and opens in it thirteen cavities, four from here (on one eight amah side), four from there, three opposite (the entrance), one to the right of the entrance, and one on the right of the entrance.  And he makes a courtyard to at the mouth of the crypt six (amot) by six, to fit the coffin and its relatives, and he opens into it (the courtyard, up to) two crypts, one from here (one side) and one from there (opposite).  Rabi Shimon says, four, in the four directions.  Rabin Shimon ben Gamliel says, all is according to the rock (whether it is sotf or hard determines the size and number of crypts).

Perek Zayin

Aleph: One who says to his friend, I am selling you the space of a kor of dirt, if there were clefts ten tfachim deep or rocks ten tfachim high, they are not measured with it (as part of the area).  Less than this, they are measured with it.  And if he (the seller) said to him, about the space of a kor of dirt, even if the clefts were more than ten tfachim deep or the rocks were more than ten tfachim high, behold these are measured with it.

Bet: (If one says,) I am selling you the space of a kor of dirt measured with a rope (exactly), if he (gave) less at all, he will reduce (the fee), and if he added at all, he (the buyer) will give back (the land).  If he (the seller) said, whether less or more, even if he diminished (the measure) by a rova per se’ah or added a rova per se’ah they came to him (the sale stands) more than this, they make an accounting (to rectify the area problem).  What does he (the buyer) return to him (if he got too much)?  Money, and if he wants he returns to him land.  So why did they say, he returns to him money?  To increase the power of the seller, for if he left in the field the space of nine kabin, or in a garden the space of half a kav, and according to Rabi Akiva the space of a rova, he (the buyer) returns him the land, and not only the rova does he return, rather he returns all of the extra (the seller can get some land back this way).

Gimmel: (If the seller said) measuring with a rope, whether less or more, (saying,) whether less or more, nullified (his statement of), measuring with a rope.  (If he said,) whether less or more, measuring with a rope, measuring with a rope mollified, whether less or more, according to Ben Nanas.  (If he sells the area) with (certain) marks and boundaries (to describe the area), (if it was off) by less than a sixth, it came to him (the sale stands), to the point of a sixth, he will deduct (from the payment).

Daled: One who says to his friend, I am selling you half (of a particular) field, we assess between them and he (the seller) takes half of (the value of) his field (so if he takes better parts, he gets less area).  (If he says,) I am selling you the half in the south, they assess between them and he takes the half in the south.  And he (the buyer) accepts upon himself (forfeiting) the space of the fence, the furrow, and the small furrow (for the fence).  And how much is the furrow?  Six tfachim.  A small furrow?  Three.

Perek Chet

Aleph: There are those who inherit and bequeath, there are those who inherit but do not bequeath, (there are those) who bequeath but do not inherit, (and there are those who) do not inherit and do not bequeath.  These inherit and bequeath, a father to his sons, sons to their father, and brothers from (the same) father, they inherit and bequeath.  A man to his mother, a man to his wife, and the sons of sister, they inherit but do not bequeath.  A woman to her sons, a woman to her husband, and brothers of the mother, they bequeath but do not inherit.  And brothers from (the same) mother do not inherit and do not bequeath.

Bet: The order of inheritances is like this, “a man who dies and has no son, and you shall transfer his inheritance to his daughter.”  A son comes before a daughter, and all who come out of the loins (descendants) of the son come before the daughter.  A daughter comes before brothers (of the person who died), and (all who) come out of the loins of the daughter come before the brothers.  Brothers come before the brothers of the father (of the person who died), and the ones who come out of the loins of the brothers come before the brothers of the father.  This is the general rule, anyone who comes before in inheritance, those who come out of his loins come before, and the father comes before all who come out of his loins.

Gimmel: The daughters of Tzlofchad (who died without sons) took three parts in an inheritance, the part of their father who was with those who went out of Egypt, and they divided with his (Tzlofchad’s) brothers the property of Chefer (Tzlofchad’s father), and since he was a firstborn, he took two pieces.

Daled: A son and a daughter are one by inheritance (from a father), except that the son takes double (if he is a firstborn) from the property of the father and he does not take double from the property of the mother.  And daughters are maintained (given a stipend by their brothers) from the property of the father, and they are not maintained from the property of the mother.

Hay: One who says, the man so-and-so my firstborn will not take double (inheritance), (or,) the man so-and-so my son will not inherit with his brothers, he did not say anything, for he made a condition on (against) what is written in the torah (which is invalid).  One who divides his property to his sons orally, if he made more for one and less for another, or made the bechor equal (to the others), his words stand.  But if he said, as inheritance, he didn’t say anything.  If he wrote, whether at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end (of his statement), as a gift, his words stand.  One who says, the man so-and-so will inherit me, in a place where he has (only) a daughter, or, my daughter will inherit me, in a place where he has a son, he did not say anything for he made a condition on what is written in the torah.  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, if ho wrote for someone who is fit for inheritance, his words stand, but (if he wrote) on someone who is not fit to inherit, his words do not stand.  One who writes his property to others and left out his sons what he did is done, but the spirit of the sages do not rest with him (it is improper).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, if his sons did not act properly, he is remembered favorably.

Vav: One who says, this is my son, he is believed.  (If he says,) this is my brother, he is not believed, and he takes with him in his share (the two of them share one piece).  If he died (the claimed brother), the property returns to its place (with the one who claimed).  If property fell to him (the claimed brother), his brothers (who claimed for him) inherit with him.  One who died and a will was found on his thigh, behold this is nothing.  If he transferred it to another, whether from (one of the) heirs or not from the heirs, his words stand.

Zayin: One who writes his property to his sons must write, from today (the time of writing) and after death, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Yossi says, he does not need to.  One who writes his property to his sons for after his death, the father cannot sell because they are written to the son, and the son cannot sell (them) because they are within the domain of the father.  If the father sol, they are sold until the father dies.  If the son sold it, the buyer does not have anything in it until the father dies.  The father may pick (from a field bequeathed to his son) and feed to anyone he wants, and whay he left picked, behold it is (property) of the heirs.  If he left adult and minor sons, the adults do not prosper on (the property) of the minors, and the minors are not maintained by the adults, rather they divide equally.  If the adults married (and took the costs from the estate) the minors will marry (with money from the estate).  But if the minors said, behold we are marrying in the way you married (and the adults married in the father’s lifetime), they do not listen to them, rather what the father gave them (the adult children in life), he gave.

Chet: If he left adult and minor daughters, the adults do not prosper on the (property of) minors and the minors are not maintained by the adults, rather they divide equally.  If the adults married, the minors will marry.  But if the minors said, behold we are marrying the way you married, they do not listen to them.  This is a stringency by daughters from sons, that the daughters are maintained but the sons and are not maintained by the daughters.

Perek Tet

Aleph: One who died and left sons and daughters, when the property is great, the sons inherit and the daughters are maintained, when the property is little, the daughters are maintained and the sons ask at the openings (beg).  Admon says, because I am a male I lost?  Raban Gamliel says, I see the words (agree with the opinion) of Admon.

Bet: If he left sons, daughters, and a tumtum (one of unknown gender), when the property is great, the males push him in with the daughters.  When the property is little, the daughters push him with the sons.  One who says, if my wife gives birth to a son, he will take a maneh, if she gave birth to a male, he takes a maneh.  (If he said, if my wife gives birth to a) female, (she will get) two hundred (zuz), if she gave birth to a female, she takes two hundred.  If a make a maneh, if a female two hundred, and she gave birth to a male and a female, the male takes a maneh and the female takes two hundred.  If she gave birth to a tumtum, he does not take.  If he said, anything which my wife gives birth to will take, behold he (the tumtum) takes.  And if there is not heir their other than him, he inherits everything.

Gimmel: If the left adult and minor sons, if the adult improved the property, they improved for the middle (the estate, to be divided among all the heirs).  If they said, look what our father left us, behold we will do (improve) and eat (what we make), they improves for themselves.  And so to a woman who improved the property, she improved for the middle (the heirs).  If she said, see what my husband left me, behold I am doing an eating, she improved for herself.

Daled: Brothers who were partners, and one fell into a trade, he fell in for the middle (for both of them, if the trade came from their father).  If he (one of the brothers) got sick and was healed, he was healed (using money) from his own.  Brothers who part of them made shushbinot (grooms gifts, given by friends to help the groom cover the costs of the wedding and then reciprocated by the groom when the friend gets married) in the life of the father, if the shushbinot were returned, they were returned to the middle, for shushbinot can be collected in court (if not reciprocated).  But, one who sends to his friends jugs of wine and jugs of oil, they are not collected in court for they are acts of kindness.

Hay: One who sends sivlonot (like shushbinot for a betrothal) to the house of his father-in-law, if he sent there on hundred maneh and ate a groom’s feast there (worth) even a dinar, he may not collect them.  If he did not eat a grooms feast there, behold these can be collected.  If he sent many sivlonot such that they will to return with her to the house of her husband, behold these are collected.  (If he sent) few sivlonot, such that they would be used in the house of her (the bride’s) father’s house, they are not collected.

Vav: One on his deathbed who wrote all of his property to others and left any land (for himself), his gift stands (even if he recovers).  If he did not leave any land, his gift does not stand.  If he did not write in it (that he was on his) deathbed, he says he was on his deathbed, and they say he was healthy (so his gifts will stand), he has to bring proof that he was on his deathbed according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, the one who removes from his friend, the (burden of) proof is on him (they have to prove he was healthy).

Zayin: One who divides his property orally, Rabi Eliezer says, whether healthy or dangerous (gravely ill), property which has responsibility (which can be mortgaged) is acquired with money, a document, and grasping, and (property) which does not have responsibility is not acquired other than with pulling.  They said to him there was a case with the mother of the sons of Rochel who was sick (the mother), and she said, give my brooch to my daughter, it is (worth) twelve maneh, she died, and they fulfilled her words.  He said to them, the sons of Rochel, their mother should bury them (they were wicked, so we cannot prove from their deeds).  Chachamim say, on Shabbat his words stand because he cannot write, but not on a weekday.  Rabi Yehoshua says, on Shabbat they said, it is a kal vechomer on a weekday (because it has the potential to be acquired on a weekday, it does not actually need it).  Similarly, one may merit for minor (for he cannot acquire things himself) and one may not merit for an adult (for he can acquire things himself).  Rabi Yehoshua says, they said it for a minor, kal vechomer for an adult.

Chet: If a house fell on him and his father, or on him and on his heirs (killing them), and there was (obligation for) a ktuba of a woman and a creditor, the heirs of the father say, the son dies first, and then the father died (so the son does not have a piece of the inheritance), and the creditors say, the father died first and then the son died (for they will collect from his piece).  Beit Shamay says, they split, and Beit Hillel says, the property is presumed (to stay with the heirs, for those who remove from them bear the burden of proof).

Tet: If a house fell on him and his wife, the heirs of the husband say, the woman died first and then the husband died (so he will not have to pay a ktuba, and the heirs of the woman say, the husband died first, and then the woman died.  Beit Shamay says, they split, an Beit Hillel says, the property is presumed, the ktuba is is grasped by the heirs of the father, and the property which enters and leaves (the marriage) with he, is grasped by the heirs of the father.

Yud: If a house fell on him and his mother, this and that (Beit Shamay and Beit Hillel) agree that they split (for both sides have inheritance).  Rabi Akiva said, I admit that here the property is in their grasp (of the mother’s heirs).  Ben Azay said to him, we are unhappy about their disagreements, (and) rather you came to disagree on the equal (when they agree)?

Perek Yud

Aleph: A simple get (divorce document) its witnesses (sign) within it, and a tied one (which is sewn in folds), its witnesses are on the back.  A simple one that its witnesses wrote on the back or a tied one that its witnesses wrote in it, they are both invalid.  Rabi Chanania ben Gamliel says, a tied one that its witnesses wrote in it is valid, because he can make it simple (by untying it).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, all is according to the custom of the district.

Bet: A simple get, its witnesses are two, and a tied, three.  A simple in which one witness is written, and a tied in which two are written, they are both invalid.  If he wore in it (a loan document that he loaned) one hundred zuz which are twenty sela (they are really twenty-five), hedoesn’t have (a right to collect) other than twenty (sela).  (If he wrote) one hundred zuz which are thirty sela, he does not have other than a maneh (on hundred zuz).  (If he wrote) silver zuzim which are, and it (the number) was erased, it is not less than two.  Silver sela’im which are, and it is erased, it is not less than two.  Darics (a gold coin) which are, and it was erased, it is not less than two.  If it is written on it above (at the top of the document) a maneh and below (at the bottom) two hundred (zuz) or above two hundred and below a maneh, all goes after the bottom.  If so, why do they write the top?  So that is one letter of the bottom is erased  he will learn (the amount) from the top.

Gimmel: One writes a get for a man even if his wife is not with him, and a receipt (which is given to the husband upon receiving a get) for a woman even if her husband is not with her, as long as they (the scribe and witnesses) know them (the couple).  And the husband gives the wage (for writing the documents).  One writes a document (of sale) for the sale even if the buyer is not with him, but they do not write for the buyer until the seller is with him.  And the buyer gives the wage.

Daled: One does not write documents of engagement or marriage except with the knowledge of both of them.  And the groom gives the wage.  One does not write documents of tenantry and receiving (as a rental) except with the knowledge of both of them.  And the receiver gives the wage.  One does not write documents of arbitration or any action of a court except for with the knowledge of both of them (both parties).  And they both give the wage.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, they both write two, for this (a copy) for himself and for that for himself.

Hay: One who paid part of his loan and (gave) his deed to a third party (to keep track of the outstanding debt), and he (the borrower) said to him (the third party), if I don’t give him (the rest) from here until such-and-such a day, he will give (undoing the paid part).  Rabi Yehuda says, he does not give.

Vav: One whose loan document was erased, witnesses testify about it, he comes to court, and they make a fulfillment for him (by saying), the man so-and-so, his document was erased on such-and-such a day, and so-and-so and so-and-so are his witnesses.  One who paid part of his loan Rabi Yehuda says, he will change (his old document for a new one.  Rabi Yossi says, he (the lender will right a receipt.  Rabi Yehuda says, we find this one must guard his receipt from mice (for without the receipt the full amount of the loan is valid).  Rabi Yossi said to him, this is good for him (proper for the borrower), and it does not reduce the power of that (the lender, for writing a new date means he will not have rights to property sold before that date which he would have with the original date).

Zayin: Two brothers, one poor and one rich, and their father left them a bathhouse and olive press.  If the made (improved) them for the wage, the wage if for the middle (to be split), if they made them for themselves.  Behold the rich can say to the poor, buy slaves for yourself and they can come and wash in the bathhouse, or, buy yourself olives and come and press in the olive press (allowing him use them, but preventing him from renting them out, effectively forcing him to sell his rights).  There were two in one city, the name of one was Yosef ben Shimon and the name of the other was Yosef ben Shimon.  They cannot take out a loan document on each other, and another cannot take a loan document on them.  If one found between his documents the document of Yosef ben Shimon which was paid, the bills of both of them are paid.  What will they do?  They will write three generations.  And if they were (the same to) three generations, they will write a sign (a description of them).  And if they have the same sign, they shall write kohen.  One who says to his son, there is a document among my documents which is paid, but I don’t know which, all of the documents are paid.  If they found for one (person) two (loan documents) there, the larger is paid and the smaller is not paid.  One who lends his friends at the hands of a guarantor, he may not collect from the third party, but if he said, on condition that I will collect from whoever I want, he may collect from the guarantor.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, if the borrower has property, either way he may not collect from the guarantor.  And so too Raban Shimon ben Gamliel would say, a guarantor for a woman on her ktuba, and her husband was divorcing her, he (the guarantor) makes him (the husband) swear (against deriving) pleasure from her, for perhaps they conspired against that one’s property and he will return his wife.

Chet: One who lends his friend with a document collects from (even) mortgaged property.  (If he lent) with witnesses (but not a document), he collects from free (unmortgaged) property.  If he took out his handwriting on him (proving the loan), he takes from free property.  A guarantor who came out after the signing of the documents (was not known of during the signing) he (le lender) collects from free property (of the guarantor).  A case came before Rabi Yishma’el and he said, he collects from free property.  Ben Nanas said to him, he does not collect not from mortgaged property and not from free property.  He said to him, why?  He said to him, behold one who strangles one (violently grabs a borrower) in the shuk, and his (the borrower’s) friend found him and said to him (the lender), leave him, he’s patur, for he did not lend him with his faith (he did not trust the third while lending, but only found him after).  Rabi Yishma’el said, one who wants to be smart will deal in the laws of money, for there is no profession in the torah greater than them, fore they are like a spring sending forth.  And one who wants to deal with the laws of money, let him serve (shadow) Shimon ben Nanas.

Mesechet Sanhedrin

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Monetary matters are judged by three judges.  Theft and injury by three.  Property damage, a shor tam, kefel, and four or five times repayment by three.  Rape, seduction, and denial of spousal virginity by three, all according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say denial of spousal virginity is by twenty-three, because a life hangs in the balance.

Bet: Lashes by three.  Based on Rabi Yishma’el it was said twenty-three.  Declaring the month by three.  Declaring the year by three, according to Rabi Meir.  Raban Shimon Ben Gamliel says, you start with three, discuss with five, and finish declaring with seven, but if it was only three it’s valid.

Gimmel: Smicha by the Sanhedrin when they accidentally caused the tzibur to sin and egla arufa (which the sages read when they kill a calf in repentance for an unknown corpse found), by three according to Rabi Shimon.  Rabi Yehuda says by five.  Chalitza and refusal of non-paternal contracted marriage by three.  Redeeming the fruit of the fourth year of a tree and ma’aser sheni which has no set value by three.  Assessing the value of hekdesh by three.  Evaluating things by three, and Rabi Yehuda says one of them must be a kohen.  Evaluating lands and people, by nine and a kohen.

Daled: Capital cases by twenty-three.  Bestiality by twenty-three, because a pasuk has them killed.  An ox that will be stoned by twenty-three, because a pasuk says to kill the owner too.  A wolf, lion, bear, tiger, panther, or snake that killed a man by twenty-three  Rabi Eliezer says whoever kills them quickly gets merit.  Rabi Akiva says they (except a snake) die only by twenty-three.

Hay: These are judged by seventy-one: a full tribe, a false prophet, a kohen gadol, going to an optional war, adding to Yerushalayim or the Beit Mikdash, appointing a Sanhedrin (of twenty-three) for the tribes, and declaring a wayward city.  But, you can’t declare a wayward city on the border (it will be a break in the border), and you can’t make three, but you can make one or two far from each other.

Vav: A large Sanhedrin was of seventy-one, and a small one was of twenty-three.  The large gets its number from the zekenim plus Moshe, and the small from two times “edah” is twenty, which we see from ten spies being called edah.  The three come from the following: a pasuk that says not to follow the many to bad, but then why achare rabim lahatot?  So, we can follow one to good, but two to bad, meaning two extra are needed to condemn (only a twelve-ten would condemn, and one of the edot is to condemn), but we can’t have an even number, so we have twenty-three.  How many people have to be in a city for there to be a Sanhedrin?  One hundred twenty.  Rabi Nechemia says two hundred thirty, according to sarei asarot.

Perek Bet

Aleph: A kohen gadol can judge and be judged, can testify and others can testify about them, he can do chalitza, and people can do yibum or chalitza for him, but he can’t do yibum, because he can’t marry an almana.  If someone close to him dies, he may not follow the corpse, either him or the pall bearers can be on a given street at the same time.  Rabi Meir says he goes out with them to the city entrance.  Rabi Yehuda says he doesn’t leave the Beit Hamikdash, saying the pasuk with ‘mikodesh’ is referring to the mikdash.  And when he consoles others, the people line up as they normally do, he walks to their right, and the second to kohen gadol walks on his right.  When others console him, they say, we are your atonement, and he says back, may you be blessed from shamayim.  When they prepare a funeral meal for him, everyone else sits on the ground, and he sits on a bench.

Bet: The king doesn’t judge and isn’t judged, doesn’t testify and isn’t testified about, doesn’t do chalitza and his wife doesn’t get chalitza, and doesn’t do yibum and his wife doesn’t get yibum.  Rabi Yehuda says if he wants to do chalitza or yibum, we look favorably upon it.  They said to him, we don’t listen to him if he wants to.  And nobody may marry his widow.  Rabi Yehuda says a king may marry a king’s widow, as we see a pasuk that says David marries Shaul’s widow.

Gimmel: If someone (of the king’s) died, he doesn’t leave the doorway of his palace.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he wants to go out after the corpse, he may, as we see David went out after Avner’s corpse, as we see from a pasuk.  They said to him, it was only to appease the nation.  When they prepare the funeral meal for him, everyone sits on the ground and he sits on a small couch.

Daled: You can only go to an optional war with the approval of a beit din of seventy-one.  And the king may break through others’ fences to make his road, and they don’t stop him, since the king’s road has no shiur.  And all booty is laid before him, and he takes a portion first.  He can only have eighteen wives.  Rabi Yehuda says, he can have more as long as they don’t cause him to do averot.  Rabi Shimon says, even one wife is prohibited if she will make him do averot.  So why do we have a limit from the pasuk?  Because even if they are like Avigayil, all good, he can’t take more than eighteen.  And he may not have too many horses, only enough for his chariot.  And he can’t have too much gold, only enough that he’ll keep up the country.  And he should have a torah written in his name (or by him), and when he goes to war he takes it with him, if he sits in judgment he has it with him, and if he sits to eat he has it with him, as we see in a pasuk.

Hay: One may not ride on the king’s horse, sit on his seat, use his scepter, or see him while he’s getting a haircut, naked, or bathing, so we will have fear like the pasuk says to.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Monetary matters by three, each party chooses a judge, and they choose the third together, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say the two judges choose the third.  One party can invalidate the judge of the other according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, when is this so?  When we bring proof that they are relatives or pasul.  But if they are kosher or an expert, you can’t make them pasul.  One can invalidate the other’s witnesses, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, when is this?  When they can prove that they are pasul or a relative, but if they are kosher, they may testify.

Bet: One said to the other, I trust my father and you father (as the judges), or that these three random herdsmen are our judges, Rabi Meir allows you to recant.  Chachamim say you can’t.  If one person had to make an oath, and he said swear to me on your life (so that we would believe him), Rabi Meir says he can go back.  Chachamim say you can’t.

Gimmel: These are pasul: gamblers, usurers, pigeon stealers, and those who sell shmitta produce.  Rabi Shimon said, they used to call them those who collect shmitta produce, but when the tax collectors demanded produce, they made is to vendors again.  Rabi Yehuda says, when is this?  When they have no craft other than this, but if they do, they are kosher.

Daled: These are relatives: his father, his brother, his blood uncle, his brother-in-law, his uncle by marriage, his stepfather, his father-in-law, and his wife’s brother, them their sons, their sons-in-law, and his wife’s son from another husband.  Rabi Yossi said, this was taught according to Rabi Akiva.  Before Rabi Akiva, it was taught that the relatives were, his uncle, his cousin, and all who could inherit from him.  All his relatives at that time, if he stopped being a relative, he is a kosher witness.  Rabi Yehuda says, if his daughter dies, her sons are still his relatives.

Hay: His friend and his enemy.  His friend is one who gave him a wedding gift, and his enemy is one who hasn’t spoken to him in three days out of anger.  Chachamim said to Rabi Yehuda, we don’t suspect Jews of being this way.
 
Vav: How do you check witnesses?  They would bring them in and intimidate them, remove everyone except the greatest among them, and say to him, how do you know this is liable for this?  If he brings hearsay evidence, it’s as if he said nothing, unless he says that the defendant admitted his debt to the plaintiff in the witness’s presence.  After this, they bring in the second and check him.  If their statements are consistent, they discuss the matter.  If two judges agree, the ruling is in their favor.  But, if one judge says he can’t decide, they add more judges and re-assess.

Zayin: They finished discussing and called the parties in.  The greatest of the judges gives the verdict.  And how do we know that a judge can’t comment on that he disagreed with his colleagues?  From psukim against rechilut.

Chet: Whenever a party brings new proof, he may dismantle the verdict.  They said to him, bring all proofs you have by then end of thirty days.  If he found it in the thirty days, he dismantles, if it was after the allotted time, the judgment stands.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, what should a person do if he didn’t find in the thirty days, but found afterwards?  They said to him, bring witnesses, and he said, I have none.  They said to him, bring proof, and he said, I have none.  After some time he finds proof or witnesses, but it’s worthless.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, what does a person do who didn’t know there were witnesses, but there were witnesses?  Or didn’t know he had proof, but found proof?  They said to him, do you have proof or witnesses and he said no, so when he saw he was going to lose, he took two random people as witnesses, or pulled some forged proof out of his girdle, so we don’t believe it.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Both monetary and capital cases require inquiry and examination, as we have a pasuk requiring us to have one manner of law.  What are the differences between monetary and capital cases?  Monetary are by three, capital by twenty-three.  Monetary cases can open discussion for either side, and capital can open discussion only with acquittal.  Monetary cases can rely on one for either side, and capital cases require an extra to convict.  Monetary cases can have the verdict changed either way, but in capital cases, the verdict can only be changed to conviction.  In monetary, clerks can present arguments for both sides, for capital, only for acquittal.  In monetary, judges can switch sides, but in capital, they may only switch to arguing acquittal.  Monetary suits start during the day and end at night, but capital cases are started during the day and finished during the day.  Monetary suits can finish the day they start, but capital cases can finish for acquittal that day, but for conviction only the following day.  Therefore, we don’t judge capital cases on erev Shabbat or erev Yom Tov.

Bet: Cases of purity versus impurity begin with the greatest judge’s opinion, but capital cases begin with the most junior.  Anyone can judge monetary cases, but the only people who can judge capital cases are kohanim, levi’im, and yisra’elim who are eligible to marry their daughters to kohanim.

Gimmel: The Sanhedrin was like half of a round threshing floor, so they could see each other.  And two scribes of the judges would stand before them, one on the right, one on the left, one rights arguments for acquittal, and one writes arguments for conviction.  Rabi Yehuda says, three, one for each side and one to record everything.

Daled: Three rows of clerks sat before them, and each one knows his place.  If they needed to add judges, they add the first, and then one person from the second row comes to the first, and one comes from the third to the second, and they choose one more person from the assembly who fills the last seat, not that of the first, for he knows his place.

Hay: How do we make sure we believe witnesses in a capital case?  They would take them in and interrogate them, perhaps you are speaking from supposition, from hearsay, from another witness, or from a trustworthy person.  Or, perhaps you don’t know that we will test you by inquiry and examination.  Know that capital cases are not like monetary suits, that a person gives money and is exonerated, capital cases his life and the life of his offspring hinge upon the case for eternity, as we found by Kayin when he killed his brother, where the pasuk says, “dmei achicha,” not, “dam achicha,” to show that it’s also his offspring.  Alternatively, his blood was cast on trees and rocks.  Therefore, man was created singly to teach you that anyone who takes a life it is as if he killed the entire world, and all who save a life it is as if they saved the entire world.  And for peace among men, so that one person shouldn’t say to another, my father is greater than yours, and heretics should not say there are many powers in heaven.  And do show the greatness of Hashem, for you make several rings from one mould and they all come out the same, but Hashem made all people from one mould and we are all different.  Therefore, everyone may say, the world was created for me.  And if the witnesses say, why should we go through this trouble, because don’t we have a pasuk that if one sees something but doesn’t testify, he bears the sin?  And maybe they’ll say, why should we be responsible for this person’s life?  And you say, when the wicked perish there is joy.

Perek Hay

Aleph: They would examine the witnesses with seven examinations: which cycle-week (week of the yovel cycle), in which year, in which month, what day of the month, what day of the week, what time, and where.  Rabi Yossi says, what day of the week, what time, where, do you know him, and did you warn him.  They add for someone accusing of avoda zara, who did he worship and how did he worship.

Bet: The more examinations, the better.  Once, Ben Zakai examined about the twigs of a fig tree.  What is the difference between examinations and checks?  Examinations, if one says, I don’t know, the testimony is invalid.  In a check if one or even two say, I don’t know, their testimony stands.  In either examinations or checks, if they contradict each other, their testimony is invalid.

Gimmel: If one says it was the second of the month and the other says the third, their testimony stands, for one might know about the extending of the month and one may not.  If one says the third and one says the fifth, their testimony is invalid.  If one says it was at 2:00 and one says at 3:00, their testimony stands.  If one says it was at 3:00 and the other says at 5:00, their testimony is invalid.  Rabi Yehuda says it stands.  If one says at 5:00 and one says at 7:00 their testimony is invalidated, for at 5:00 the sun is in the east, and at 7:00 it is in the west.

Daled: Afterwards, they bring in the second witness.  If they are consistent, they open with acquittal.  If one of the witnesses says, I can argue for acquittal, or one of the clerks says, I can argue for conviction, we silence them.  If one of the clerks says, I can argue for acquittal, they raise him up amongst them, and he doesn’t return down the entire day.  If he has something meaningful to say, they listen to him.  And even if the defendant says, I can argue for my acquittal, they listen to him provided he has something meaningful to say.

Hay: If they found for him merit, they set him free, if not, they transfer the sentence to the next day, they would pair up (to review the case more), eat less, not drink wine the whole day, deliberate all night, get up early the next morning and come to the court.  One who found innocent would say, I acquit (yesterday), and I find for acquittal in my place.  The one who found guilty would say, I convict, and I find for conviction in my place.  One can change from conviction to acquittal, but not vice versa.  If they make a mistake in a matter, the scribes tell them.  If they find him innocent, they free him.  If not, they stand for the count.  If twelve acquit and eleven convict, he is acquitted.  If twelve commit and eleven acquit, even if eleven find each way and one says, I don’t know, and even if twenty-two find one way and one says I don’t know, they add judges.  How many can they add?  Two at a time, up until seventy-one.  If thirty-six acquit and thirty-five convict, he goes free.  Thirty-six convict and thirty-five acquit, they discuss with each other until one agrees to acquit.

Perek Vav

Aleph: The judgment is finished and they take him out to stone him.  The place of stoning was outside (and far from) the court, as we see in a pasuk.  One stands at the entrance of the court with a scarf in his hand and one rides on a horse at a distance such that he will see him.  If one (comes to court and) says, I have an argument for acquittal, the man waves the scarf and the man on the horse goes to stop them.  And even if he says, I have an argument for my acquittal they return him, even four or five times, as long as he says something substantial.  If they have merit, he is freed, if not, he is stoned.  And a crier goes before him and says, such and such a person is being stoned based on these witnesses, anyone who knows merit for him should come and teach us.

Bet: When he is ten amot from the place of stoning they say to him, confess.  For people who are to be put to death confess, for those who confess have a place in olam haba.  And we saw like this in several psukim about Achan where Yehoshua has him repent, and says, you are uprooted in this world, but not in the world to come.  If he doesn’t know how to confess, they tell him to say, may my death repent for all my sins.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he knows that he is subject to false testimony, he should say, may my death repent for all my sins save this one.  Chachamim said, if so, everyone would say this in order to clear himself.

Gimmel: When he’s four amot away, they undress him.  A woman they cover from the front, and a woman, they cover her front and back, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Chachamim say, a man is stoned naked, but a woman is not.

Daled: The stoning cliff was twice as tall as a man.  One of the witnesses pushes him by his loins.  If he landed on his heart, the witnesses turn him on his back.  If he died from this, he was stoned.  If not, the other witness puts a stone on his heart.  If this kills him, he was stoned.  If not, he is pelted with stones by the people, as we see in a pasuk.  All the stoned are hanged according to Rabi Eliezer.  Chachamim say, he isn’t hanged except for the blasphemer and idolater.  A man is hanged facing the people, and a woman is hanged facing the tree, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Chachamim say a man is hanged, but a woman is not.  Rabi Eliezer said to them, didn’t Shimon ben Shetach hang women in Ashkalon?  They said to him, he hanged eighty women (in one day), and normally you can’t judge two capital cases in one day (meaning we can’t learn from this provisional measure).  How do you hang him?  They stick the post in the ground, a wooden peg protrudes from it, they lay his hands on top of each other, and hang him.  Rabi Yossi says, the post is leaned against a wall, and they hang him as butchers do.  They remove him immediately, for if he stays overnight they have violated a lo ta’ase with him as we see in a pasuk.  Because why are people hung?  For he blessed heaven (a euphemism) and heaven’s name was defiled.

Hay: Rabi Meir says, when one is suffering punishment, what does the Divine presence say?  As it were, I am lighter than my head, I am lighter than my arm.  If so, Hashem grieves on the spilt blood of the wicked, He more so grieves on the spilt blood of the righteous.  And not just this, whoever lets his dead stay (unburied) overnight transgresses a lo ta’ase.  If they did it for the dead’s honor, as in to bring him a coffin and shrouds, they do not transgress.  And they would not bury him amongst the graves of his ancestors, rather there were two graveyards prepared for the court, one for those killed or hanged, and one for those stoned or burned.

Vav: Once the flesh has rotted away, they collect the bones and bury him with his ancestors.  The relatives come and greet the judges and the witnesses, saying that they have nothing in their hearts against the judges and witnesses, for they judged in truth.  They would not become an avel (openly mourn) but grieve, for grieving is only in the heart.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: Four kinds of death were given to the court: stoning, burning, killing, and strangling.  Rabi Shimon says (the order of severity was), burning, stoning, strangling, killing.  We have already seen the commanded way of stoning.

Bet: The commanded way of burning: they would put him in manure up to his knees and they would put hard scarf into a soft one and twist it around his neck.  They would pull the scarf on either side until he opens his mouth, and they would light the lead bar and throw it into his mouth, and it would go into his bowels and scorch the organs.  Rabi Yehuda says, if they killed him like this, they didn’t fulfill the commanded way of burning, rather they open his mouth with tongs against his will, they light the bar, throw it into his mouth, and it goes into his bowels and scorches the organs.  Rabi Elazar ben Tzadok said, once the daughter of a kohen committed adultery, and they encircled her with bundles of branches and burned her.  They said to him, this court was not at that time one of experts.

Gimmel: The commanded way of killing: they would cut his head with a sword, the way the government does.  Rabi Yehuda says, this is a disgrace, rather they rest his head on a block and cut it with a hatchet.  They said to him there is no more disgraceful death than what you said (it resembles cutting an animal).  The commanded way of strangling: they put him in manure up to his knees, they put a hard scarf into a soft one, wind it on his neck, and pull on either side until he dies.

Daled: These people are stoned: one who has sex with his wife, his father’s wife, his daughter-in-law, a man, an animal (man or woman), the blasphemer, idolater, one who sacrifices his child to Molech, a necromancer, a soothsayer, one who desecrates Shabbat, one who curses his parents, one who has sex with an betrothed woman, the enticer to idolatry, the misleader of the masses, the sorcerer, and a rebellious son.  One who has sex with his mother if chayav based on both his mother and his father’s wife.  Rabi Yehuda says, only because of his mother.  One who has sex with his father’s mother is chayav based on his father’s wife and a married woman, whether his father is dead or alive or if they are betrothed or married.  One who has sex with a man or an animal, male or female, If he sinned, did the animal sin (i.e. why is it put to death)?  Rather, because the man came to sin through it, therefore the pasuk says to stone them.  Another idea, such that the animal won’t come to be for sale, and people will say this is the animal that caused so and so to be stoned.

Hay: The blasphemer isn’t accountable until he says the holy Name.  Rabi Yehoshua ben Korcha says, when they interrogate the witnesses, they use a substitute name, “Yossi will smite Yossi.”  When the judgment is concluded, they do not kill with a substitute name, rather they send out everyone and ask the greatest of the witnesses, say exactly what you heard.  And he says, and the judges stand up and tear their clothes and never mend them.  The second witness comes in and says, I heard as he did, and so too with the third.

Vav: The idolater, one who worships, sacrifices, burns incense, pours libations, bows, accepts as a god, or says to it, you are a god for me.  But one who hugs, kisses, honors with sweeping, sprinkles water before, washes, “anoints”, dresses, or puts shoes on, transgresses a lo ta’ase.  One who makes a vow in its name or makes an act in its name transgresses a lo ta’ase.  One who relieves himself before Ba’al-Pe’or, this is the manner of worshipping it.  One who throws a stone to Markulis (Mercury), this is the manner of worshipping it.

Zayin: One who gives his child to Molech isn’t chayav until he gives himself over to Molech and passes through the fire.  He gave to Molech but did not pass through the fire or passed through the fire but did not give over, isn’t chayav, until he does both.  A necromancer is a sorcerer who speaks from his armpit, and a soothsayer is a sorcerer who speaks with his mouth.  Behold these are killed by stoning and one who asks from them is forewarned.

Chet: One who desecrates Shabbat, something which if done intentionally is punished by excision and if done intentionally is punished by a korban chatat.  One who curses his parents, isn’t chayav until he curses with the holy Name.  If he cursed with a substitute name, Rabi Meir says chayav and Chachamim say patur.

Tet: One who has sex with a betrothed woman isn’t chayav unless she is a young virgin betrothed in her father’s house.  If two had sex with her, the first is stoned and the second is strangled.

Yud: The enticer, this is a layman who entices a layman (to idolatry).  He says to him, there is fear of an idol in such and such a place, thus it feeds, thus it gives drinks, thus it does good, and thus it does bad.  One does not set up a sting for any death given by the torah except for this.  He said to two, and they are the witnesses, so they bring him to court and stone him.  He said to one, the one will say, I have friends who want something like this.  If he is subtle, and will only talk to one, they hide witnesses behind the fence, and the first witness says, tell me what you said in private.  Then he says it, and the witness says, how can leave Hashem and go serve trees and stones?  If he retracts, this is good (enough to not bring him to court).  But if he said, this is our duty and it is nice for us, the witnesses behind the fence take him to court and stone him.  If a person says I will worship, sacrifice, bring incense, bring libations, or bow; or I will go worship, sacrifice, bring incense, bring libations, or bow; or we will go worship, sacrifice, bring incense, bring libations, or bow, this is an enticer.  One that leads astray is one who says, let’s go and worship avoda zara.

Yud Aleph: A sorcerer is one who does a liable act, and not one who does slight of hand.  Rabi Akiva says in the name of Rabi Yehoshua, two who gather squash, one is patur and one is chayav.  The one who gathered through sorcery is chayav, and the one who ‘gathered’ by slight of hand is patur.

Perek Chet

Aleph: A rebellious son, when is he considered rebellious?  Only in the time period from when he grows two beard hairs until the time he has a full beard, the lower (pubic) and not upper (facial), the rabbis spoke in clean language.  This timeframe comes from the pasuk, “when a man should have a son,” son and not daughter, son and not a man.  A minor is exempt, for he has not come under the generality of mitzvot.

Bet: When is the rebellious son liable to be stoned?  When he eats a certain amount (tartemeymar) of meat and drinks a certain amount (half log) of Italian (very fine) wine.  Rabi Yossi says, a maneh of meat and a log of wine (both twice tanna kama).  If he ate it at a religious gathering, at the declaring of the month, as ma’aser sheni in Yerushalayim, he ate animals that died of natural causes, torn flesh, a sheketz or a remes, he ate food of mitzva or avera, ate anything other than meat or drank anything other than wine, he isn’t a rebellious son, until he eats meat and drinks wine, as it says, “a glutton and a drunkard.”  Even though there is no proof for this, there is a hint, as it says, “do not be among gluttons of meat or drunkards of wine.”

Gimmel: If he stole from his father and ate on his property, from others and ate on their property, from others and he ate on his father’s property, he’s not a rebellious son.  Only when he steals from his father and eats on another’s property.  Rabi Yossi bar Rabi Yehuda says, until he steals from his father and his mother.

Daled: If only one of his parents wants him to be judged, he cannot be a rebellious son, for only if both parents want.  Rabi Yehuda says, if his mother is not of the same level as his father, he cannot be a rebellious son.  If one of the parents was missing a hand, lame, mute, blind, or deaf-mute, he doesn’t become a rebellious so, as it says, “they will catch him,” not missing a hand, “and take him out,” not lame, “and they’ll say,” not mute, “this is our son,” not blind, “he doesn’t listen to us,” not a deaf-mute.  They warn him in the presence of three people and whip him.  If he repeated his rottenness, he is judged by twenty-three.  And the initial three must be there, for it says, “this is our son,” the one who was lashed in your presence.  If he ran away before his trial was finished, but his beard had finished growing he’s patur.  If he ran away after the trial was finished and his beard grew in, he’s still chayav.

Hay: A rebellious son is judged based on his future, let him die innocent and not guilty, for the death of the wicked is pleasure for them and for the world, but of the righteous is bad for them and the world.  Wine and sleep (i.e. neutral time) for the wicked is pleasure for them and for the world, and for the righteous, good for them and the world.  Not congregating with others, for the wicked is good for them the world and for the righteous, bad for them and the world.  Convening with others and quiet are the same as the first two cases.

Vav: A thief caught breaking in is judged based on his future.  If he breaks a barrel of wine, if he is prohibited to kill the thief (it is known the thief would not come to kill the owners) he pays, and if he would be allowed to kill the thief, he is patur.

Zayin: And these are those who we save from sin by taking their life: one who is chasing his friend to kill him or chasing a betrothed maiden.  But one who is chasing after an animal, desecrating Shabbat, or committing idolatry, we don’t save them by taking their life.

Perek Tet

Aleph: And these are the people who are burnt: one who has sex with a woman and her daughter (one of whom is his wife) and a kohen’s daughter who committed adultery.  The category of a woman and her daughter includes his daughter, his granddaughter, his wife’s daughter his step-granddaughter, his mother-in-law, his mother-in-law’s mother, and the mother of his father-in-law.  And these are the people who are killed: the murderer and the people of a wayward city.  A murderer who killed with a stone or with iron or forced him into water or fire such that he couldn’t get out, and he dies, is chayav.  One who pushes his friend into water or fire, and he can get out, is patur.  He sicced upon him a dog or a snake, he’s patur.  He caused a snake to bite the person, Rabi Yehuda says he’s chayav, and Chachamim say patur.  If a person struck his friend whether with a rock or his fist, and they evaluated that he would die, he got better, but then got worse and died, he’s chayav.  Rabi Nechemia says patur, for there is basis for him to be patur.

Bet: One who intended to kill an animal but killed a human, to kill a non-Jew but killed a Jew, to kill a premature baby (who would routinely die in those days) but killed a normal baby is patur.  He intended to hit him on the loins, and there wasn’t sufficient force to kill on his loins, but he hit the heart, where there was sufficient force to kill, he is patur.  If he intended to hit the heart with sufficient force to kill, but he hit the loins with insufficient force but the person died anyway, he is patur.  He meant to hit an adult with insufficient force to kill, but he hit a minor with a sufficient force to kill, he is patur.  He intended to hit a minor with sufficient force to kill, but he hit an adult with insufficient force to kill but he died anyways, he is patur.  But, if he intended to hit on the loins and there was sufficient force to kill on the loins and it went on the heart, he is chayav.  He intended to hit an adult and there was sufficient force to kill an adult but he hit a minor who died, he’s chayav.  Rabi Shimon says, even if he intended to kill this one and he killed that he is patur.

Gimmel: A murderer who got confused among other people, we find all of them patur.  Rabi Yehuda says, we assemble them in the dome (prison).  All who are to be killed but get mixed up with others are judged by the most lenient death.  Those who should get stoning mixed in with those to be burned, Rabi Shimon says they are stoned, since burning is worse, and Chachamim say that they are burned, for stoning is worse.  Rabi Shimon said to them, if burning weren’t worse, it wouldn’t be given to the daughter of a kohen who committed adultery.  They said to him, if stoning weren’t worse, it wouldn’t be given to a blasphemer or idolater.  Ones who might be killed by strangulation, Rabi Shimon says by sword, and Chachamim say by strangulation.

Daled: One who is chayav two deaths by the court is given the stricter one.  If he did one act which can have two deaths, he is given the stricter.  Rabi Yossi says, he gets the first punishment for which the trial was first completed.

Hay: One who was lashed and repeated the offence, the court sends him to jail and feeds him barley until his stomach bursts.  One who kills without witnesses, they bring him to prison and feed him slight portions of bread and scant water.

Vav: One who steals a vessel used for libation, curses by magic, or has sex with an Aramean woman, zealots kill him (on the spot).  A kohen who did temple service while tame, his brother kohanim don’t bring him to court, rather the young kohanim take him outside of the courtyard and smash his head with a plank.  A non-kohen who served in the Temple, Rabi Akiva says, he dies by strangulation, and Chachamim say, at the hands of Hashem.

Perek Yud

Aleph: All Jews have a portion in the world to come, as it is written, “and your nation is all righteous, forever will they inherit the land, the branch of My planting, and the work of My hands to be glorified.”  And these are they who do not have a portion in the world to come: one who says, Resurrection of the dead isn’t from the torah, one who thinks the torah isn’t from Heaven, and a heretic who mocks torah (apikores).  Rabi Akiva says, also one who reads external (non-Rabbinic) books about torah, one who whispers to a wound and says, “all the sickness I put on Egypt I will not put on you for I Hashem am your healer.”  Abba Shaul says, also one who says the Name by its letters.

Bet: Three kings and four hedyotot (people who do not have smicha linked to Moshe) have no portion in the world to come.  The kings are Yiravam, Achav, and Menashe.  Rabi Yehuda says, Menashe has a portion in the world to come, as it says, “and he prayed to Hashem and begged Him and He listened to his supplication and He brought him back to Yerushalayim to his kingdom.”  They said to him, Hashem returned him for his kingdom, He didn’t return him for the world to come.  The four hedyotot: Bilam, Do’eg, Achitofel, and Geychazi.

Gimmel: The generation of the flood has no portion in the world to come, and they aren’t judged, as it says, “My spirit will never judge these people,” no judgment and no spirit.  The generation of the Tower of Babble has no portion in the world to come, as it says, “and Hashem scattered them from there unto the face of the earth.”  “And Hashem scattered them,” in this world, “and from there Hashem scattered them,” for the world to come.  The people of Sdom have no portion in the world to come, as it says, “and the people of Sdom are evil and sins to Hashem very much.”  “Evil,” in this world, “and sins,” for the world to come.  But they are judged.  Rabi Nechemia says, neither of these has judgment, as it says, “because of this the wicked will not be avenged with judgment, also sinners in an assembly of the righteous.”  “Because of this the wicked will not be avenged with judgment,” this is the generation of the flood, “also sinners in an assembly of the righteous,” this is Sdom.  They said to him, the people of Sdom weren’t in an assembly of the righteous, they were in an assembly of the wicked.  The spies have no portion in the world to come, as it says, “and the people who said bad things about the land (Israel) died in an affliction before Hashem.”  “Died,” in this world, “in an affliction,” in the world to come.  The generation of the desert has not part in the world to come and isn’t judged, as it says, “in the desert they will be consumed and there they will die,” according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Eliezer says, about them it is written, “collect for me my pious ones, who sealed a covenant with me by sacrifice.”  Korach’s assembly has no future to rise up, as it says, “and the land covered them up,” for this world, “and they got lost in the congregation,” for the world to come, according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Eliezer says, it says about them, “Hashem has die and gives life, lowers to the depths and raises.”  The ten lost tribes aren’t going to return, as it says, “and he sent them to a different land until this day.”  Just as this day goes and never returns, so too they go and never return, according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Eliezer says, just as today grows dark and grows light, so too the ten tribes it darkened for them, and it will lighten for them.

Daled: The people of a wayward city have no place in the world to come, as it says, “base men have come out of your midst and they led astray the residents of their city.”  They aren’t killed until they are from the same city and the same tribe, most of the town has bean misled, and the men have misled it.  If the women and children misled it, or only a minority has been misled, of if the person who led astray was from the outside, these are treated as individuals, and you need two witnesses and warning for each one.  This is a stringency by individuals as compared to the many, for individuals are stoned so their property is saved (as a redeeming factor), but the many die by sword, therefore their property is lost.

Hay: “Smite shall you smite etc.” a pack of donkey-riders or camel-riders, which passes from place to place, behold these can the wayward city.  “Destroy it and all that is in it etc.” from here they said, the property of the righteous that are in it are lost, that are outside the city, are spare, and of the wicked whether inside or outside of the city are lost.

Vav: As it says, “and all the spoils of the city, you shall gather into its open area etc.”  If it doesn’t have an open area, you make one.  If the open are is outside the city, they build the city’s wall such that it will be inside.  “And you shall burn by fire the city and all of its spoils, all of it for Hashem,” its spoils, and not the spoils of heaven (holy objects).  From this they said, hekdesh in it will be redeemed, truma will rot, and ma’aser sheni and holy writings will be hidden.  “All of it for Hashem,” Rabi Shimon said, Hashem said, if you judge a wayward city I put upon you as if you go up in your entirety as an olah before me.  “And it shall be a heap forever, it will never be rebuilt,” you can’t even make gardens or orchards, according to Rabi Yossi Hagelili.  Rabi Akiva says, “it will never be rebuilt,” to as it was you can’t build it, but you can make gardens and orchards.  “And none of the banned items may stay in your hand,” that whenever there are wicked in this world, there is extreme anger in the world, when the wicked are destroyed, extreme anger is removed from the world.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: These are the people who get strangulation: one who strikes his parents, one who kidnaps a Jew, an elder who rebels against the court’s decision, a false prophet, one who prophesies for idolatry, the adulterer, and those who testify falsely against a kohen’s daughter and her husband.  One who strikes his parents isn’t chayav until he wounds them.  This is a stringency of cursing over wounding, for one who curses his parents after death is liable, but one who strikes after death isn’t.  The kidnapper isn’t chayav until he brings the person into his domain.  Rabi Yehuda says, until he brings him into his domain and uses him as a slave, as it is said, “he will make him a slave and sell him.”  One who kidnaps his son, Rabi Yishma’el the son or Rabi Yochanan be Bruka makes him chayav, and the Chachamim make him patur.  One who kidnapped someone who was half slave and half free (one of his joint masters freed him), Rabi Yehuda makes him Chayav and Chachamim make him patur.

Bet: An elder who rebels against the court’s decision, as it says, “when a thing will be strange for you in judgment etc.”  Three courts were there, one sitting at the entrance to the Temple Mount, one sitting at the entrance of the Temple, and one sitting in the Gazit Chamber.  People would come to that at the entrance to the Temple Mount, and say, this is how I interpreted, and this is how my friends interpreted, this is how I learned, and this is how my friends learned.  If they had learned about this case, they would tell them, and if not, they bring them to the court at the entrance to the Temple, and he repeats the case.  If they had learned about this case, they tell them, and if not, they all go to the court in the Gazit Chamber, for there Torah can be put out on all Jews, as it says “from that place which Hashem will choose.”  He returns to his town, and if he learns like she should, he’s patur.  But, if he continues to rule that they should do like him, he’s chayav, as it says, “the person who does with premeditation.”  He is not liable until he rules what is to be done.  A student (who is not yet allowed to rule) who ruled to do is patur, because his severity (that he isn’t allowed to rule) is his leniency (because people won’t listen to him, so it doesn’t matter if he ruled rebelliously).

Gimmel: We are more stringent about expounded laws than laws from the torah (when it comes to a rebellious elder).  One who says, there is not tfillin, in order to transgress a torah law, he’s patur (nobody will follow this absurdity).  One who says tfillin have five compartments, to add to expounded laws, he’s chayav.

Daled: Neither the court in his town nor the court in Yavneh puts him to death, rather they bring him to the great court in Jerusalem.  And they keep him until the closest holiday and they kill him on the holiday, as it says, “and all the nation shall see, hear, and stop being presumptuous,” according to Rabi Akiva.  Rabi Yehuda says, we do not delay his justice, rather we kill him instantly and write messages and send messengers to all places saying, such and such a person was put to death at the hand of the court.

Hay: A false prophet who prophesies on what he did not hear and what was not told him is killed by people.  But one who hold back prophesy, disregards what a prophet told him, or does something contrary to what Hashem told him is killed by Hashem, as it says, “I will require [the punishment] of him.”

Vav: One who prophesies in the name of idolatry and says, such told me an idol, even if it is in accordance with halacha, like declaring the impure impure and the pure pure.  One who commits adultery, since he entered the domain of the husband, even though the marriage hasn’t been consummated, one who has sex with her is strangled.  And those who testify falsely about the daughter of a kohen and her husband, for all zomemim (false witnesses) have the same death (as what they accused) except for those who testify about a kohen’s daughter and her husband.

Mesechet Makkot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: How do witnesses (not) become zomemim (false witnesses)?  (They say) we testify that this person is the son of a divorcee or one who got chalitza.  We don’t say, let’s make this one the son of a divorcee or widow, rather we give him forty lashes.  We testify about this person that he must be exiled.  We don’t say, they’ll be exiled in his stead, rather, he gets forty lashes.  We testify that this man divorced his wife, but didn’t pay his ktuba (prenuptial agreement), whether today whether tomorrow, isn’t he going to pay the ktuba?  We evaluate how much one would pay for this ktuba for if she becomes a widow or divorced, and if she dies, her husband inherits it.  We testify that this person owes his friend one thousand zuz, and he owes him within thirty days, and he says he owes in ten years.  They evaluate how much a person would pay if he had a thousand zuz and instead of having to pay in thirty days, he had to pay in ten years.

Bet: We testify that this person owes his friend two hundred zuz, they are whipped and pay, for what makes him get lashes is not what makes him pay, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, anyone who pays isn’t whipped.

Gimmel: People who testify that so-and-so is chayav lashes, and they are found to be zomemim, they get eighty lashes, because of, “you shall not bear upon your friend as a false witness,” and because, “and you shall do to them as what they falsified,” according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, the only get forty lashes.  The split money but not lashes.  When?  They testified that one owed his friend 200 zuz, and they are found to be zomemim, they split it, but if they testify that he is chayav forty lashes and are found to be zomemim, they each get forty lashes.

Daled: Witnesses do not become zomemim until they are invalidated themselves.  When?  They say, we testify that so-and-so killed a person.  They (a second pair of witnesses) said to them, how can you testify, the victim or the murderer was with us that day is such-and-such a place, these are not zomemim.  But if they said to them, how can you testify, for you were with us on that day in such-and-such a place, these are zomemim, and they can be killed based on the latter witnesses’ statements.

Hay: If two other witnesses came and they made them zomemim, and two more came and they made them zomemim, even if one hundred pairs came, they all die as zomemim.  Rabi Yehuda says, this is a conspiracy (the first pair has decided to protect the defendant and make any witnesses who come zomemim), and the only pair that will die is the first pair (who were made zomemim).

Vav: Edim zomemim are only killed once the trial (of the original defendant) is finished.  For behold, the Tzedukim would say, until the person dies, as it says, “a life in place of a life.”  The Chachamim said to them, hasn’t it already been said, “and you shall do to him as he intended to falsify about his friend,” and behold, his friend is alive!  If so, why does it say, “a life in place of a life?”  One might have thought it was from the time the testimony was received, making him liable to die.  The torah teaches, “a life in place of a life,” behold, they aren’t killed until the judgment is finished.

Zayin: “Based on two witnesses or three witnesses will the one who will the person die.”  If the judgment stands based on two, why did the pasuk make a case of three?  Rather they compare the three to the two, just as three can make two zomemim, two can make three zomemim.  And how do we know they can even make a hundred zomemim?  The torah teaches, “edim.”  Rabi Shimon says, just as two aren’t killed until they are both zomemim, so too three aren’t killed until they are all zomemim.  And how do we know even a hundred?  The torah teaches, “edim.”  Rabi Akiva says, the third only comes to make the sentence more stringent and like the other two (i.e. we don’t simply take the first two and ignore the third), and if so the pasuk punished those who join sinners as those who sin, how much more so Hashem will give reward to those who join those who do mitzvot as those who do mitzvot.

Chet: Just as with two, if one of them is found to be a relative or invalid their testimony is invalid, so too with three if one of them is found to be a relative or invalid their testimony is invalid.  How do we know this holds for even a hundred?  The torah teaches, “edim.”  Rabi Yossi said, what is this talking about?  Capital cases, but in monetary cases, the testimony can be held up by the leftover witnesses.  Rabi says, it applies to both capital and monetary cases, if they (the invalid witnesses) warned them (the defendant, showing they intended to testify), but if they didn’t warn them (and didn’t intend to testify), what should two brothers do with one who saw a person killing with them (can’t one of them testify with the third person)?

Tet: If two people saw him (the accused) from this window, and two people saw him from that window and one is warning him in the middle, if they see one another, they provide a single testimony, but if they don’t they provide two testimonies.  Therefore, if one of them was found to be a zomem, he and they die, but the second group is patur.  Rabi Yossi says, we never put to death until two witnesses warn him, as it says, “from the mouth of two witnesses.”  Alternatively, “from the mouth of two witnesses,” teaches that the Sanhedrin may not listen to a translator.

Yud: One whose trial was completed and he fled, and he came before the same court, they do not void his sentence.  Wherever two people stand and say, we testify about such-and-such that he was sentenced in the court so-and-so, and such-and-such are hit witnesses, behold, he will be killed.  The Sanhedrin has jurisdiction in Israel and outside of it.  A Sanhedrin which kills once every seven years is called bloodthirsty.  Rabi Elazar ben Azariah said, once every seventy years.  Rabi Tarfon and Rabi Akiva say, if we were on the Sanhedrin, we would never kill someone.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, they surely would have increased the number of murderers in Israel.

Perek Bet

Aleph: These are the people who are exiled, those who kill a person by accident.  He was pushing a roof-flattener and it fell on someone and killed him, he was lowering a barrel (by chain) and it fell and killed someone, and if he was going down on a ladder and he fell on someone and killed him, these are exiled.  But if he was pulling a roof-flattener and it fell on someone and killed him, he was raising a barrel and fell and killed someone, or he was going up a ladder and he full on someone and killed him, these aren’t exiled.  This is the general rule, anything that’s on its way down, is exiled, but what isn’t going down, isn’t exiled.  If the ax-head separated from the handle and killed someone, Rabi Meir said, he’s not exiled, Chachamim say he is.  (If the ax-head flew) from the tree being cut, Rabi Meir said he’s exiled, Chachamim say he’s not.

Bet: One who throws a stone into the public domain and kills someone he is exiled.  Rabi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says, if it was after the time that the stone left his hand that the victim poked out his head and got hit, he’s patur.  If he threw a stone into his yard and killed someone, if the victim has a right to enter there, he’s exiled, and if not, he’s not exiled, as it says, “when he shall come upon his friend in the forest.”  Just as the forest is a domain for the damager and the victim to enter, it excludes the yard of the owner, for the damager and victim don’t both have a right to be there.  Abba Shaul says, just as cutting trees is optional, it excludes a father who hits his son, a Rabbi reprimanding his student, and an emissary of Beit Din.

Gimmel: A father can be exiled at the hands of the son, and the son can be exiled at the hands of the father.  All are exiled at the hands of a Jew, and a Jew is exiled at the hands of everyone, except for at the hands of a resident alien.  A resident alien is only exiled at the hands of a resident alien.  A blind person isn’t exiled according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Meir says, he is exiled.  One who hates (the victim) isn’t exiled.  Rabi Yossi bar Yehuda says, one who hates is killed because he is as if forewarned.  Rabi Shimon says, there are those who hate who are exiled, and there are those who hate who aren’t.  This is the general rule, anytime on can say he killed willingly, he isn’t exiled, and when he didn’t kill willingly, this person is exiled.

Daled: To where are people exiled?  To an ir miklat, the three in Transjordan and the three in the land of Cana’an, as it says, “you shall put the three cities in Transjordan, and you shall put the three cities in the land of Cana’an, etc.”  Until the three in Israel we chosen, the three in Transjordan weren’t refuge, as it says, “six arei miklat shall there be,” until all six of them are refuge together.

Hay: And direct paths were made from one to the other, as it says, “prepare for yourself a path and divide into three etc.”  And they would give them (the exiled) two scholars lest the avenger kill them on the way, and they speak with them (the avenger).  Rabi Meir says, even he can speak on his own behalf, as it says, “and this is the word of the killer.”

Vav: Rabi Yossi said, it used to be that whether accidental or intentional, killers would go immediately to an ir miklat, and the court would send people to take them from there.  One who was guilty would be killed, the innocent would be set free, and the exiled would be returned as it says, “and the assembly would return him to his ir miklat etc.”  Whether a kohen gadol is anointed, is given increased garments (to start his ‘term’ when the anointment oil was no longer available), or passed from appointment (temporarily removed), they allow the killer to return.  Rabi Yehuda says, even one anointed for battle (a certain kohen but not the kohen gadol) can bring back the killer.  Therefore, mothers of kohanim provide (the accidental killers) with food and clothes, so that they won’t pray for their sons to die.  If once the sentence is passed a kohen gadol dies, he isn’t exiled.  If his case hasn’t finished and the kohen gadol dies, and then his case finishes, the new kohen gadol’s death allows him to return.

Zayin: When he got his sentence there was no kohen gadol, or he killed the kohen gadol, or the kohen gadol is a murderer, he never leaves the ir miklat.  He may not leave to give testimony about a mitzva, to give testimony about money, or to give testimony about capital cases.  Even if the Jews need him, even the general of the army of Yisra’el like Yo’av ben Tzruya, he never leaves there, as it says, “which he fled there,” there will be the place he lives, there will be the place he dies, and there will be the place he is buried.  Just as the city grants refuge, so too its outskirts grant refuge.  A murderer who was outside the limits and the avenger found him, Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, it’s a mitzva for the avenger and optional for everyone.  Rabi Akiva says, it’s optional for the avenger and everyone has no chiyuv for (killing) him.  A tree which is within the border and its branches bend beyond the border, or is outside the limits and its branches bend within the border, everything is decided (even) according to the branches.  One who killed in that city is exiled from one neighborhood to another, and a levi is exiled from city to city.

Chet: Similarly, a killer who was exiled to his ir miklat, and the people of the town want to honor him, he must say to them, I’m a killer.  If they say, even so, he may get from them, as it says, “and this is the word of the killer.”  They would pay rent to the levi’im according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Meir says, they wouldn’t pay the levi’im rent.  He returns to any office he had held, according to Rabi Meir, and Rabi Yehuda says, he doesn’t return to any office he had/

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: And these are the lashed, one who has sex with his sister, his father’s sister, his mother’s sister, his wife’s sister, his brother’s wife, the wife of his father’s brother, and a nidda, a widow for a kohen gadol, a divorcee or one who got chalitza for a lay kohen, or a mamzer or a Netina (groups who married in during the time of Yehoshua) to a Yisra’el.  A widow and a divorcee (one woman who is both) is chayav on two counts.  If she is both a divorcee and one who got chalitza it is only one count.

Bet: One who is tame who ate something holy, came to the Beit Hamikdash tame, or ate forbidden fats, blood, leftover korbanot, pigul (a korban intended to be eaten after time), and tame (korbanot), or one who slaughtered and offered outside (the Beit Hamikdash), ate chametz on Pesach, ate or did work on Yom Kippur, concocts oil (like the anointing oil), concocts the incense (like the incense mixture), anoints with the anointing oil, eats animals which died of natural causes, were torn apart, or are sheketz or remes, ate tevel or ma’aser rishon which didn’t have truma taken, or ate ma’aser sheni or hekdesh which wasn’t redeemed.  How much tevel must he eat to be chayav?  Rabi Shimon says, any at all, and Chachamim say a kzayit.  Rabi Shimon said to them, don’t you admit that he is chayav if he eats an ant, no matter how small?  They said to him, it is as it was created.  He said to them, so too a grain of wheat is as it was created (and is therefore significant).

Gimmel: One who eats bikurim before reading (the required psukim), the holiest of holies (meat of a chatat or asham) outside the hangings (the courtyard of the Beit Hamikdash), or normal holy things and ma’aser sheni outside the wall (of Yerushalayim).  One who breaks a bone in a tahor korban pesach, he is lashed with forty.  But one who leaves over from tahor or breaks a bone in the tame (korban pesach) isn’t lashed forty.

Daled: One who took a mother bird and her children, Rabi Yehuda says, he’s lashed and doesn’t send away (the mother), and Chachamim say, he sends but isn’t lashed.  This is the general rule, any negative mitzva which has a ‘get up and do’ (commandment to do), one isn’t chayav on it.  

Hay: One who balds his head (as a sign of grieving), rounded the corner of his head (shaving hair), destroys the corner of his beard (shaves with a razor), or makes cuts (himself) once for the dead, is chayav.  If he made cut once for five people or five times for one person, he is chayav for each one.  On his head (rounding), two, once for this side and one for the other.  On his beard, two from here, two from there, and one for below (chin).  Rabi Eliezer says, if he took it all off at once, he’s only chayav one.  And isn’t chayav unless he takes it off with a razor.  Rabi Eliezer says, even if he took it off with pincers or an adze, he’s chayav.

Vav: One who writes and etches (tattoos), if he wrote but didn’t etch or etched but didn’t write, he’s not chayav, until he writes and etches in ink, eye shadow, or anything that leaves a mark.  Rabi Shimon ben Yehuda in the name of Rabi Shimon says, he isn’t chayav until he writes Hashem’s name, as it says, and a writing of etching you shall not put upon yourself I am Hashem”.

Zayin: A nazir who drank wine all day is only chayav one.  They said to him, don’t drink, don’t drink, and he drinks, he is chayav on every one (drink). 

Chet: If he (the nazir) was become tame met the whole day, he is only chayav one.  If they said to him, don’t become tame, don’t become tame, and he became tame, he’s chayav on each one.  If he was shaving the whole day, he is only chayav one.  If they said to him, don’t shave, don’t shave, he’s chayav on each one.  If one wears kilayim the whole day, he’s only chayav one.  If they said to him, don’t wear it, don’t wear it, and he strips and puts it back on, he’s chayav on each one.

Tet: One can plow a single furrow and be chayav because of eight prohibitions, one who plows with an ox and a donkey, and they are hekdesh (the ox may not be not be used since it is a bechor, and the donkey may not be used since it is hekdesh), among vineyard kilayim, during shvi’it, on Yom Tov, and he is a kohen and a nazir in a tame place.  Chanania ben Chachinai says, he may also be wearing kilayim.  They said to him, this is not the same title (it is not directly related to his plowing).  He said to them, also him being a nazir isn’t the same title.

Yud: How much do we lash him?  Forty minus one, as it says, “by number forty,” a number which is close to (approaches) forty (i.e. thirty-nine).  Rabi Yehuda says, he is lashed a full forty.  And where does he get whipped the extra one (as we will see, lashes are divided between three places)?  Between his shoulders.

Yud Aleph: We only evaluate him for lashes which are divisible by three.  They evaluated him to get forty, he got part of them, and they said he can’t get all forty, he’s patur.  If they evaluated him to get eighteen, and after he got lashed they said he could take forty, he’s patur.  If he did something which has two prohibitions, if they evaluate him once, he is whipped (for both, i.e. forty-two which include three for the second) and is patur.  If not, he is whipped, recovers, and is whipped again.

Yud Bet: How do you whip him?  They tie his two hands on a pillar an either side, the agent of the court grabs his clothes and if they are torn, they are torn, and if they come apart, they come apart, until he reveals his heart (the front too).  A rock is placed behind him, the agent of the court stands on it with a strap of calf (hide) in his hand, doubled up and redoubled up, and two straps going up and down it (tied along it).

Yud Gimmel: Its handle is a tefach, it’s a tefach wide, and its head reaches his navel.  He whips him one third on his front and tow thirds on his back, and he doesn’t whip him sitting or standing, rather leaning (on the pillar), as it says, “and the judge will cause him to tumble down.”  And the one who whips whips with one hand with all his strength.

Yud Daled: And the reader reads (while the person is being whipped), “and it you won’t guard to do etc.” and, “and Hashem will make great your blows, and the blows of etc.” and he returns to the beginning of the passage.  And if he died under the hand (of the agent of the court) he is patur (from having killed a man).  If he added another strap and he died, he is exiled.  If one dirties himself with excrement or urine, he is patur (they end the whipping).  Rabi Yehuda says, a man with excrement, a woman with (even) urine.

Tet Vav: Anyone chayav karet who got lased is patur from their karet as it says, “and your brother shall be lightened in your eyes,” when he is whipped he is like your brother, according to Rabi Chanina ben Gamliel.  Rabi Chanina ben Gamliel said, just as one who does one sin we take away his life, the one who does a mitzva, how much more so will he be given his soul.  Rabi Shimon says, from his place (source) we learn, as it says, “and the souls who do will be cut off etc.”  And it says, “which man shall do and live by them,” and behold, whoever sits and doesn’t sin gets reward as if he did a mitzva.  Rabi Shimon bar Rebi says, behold it says, “only hold strongly to not eat blood for the blood is the soul etc.”  And just as the blood, which is the soul of man, if one keeps away from it the one who removes himself from it gets reward, theft and inappropriate relations, for the soul of man yearns for them, one who removes himself from them 
How much more so will he merit for himself, for his generations, and for the generations of his generation until the end of all generations.

Tet Zayin: Rabi Chanania ben Akashia says, Hashem wanted to give merit to the Jews, therefore he increased for them torah and mitzvot, as is says, “Hashem enjoys for the sake of His righteous, to enlarge torah and to make it glorious.

Mesechet Shevuot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: There are two shvuot (oaths) which are four.  There are two laws of knowing of tuma, which are four.  Carrying on Shabbat is by two (laws), which are four.  The signs of afflictions are two, which are four.

Bet: Whenever there is knowledge at the beginning (of doing an act while impure which requires purity) and the end, and unknowing in between, this is in a (korban) which may go up or down in value (based on the means of the bringer).  If there was knowledge at the beginning, but not the end, the goat which is offered inside (the holy of holies) on Yom Hakippurim suspends it until he becomes aware and brings a (korban) which may go up or down in value.

Gimmel: If there was no knowledge at the beginning, but there was at the end, the goat done outside on Yom Hakippurim atones, as it says, “besides the chatat of atonement.”  One what this atones for that atones for, just as the inner one only atones for something upon which there was knowledge, so too the outer only atones for something which had no knowledge.

Daled: One what there is no knowledge at the beginning and the end, the goats of the festivals and of Rosh Chodesh atones, according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Shimon says, the goats of the festivals atone, but not the goats of Rosh Chodesh.  And for what do the goats of Rosh Chodesh atone?  For a tahor person who ate something tame.  Rabi Meir says, all of the goats have the same atonement for contaminating the Beit Hamikdash and its holy things.  Rabi Shimon used to say, the goats of Rosh Chodesh atone for a tahor person who ate something tame, those of the festivals atone for one who has no knowledge at both beginning and end, and of Yom Hakippurim atones for what had no knowledge in the beginning but had in the end.  They said to him, may they bring one (goat) set aside for one day on another?  He said to them, they may offer it.  They said to him, since their atonement isn’t the same, why can they offer this for this?  He said to them, they all come to atone for one who contaminates the Beit Hamikdash and its holy things.

Hay: Rabi Shimon ben Yehuda says in his name, the goats of Rosh Chodesh atone for a tahor person who ate something tame, they are added to with those of the festivals, for they atone for a tahor person who ate something tame and for one who had knowledge neither at the beginning nor at the end.  They are added to with those of Yom Hakippurim, for they atone for a tahor person who ate something tame, for one who had knowledge neither at the beginning nor the end, and for one who had no knowledge at the beginning, but did have in the end.  They said to him, may they offer one in the place of the other?  He said to them, he may.  They said to him, if so, those of Yom Hakippurim could be brought on Rosh Chodesh, but how can those of Rosh Chodesh be brought on Yom Hakippurim to atone for something that isn’t its (to atone for)?  He said to them, they all come to atone for a tahor person who ate something tame.

Vav: And for (one who) willingly contaminated the Beit Hamikdash and its holy things, the inner goat of Yom Hakippurim and Yom Hakippurim atone.  And on the rest of the transgressions which are in the torah, a positive or negative commandment, those punishable by karet, and those punishable by death at the hands of the court, the scapegoat atones.

Zayin: Whether a Yisra’el, a kohen, or an anointed kohen (these atonements hold).  What is the difference between a Yisra’el, a kohen, and an anointed kohen.  Only that the blood of the bull atones on the kohanim who made the Beit Hamikdash and its holy things tame.  Rabi Shimon says, just as the blood of the inner goat atones for Yisra’elim, so too the blood of the bull atones for the kohanim.  Just as the confession of the scapegoat atones for a Yisra’el, so too the confession of the bull atones for the kohanim.

Perek Bet

Aleph: There are two laws about tuma, which are four.  One became tame and knew, and he forgot his tuma but remembered (the food) was holy, or forgot it was holy but remembered he was tame, or he forgot both, and he ate and didn’t know, but afterwards found out, he brings a graded korban (the korban is based on how wealthy he is).  If he became tame and knew, and he forgot about his tuma but remembered he was entering the Beit Hamikdash, or forgot he was entering the Beit Hamikdash but remembered he was tame, or forgot both, and he entered the Beit Hamikdash and didn’t know, and after he left he found out, he brings a graded korban.

Bet: (This applies) whether he entered the Temple court or an addition to the Temple court, for one may not add to the city (of Yerushalayim) or on the Temple court unless there are a king, navi, the urim vetumim, a Sanhedrin of seventy-one, two korban toda, and song.  And the court leads the procession and the two korban todas are behind them and all of the Jews are after them.  The inner one is eaten (korban toda) and the outer one is burnt.  And anything which wasn’t done with all of these, one who enters there, he isn’t chayav about them.

Gimmel: If he became tame in the Temple court and forgot about his tuma, he forgot the Temple and remembered he was tame, or forgot both of these and bowed or waited the time of bowing or went out a longer way, he’s chayav, in the shortest way, he’s patur.  This is a positive mitzva in the Beit Hamikdash which one is not chayav for.

Daled: And what is a positive mitzva about nidda which one is chayav for?  He was having sex with a tahor (woman), and she said to him, I have become tame.  If he withdrew immediately, he is chayav, for it was as pleasant to him as his entry.

Hay: Rabi Eliezer says, “a sheretz,” “and he forgot it,” he is chayav for forgetting about a sheretz, but he is not chayav for forgetting the Beit Hamikdash.  Rabi Akiva says, “and he forgets about it and he is tame,” he is chayav for forgetting he is tame, but he is not chayav for forgetting the Beit Hamikdash.  Rabi Yishma’el says, “he forgot, he forgot,” twice to make chayav for forgetting tuma and for forgetting the Beit Hamikdash.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: There are two oaths which are four, the oath, I will eat, and, I will not eat and, I ate, and, I didn’t eat.  If he swore he didn’t eat, if he ate at all, he’s chayav, according to Rabi Akiva.  They said to Rabi Akiva, where (else) have we found that one who eats at all is chayav, such that this one is chayav?  Rabi Akiva said to them, where (else) do we found where one speaks and brings a korban, for this one speaks and gives a korban?  If he swore he didn’t eat and he ate and drank, he is only chayav one.  If he swore he won’t eat and he won’t drink, and he ate and drank, he’s chayav two.

Bet: If he swore he didn’t eat, and he ate wheat bread, barley bread, and spelt bread, he is only chayav one.  If he swore he wouldn’t eat wheat bread, barley bread, and spelt bread, and he ate, he is chayav on each.

Gimmel: If he swore he won’t drink, and he drank many different drinks, he is only chayav one.  If he swore he wouldn’t drink wine, oil, and honey and he drank, he is chayav on each one.

Daled: If he swore her won’t eat, and he ate foods which aren’t fit to be eaten and he drank drinks which aren’t fit to be drunk, he’s patur.  If he swore he didn’t eat, and he ate animals which died naturally or were torn, sheketz and remes, he’s chayav, and Rabi Shimon exempts.  One said, konam (a form of oath) that my wife will not benefit from me if I have eaten today and he ate animals which died naturally or were torn, sheketz and remes, he is assur to his wife.

Hay: (It is the same) whether his things, others’ things, things which have substance, or things which have no substance.  How?  If he said, a swear that I will give so-and-so (a person) and that I won’t give, that I gave and that I didn’t give, that I will sleep and that I won’t sleep, that I slept and that I didn’t sleep, that I will throw a pebble into the sea and that I won’t throw, and that I threw and that I didn’t throw.  Rabi Yishma’el says, he isn’t chayav unless it is on the future, as it says, “to make evil or to make good (both future).”  Rabi Akiva said to him, if so, it should only be for things which have to do with evil and good, things which don’t have in them evil or good, from where do we get them?  He said to him, from an inclusion in the text.  He said (back) to him, if there is an inclusion for that (all things) there should also be an inclusion for that (the past).

Vav: He swore to neglect a mitzva, and he didn’t neglect, he’s patur.  To fulfill and he didn’t fulfill, he’s patur.  There was (a thought) in the law that he should be chayav, according to the words of Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira, for Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira said, just as he is liable for something which he isn’t sworn to hold from Har Sinai, a mitzva which he is sworn to hold from Har Sinai, isn’t it logical that he should be chayav for it?  They said to him, no, if you spoke about optional oaths, for here he made a negative commandment like a positive, but you can say in the oath of a mitzva, where you didn’t make a negative commandment like a positive, for if he swore to neglect and he didn’t neglect, he’s patur.

Zayin: (If one says), an oath that I won’t eat this loaf, an oath that I won’t eat it, an oath that I won’t eat it, he is only chayav one.  This is a spoken oath which one is chayav lashes on if he transgressed intentionally and a graded offering if he transgressed accidentally.  A vain oath, one is chayav Makot if he intentionally (transgressed) and if accidental, he’s patur.

Chet: What is a vain oath?  He swore changing something that is known to people, he said about a stone pillar that it is gold, on a man that he is a woman, and on a woman that she is a man.  He swore of something that isn’t possible, if I didn’t see a camel floating in the air or, I have not seen a snake like the beam of an olive press.  He said to witnesses, come and testify, (and they said we made) an oath that we will not give testimony for you.  He swore to nullify a mitzva, not to make a sukka, not to take lulav, and not to wear tfillin, this is a vain oath, and one is chayav on it if intentionally lashes and if accidentally he’s patur.

Tet: An oath that he will eat this loaf and then that he won’t eat it, the first is a spoken oath, and the second is a vain oath.  If he ate it, he transgressed a vain oath, if he didn’t he transgressed on a spoken oath.

Yud: A spoken oath applies to men and women, with non-relatives and relatives, with valid (witnesses) or invalid, before a court or not, based on itself.  One is chayav upon it (transgressing) intentionally lashes, and accidentally a graded korban.

Yud Aleph: A vain oath applies to men and women, with non-relatives and relatives, with valid (witnesses) or invalid, before a court or not, and based on itself, and one is chayav for (transgressing) intentionally Makot, and if accidentally, he’s patur.  Whether this or that (kind of oath), one who is sworn by other people is chayav.  How?  HE said, I didn’t eat today and I didn’t put on tfillin today, if I make an oath on him and he says amen he’s chayav.

Perek Daled

Aleph: An oath of a witness (testimony) works by (is valid with) a man but not a woman, a non-relative but no a relative, a valid witness but not an invalid witness, and it only works with those fit to testify, before whether before a court or not before a court, and from his own mouth (willingly).  If it is from the mouth of others, they are not liable (as forced) until they are nullified in court according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, whether it is from his mouth or from others’ mouth, he isn’t chayav until it is nullified before a court.

Bet: One is chayav for intentional (transgression of) an oath or if they accidentally (transgressed) but (denied testifying) intentionally, but aren’t chayav on accidentally (doing both).  And what are they chayav for on intentionally (violating) oaths?  A graded korban.

Gimmel: What is the oath of testimony?  He said to two, come and testify, they swear that they don’t know any testimony for him, or that they said to him, we don’t have testimony for you and he says, I make a swear for you, to which they respond amen, these are chayav.  If he made them swear five times out of court and they came to court and admitted, they are patur.  If they denied (in court that they have testimony) they are chayav on each one.  If he made them swear five times in court and they denied they are only chayav on one.  Rabi Shimon said, why?  Since they can’t go back and admit.

Daled: If both of them denied at once, they are both chayav, if one after another, the first is chayav and the second is patur.  If one denied and one admitted, the denier is chayav.  If there were two sets of witnesses and the first denied and then the second denied, they are both chayav, for the testimony could stand with the two of them (who make up on set).

Hay: I make you swear to come and testify that I have in the hand of so-and-so collateral, a loan, a stolen object, and a lost object of mine, they swear that don’t know any testimony for him, they are only chayav one.  If they swear that they don’t know testimony for him that so-and-so has collateral, a loan, a stolen object, and a loan, they are chayav on each one.  I make you swear to come and testify that so-and-so has collateral of wheat, barley, and spelt, they swear that they don’t know testimony for him, they are only chayav one.  If they swear that they don’t have testimony for him that so-and-so doesn’t have collateral of wheat, barley, and spelt, they are chayav on each one.

Vav: I make you swear that you won’t come and testify that I have from the hand of so-and-so damage and half-damage (from a forewarned and unforewarned ox, respectively), restitution of double, restitution of four and five times, that so-and-so raped my daughter, or seduced my daughter, that my son hit me, that my friend wounded me (on Yom Kippur), and that they lit my pile of grain on Yom Kippur, these are chayav.

Zayin: I make you swear that you won’t come to court and testify that I am a kohen, I am a levi, I am not the son of a divorcee, I am not the son of a widow, that so-and-so is a kohen, that so-and-so is a levi, that so-and-so is a levi, that he is not the son of a divorcee, that he is not the son of a widow, that so-and-so raped his daughter, seduced his daughter, that my son wounded me, that my friend wounded me (on Shabbat), or that they lit fire to my grain pile on Shabbat, these are patur.

Chet: I make you swear that you won’t come and testify that so-and-so said he would give me 200 zuz and he didn’t give me, they are patur, for they aren’t chayav in a claim about money like a collateral.

Tet: I make you swear that when you know testimony for me, you will come and testify, they are patur, for the swear came before the (having of the) testimony.

Yud: He stood in shul and said, I make you swear that if you know testimony for me that you must come and testify for me, they are patur, until he intends for them (specifically).

Yud Aleph: He said to two, I make you swear so-and-so and so-and-so that if you know testimony for me you will come an testify, a swear that we don’t know for you testimony and they know testimony for him as witnesses from the mouth of witnesses or one of them was a relative or invalid, they are patur.

Yud Bet: If he sent his slave, or he told to the defendant, I make you swear that if you know for me testimony that you will come and testify, they are patur, until they hear from the plaintiff.

Yud Gimmel: I make you swear, I command you, or I forbid you, these are chayav.  (If he said) by heaven and earth, they are patur.  With the names of aleph daled (adoshem) or yud hay (the four-letter name), with Shaday, Tzva’ot, Gracious and Merciful, Long-suffering and Great in kindness and in all substitutes, they are chayav.  One who curses by any of them is chayav according to Rabi Meir and Chachamim exempt.  One who curses his father and mother with any of them is chayav according to Rabi Meir and Chachamim exempt.  One who curses himself and his friend in any of them transgresses a lo ta’ase.  Elokim will smite you or Elokim will smite you like this, this is what the torah spoke of (as forcing a swear).  He won’t smite you, He will bless you, and He will make good for you, Rabi Meir makes chayav and Chachamim exempt.

Perek Hay

Aleph: The oath of a deposit applies to men and women, non-relatives and relatives, kosher and pasul (witnesses), in court and out of court, and from his mouth and from another’s mouth, and he is only chayav when he denies it in court according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, whether from his moth or from others’ mouths, since he denied it, he’s chayav.  He is chayav on intentionally swearing and on it accidentally but intentionally (denied) the deposit, but he’s not chayav on doing it accidentally.  And what is he chayav if on doing it intentionally?  A asham of (the value of) two shekels of silver.

Bet: How is the oath of a deposit (formulated)?  He said to him, give me the deposit which you have, he swears that it is not in his possession.  Or he said to him, I have nothing of yours, I (the second person) make him swear and he says amen, this is chayav,  If he made him swear five times, whether in court or not and he denied, he is chayav on each.  Rabi Shimon said, why?  Since he can repent and admit.

Gimmel: Five people were claiming from him, they said to him, give us the deposit that that we have (given into) your hand.  He swear that I don’t have in my hand, he is only chayav one.  If he swears that I don’t have in my hand, and not for you, and not for you etc. he is chayav on each of them.  Rabi Eliezer says, only if he says the oath at the end.  Rabi Shimon says, until he gives an oath for each one.  (If he says) give the deposit, loan, stolen item, and lost item that I have in your hand, if he swears that I don’t have of yours in my hand, he’s only chayav on.  If he swears that that I don’t have a deposit, loan, a stolen object, and a lost object, he is chayav on each one.  (If he says) give me the wheat, barley, and spelt of mine that you have un your hand.  If he swears, I don’t have for you in my hand, he is chayav one.  If he swears, you don’t have in my hand wheat, barley, and spelt, he is chayav on each.  Rabi Meir says, even if he says, wheat, barley, and spelt, his is chayav on each.

Daled: (If he says,) you raped and seduced my daughter, and he says, I didn’t rape and I didn’t seduce, if I make you swear, and he says amen, he’s chayav.  Rabbi Shimon exempts, for one does not pay a fine based on his own admission.  They said to him, even though he doesn’t pay a fine based on his own admission, he pays embarrassment and stigma based on his own admission.

Hay: (If he says) you stole my ox, and he says, I didn’t steal, I make him swear and he says amen, he’s chayav.  I stole but didn’t slaughter or sell, I swear and he says amen, he’s patur.  You killed his ox or my ox, and he says, I didn’t kill, I swear and he said amen, he’s chayav.  Your ox killed my slave and he said, it didn’t kill, I swear and he says amen, he’s patur.  You wounded me and made a wound in me and he says, I didn’t wound and make a wound, I swear and he says amen, he’s chayav.  His slave said to him, you knocked out my tooth and blinded my eye, and he says I didn’t knock out or blind, I swear and he says amen, he’s patur.  This is the general rule, anyone who would pay base on his own admission is chayav, and one who does not pay on his own admission is patur.

Perek Vav

Aleph: A judge-imposed oath, if the claim is (at least) two silver (ma’ah) and the admission is worth a pruta, if the admission isn’t in kind with the claim he’s patur.  How (is this)?  (If he claims) you have two silver of mine, (and he says) I only have a pruta of yours, he’s patur.  (If he claims) you have two silver and a pruta of mine, (and he says) I only have a pruta of yours, he’s chayav.  You have a maneh of mine, I don’t have of yours, he’s patur.  You have a maneh of mine, I only have fifty dinar of yours, he’s chayav.  You have a maneh of my father, I only have fifty dinar of his, he’s patur, for he is like one returning lost property.

Bet: You have a maneh of mine, if he said in front of witnesses, yes, and the next day he said, give it to me, and he said, I gave it to you, he’s patur.  (If he said) you don’t have anything in my hand, he’s chayav.  You have a maneh of mine, he said to him, yes (and he responded), do not give it to me except before witnesses, the next day he said to him, give it to me, I have given it to you, he’s chayav, for he should have given before witnesses.

Gimmel: You have a litra of gold of mine, you only have in my hands a litra of silver, he’s patur.  You have a golden dinar of mine, you only have in my hands a silver dinar, a trisit, a pundayon, or a pruta (all coins), he’s chayav, for all coins are like one.  You have a kor of produce of mine, you only have in my hands a letech (half a kor) of legumes, he’s patur.  You have a kor of produce of mine, you only have in my hands a letech of legumes, he’s chayav, for legumes are included in produce.  He claimed wheat and he admitted barley, he’s patur, and Raban Gamliel makes chayav.  One who claims from his friend jugs of oil and he admitted to him jars, Admon says, since he admitted part of the claim, he must make an oath, and Chachamim say, the admission is not the same type as the claim.  Raban Gamliel said, I see (the reason of) the words of Admon.  He claimed vessels and land, and he admitted vessels but denied land or admitted land and denied vessels, he’s patur.  If he admitted part of the land, he’s patur, part of the vessels, he’s chayav, for property which doesn’t have a security requires property which has security to be sworn on.

Daled: One does not swear over the claim of a deaf-mute, mentally infirm, or minor, and no oath is forced on a minor, but one forces an oath when (a claim is made against) a minor or hekdesh.

Hay: And these are things which one does not swear over, slaves, documents, lands, and hekdesh.  There is no kefel restitution by them and there is not restitution of four and five.  An unpaid guard doesn’t swear, and a paid guard doesn’t pay.  Rabi Shimon says, holy things which he is responsible for, he swears for them, and those which he isn’t responsible for, he doesn’t swear for.

Vav: Rabi Meir says, there are things which are on (attached to) the ground and they are not like land, and the Chachamim do not admit this to him.  How?  I delivered ten vines with fruit to you, and that one says, there were only five, Rabi Meir requires an oath, and the Chachamim say, anything attached to the ground is like the ground.  One does not swear except on something which is by size, weight, or number.  How?  I delivered a houseful (of grain) to you, (or) I delivered a pocketful to you, and that one says, I don’t know, but what you left, you take, he’s patur.  This (one) says, (the grain filled) up to the ledge, and this (one) says, until the window, he’s chayav.

Zayin: One who lends his friend on collateral and he lost the collateral, he (the lender) said to him, I lent you a sela and it (the collateral) was worth a shekel (half a sela), and the other says, not so, you lent me a sela and it was worth a sela, he’s patur.  (The lender says) I lent you a sela on it, and it was worth a shekel, and the other says, not so, you lent me a sela and it was worth three dinar (meaning he still owes a dinar) he’s chayav (to an oath).  You lent me a sela on it and it was worth two (sela), and the other one says, not so, rather, I lent you a sela on it, and it was worth a sela, he’s patur.  You lent me a sela on it and it was worth two, and the other one says, not so, rather I lent you a sela and it was worth five dinar, he’s chayav.  And who swears?  The one who the deposit is by him, for perhaps this one will swear and that one will take out the deposit (and have an easy way to invalidate him as a witness).

Perek Zayin

Aleph: All who swear from the torah swear and don’t pay.  These swear and take (money), a hired worker, one who was robbed, was wounded, whose opponent was suspected in his oath, and a shopkeeper with his ledger.  The hired worker how?  He said to him, give me my wage which I have in your hand, and he says, I gave it, and the other one says, you didn’t give me, he swears and takes.  Rabi Yehuda says, (he doesn’t pay) until there is in that case a bit of acknowledgement (of the claim).  How?  He said to him, give me my wage of fifty dinar that I have in your hand and he says, you got a golden dinar (twenty-five dinar).

Bet: One who was stolen from, how?  They testified about him that he entered someone else’s house to take a collateral without a right, he says, you took my vessel, and he says, I didn’t take it, behold this one may swear and take (what he claims was robbed from him).  Rabi Yehuda says, only when there is in that case a bit of acknowledgement.  How?  He said to him, you took two vessels and he says, I only took one.

Gimmel: One who was wounded how?  They testified about him that that he entered under his hand whole and exited wounded, and he said to him, you wounded me, and he says, I didn’t wound you, behold this one swears and takes.  Rabi Yehuda says, only when there is in that case a bit of acknowledgement.  How?  He said to him, you wounded me twice, and that one says, I only wounded you once.

Daled: And when his opponent is suspected about his oath how?  Whether the oath of testimony or the oath about a deposit, and even a vain oath.  If one of them was a gambler, usurer, pigeon stealer, or seller of shmitta produce, the one against him may swear and take.  If they were both suspected, the oath returns to its place (by whom it would normally be made) according to Rabi Yossi.  Rabi Meir says, they split it.

Hay: And a storekeeper based on his ledger how?  Not that he said to him, it is written in my ledger they you owe me two hundred zuz, rather that he said to him give my son two se’ah of wheat, give my workers small change worth a sela, and he says, I gave and they say we didn’t take, he swears and takes, and they swear and take.  Ben Nanas said, how?  These and these are coming to a vain oath!  Rather he takes without an oath and they take without an oath.  

Vav: He said to the storekeeper, give me a dinar of produce, and he gave it, he said, give me the dinar, and he said, I gave it to you, and you put it on the till, the homeowner must swear.  He gave him a dinar, and said to him, give me the produce, and he said, I gave it to you and you brought it home, the storekeeper must swear.  Rabi Yehuda says, whoever has the produce has the upper hand.  He said to the moneychanger, give me change for a dinar, and he gave him, he said to him, give me the dinar, he said to him, I gave it to you, and you put it on the till, the homeowner must swear.  He gave him the dinar, and said to him, give me the change, he said, I gave it to you, and you put it in your pocket, the moneychanger must swear.  Rabi Yehuda says, it is not the way of the moneychanger to give an issar until he takes a dinar.

Zayin: Just as they said, one who impairs her ktuba (says that only part of it was paid and wants the rest) does not collect except by an oath, and one witness testifies that she collected and she does not collect except by an oath, from property (which was designated for) captives and orphans she may not collect (as payment for her ktuba) except by an oath, and one who collects in her husband’s absence (from his estate) may not collect except by an oath.  So too orphans may not collect except by an oath, an oath that (they say) we didn’t instruct us or tell us and that we have not found among the documents of our father that this bill was collected (for these orphans).  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, even if the son was born after the death of the father, he may swear and take.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, if there are witnesses that the father said when he was going to die, this bill is not paid, he may take without an oath.

Chet: And these swear without a claim (even on suspicion), partners, sharecroppers, trustees, a woman who conducts business for the house, and a member of the household (who manages an inheritance).  One (of the above) says to him (who asks for an oath), why are you accusing me?  (He says,) I want you to swear to me, he’s chayav (to make the oath).  If partners or sharecroppers divided (their produce already), he cannot force him (the other) to swear.  If his oath was rolled (there is a concept that one can ‘roll’ an unnecessary oath into the language of a necessary oath and force one to take it) from another place, they roll it on everything.  And shvi’it cancels the oath.

Perek Chet

Aleph: There are four (types of) watchmen, an unpaid guard, a borrower, a paid guard, and a renter.  An unpaid guard swears (and exempts himself from paying if the object is not returned for whatever reason) on everything, and a borrower pays for everything.  A paid guard and a renter swear on something broken, captured, or dead, and pay for something lost or stolen.

Bet: He said to the unpaid guard, where is my ox, and he said it died, and it broke (was injured), was captured, was stolen, or was lost; it broke and it died, was captured, was stolen, or was lost; it was captured and it died, broke, was stolen, or was lost; it was stolen and it died, broke, was captured, or was lost; or it was lost and it died, broke, was captured, or was stolen, I make you swear and he says, amen, he’s patur (for he saved himself nothing by lying).

Gimmel: (The owner asked) where is my ox?  And he (the guard) said, I don’t know what you’re talking about, and it died, broke, was captured, was stolen, or was lost, I make you swear, and he says, amen, he’s patur.  Where is my ox?  He said, it was lost, I make you swear, and he says, amen, and witnesses testify that he ate it, he pays the principle.  If he admitted himself, he pays the principle, chomesh, and brings a korban asham.  Where is my ox, he said, it was stolen, I make you swear, and he says, amen, and witnesses testify that he himself stole it, he pays kefel.  If he admitted himself, he pays the principle, chomesh, and a korban asham.

Daled: If he said to someone in the shuk, where is my ox that you stole, and he says, I didn’t steal it, and witnesses testify that he stole it, he pays kefel.  If he slaughtered or sold it, he pays restitutions of four or five times.  If he saw witnesses approaching and he says, I stole it, but I didn’t slaughter or sell it, he only pays principle.

Hay: He said to a borrower, where is my ox?  He said, it died, and it broke, was captured, was stolen, or was lost; broke, and it died, was captured, was stolen, or was lost; was captured, and it died, broke, was stolen, or was lost; was stolen, and it died, broke, was captured, or was lost; or was lost, and it died, broke, was captured, or was stolen, I make you swear, and he says, amen, he’s patur (he has to pay either way).

Vav: Where is my ox?  And he said, I don’t know what you’re talking about, and it died, broke, was captured, was stolen, or was lost, I make you swear, and he says, amen, he’s chayav.  He said to a paid guard or a renter, where is my ox?  And he said, it died, and it broke or was captured; it broke and it died or was captured; it was captured, and it died or broke; it was stolen, and it was lost; or it was lost, and it was stolen, I make you swear, he says amen, and he’s patur.  It died, broke, or was captured, and it was stolen or lost, I make you swear, and he says, amen, he’s chayav.  It was lost or stolen and it died, broke, or was captured, I make you swear, he says, amen, he’s patur.  This is the general rule, (changing circumstances) from obligation to obligation, innocence to innocence, or innocence to obligation, he’s patur.  From obligation to innocence, he’s chayav.  This is the general rule, anyone who swears to make easier upon himself is chayav, and to make more stringent upon himself is patur.

Mesechet Eduyot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Shamay says, all women, their time is sufficient (from the time they saw their menstrual blood to consider things they touch tame).  Hillel says, from check to check (all things she touched from the time of her last clean check are tame), even many days.  Chachamim say, it is not like this one’s opinion or that one’s opinion, rather it is like from time to time (a one day period) if it less than from check to check, or from check to check if it is less than from time to time.  All women who have a set flow, their time (that it usually comes) is good enough for them.  One who has relations and uses a proof cloth (to check before and after) this is like a check and she takes the lesser of time-to-time and check to check.

Bet: Shamay says, from a kav (or more flour) you do challa, and Hillel says, from two kav.  Chachamim say, it is not like this one’s opinion or that one’s opinion, rather from a kav and a half one is chayav challa.  From when the measurements were increased (when they moved to Tzippori they increased the measurements from the Jerusalem ones) they said, five fourths (of a kav) are chayav.  Rabi Yossi says, five are patur, five and a bit are chayav.

Gimmel: Hillel says, a full hin (twelve log) of drawn water invalidates a mikva, (and he would have used the modern measurement of log) but one must speak in the in the language of his Rebbe.  And Shamay says, nine kav.  Chachamim say, not is not like the opinion of this or the opinion of that.  Rather, it was when two weavers came from the Ashpot Gate in Yerushalayim and testified in the name of Shemaya and Avtalyon (Hillel and Shamay’s teachers) three log of drawn water invalidate a mikva, and the Chachamim stood up their words.

Daled: And why do they mention the opinions of Hillel and Shamay purposelessly?  To teach future generations that a person does not stand on their opinion (even when they are ruled against), for behold, the fathers of the world did not stand on their words.

Hay: And why do they mention the opinion of an individual among the many, since the ruling is only like the many?  For if the court sees (merit in) the opinion of the individual it will rely upon him, for a court cannot nullify the opinion of its fellow court until it is greater in number and wisdom.  If it was greater in wisdom but not number, or number or not wisdom, it cannot nullify its opinion, until it is greater in wisdom and in number.

Vav: Rabi Yehuda said, if so, why do we mention the opinion of the individual among the many which is nullified?  For if a person says, I accept like this, he will say to him, you heard like the opinion of so and so (who we don’t hold by).

Zayin: Beit Shamay says, a rova of bones is (considered a significant piece) from the bones (and therefore makes tame ohel), whether from two (bones) or from three.  And Beit Hillel says, a rova of bones from the corpse (is enough) from the majority of the build or from a majority of the number (the bones are a majority of the organs, though both are miscounted based on modern science).  Shamay says, even one bone (which is of sufficient size is counted).

Chet: Truma vetches, Beit Shamay says, one soaks and rubs (on skin) while tahor, and feeds (to animals) while tame.  Beit Hillel says, one soaks while tahor, and one rubs or feeds while tame.  Shamay says, they should be eaten dry.  Rabi Akiva says, all of their actions may be done while tame.

Tet: One who exchanges (for) a sela from ma’aser sheni change, Beit Shamay says, for a whole sela (he exchanges) the change.  Beit Hillel says, a shekel of silver and a shekel of change (is what he can buy, and he will need the change to buy food).  Rabi Meir says, one may not redeem (a mix of) money and produce on money, and the Chachamim allow.

Yud: One who exchanges a sela of ma’aser sheni in Yerushalayim, Beit Shamay says, the whole sela (he can exchange for change) and Beit Hillel says, half silver, half copper.  Ones who judge before the Chachamim say, three silver dinar and one dinar of copper.  Rabi Akiva says, three silver dinar and (the last dinar) one quarter copper.  Rabi Tarfon says, four silver aspers (some part of the last dinar).  Shamay says, let him leave the money in a shop and eat its equivalent.

Yud Aleph: The chair of a bride from which the coverings have been removed (and may or may not be suitable for sitting), Beit Shamay (says if it was touched by a zav or zava) it is tame, and Beit Hillel say it is tahor.  Shamay says, even the framework of the chair is tame.  A chair which was attached to a kneading trough, Beit Shamay make tame, and Beit Hillel make tahor.  Shamay says, even a chair which is made in it.

Yud Bet: These are things which Beit Hillel returned to agree with the opinion of Beit Shamay.  A woman who comes from a sea (overseas) nation and says, my husband died, she may marry, (or) my husband died, she gets yibum.  And Beit Hillel says, we only heard from when she came from the harvest (where she says he died while out to harvest).  Beit Shamay said to them, whether coming from the harvest, the olives, or a sea nation, they only said harvest because it was the current case.  Beit Hillel returned and admitted like Beit Shamay.  Beit Shamay says, the may get marry and she takes her ktuba.  Beit Hillel says, she may get marry but not take her ktuba.  Beit Shamay said to them, you allowed the strict intercourse, but you won’t allow the lax money?  Beit Hillel said to them, we have found that the brothers may not inherit the land based on her testimony.  Beit Shamay said to them, and don’t we learn from the document of the ktuba that he writes for her, that if she marries another, she may take what is written for her.  Beit Hillel returned to agree with the opinion of Beit Shamay.

Yud Gimmel: One who is half slave half freedman works for his master one day and himself one day, according to Beit Hillel.  Beit Shamay said to them, you fixed it for the master, but for him you haven’t fixed it, he cannot marry a maidservant and he cannot marry a freedman (for each is forbidden to half of him), should he refrain (from getting married)?  And behold, wasn’t the world only created for being fruitful and multiplying, as it says, “not wasteful did He create it, to be inhabited He fashioned it.”  Rather, for the purpose of the public interest, they force his master and make him a freedman, and he rights a bill for half of his value.  Beit Hillel returned to agree with the opinion of Beit Shamay.

Yud Daled: An earthenware vessel (if tahor and sealed) protects everything (from tuma) according to Beit Hillel.  And Beit Shamay says, it only protects food, drink, and earthenware vessels.  Beit Hillel said to them, why?  Beit Shamay said to them, because it is tame (if owned) by an am ha’aretz, and a tame vessel does not make a barrier.  Beit Hillel said to them, and didn’t you make food and drink in it tahor?  Beit Shamay said to them, when we made the food and drink tahor, we made it itself tahor, but when you made the vessel tahor, you made this and that tahor.  Beit Hillel returned to agree with the opinion of Beit Shamay.

Perek Bet

Aleph: Rabi Chanina a sgan of the kohanim testified about four things, in all their days the kohanim never hesitated from burning meat which became tame from a contaminated object with meat which became tame from a source of tuma, even though they are adding tuma on tuma.  Rabi Akiva added, in all their days the kohanim they didn’t hesitate from burning the oil which became invalid from a person who immersed that day with candles which became tame with the tuma of a corpse, even though they were adding tuma on tuma.

Bet: Rabi Chanina a sgan of the kohanim said, in all my days, I never saw a hid going out to the place of burning.  Rabi Akiva said, from his words we learned that one who flays a bechor and finds it to be tref (internally torn) that the kohanim would derive benefit from the hide.  And the Chachamim say, (saying) I didn’t see isn’t a proof, rather it does go out to the place of burning.

Gimmel: He also testified about a small village which was near Yerushalayim and there was one elder there he would lend to all the people of the village and would write in his handwriting and others would sign, and the story came before the Chachamim and they allowed it.  According to their ways you can learn that a woman can write her own get, and a man may write his own receipt (proving he has paid the ktuba), for the enactment of the get is only with its signing.  And (he testified) on a needle found in the meat, for the knife and the hands are tahor and the meat is tame, but if it is found in the excrement (of the animal), all is tahor.

Daled: Three things Rabi Yishma’el said before the Chachamim in Kerem Beyavne, about a beaten egg that is put on truma vegetables, is it a connection (for becoming tame, so even in a situation where the egg could not become tame, the vegetables could), but if it was like a hat (the egg puffed and there was space between it and the vegetables) it is not a connection.  And about a stalk which was in the harvest (but was missed by the harvesters) and its head reaches the standing crop (when bent) it belongs to the homeowner, and if not, behold it is of the poor; and about a small garden which is surrounded by a row of trellised vines, if it has enough (space) for a harvester and his basket on this side, and enough for a harvester and his basket on that side, it may be planted, and if not, it may not be planted.

Hay: Three things were said before Rabi Yishma’el and he didn’t say either an issur or a heter, and Rabi Yehoshua ben Mattia expounded them.  One who opened a pussy wound on Shabbat, if it is to make the opening, he’s chayav, and if to get out the pus, he’s patur.  And on one who traps a snake on Shabbat, if he is dealing that it shouldn’t bite him, he’s patur, but if for medicine, he’s chayav.  And on (the status of accepting tuma of unopened) Ironion pots (made as a clay ball and then, once dry, the top is removed), that they are tahor in a tent (the same roof) with a dead body, and tame if carried by a zav.  Rabi Eliezer ben Tzadok says, even when carried by a zav they are tahor, for their work has not been finished.

Vav: Rabi Yishma’el said three things and Rabi Akiva did not agree with him, that garlic, unripe grapes, and unripe wheat which he crushed that day (erev Shabbat, for the juices) for Rabi Yishma’el says he may (have the juice) if it finished from when it gets dark (even if the juice still flows out on Shabbat) and Rabi Akiva says, he may not finish it.

Zayin: Three things they said before Rabi Akiva, two in the name of Rabi Eliezer, and one in the name of Rabi Yehoshua.  The two in the name of Rabi Eliezer, that a woman may go out (on Shabbat) with a ‘city of gold’ (a brooch which is carved like Yerushalayim) and that pigeon racers are invalid for testimony.  And the one in the name of Rabi Yehoshua, if a sheretz (impure animal) is in the mouth of a rat and it walks on loaves of truma, it’s a doubt whether it touched or didn’t touch, the doubt is tahor.

Chet: Rabi Akiva said three, things, on two they agreed with him, and on one they didn’t agree with him.  On a limeworker’s sandal (used while working with the lime) that it accepts midras tuma.  And on the remnants of an oven four (tfachim are needed to be considered a large enough piece of the oven to accept tuma), for they would say three, and they agreed with him (on both).  And the one that they didn’t agree with him, on a chair (the seat of which was made from three slats) which two of its coverings (slats) were removed, one next to the other, that Rabi Akiva (allows to) make tame, and the Chachamim make tahor.

Tet: He used to say, the father merits for the son beauty, strength, wealth, wisdom, (length of) years, and the number of generations before him, and he is the end (this phrase is of unclear meaning), as it says, “(He) called the generations already.”  Even though it says, “and they will work them and make them suffer four hundred years,” and it says, “and the fourth generation will return here,” (showing that forefathers’ merits were not necessarily enough to prevent slavery).

Yud: He also used to say five things were (the length of) twelve months, the judgment of the generation of the flood was twelve months, the judgment of Iyov was twelve months, the judgment of the Egyptians (the plagues) was twelve months, the judgment of Gog and Magog will come and be twelve months, and the judgment of the wicked in Hell is twelve months, as it says, “and it will be from a new moon to the (same) new moon.”  Rabi Yochanan ben Nuri says, from Pesach to Shavuot, as it says, “from one Shabbat to another (a reference to Shavuot).”

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: All things which (are enough of a corpse) to make tame in a tent which were divided (and were therefore not enough each to be the full amount needed to make tame, such as a kzayit of a corpse’s flesh which was split in half) and were brought into the house, Rabi Dosa ben Harkinas makes tahor, and Chachamim make tame.  How?  One who touches in two halves of a kzayit from a nevela (animal which died naturally) and with a dead body, one who touches a half of a kzayit and makes a tent over half a kzayit, or touches a half a kzayit and half a kzayit makes a tent over him (is above him), or two halves of a kzayit make a tent above him, or he makes a tent above half a kzayit and half a kzayit makes a tent above him, Rabi Dosa ben Harkinas makes tahor and the Chachamim make tame.  But one who touches half a kzayit and another thing makes a tent on him and half a kzayit, or he makes a tent on half a kzayit and another thing makes a tent on him and on half a kzayit, he’s tahor.  Rabi Meir says, even in this Rabi Dosa ben Harkanya makes tahor and the Chachamim make tame, (for the Chachamim hold that) everything is tame, except for touching (half a kzayit) while carrying (half a kzayit but not touching it) and carrying while making a tent.  This is the general rule, everything which is from one name (contact, carrying, or ohel, forming a tent) is tame, from two names, is tahor.

Bet: Food which is separated (such that no piece is big enough to make any others tame) does not combine according to Rabi Dosa ben Harkanya, and Chachamim say it does combine.  One may redeem ma’aser sheni on unstamped coins, according to Rabi Dosa, and Chachamim say, one may not redeem.  One immerses his hands for a chatat according to Rabi Dosa, and Chachamim say, if his hands became tame, his body became tame.

Gimmel: The insides of watermelon (seeds)and extra greens of truma, Rabi Dosa allows for zarim and Chachamim prohibit.  Five ewes each shorn a maneh and a half (of wool) is chayav in the first shearings (which go to the kohen).  Chachamim say, five ewes regardless.

Daled: All mats (with a lip) become tame met (because the lip makes them a vessel) according to Rabi Dosa, and Chachamim say, (they accept even) midras (tuma).  All woven nets are tahor except of a girdle according to Rabi Dosa, and Chachamim say they are all tame except of wool.

Hay: A sling with a woven pouch is tame, and with leather, Rabi Dosa ben Harkanya makes tahor, and Chachamim make tame.  If its finger hole was torn it is tahor (since it is no longer a usable vessel), and if the hand strap (which hold the hand in place while slinging) it is tame (for it can still be used).

Vav: A captive woman (who was the wife of a kohen) may eat truma (which assumes she was not raped), according to Rabi Dosa, and Chachamim say, there are captive women who may eat and there are captive women who may not eat.  How?  A woman who says, I was captured and I am tahor she may eat, for the mouth which forbade is the mouth which allowed (if one’s testimony forbids something, and by extension permits something, it is believed).  And if there are witnesses that she was taken captive, and she says, I am pure, she does not eat.

Zayin: Four doubts Rabi Yehoshua makes tame and Chachamim make tahor.  How?  The tame one (a metzora) stands (under an ohel) and the tahor passes (by, and it is not sure whether he was under the ohel or not), the tahor stands and the tame passes, there is tuma (a tame object) in a private domain and tahara (a similar but tahor object) in the public domain (and we are not sure which one he touched), or there is tahora in the private domain and tuma in the public domain, and it is a doubt if he touched, a doubt if he didn’t touch, a doubt if he had ohel, a doubt if he didn’t have ohel, a doubt if he shifted (the tame object), a doubt if he didn’t shift, Rabi Yehoshua makes tame and Chachamim make tahor.

Chet: Three things Rabi Tzadok makes tame and Chachamim make tahor, the ail of a money changer (used for the scales), the chest of a miller (used to bring ground grain to the shuk), and the nail of a sundial (which casts the shadow), Rabi Tzadok makes tame and Chachamim make tahor.

Tet: Four things Raban Gamliel makes tame and Chachamim make tahor, the covering of panniers (large basket-like vessels) of homeowners, the hangers for metal combs, unfinished metal vessels, and a large (earthenware) plate split into two parts.  And the Chachamim admit to Raban Gamliel that a large plate which split into two, one large and one small, the large is tame and the small is tahor.

Yud: In three things Raban Gamliel was stringent according the opinion of Beit Shamay, one may not insulate hot food from Yom Tov for Shabbat, one may not set a menorah up on Yom Tov, and one may not bake breads (on Yom Tov) in large loaves but rather thin rolls.  Raban Gamliel said, in the days of my father’s house they would not bake large loaves but rather thin rolls.  They said to him, what was done in your father’s house, they would be stringent on themselves and lenient on all yisra’el, to bake breads in large loaves and thick cakes.

Yud Aleph: Also he says three things to be lenient, one may sweep between beds, on may lay spices (on the fire as a perfumant) on Yom Tov, and one may prepare a mekulas goat (a lamb roasted whole) on the night of Pesach, and the Chachamim forbid.

Yud Bet: Three things Rabi Elazar ben Azarya allows and Chachamim forbid, his cow may go out with a strap between its horns, one may comb an animal on Yom Tov, and one may grind pepper in its mill.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may not comb an animal on Yom Tov since it makes a wound, but one may brush.  And Chachamim say, one may not comb, (and one may) even not brush.

Perek Daled

Aleph: These are things from the leniencies of Beit Shamay and the stringencies of Beit Hillel.  An egg which was laid on Yom Tov, Beit Shamay says it may be eaten, and Beit Hillel says it may not be eaten.  Beit Shamay says, leavening (the amount which is assur to be used on Pesach) is a kzayit and chametz by a drying date, and Beit Hillel says, both a kzayit.

Bet: An animal born on Yom Tov, all agree that it is mutar.  And a chick which hatched from an egg, all agree that it is assur.  One who slaughters an animal or fowl on Yom Tov, Beit Shamay says, he may dig with a shovel and cover (the blood), and Beit Hillel says, he shall not slaughter unless he has dirt ready from that day.  And they admit, that if he slaughtered he should dig with a shovel and cover, for ashes of a stove (he can use because) they are considered prepared.

Gimmel: Beit Shamay says if you make something hefker for the poor, it’s hefker.  Beit Hillel says it’s only hefker if you make it even for rich people, like shmitta.  If all of the bundles are a kav and one is four kabim and you forget it, Beit Shamay says it’s not shichicha, and Beit Hillel says it is.

Daled: A heap close to an uncemented wall, a pile of grain, cattle, vessels, and he forgot it, Beit Shamay says it isn’t shichicha and Beit Hillel says it is.

Hay: Kerem revai (a vineyard in its fourth year), Beit Shamay says, it has no chomesh (a fifth added to produce which needs to be eaten in Yerushalayim redeemed on money) and it has not biur (removal from the house in the shmitta year after the produce goes out of season).  Beit Hillel says, It has chomesh and it has biur.  Beit Shamay says, it has peret (grapes which fell from the vine go to the poor) and olelet (clusters which are not fully developed are left for the poor), and the poor redeem for themselves (what they collected on money) and Beit Hillel says, it all goes to the winepress.

Vav: A barrel of pickled olives, Beit Shamay says, he doesn’t have to make a hole (to let the brine flow out, showing its unimportance such that it will not make the olives tame) and Beit Hillel says, he needs to make a hole.  And they agree that if he made a hole and the dregs stopped it, it is tahor.  One who anoints (rubs his skin with) tahor oil and becomes tame, and went down and immersed, Beit Shamay says, even thought it (the oil) still drips off of him it is tahor and Beit Hillel says, (it is tahor only if there is only enough) to anoint a small limb (the pinky).  And if the oil was tame from the start, Beit Shamay says, enough to anoint a small limb, and Beit Hillel says, a moist liquid (if there is enough for a person’s hand to feel moist when that much is rubbed on it).  Rabi Yehuda says in the name of Beit Hillel it is moist and makes moist.

Zayin: A woman can be engaged by a dinar or the value of a dinar, according to Beit Shamay and Beit Hillel say with a pruta or the value of a pruta.  And how much is a pruta?  One eighth of an Italian issar.  Beit Shamay says, he dismisses his wife with an old get, and Beit Hillel forbids it.  What is an old get?  All which he was alone with her after it (the get) was written for her.  One who divorces his wife and she stays with him in an in, Beit Shamay says, she does not need a second get from him, and Beit Hillel says, she needs a second get from him.  When?  When they divorced from marriage, but if the divorced from engagement she doesn’t need a second get from him for he is not haughty (presumptuous) with him.

Chet: Beit Shamay allows the rivals (of the prohibited women) to the brothers (for yibum or chalitza), and Beit Hillel prohibits.  If they did chalitza, Beit Shamay makes invalid for marrying kohanim (who may not marry a chalitza), and Beit Hillel makes valid (for their chalitza was invalid).  If they did yibum, Beit Shamay validates and Beit Hillel invalidates.  Even though these (Beit Hillel) prohibit (yibum to rivals) and these (Beit Shamay) allow, these (Beit Shamay) invalidate (for marriage after such a yibum) and these (Beit Hillel) validate, Beit Shamay did not refrain from marrying the women of Beit Hillel, and Beit Hillel did not refrain from marrying the women of Beit Shamay.  All (matters of) tahor and tame (by vessels) that these would make tahor and these would make tame they did not refrain from making teharot based on them (they would trust that the other group would only lend them vessels which the borrowers themselves would consider tahor, even though the lender might not agree with the other’s views).

Tet: Three brothers, two of them are married to two sisters, and the third is unmarried.  One of those married to the sisters died, and the unmarried one married her by a ma’amar (monetarily or by document without consummating the marriage) and then the other died, Beit Shamay says, his wife is with him and that one will be exempt because of (the fact that she is) the sister of his wife.  Beit Hillel says, he removes his wife with a get (because she is forbidden as the sister of a zkuka, one who needs yibum) and chalitza, and the sister of his brother with chalitza.  This is what they said, woe to him on his wife and woe to him on his brother’s wife.

Yud: One who vows (against) his wife (meaning) having sex (with her), Beit Shamay says, two weeks (after which the husband must divorce her and pay her ktuba).  Beit Hillel says one week.  One who miscarried the night of the eighty-first (day), Beit Shamay exempt from a korban and Beit Hillel require.  A linen cloak with tzitzit, Beit Shamay exempt and Beit Hillel require.  A large basket for Shabbat (which one wants to snack from before Shabbat), Beit Shamay holds it’s patur, and Beit Hillel hold it’s chayav.

Yud Aleph: One who vowed for an extended nezirut (a vow against certain impurities which he extended beyond the thirty day minimum) and he finished his nezirut, and afterwards came to Israel (the only place his vow can really be fulfilled), Beit Shamay says, he is a nazir for thirty days (the minimum) and Beit Hillel says he is a nazir from the start.  One who had two groups of witnesses testifying about him, one testifying that he vowed two (thirty day periods) and one testifying that he vowed five, Beit Shamay says, the testimony is divided and there is no nezirut, and Beit Hillel says, two are included in five, he should be a nazir two.

Yud Bet: One who is lying under the crack (in a portico the ceiling of which is completely cracked, and on one side there is a dead body and on the other side there are vessels), Beit Shamay says, he does not bring the tuma (to the vessels, acting as a bridge for the gap) and Beit Hillel says a man is hollow, and the upper side (of the person acts as a tent) and brings the tuma.

Perek Hay

Aleph: Rabi Yehuda says, there are six things which are leniencies of Beit Shamay and stringencies of Beit Hillel, the blood of nevelot (animals which died of natural causes) Beit Shamay makes tahor and Beit Hillel makes tame.  The egg of a nevela, if (things formed) like it are sold in the shuk it is allowed and if not, it is assur, according to Beit Shamay.  Beit Hillel prohibits (either way).  And they admit by the egg of a trefa (an animal which after slaughtering was found to be unfit) that it is assur, since it grew in something assur.  (Menstrual)  blood of a non-Jew, and the purity blood of a metzora’at (that she sees after the allotted amount of time after she gives birth passes, making her tahor again) Beit Shamay make tahor, and Beit Hillel say, it is like her spit and urine (decreed tame derabanan).  One may eat the produce of shvi’it with thanks or without thanks.  Beit Hillel says, one does not eat except with thanks (such that people will talk to the owner, so if they accidentally come in one of the other six years the owner will tell them).  A flask (which had a hole in it) Beit Shamay says it is tied up and stays (usable, only them can it become tame), and Beit Hillel says (it can become tame) even not tied.

Bet: Rabi Yossi says, six things from the leniencies of Beit Shamay and the stringencies of Beit Hillel, chicken may be raised on a table with cheese but is not eaten (together) according to Beit Shamay, and Beit Hillel says, it is not raised and it is not eaten.  One may give truma of olives on oil and grapes on wine according to Beit Shamay, and Beit Hillel says, one may not give truma (in such a fashion).  One who sows (within) four amot (of vines) in a vineyard, Beit Shamay says, he separated one row (of vines which he may not use because of kilayim) and Beit Hillel says, he separated two rows.  Me’isa (a type of dough) Beit Shamay exempt (from taking challa) and Beit Hillel require.  One may immerse in a torrent (of flowing water as long as there is the sufficient quantity of water in the entire stream) according to Beit Shamay, and Beit Hillel says, one does not immerse.  A convert who converted the night of Pesach, Beit Shamay says, he immerses and eats his (korban) pesach that night, and Beit Hillel says, one who separates from his foreskin is like one who separates from a grave (has seven days of tuma as if he touched a grave).

Gimmel: Rabi Yishma’el says, three things from the leniencies of Beit Shamay and the stringencies of Beit Hillel, Kohelet (Ecclesiastes) does not make the hands tame (if one touches the scroll) according to Beit Shamay and Beit Hillel says it does.  The waters of sin (water with the ashes of the red heifer which serves to purify) which have done their job, Beit Shamay make tahor and Beit Hillel make tame.  Black cumin, Beit Shamay make tahor (it can never become tame, for it is not considered food) and Beit Hillel make tame (say it can become tame) and so too for ma’asrot (where it only requires if considered a food).

Daled: Rabi Eliezer says, two things from the leniencies of Beit Shamay and the stringencies of Beit Hillel, the blood of a woman who gave birth but did not immerse, Beit Shamay says it is like her spit and urine (which makes moist things tame), and Beit Hillel says, it makes moist and dry tame.  And they agree about one who gave birth while a zava, that it (the blood) make moist and dry tame.

Hay: Four brothers, two of them married two sisters, and those married to the sisters died, behold these (women) get chalitza and not yibum, and if they went ahead and married, they exit (the marriage).  Rabi Eliezer says, Beit Shamay says, they stand (married), and Beit Hillel says, they exit (from the marriage).

Vav: Akavia ben Mahalalel testified to four things.  They (the Chachamim) said to him, Akavia, return in the four things you used to say, and we will make you the head of the court for Yisra’el.  He said to them, it is better for me to be called insane all my days and not for one hour wicked in the before Hashem, such that they will not say, for the position he returned (from his beliefs).  He would make leftover hair (hair on a metzora which stayed over from one affliction, which after clearing was replaced by another bright spot) tame (allow it to be considered, making the person a metzora again) and (make tame) yellowish blood (if a woman has an emission of yellowish blood, he would declare it a menstrual flow and her a nidda), and the Chachamim would make it (declare it) tahor.  He would allow the hair of a blemished bechor (firstborn animal, which was given to a kohen, and the hair of which could not be taken from the animal when it was alive) that he (the kohen) left in a window (if the hair fell out, a kohen might place it in a window to save) and after he slaughtered it (use the hair, and this was acceptable according to Akavia ben Mahalalel), and the Chachamim would prohibit.  He would say, one does not give to drink (the waters of a sota) a convert or a freed maidservant, and Chachamim said, they would give to drink.  They said to him, there was a case of Karkemit (who was) a freed maidservant who was in Yerushalayim, and Shmaya and Avtalyon gave her to drink.  He said to them, they gave her to drink as an example (to show the high level of converts, for they were also converts).  And the excommunicated him, and he died in excommunication, and the court stoned his coffin.  Rabi Yehuda said, God forbid that Akavia was excommunicated, for the courtyard (of the Beit Hamikdash) was not locked (which occurred when everyone came in for the festival) before any man from Yisra’el with the wisdom and fear of sin like Akavia ben Mehalalel (meaning none paralleled him in these traits).  And who did they excommunicate?  Eliezer ben Chanoch, for he questioned making the hands tahor (the ruling of the Chachamim that certain things make the hands tame but not the rest of the body).  And when he died, the court sent and rested a rock on his coffin, which teaches that all who are excommunicated and die in excommunication they stone his coffin.

Zayin: When he (Akavia ben Mehalalel) died, he said to his son, my son, return for you in the four things I used to say.  He (the son) said to him, why didn’t you return for yourself?  He said (back) to him, I heard from the mouth of the many, and they heard from the mouth of the many, I stood on what I heard, and they stood on what they heard.  But you heard from the mouth of one and from the mouth of the many, it is better to leave the words of one and grasp the words of the many.  He said to him, father, commend me to your friends (make them draw me in) and he said, I will not commend.  He (the son) said to him, did you find fault in me?  He said to him, not, your actions will draw you close or your actions will distance you.

Perek Vav

Aleph: Rabi Yehuda ben Bava testified about five things, that (female, orphan) minors may refuse (contracted marriage), that we allow a woman to marry based on one witness (saying that her husband died overseas), a rooster was killed in Yerushalayim for killing a person, that forty day old (or older) wine (exclusively) is made as a libation on the mizbe’ach, and on the (korban) tamid of the morning, that it is offered at four hours (after the start of the day).

Bet: Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Nechunya ben Elinatan a man from Kfar Habavli testified that the organ of a corpse is tame, for Rabi Eliezer says, they only said (it was tame) about a organ from the living.  They said to him, isn’t it a kal vechomer.  Just as from the living who is pure, an organ separated from him is tame, a corpse, which is tame, shouldn’t it be that an organ separated from it is tame.  He said to them, they only said it about the organ of the living.  And another thing which the tuma of the living is greater than the tuma of the dead, for the living (who is a zav) makes a couch and seat under him (even if he does not touch them, tame to such a point that) it makes a person tame and it makes clothes tame, and on top of him (he makes) a shelf (tame) to make food and drinks tame, which a corpse does not make tame.

Gimmel: A kzayit of flesh which separates from an organ from the living, Rabi Eliezer make tame and Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Nechunya make tahor.  Bone the size of a grain of barley which separates from an organ from the living, Rabi Nechunya makes tame and Rabi Eliezer and Rabi Yehoshua make tahor.  They said to Rabi Eliezer, what did you see (that made you decide) to make a kzayit of flesh which separates from an organ from the living tame?  We have found that an organ from the living is like a whole corpse, just as a corpse (where) a kzayit of flesh which separated from it is tame, so too an organ from the living, a kzayit from it is tame.  They said to him, no, if you made a kzayit of flesh which separates from a corpse tame, so too you made bone the size of a grain of barley tame, how do you make a kzayit of flesh which separates from an organ from the living tame, for you make a bone the size of a barley grain from it tahor (we see that he does not hold an organ from the living and a corpse to be the same)?  They said to Rabi Nechunya, what did you see to make bone the size of a grain of barley from an organ from the living tame?  He said to them, we found that an organ from the living is like a whole corpse, just as the corpse, bone the size of a grain of barley which is separated from it is tame, also an organ from the living bone the size of a grain of barley will be tame.  They said to him, no, if you make bone the size of a grain of barley which separates from a corpse tame, and so too you make a kzayit of flesh which is separated from it tame, how do make bone the size of a grain of barley which separates from an organ from the living tame and also make a kzayit of flesh which separates from it tahor?  They said to Rabi Eliezer, what did you see to make you disagree with your own opinion?  Either (make) tame in both or tahor in both.  He said to them, the tuma of the flesh is greater than the tuma of the bones, for the flesh works by nevelot and sheratzim (flesh of these classes of makes things tame) which we don’t have by bones.  Another thing, an organ which has on it enough flesh (to be functional, even if it is not a kzayit) makes tame by touching, carrying, and making a tent (with it), if it is missing flesh, it is tame, and if it is missing bones, it is tahor.  They said to Rabi Nechunya, what did you see to make you disagree with your own opinion?  Either (make) tame in both or tahor in both.  He said to them, the tuma of bones is greater than the tuma of flesh, for flesh which separates from the living is tahor, and an organ which separates from it and it is in healthy condition is tame (for it contains bone).  Another thing, a kzayit of flesh makes tame in touching, carrying, and making a tent and most of the bones (of a corpse) makes tame with touching, carrying, and making a tent, if (the full amount of) flesh is missing, it’s tahor, but if most of the bones are missing, even though it is tahor from making tame with a tent (meaning it does not make tame by making a tent) it makes tame by touching and carrying.  Another thing, any flesh of the dead which is less than a kzayit is tahor, most of its structure or its number even if they do not have a rova (a measurement) they make tame.  They said to Rabi Yehoshua, what you see to make them both tahor?  He said to them, no, if you said by a corpse which has a majority, a rova, and decayed matter, will you say by the living which does not have a majority, a rova, or decayed matter?

Perek Zayin

Aleph: Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Tzadok testified about redeeming the firstborn of a donkey (with a lamb, and the lamb) died, that the kohen (who would normally get the lamb) has nothing, for Rabi Eliezer says, they (the owners) are responsible for it like the five sla’im of (redeeming of a firstborn) son.  And the Chachamim say, they are not responsible for it, rather it is like the redeeming of ma’aser sheni.

Bet: Rabi Tzadok testified about the brine of tame (impure) grasshoppers that it is tahor, for there is an original mishna, tame grasshoppers which were pickled with tahor grasshopper, they did not make their brine pasul.

Gimmel: Rabi Tzadok testified about flowing water (which does not need to collect in one place to make a mikva) which were greater than dripping waters (which do need to collect in one area) that they are valid.  There was a case (like this) in Birat Hapilya, and the case came before the Chachamim and the validated it.

Daled: Rabi Tzadok testified about flowing water which one channeled (making a mikva) with nut leaves (the outer, green shells) that they are valid.  There was a case (like this) in Ahalya and the case came before the gazit chamber (the Sanhedrin) and they validated it.

Hay: Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Yakim a man of Hadar testified about a jar of chatat (ashes of the red heifer) which was placed on a sheretz, that it is tame, for Rabi Eliezer makes it tahor.  Rabi Papis testified on one who made two nazir vows, for if he shaves for the first on the thirtieth day (he would shave on the thirtieth day to end his first nezirut) that he shave the second on the sixtieth day, and if on the fifty-ninth day, he’s yotze, for the thirtieth day is counted in the number (of the second nezirut).

Vav: Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Papis testified about a child of a shlamim is brought as a shlamim, for Rabi Eliezer says that the child of a shlamim is not brought as a shlamim.  And Chachamim say, it is brought.  Rabi Papis said, I testify that we have a cow for the shlamim offering and we ate it on Pesach, and we ate its child as a shlamim on Sukkot.

Zayin: They testified about the board of bakers (on which bakers arrange breads before baking) that they can become tame, for Rabi Eliezer makes them tahor.  They testified that an oven which one cut into layers (of bricks) and put sand between each layer that can be tam, for Rabi Eliezer makes it tahor.  They testified that they could make the year a leap year in all of Adar, for people used to say, (only) until Purim.  They testified that they could make the year a leap year conditionally (without the approval of the head of the Sanhedrin if he isn’t there, which he can then nullify).  And there was a case with Raban Gamliel who went to get permission from the governor in Syria and he was delayed in coming, and the make the year a leap year conditionally, if Raban Gamliel wanted.  And when he came he said, I want, and they found the year was a leap year.

Chet: Menachem ben Signai testified about the rim (which was an added barrier made of clay) of the pot of the olive boilers can be tame, and that of the dyers is tahor, for they used to say the opposite way.

Tet: Rabi Nechunya ben Gudgeda testified about a deaf-dumb woman whose father married her off, that she exits (the marriage) with a get (which she, and not her father, receives), and about a minor bat yisra’el who married a kohen, that she eats truma.  And if she died, her husband inherits her.  And (he testified) about a stolen beam which is built into the palace, that he (the thief) must give its value (and not the beam itself), and about a stolen chatat (a stolen animal used for a chatat), that the public is unaware of, that it does atone, because of the sake of the mizbe’ach (so people are not over-careful when bringing korbanot).

Perek Chet

Aleph: Rabi Yehoshua ben Bteira testified about the blood of nevelot that it is tahor.  Rabi Shimon ben Bteira testified about the ashes of a chatat part of which touched something tame that it made the whole thing (ashes) tame.  Rabi Akiva added the fine flour (brought as a mincha), incense, frankincense, and coals which a tvul yom (one who immersed that day to purify himself) touched part of, he invalidated all of it.

Bet: Rabi Yehuda ben Bava and Rabi Yehuda Hakohen testified about a minor bat yisra’el who married a kohen that she eats truma since she entered the chupa (bridal canopy) even though she has not had sex with him.  Rabi Yossi Hakohen and Rabi Zachariah ben Hakatzav testified about a baby which was taken as a pledge (against a loan by non-Jews) in Ashkalon, and her family (who were kohanim) distanced her (would not let her marry a kohen) and her witnesses (who testified she was left as a pledge) testify for her that she was not concealed and she was not defiled.  The Chachamim said to them, if you believe she was taken as a pledge, believe that she was not concealed and not defiled, and if you don’t believe that she wasn’t concealed and wasn’t defiled, don’t believe that she was taken as a pledge.

Gimmel: Rabi Yehoshua and Rabi Yehuda ben Bteira testified about the widow of an isah (a family of kohanim in which one of the men married a woman who it is unclear whether she was a divorcee or a widow) that she is kosher for kohanim (for if she married a chalal, even as a widow she is assur to kohanim), the isah (family)is kosher (to testify whether she is) tahor or tame (has even been defiled or not), and to distance and draw near (decide whether a girl was defiled or not).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel said, we received your testimony but what should we do, since Raban Yochanan ben Zakai decreed not to set up courts for this (and since we can’t really decide) the kohanim listen to you to distance, but not to draw near.

Daled: Rabi Yossi ben Yoezer a man of Tzrara testified about ayal kamtza (a species of locust) that it is kosher, the liquid (blood which flows out of) the slaughterhouse (in the Beit Hamikdash that it is (always) tahor, and that (in a public place only) a person who touches a dead body (and not anyone in the area) becomes tame.  And (because of these rulings) they called him Yossi the permitter.

Hay: Rabi Akiva testified in the name of Nechemia a man of Beit Dli that one may marry a woman based on (only) one witness (testifying that her husband died overseas).  Rabi Yehoshua testified about bones which were found in a woodshed (in the woman’s courtyard in the Beit Hamikdash), the Chachamim said, he takes bone by bone and everything (is presumed) tahor.  

Vav: Rabi Eliezer says, I heard that when they were building the sanctuary they made hangings (surrounding curtains) for the sanctuary and hanging for the courtyards, except that they built the sanctuary from outside (inward), and in the courtyard they build from inside.  Rabi Yehoshua said, I heard that they would offer (korbanot in the place of the Beit Hamikdash) even though there is not house (Beit Hamikdash), and they would eat the holy of holies even though there are no hangings (within which these korbanot were eaten) and (they would eat) lightly holy things and ma’aser sheni (which had to be eaten in Yerushalayim) even though there was no wall, for the holiness of the first (Beit Hamikdash) made holy for its time and for the future.

Zayin: Rabi Yehoshua said, I got (a tradition) from Raban Yochanan ben Zakai for hear from his rav, and his rav from his rav, a halacha to Moshe from Sinai, that Eliyahu will not come to make tame and tahor (lineage), distance and draw near (women who may have been defiled) but to distance those who were drawn near by force and to draw close those who were distanced by force.  (an example of such a case is) the family of Beit Tzrifa which was in Transjordan, and Ben Tzion (a powerful person) distanced them by force.  And there was another one there which Ben Tzion with force, (cases) such as there Eliyahu will come to make tame and tahor to distance and draw close.  Rabi Yehuda says to draw near, but not to distance.  Rabi Shimon says, to settle disputes.  Chachamim say, not to distance and draw close, rather to make peace in the world, as it says, “and he shall return the heart of fathers on sons and the heat of sons on their fathers.”

Mesechet Avodah Zarah

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Three days before the festivals of non-Jews, it is assur to but and sell with them, to lend them (things) and borrow from them, to lend them (money) or borrow from them, or the pay them back or to be paid back by them.  Rabi Yehuda says, one may collect payment from them because is distressing for him.  They said to him, even though it distresses him now, he will be happy after some time.

Bet: Rabi Yishma’el says, three days before them (non-Jewish festivals) and three days after them (everything above) is assur.  Chachamim say,, before their festivals is assur, after the festivals is mutar.

Gimmel: And these are the festivals of non-Jews, Calenda (calendar, a new month or year), Starnura (Saturn, the end of the year), Kratesim (Empire day, when Rome conquered Alexandria), the Coronation day of Kings, the day of birth (of the king), the day of death (of a king), according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, any death which has burning (a funeral pyre) has avoda zara (idolatry, making it a festival), any death which does not have burning, does not have avoda zara.  (There are also personal festivals, which a non-Jew makes on) a day when he shaves his beard and his locks, a day when he came up from the sea (got back from a foreign country), a day he left prison, and a non-Jew who made a (wedding) feast for his son, it is not assur except that day, and that person alone.

Daled: A city in which they did avoda zara, (conducting business) outside it is mutar.  If there was (a city where) outside it there was avoda zara, its inside is mutar.  What is it (is it permitted) to go in there (a city of avoda zara)?  When the path is special (only for) that place, it is assur, but if he can go on it to another place, it’s mutar.  A city which has avoda zara in it, if (on the day of a festival) there are decorated shops and undecorated ones, this was a case in beit She’an, and the Chachamim said, the decorated (shops) are assur, but those which aren’t decorated are mutar.

Hay: These things (which are used for avoda zara) are assur to sell to a non-Jew, the fruit of cedars, white figs and their stems, frankincense, and a white chicken (rooster).  Rabi Yehuda says, he may sell a white one among (other) chickens. And when it is (being sold) alone, he cuts off a finger and sells to him, because they do not offer something missing (a part) to avoda zara.  And all other things, if (he sold it) without specifying (an intended purpose), they are mutar (to sell), but specified (for use of avoda zara), it is assur.  Rabi Meir says, even good palm (fruit, dates), sugar cane, and fine herbs are assur to sell to non-Jews.

Vav: In a place where it was the custom to (allow people to) sell a thin animal (sheep) to non-Jews, that may sell, in a place where they had a custom not to sell, one may not sell.  And in all places one does not sell a large animal (cattle) to them, calves and foals, whole (unblemished) or broken (injured).  Rabi Yehuda allows by a broken one, and Ben Bteira allows by a horse.

Zayin: One may not sell them bears and lions or anything which can damage the public.  One does not build with them a basilica (used as a courthouse), a scaffold (for gallows), a stadium (such as for gladiators), or a stage (pulpit), but one may build with them a public bathhouse or a bathhouses.  Once they reach the dome where they stand the idol (in the bathhouse), it is assur for build.

Chet: And one may not make jewelry for avoda zara, necklaces, nose rings, and rings.  Rabi Eliezer says, for money it is mutar.  One may not sell them (produce) which is attached to land (for one may not let them settle in Israel, and something attached to the soil is like the soil), but he may sell to him once it is cut.  Rabi Yehuda says, he may sell him (attached produce) in order for him to cut it.  One may not lease them houses in the land of Israel, and there is no need to say (one may not lease them) fields (for it is obvious).  In Syria one may lease them houses, but not fields, and outside of Israel on may sell them houses and lease them fields, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi says, in the land of Israel they lease them houses but not fields, in Syria one sells them houses and leases them fields, and outside the land (of Israel) one may sell them this and that (either).

Tet: Even in a place where they said (one may) lease, they did not refer to a place to live (they were allowing rental of a storehouse or the like), because (if he leases a house) he is bringing avoda zara into it, as it says, “and you shall not being an abomination (avoda zara) to your house.”  And in every place he may not lease him a bathhouse, because it is called on its name (they name bathhouses after idols).

Perek Bet

Aleph: One may not stand an animal at an inn of non-Jews because they are suspected about bestiality.  And a woman may not be alone with them (non-Jews) because they are suspected about inappropriate relations.  And a man may not be alone with them, because they are suspected about murder.  A bat yisra’el may not deliver (be a midwife) for a non-Jewess, for she is delivering a child for avoda zara, but a non-Jewess may deliver for a bat yisra’el.  A bat yisra’el may not wean the child of a non-Jewess, but a non-Jewess may wean the child of a yisra’elit with her permission.

Bet: One may be healed by them (non-Jews) a healing of money (non life-threatening illness), but not a healing of souls (life-threatening illness).  And one may not get a haircut from them anywhere (even in public, for he might slit the Jew’s throat) according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, in a public domain it is allowed, but not when it is between him and him (when they are alone).

Gimmel: These things of non-Jews are forbidden, and their prohibition is a prohibition against (deriving any) benefit (from them) wine, the vinegar of non-Jews which started as wine, Hadriani earthenware (made with wine so that they can be soaked to release the wine), and skins (leather) of the (area of) the heart (for avoda zara they would take out the heart from the animal while killing it).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, where its tear is round (meaning the heart was removed) is it assur, but pulled (a long cut, meaning that is simply where they flayed it) it’s mutar.  Meat brought into (a place of) avoda zara (and taken out by a Jew) is mutar, but what is brought out (by a non-Jew) is assur, because it is like the sacrifices of the dead (which are assur), according to Rabi Akiva.  Those who are going to a place of avoda zara, it is assur to buy and sell with them, but those who are coming (back from the place) are mutar (to do business with).

Daled: The skins (for carrying liquids) of non-Jews and their jars with the wine of a Jew contained in it are assur, and their issur is a prohibition of (against) benefit, according to Rabi Meir.  The Chachamim say, their issur is not a prohibition of benefit.  The grape skins and grape seeds of non-Jews are assur, and their issur is a prohibition of benefit, according to Rabi Meir.  The Chachamim say, moist ones are assur, but dry ones are mutar.  Fish brine and Beit Unyaki (a place with a lot of avoda zara) cheeses of non-Jews are assur, and their issur is a prohibition of benefit, according to Rabi Meir.  The Chachamim say, their issur is not a prohibition of benefit.

Hay: Rabi Yehuda said, Rabi Yishma’el asked Rabi Yehoshua (a question when) they were walking on their way, he said to him, because of what are the cheeses of non-Jews assur?  He said to him, because they stand it (curdle it) with the rennet of a nevela (animal which died naturally).  He said to him, and isn’t (use of) the rennet of an olah (which is completely burnt), and they said, a kohen whose knowledge is good (who can stand it) may consume (milk) from it (the stomach of an olah) raw (before it is burnt).  And they did not admit to him (that a kohen can drink from the stomach of an olah raw), and they said, one does not benefit (from the olah) but there is no me’ila (if he does we do not consider it misappropriation of holy property).  He (Rabi Yehoshua) returned and said to him, because they let it stand in the rennet of calves of avoda zara.  He said to him, if so, why did they not prohibit benefit (gotten from the cheese)?  He (Rabi Yehoshua) brought him to a different subject, he said to him, Yishma’el my son, how do you read (the pasuk), “for your love (in the masculine) is better than wine?” or, “for your love (in the feminine) is better?”  He said to him, “for your love (in the feminine) is better.”  He said to him, the thing is not so, for behold his friend (the next pasuk) teaches about it, “for the smell of your (in the masculine) oils is good.”

Vav: These things of non-Jews are assur, but their issur is not a prohibition of (against) benefit, milk which a non-Jew milked and a Jew was not watching him, bread, oil, though Rabi and his court allowed oil, cooked dishes, pickled foods which it is the way to put in wine and vinegar, chopped tarit (a type of prepared fish), fish brine which does not have kilbit fish swimming in it (for that fish would grow only with kosher fishes), bits of asafetida (a spicy plant which would be finely chopped to use as a spice), or lumpy salt (which was used by bakers and could be made with lard mixed in).  Behold, these are assur, but their issur is not a prohibition of benefit.

Zayin: These are mutar by eating, milk which a non-Jew milked with a Jew watching, honey, clusters of grapes, even if they are dripping and they do not have (a problem of) validity of drinks (though wine can become tame, if they drip on something, it does not make the object able to become tame), pickled things which their way is not to put in wine and vinegar, tarit which is not chopped, fish brine which has fish in it (so you can be sure that it was only kosher fish), the leaf of asafetida, and olives in round loaves (brines in round containers).  Rabi Yossi says, very soft olives are assur.  Locusts which come from a basket are assur, but from the storeroom (where they are sealed in barrels), they are mutar, and so too with truma (we fear one selling in baskets may mix in truma, but not into the sealed barrels).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: All images (of avoda zara) are assur, because they are (all) worshipped (at least) once a year, according to Rabi Meir.  The Chachamim say, they are not assur, except one which has a staff, a bird, or a ball in its hand.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, any which has anything in its hand.

Bet: One who finds shards of images, behold these are mutar.  If he found the form of a hand or the form of a foot, behold these are assur, because things like them are worshipped.

Gimmel: One who finds vessels and on them is the figure of the son, the figure of the moon, or the figure of a dragon, he shall bring it to the Dead Sea (for there it will be destroyed there).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, those (figures) on honored (expensive) ones (vessels) are assur, those on detested (cheap) ones are mutar.  Rabbi Yossi says, he grinds (the vessels) and throws them to the wind or brings it to the sea.  They said to him, even that will become fertilizer (which is assur), as it says, “and not a thing will stick in your hand from the exiled (forbidden objects).”

Daled: Proklos ben Philosophis asked Raban Gamliel (when he was) in Akko washing in the bathhouse of Aphrodite, he said to him, it is written in your torah, “and not a thing will stick in your hand from the exiled property (forbidden objects),” so why are you bathing in the bathhouse of Aphrodite?  He said to him, one does not answer In a bathhouse.  And when he (Raban Gamliel) exited, he (Raban Gamliel) said to him, I did not to her place, she came to my place (it was a preexisting bathhouse which was then dedicated to Aphrodite), one may not say let us make this bathhouse a beauty for Aphrodite, rather one says, let us make Aphrodite a beauty for this bathhouse.  Another thing (a different explanation), (even) if they gave you a lot of money, you would not enter before your avoda zara naked, after a (seminal) emission), or urinating before it, but this stands before the sewer and everyone urinates before it.  The pasuk does not say other than, “their gods,” that which one acts before it like a god (if it is avoda zara which people treat as such it) is assur, but that which one does not act before it like a god is mutar.

Hay: If bon-Jews worship the mountains and the hills they are mutar, but what is upon them is assur, as it says, “and you shall not be jealous of silver and gold which is on them and take it.”  Rabi Yossi Hagelili says (the pasuk says), “their gods on mountains,” and not, (if) the mountains are their gods, and, “their gods on hills,” and not, the hills are their gods.  And because of what is ashera (a tree idol) assur?  Because it has the grasp of the hand of people (people contributed to making it by planting it), and anything which has the grasp of the hand of people in it is assur.  Rabi Akiva said, I will clarify and judge before you, any place that you find a tall mountain, a high hill, or a pleasant tree, know that there is avoda zara there.

Vav: One whose house was next to avoda zara and it fell, it is assur to build it (for it seems his building is benefiting the avoda zara).  What should he do?  He withdraws within his (property) four amot and build (so it is clearly separate).  If (the property) was his and of avoda zara (split) it is judges half by half (he must assume that half of any structure, such as a wall, he makes, is counted towards his four amot).  His stones, wood, and earth (which is joint property) become tame like a sheretz (slithering animal), as it says, “detest shall you detest it (and there is a play on words with sheretz).”  Rabi Akiva says, (it becomes tame) like a nidda (menstruating woman), as it says, “you shal distance (idolatry) like a menstruant go out and tell him.”  Just as a nidda makes tame by carrying (an object), so too avoda zara makes tame by carrying.

Zayin: There are three (types) of houses, a house which is built from the beginning for avoda zara, behold this is assur (to be benefited from), if he limed it or cemented it for avoda zara and renewed it, he may remove what was renewed (and use it), or if one brought avoda zara into it and then removed it, it is mutar.  There are three stones, a stone which was carved from the beginning for a pedestal (for an idol), behold this is assur, if he limed it or cemented it for the sake of avoda zara or renewed it, one removes what he renewed (and uses the stone), and if he stood avoda zara on it and then removed it, behold this is mutar.  There are three asherot (levels of use of a tree as avoda zara), a tree which he planted from the beginning for avoda zara, behold this is assur, if cut it back or he trimmed it for avoda zara and it had new growth, he removes the new growth, and if he stood avoda zara under it and nullified (removed) it, behold it is mutar.  Which is an ashera?  Any (tree) which has avoda zara under it.  Rabi Shimon says, any which one worships.  And there was a case in Tzidan with a tree which they would worship and they found a mound under it.  Rabi Shimon said to them, check this mound and they checked it, and they found an image in it.  He said to them, since they were worshiping the image, we will allow them the tree.

Chet: He may not sit in its shade (that of an ashera), but if he sat in it, he is tahor (for avoda zara makes people tame).  And he may not pass under it, and if he passed, he is tame.  If it steals (space) from the public (domain) and he passed under it, he is tahor.  And one may sow vegetables under it in the rainy season, but not in the dry season (for he is benefiting from its shade then), but lettuces, (one may) not (sow under an ashera) in the dry season or in the rainy season.  Rabi Yossi says, also not vegetables in the rainy season, because the dead leaves fall on them and are manure (fertilizer) for them.

Tet: If he took wood from them (asherot), they are assur from benefit (he may not gain any benefit from them).  If he fueled an oven with them if it a new oven (so they hardened it) he must shatter it, but if it is old, he must cool it.  If he baked bread in it, it is assur from benefit.  If it (the wood) got mixed with others, they are all assur from benefit.  Rabi Eliezer says, he must take the (value of what he is going to) benefit to the Dead Sea (where coins will be destroyed, and then he can use the forbidden objects).  They said to him, there is no redemption (of things which are) avoda zara.  If he took a shuttle (for a loom) from it, is it assur from benefit.  If he wove a garment with it, the garment is assur from benefit.  If it got mixed with others, and (even) if the other (got mixed with) others, they are all assur from benefit.  Rabi Eliezer says, he must take the benefit to the Dead Sea.  They said to him, there is no redemption for avoda zara.

Yud: How does he nullify it (a tree from being an ashera)?  If he trims it, prunes it, or took from it a staff or scepter, even a leaf, behold this is annulled.  If he smoothed it (the bark of the tree) for its sake (to make the ashera beautiful) it is assur, not for its sake, it is mutar.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Rabi Yishma’el says, three stones one next to the other next to a Markulis (image of Mercury, who was worshipped by throwing stones near his idol) they are assur (for they were clearly thrown there), but two are mutar (for they may be there by chance).  Chachamim say, which appear with it (near it) are assur, those which do not appear with it are mutar.

Bet: If he found on its head (on an idol of Markulis) money, clothing, or vessels, behold these are mutar (for they are not the normal decoration for the idol).  (If he found on it) clusters of grapes, crowns of stalks (of grain), wines, oils fine flour, or anything similar to these on it or offered on its altar, it is assur.

Gimmel: Avoda zara which had a garden or a bathhouse (one may benefit from them not for a fee (for the fee is for the avoda zara), but one does not benefit from them for a fee.  If it (the garden or bathhouse) was for it and of others, one may benefit from them whether for a fee or not.

Daled: The avoda zara of a non-Jew is assur immediately, but that of a Jew (made by a Jew) is not assur until it is worshipped.  A non-Jew can annul his avoda zara and that of his friend, but a Jew does not annul the avoda zara of a non-Jew.  One who annuls avoda zara has nullified its accessories.  If he annulled its accessories, its accessories are mutar but it is assur.

Hay: How does he annul it?  If he cut off the tip of its ear, the tip of its nose, the tip of its finger, or even battered it without removing from it, it is annulled.  If he spat before it, urinated before it, dragged it, or threw excrement on it, behold this is not annulled (for sometimes they would do this to idols but then go back to worshipping them).  If he sold it or gave it as collateral, Rabi says, he annulled it, but Chachamim say, he didn’t annul it.

Vav: Avoda zara which its worshipers abandoned in a time of peace (out of their own will) is mutar, but (if they abandoned it) in a time of war (which was because of the war) it is assur.  Pedestals of kings, behold these are mutar because they set them up at the time that the kings pass.

Zayin: they asked the elders in Romi (Rome), if He (Hashem) does not want avoda zara, why does he not annul it?  They said to them, if they worshipped a thing which had no purpose in the world, He would annul it, but they worship the sun, the moon, the stars, and the constellations, will He destroy His world because of mentally infirm people?  They said to them, if so, he should destroy a thing which has no purpose in the world and leave a thing that the world needs.  They (the Rabbis) said to them, we would also be strengthening their worship, for they would say, know that they are gods, for they were not annulled.

Chet: One may buy a trodden winepress (one which has pressed grapes in it) from a non-Jew, although he may take (crushed grapes) in his hand and put them in a pile (where grapes are left so their juices are collected).  And it is no made into libation wine until it goes down into the hole (where it is fermented).  If it went down into the hole, what is in the hole is assur and the rest is mutar.

Tet: One may step (on grapes) in a winepress with a non-Jew, but one may not harvest grapes with him.  A yisra’el who makes (works) while tame, one may not step or harvest grapes with him, but one may bring barrels with him to the winepress with him and they may bring (barrels) with him from the winepress.  A baker who makes while tame, one may not knead with him or roll with him, but one may bring bread with him to the bakery.

Yud: A non-Jew who is found standing at the side of a pit of wine, if he has a lien on it, it is assur, if he does not have a lien on it, it is mutar (for if he had rights to it he may have touched it, but if he has no rights, he would not touch it).  If he fell into the pit and they brought him up (but he died), if he tested it with a reed, he flicked out a hornet from it with a reed, or he slapped a barrel which was boiling (he wicked off foam from a barrel), there was a case of each of these an they said, it may be sold (to non-Jews), and Rabi Shimon allows it.  If he (a non-Jew) took a barrel and he threw it in his anger into a pit, this was a case and they validated it (to be benefited from).

Yud Aleph: One who makes the wine of a non-Jew tahor (by making it for him) and put it in his domain, a house which is open to the public domain, in a city in which there are non-Jews and Jews, it is mutar.  In a city which is all non-Jews, it is assur, until he puts a guard, and the guard does no have to sit and guard, even if he enters and enters it is mutar.  Rabi Shimon ben Elazar says, any domain of non-Jews is one (it is all assur).

Yud Bet: One who makes tahor wine for a non-Jew and puts it in his (the non-Jew’s) domain, and that one writes for him, I received money from you, it is mutar (for he acknowledges that the wine is from a Jew and will not touch it).  But, if a yisra’el wants to take it out, but (the non-Jew) does not let him until he gives him his money, this was a case in Beit She’an, and the Chachamim forbade it.

Perek Hay

Aleph: One who hires (a Jewish) worker to work with him on libation wine (for avoda zara), his wage is assur.  If he hired him to do some other work, even if he said to him, transfer for me this barrel of libation wine from place to place, his wage is mutar.  One who rents a donkey to bring libation wine on it, its rent is assur.  If he rented it to sit on it, even if the non-Jew rested his bottle (of wine) on it, its rent is mutar.

Bet: Libation wine which fell on grapes, he may wash them and they are mutar, but if they were split they are assur.  If it fell on figs or on dates, if there is enough to impart flavor, it is assur.  There was a case with Baytos ben Zonin who brought dried figs in a boat, a barrel of libation wine broke and fell on them, he asked the Chachamim and they allowed them.  This is the general rule, all which he benefits by it imparting flavor is assur, and anything which he does not benefit from it imparting flavor is mutar, for example vinegar which fell on barley.

Gimmel: A non-Jew who was moving barrels of wine from place to place with a Jew, if he was with a presumption of one who was supervised (so it is known that he will not try to touch the wine) it is mutar.  If he (the supervising Jew) informed him that he was leaving, (it is assur if he leaves) long enough to open (a barrel), seal, and wipe (away any trace of wine).  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, long enough for him to open, stop up, and for it to dry.

Daled: One who leaves his wine in a wagon or ship (in the care of a non-Jew) and goes on a short cut, enters a region, and bathes, it (the wine) is mutar (for the non-Jew does not know how long he will be and will be afraid to touch the wine.  If he informed him that he was leaving, long enough for him to open, close, and wipe off.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, enough for him to open, stop up, and for it to dry.  One who leaves a non-Jew in a store (that sells wine), even if he (the owner merely) enters and exits, it is mutar.  If he informed him that he was leaving, long enough for him to open, close, and wipe off.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, enough for him to open, stop up, and for it to dry.

Hay: If he (a Jew) was eating with him (a non-Jew) on a table, and he (the Jew) put a bottle (of wine) on the table and a bottle on the serving stand, and left it and exited, what is on the table is assur (for the non-Jew would not fear to touch something on the table), but what is on the serving stand is mutar.  But if he (the Jew) said to him, pour and drink, even what is on the serving stand is assur.  Open barrels (left with a non-Jew in the house) are assur.  Closed ones, (are assur if left) long enough to open, stop up, and for them to dry off.

Vav: A troop of non-Jews (who came to search houses for provision they can take) which came into a town during peacetime, open barrels (in a house were they are) are assur, and closed ones are mutar.  In wartime, these and those (both) are mutar, for there is not time for libations.

Zayin: Jewish artisans to whom a non-Jew sent a barrel of wine as his fee, they may say to him, give me its money (the worth), but if it is from the time it entered their possession, it is assur (because then it is his and he may not benefit from it).  One who sells his wine to a non-Jew, if he set (the price) for him before he measured (and the non-Jew touched it) his money is mutar, but if he measured and then set for hi, his money is assur.  If he took a funnel and measured into the bottle of the non-Jew (which had some win left in it), and then measured into the bottle of a Jew, fire there is on it (the funnel) the residue of wine, it is assur.  One who pours from vessel to vessel, that which is poured from is mutar (even if it is pouring into assur) and that which is poured into is assur.

Chet: Libation is assur and forbids by any amount at all.  Wine (which is assur mixed) with wine, or water (which was used for avoda zara) with water, (is assur) in any amount.  Wine with water or water with wine, with enough (assur) to impart flavor.  This is the general rule, a type in its type, with some (it becomes any assur from any at all) but with what is not its type, enough to impart flavor.

Tet: These are assur and forbid (other things) with any amount at all, libation wine, avoda zara, skins (leather) of the heart (for avoda zara they would take out the heart from the animal while killing it), a stoned ox, egla arufa (when the sages kill a calf in repentance for an unknown corpse found), the birds (brought as a korban by) a metzora, the hair of a nazir, the redeemed donkey (the firstborn which is redeemed with a sheep), meat and milk, the sent goat (on Yom Hakippurim sent into the wilderness), and chulin (non-holy meat) which was slaughtered in the courtyard (of the Beit Hamikdash), behold there are assur and forbid with any amount at all.

Yud: Libation wine which fell into a pit (of wine), it is all assur from benefit.  Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, he may sell it all to a non-Jew except (minus) the worth of the libation wine in it.

Yud Aleph: A stone winepress (or the barrel) which a non-Jew tarred, he may wipe it (wash it) and it is tahor (valid for use).  One (a barrel) of wood (which a non-Jew tarred), Rabi says, he may wipe it.  Chachamim say, he peels off the tar.  And one of earthenware, even if he peels off the tar, behold it is assur.

Yud Bet: One who buys a vessel of use (for cooking) from a non-Jew, one which its way is to be immersed (used with cold liquids), he immerses, to be boiled (used with hot liquids), he boils.  To make white hot in fire (cook on), he makes white hot with fide.  A skewer and a grill, he must make white hot with fire, a knife, he sharpens and it is tahor.

Mesechet Avot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: Moshe got the torah from Sinai, and passed it to Yehoshua, and Yehoshua passed to the elders, and the elders to the prophets, and the prophets to the men of the great assembly.  They said three things, be deliberate in judgment, raise up many students, and make fences for the torah.

Bet: Shimon Hatzadik was one of the remnants of the great assembly, and he used to say, the world stands on three things, on torah, on temple service, and on acts of kindness.

Gimmel: Antigonus of Socho received (the torah) from Shimon Hatzadik.  He used to say, do not be like slaves who serve the master in order to get a reward, rather be like slaves who serve the master not to get a reward, and be let fear of Heaven be upon you.

Daled: Yossi ben Yoezer of Tzrar and Yossi ben Yochanan of Yerushalayim received (torah) from them (Shimon and Antigonus).  Yossi ben Yoezer used to say, let your house be a meeting house for wise men, be stuck to the dust of their feet (follow them), and drink down their words with thirst.

Hay: Yossi ben Yochanan of Yerushalayim used to say, let you house be wide open, let the poor be household members, and don’t talk too much (idly) with women.  If by his wife they said this, it obviously talks about his friend’s wife.  From here the Chachamim say, whenever a man talks too much with a woman, he causes himself harm, he voids torah, and in the end he will inherit hell.

Vav: Yehoshua ben Prachia and Nitai Ha’arbeli received (torah) from them.  Yehoshua ben Prachia says, make for yourself a Rabbi, acquire for yourself a friend, and judge everyone favorably.

Zayin: Nitai Ha’arbeli says, distance yourself from a bad neighbor, do not attach yourself to a wicked man, and do not lose faith in ‘karma’.

Chet: Yehuda ben Tabay and Shimon ben Shetach got torah from them.  Yehuda ben Tamay says, do not make yourself like a lawyer, when the parties stand before you treat them as sinners (look carefully into their words), and when they depart from you look upon them as innocent for they accepted the judgment upon themselves.

Tet: Shimon ben Shetach says, examine the witnesses a lot and be careful with your words, for from them, they might learn how to lie (find a loophole).  

Yud: Shmaya and Avtalyon got from them.  Shmaya says, love work, hate being a master, and don’t become familiar with the ruling powers (in seek of power).

Yud Aleph: Avtalyon says, Chachamim, be careful of your words, lest you become liable of the punishment of exile, and you will be exiled to the place of bad water, and the students after you will drink and will die, and the name of Heaven will be cursed.

Yud Bet: Hillel and Shamay got from them.  Hillel says, be a student of Aaron, love peace and chase peace and love the creations and draw them close to torah.

Yud Gimmel: He (Hillel) used to say, one who seeks fame will lost his reputation, one who doesn’t add detracts, one who doesn’t learn deserves death, and one who uses the crown (of torah for worldly benefits) will perish.

Yud Daled: He (Hillel) used to say, if I am not for myself, who is for me?, and when I am for myself (only) who am I?, and if not now, when?

Tet Vav: Shamay says, make your torah a fixed habit, say little and do much, and receive everyone with a cheerful face.

Tet Zayin: Raban Gamliel says, set for yourself a Rav, remove yourself from doubt, and don’t often take ma’asrot by guesswork.

Yud Zayin: Shimon his son says, all my days I grew up among the sages, and I didn’t find anything better for a person than silence, the expounding (of rules) isn’t the most important, but rather the action, and anyone who speaks excessively brings in sin.

Yud Chet: Raban Shimon ben Gamliel says, on three things does the world stand, on judgment, on truth, and on peace, as it says, “truth, judgment, and peace shall you judge in your gates.”

Perek Bet

Aleph: Rabi says, what is the straight path that man should choose?  That which is honorable to the doer and brings honor from people.  And be careful in a light mitzvah just as in a grave one, for you don’t know the reward given for a mitzvah.  Consider the loss of doing a mitzvah against its reward, and the benefit from an avera against its loss.  And look at three things and you won’t do any avera, know what is above you, an eye sees and an ear hears, and all of your actions are written in a book.

Bet: Raban Gamliel the son of Rabi Yehuda Hanasi said, nicer is learning torah while doing a worldly job, for working in both causes sin to be forgotten.  And any torah which isn’t with work, in the end it is void and it causes sin.  And all those who work with the public, they should work with them in the name of Hashem, for the merit of their father helps them and their righteousness stands forever.  And you, I raise upon you a great reward, as if you did.

Gimmel: They were careful with the authorities, for a person doesn’t get close to another except for their own needs.  They seem to be like those who love in the hour or of their benefit, and they don’t stand for that person in the time of his distress.

Daled: He (Raban Gamliel) used to say, do His desire as if it were your desire, such that His desire will be your desire.  Void you desire because of His desire, such that He will void the desire of offers because of your desire.  Hillel says, do not separate from the public, don’t trust yourself (as virtuous) until the day of your death, don’t judge your friend until you are in his situation, don’t say something which may not be heard for in the end it will be heard, and don’t say,  when I become free I’ll study, for you may never become free.

Hay: He (Hillel) would say, a boor cannot fear sin, no ignorant person can be pious, a shy person cannot learn, no impatient person can teach, not everyone who does much business gets intelligent, and in a place where there are no people (to study with), strive t be a person (who one can study with).

Vav: He also saw a skull floating on the surface of the water.  He said to it, since you drowned someone, you were drowned, and in the end because you drowned, others will drown.

Zayin: He used to say, the more flesh (fat) the more worms (after death), the more possessions the more worry, the more wives the more sorcery, the more maidservants the more looseness, the more slaves the more theft, the more torah the more life, the more sitting (learning) the more wisdom, the more advice the more understanding, the more charity the more peace.  If he acquired a good name, he acquired for himself.  If he acquired words of torah he acquired the world-to-come.

Chet: Raban Yochanan ben Zakai got (torah) from Hillel and Shamay.  He used to say, if you have learned torah a lot do not claim merit for yourself, because you were created for that.  Raban Yochanan ben Zakai had five students, and these are they, Rabi Eliezer ben Hurkanos, Rabi Yehoshua ben Chanania, Rabi Yossi the kohen, Rabi Shimon ben Netanel, and Rabi Elazar ben Arach.  He would recount their praises, Rabi Eliezer ben Hurkanos is a plastered cistern which doesn’t lose a drop.  Rabi Yehoshua (ben Chanania) fortunate is she who gave birth to him.  Rabi Yossi (the kohen) is pious.  Rabi Shimon ben Netanel fears sin.  And Rabi Elazar ben Arach is an overflowing spring.  He would say, if all the sages of Yisra’el were on one side of a scale and Rabi Eliezer ben Hurkanos was on the other, he would outweigh them all.  Abba Shaul used to say in his name, if all the sages of Yisra’el were on one side and Rabi Eliezer ben Hurkanos was with them, and Rabi Elazar was on the other side, he would outweigh them all.

Tet: He (Rabi Yochanan ben Zakai) said to them, go out and see what is the straight path to which man should stick to.  Rabi Eliezer says, a good eye (liking what one has).  Rabi Yehoshua says, a good friend.  Rabi Yossi says, a good neighbor.  Rabi Shimon says, one who foresees what will be.  Rabi Elazar says, a good heart.  He said to them, I agree with the words of Elazar ben Arach, for included in his words are all of yours.  He said to them, go out and find a bad way which man should distance himself from.  Rabi Eliezer says, a bad eye (liking what one has).  Rabi Yehoshua says, a bad friend.  Rabi Yossi says, a bad neighbor.  Rabi Shimon says, one who borrows and doesn’t pay back, whether he borrows from man or from God, as it says, “you shall lend to a wicked person and he will not pay, and the righteous forgive and pay.”  Rabi Elazar says, a bad heart.  He said to them, I agree with Rabi Eliezer ben Arach, for included in his words are all of yours.

Yud: They said three things.  Rabi Eliezer says, let the honor of your friend be cherished by you like your own, don’t anger easily, and repent one day before your death.  And warm up next to the lamp of Chachamim, , but beware of their burning coals lest they burn you, for their bite is the bite of a fox, their sting is the sting of a scorpion, their hiss is the hiss of a serpent, and all of their words are like coals of fire.

Yud Aleph: Rabi Yehoshua says, a bad eye, a bad inclination, and hating the creations remove the man from the land.

Yud Bet: Rabi Yossi says, let the money of your friend be cherished by you as if it were yours, make yourself fit to learn torah, for it is not an inheritance for you, and all of your actions should be in the name of Heaven.

Yud Gimmel: Rabi Shimon says, be careful when reading shma and shmone esray, and when you pray, don’t make your prayer fixed, rather (make them) mercy and supplication before God, as it says, “for He is gracious and merciful, long suffering, great in kindness, and forgiving of bad (decree).”  And don’t be wicked in front of yourself.

Yud Daled: Rabi Elazar says, be diligent in learning torah, know what to answer an apikores, know before whom you labor, and believe in your employer that he will pay the reward of your work.

Tet Vav: Rabi Tarfon says, the day is short, the work is great, the workers are lazy, the reward is great, and the homeowner is pushing forward (referring to serving God).

Tet Zayin: He used to say, the work is not upon you to finish, and you are not a free person to push it off.  If you learned a lot of torah, they give you a lot of reward, and believe your employer that he will pay the reward of your work.  And know, the giving of the reward for the righteous will come in the future.

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: Akavya ben Mehalalel says, look at (these) three things and you won’t come to sin, know where you came from, to where you are going, and before whom you stand to give judgment and accounting.  From where did you come?  From a putrid drop (to get rid of pride).  Where are you going?  To a place of dust, worm, and maggot.  And before whom will you stand to give judgment and accounting?  Before the King of kings, the Holy one blessed be He.

Bet: Rabi Chanina the deputy kohen (gadol) says, pray for the welfare of the rulership, for without the fear of it, man would swallow his friend alive.  Rabi Chanina ben Tradyon says, two who sit and there are no words of torah between them, this is the seating of jesters, as it says, “and in the seating of jesters he did not sit.“  But two who sit together and there are words of torah between them, the shchina is between them, as it says, “then those who fear Hashem will spoke to each other, and Hashem heard and listened, and a book of remembrances was written before Him for those who fear Hashem and consider His name.”  This is only for two, from where do we know that even one who sits and engages in torah that Hashem sets a reward for him?  As it says, “he shall sit alone and be silent, because He has laid it upon him.”

Gimmel: Rabi Shimon says, three who ate on one table and didn’t say on it words of torah, it is as if the ate from the sacrifices of the dead, as it says, “for all the tables filled with vomit and excrement without any space.”  But three who ate on one table and said on it words of torah, it is as if the ate from Hashem’s table, as it says, “and he spoke to me, this is the table which is before Hashem.”

Daled: Rabi Chanania ben Chachinai says, one who stays up at night, or walks on a road alone, or turns his heart to idleness, behold he transgresses on his own soul.

Hay: Rabi Nechunya ben Hakana says, anyone who accepts upon themselves the yoke of torah, they remove from him the yoke of kingship and the yoke of worldly care, and all who remove from themselves the yoke of torah, they put on him the yoke of kingship and the yoke of worldly care.

Vav: Rabi Chalaphta a person of Kfar Chanania says, ten who sit and engage in torah, the shchina (Divine Presence) rests among them, as it says, “God stands in an assembly of God.”  From where do we know even five?  As it says, “and his band (referring to five) he has based on the earth.”  From where even three?  As it says, “He judges among judges (which are three).”  From where even two?  As it says, “then those who fear Hashem will a person to his friend and Hashem listened and He heard.”  And from where even one?  As it says, “in every place where My name is mentioned, I will come to you and bless you.”

Zayin: Rabi Eliezer a person of Bartota says, give Him from what is His, for you and what is yours is His, and so too by David who says, “because from You is everything and from Your hand we have given you.”  Rabi Shimon says, one who is walking on his way and interrupts from his studies and says, how beautiful is this tree, or, how beautiful is this field, the torah holds upon him as if he is liable (to lose) his life.

Chet: Rabi Dostai beRebi Yanai said in the name of Rabi Meir, anyone who forgets one thing of his studies, the torah holds upon him as if he is liable (to lose) his life, as it says, “only guard for yourself and guard your soul very much lest you forget the things which your eyes have seen.”  Could this be even if he studies were too hard for him?  We learn from the torah, “and lest they leave from your heart all the days of your life,” behold he isn’t liable on his life until he sits and removes them from his heart.

Tet: Rabi Chanania ben Dosa says, anyone who fear of sin comes before his intelligence, his intelligence endures, and all whose intelligence comes before their fear of sin, their intelligence doesn’t endure.  He used to say, all whose actions are greater than his intelligence, his intelligence endures, and anyone whose intelligence is greater than his actions, his intelligence endures.

Yud: He used to say, all who the spirit of the creations rests with him, the spirit of Hashem rests with him, and all who the spirit of the creations doesn’t rest with him, the spirit of Hashem doesn’t rest with him.  Rabi Dosa ben Harkinas says, sleep of shacharit (morning), wine of afternoon, children’s talk, and sitting in the bati knesset of amei ha’aretz, remove a person from the world.

Yud Aleph: Rabi Elazar of Modin says, one who desecrates holy things, one who hates the holidays, one who shames his friend in public, one who nullifies the covenant of Avraham, and one who interprets the torah not according to halacha, even if he has in his hand torah and good actions, he has not portion in the world to come.

Yud Bet: Rabi Yishma’el says, be swift for those who are older than you, kind to children, and accept every man with happiness.

Yud Gimmel: Rabi Akiva says, jesting and levity lead to lewdness, tradition is a fence for the torah, ma’asrot are a fence for wealth, vows are a fence for abstinence, and quiet is a fence for wisdom.

Yud Daled: He used to say, cherished is man, for he was created in the image, he has an excessive cherishing (since) he was informed that he was created in the image, as it says, “in the image of Hashem He made man.”  Jews are cherished, for they are called children of Hashem, and they have an excessive cherishing (since) they were informed they were Hashem’s children, as it says, “you are children of Hashem your God.”  Jews are cherished for they were given a precious vessel, and they have an excessive cherishing for they were given a precious vessel from which the world was created, as it says, “for it is a good message I have given you my torah, do not leave it.”

Tet Vav: All is expected, and yet free choice is given,  The world is judged in good, yet all is according to the greatness of the act.

Tet Zayin: He used to say, all may be given as a pledge (man is held accountable for everything) and a net is spread over life (there is not escaping it).  The store is open, the storekeeper gives credit, the ledger is open, the hand is writing, and all who wish to borrow should come and borrow, but the debt collectors return always, every day, and collect from a person whether he knows it or not, and they have what to depend, and the judgment is true judgment, and everything is prepared for a banquet.  

Yud Zayin: Rabi Elazar ben Azariah says, if there is not torah there is no consideration, if there is no consideration, there is no torah.  If there is not wisdom, there is not fear, if there is no fear, there is no wisdom.  If there is no understanding, there is no knowledge, if there is no knowledge, there is no understanding.  If there is no flour, there is not torah, if there is no torah, there is no flour.  He used to say, all whose wisdom is greater than his deeds, what is he like?  A tree whose branches are many and its roots are few, and the wind comes and uproots it and turns it on its face, as it says, “for he shall be like a tamarisk in the wilderness, and he shall not see when good comes and he shall dwell in parched places in the desert, a salted land not inhabited.”  But all whose actions are greater than his wisdom, what is he similar to?  Like a tree with few branches and many roots, for even if all of the winds come and blow on it, they don’t move it from its place, as it says, “and it will be like a tree planted on water and on the river it will send out its roots, and it will not fear when heat comes, and its leaves will be fresh and in a year of drought it won’t worry, and it will not stop making fruit.

Yud Chet: Rabi Elazar Chimsa says, kinin (bird korbanot) and the onset of menstruation, they are the body of halacha, but (calculation) of times and gematriya, they are the dishes (which feed) wisdom.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Ben Zoma says, who is a wise person?  One who learns from all people, as it says, “from all of my teachers I have understood.”  Who is mighty?  One who conquers his will, as it says, “one who is slow to anger is better than a hero and one who rules his spirit from one who captures a city.”  Who is rich?  One who is happy with his portion as it says, “what comes to your hands when you eat it will make you happy and will be good for you.”  “Will make you happy,” in this world, “and will be good for you,” for the world to come.  Who is honored?  The one who honors the creations, as it says, “for those who honor me I will honor and those who have disdain for me will be regarded in levity.”

Bet: Ben Azay says, run to an easy mitzva the same as a strict one, and flee from sin, for a mitzva causes a mitzva and a sin causes a sin, for the reward of a mitzva is a mitzva and the reward of a sin is a sin.

Gimmel: He used to say, do not have disdain for any man, and do not argue on every thing, for there is no person who does not have a time and there is no thing which does not have its place.

Daled: Rabi Levitas a man from Yavne says, be very very humble, for the hope of man is but a worm (all people are destined to the grave).  Rabi Yochanan ben Broka says, all who desecrate the name of heaven in private, his punishment is in the open.  Whether accidentally or intentionally when it comes to disgracing Hashem.

Hay: Rabi Yishma’el his son says, one who learns in order to teach, they make him able to learn and teach.  And one who learns in order to do, they make him able to learn, teach, keep (mitzvot), and do.  Rabi Tzadok says, do not make them a crown to become great through them or a spade to dig with it (to benefit from it as a living).  And Hillel would say like this, all who use the crown perish, from hear you learn, all who benefit from the word of torah removes his life from the world.

Vav: Rabi Yossi says, all who honor the torah, he himself is honored above the creations, and all who disrespect the torah, he himself is disrespected by the creations.

Zayin: Rabi Yishma’el his son says, one who hides himself from (passing) judgment separates himself from hatred, theft, and vain oaths.  One who makes his heart in the thick of legal decisions, is foolish, wicked, and haughty.

Chet: He used to say, do not judge alone, for only One (Hashem) can judge alone.  And do not say, accept my opinion!  For they decide and not you.

Tet: Rabi Yonatan says, all who fulfill the torah while poor will in the end fulfill it rich.  And all who neglect the torah while rich in the end will neglect it while poor.

Yud: Rabi Meir says, diminish in business and engage in torah, and be humble before everyone, and if you neglect from the torah, you will have many idlers as your counterparts, and if you work on torah, He has much reward to give you.

Yud Aleph: Rabi Elazar ben Ya’akov says, one who does one mitzva acquires himself one advocate, and the one who transgresses one transgression acquires for himself one prosecutor.  Repentance and good deeds are a shield against punishment.  Rabi Yochanan the sandalmaker says, all assembly which is for the sake of Heaven its end is to last, and that which is not for the sake of Heaven, it’s end is not to last.

Yud Bet: Rabi Eliezer ben Shamu’a says, let the honor of your student be beloved by you like your own, and the honor of your friend, like the awe for your master, and the awe for your master, like your awe for Heaven.

Yud Gimmel: Rabi Yehuda says, be careful in learning, for an error in learning goes up as an intentional (transgression).  Rabi Shimon says, there are three crowns, the crown of torah, the crown of kehuna, and the crown of kingship, and the crown of a good name (reputation) goes above them all.

Yud Daled: Rabi Nehoray says, be exiled to a place of torah, and do not say that it will come after you, or your friend will make it last in your hand, and do not rely on your understanding.

Tet Vav: Rabi Yanay says, it is not in our hands (to explain) neither the peace of the wicked nor the suffering of the righteous.  Rabi Matya ben Charash says, be early to greet every person, be a tail for lions (associate with great people though they will outshine you), and do not be a head for foxes (to associate with lower people though you can be head over them).

Tet Zayin: Rabi Ya’akov says, this world is like a entry room before the world to come, fix yourself up in the entry room so that you can enter the banquet hall.

Yud Zayin: He used to say, one hour of repentance and good deeds in this world is better than all of the world to come, and one hour of bliss in the world to come is better than all of this world.

Yud Chet: Rabi Shimon ben Elazar says, do not appease your friend when he is angry, do not console him when his dead lies before him, do not question him (about loopholes and motives) when he makes a vow, and do not try to see the time of his mistakes.

Yud Tet: Shmu’el Hakatan says, “in the downfall of your enemies do not be happy and in his stumbling let your heart not be glad, lest Hashem sees and it is bad in His eyes and He will return from upon him His wrath.”

Kaf: Elisha ben Avuya says, one who learns as a child, what is he like?  Like ink written on new paper.  One who learns as an old person, what is he like?  Like ink written on blotted (reused) paper (where the letters are not as clear and can be rubbed of more easily).  Rabi Yossi bar Yehuda a man of the Bavli village says, one who learns from children, what is he like?  Like one who eats unripe grapes and drinks wine (unfinished) from the winepress.  One who learns from old people, what is he like?  Like one who eats ripe grapes and drinks aged wine.  Rabi says, do not look at the jar, but rather what is in it, there are new jars filled with old (wine) and old (jars) that even new (wine, grape juice) it doesn’t have in it.

Kaf Aleph: Rabi Eliezer Hakapar says, jealousy, desire, and (desire for) gravity remove a man from this world.

Kaf Bet: He used to say, the born (are destined) to die, the dead to live, the living to be judged, to know, to inform, and to assure that he is God, He is the Former, He is the Creator, He understands, He is the judge, He is a witness, He is a legal party, and He will judge.  Blessed is He, for before Him there is no cheating, no forgetting, no favoring, and no bribing, for everything is His.  And know, that everything is according to calculation.  And let your (evil) will not be your ensurer that hell will be your refuge, for against your will your were created, against your will you were born, against your will you live, against your will you die, and against your will you will stand for judgment and calculation before the King, the King of Kings the Holy one blessed be He.

Perek Hay

Aleph: The world was created with ten sayings.  What does this come to teach us, couldn’t (Hashem) have created with (only) one saying?  Rather, to punish the wicked, for they are destroying the world created with ten sayings, and to give reward to the righteous, for they uphold the world which was created with ten sayings.

Bet: There are ten generations from Adam to Noach, to show how long-suffering He is, for all the generations constantly angered until He brought upon them the waters of the flood.  There are ten generations from Noach to Avraham, to show how long-suffering He is, for all the generations constantly angered until Avraham came and accepted upon himself the reward for all of them.

Gimmel: Avraham our father, upon him may there come peace, was tested with ten tests, and he stood through all of them, to show how much was the love of Avraham our father, upon him may there come peace (for Hashem).

Daled: Ten miracles were done to our forefathers in Egypt and ten on the sea.  Hashem brought ten plagues on the Egyptians in Egypt and ten on the sea.  Our forefathers tested Hashem with ten tests in the desert, as it says, “for these tested me ten times and did not listen to my voice.”

Hay: Ten miracles were done for our forefathers in the Beit Hamikdash, that no woman miscarried from the smell of the holy meat, the holy meat never became putrid, a fly was never seen in the slaughterhouse, no happenstance (a nocturnal emission of semen) happened to the kohen gadol on (the night before) Yom Hakippurim, the rains never put out the fire of the woodpile, the wind never won over (moved) the pillar of smoke, a disqualification was never found in the omer, the two breads, or the showbreads (each of which could not have been replaced that day), (when praying) they would stand close together but bow with space, a snake or scorpion never damaged in Yerushalayim, and no man ever said to his fried, there is not enough place for me to sleep over in Yerushalayim.

Vav: Ten (miraculous) things were created one erev Shabbat at twilight (ben hashmashot), and these are they, the mouth of the earth (which swallowed korach), the mouth of the well (which supplied water in the desert), the mouth of (Bilam’s) donkey, the rainbow, the man, the staff (of Moshe), the shamir (a special worm used to cut stones for the mishkan), letters, writing, and the tablets.  And there are those who say, even the harmers (ghosts and demons), the grave of Moshe our Rabbi, and the ram of Avraham our father.  And there are those who say, even tongs made from tongs.

Zayin: There are seven things about a boor and seven about a wise person.  A wise person does not speak before one who is greater than wisdom than him, he does not get involved in his friend’s business, he is not hasty to answer, he asks what is relevant and answers base on halacha, he says the first thing first and the last last, and on what he has not heard he says, I haven’t heard and he confesses to the truth, and the opposite for a boor.

Chet: Five types of punishment come to the world for seven bodies of transgression, whine some take ma’asrot and some do not take ma’asrot, famine of (due to) drought comes, some are hungry and some are satiated.  When they decide not to do ma’aser, famine of upheaval and drought comes.  And (they decide) not to take challa, famine of decimation comes.  Plague comes to the world for (as a punishment when people do actions deserving of) deaths said in the torah which were not given into the hand of the court, and for (ignoring the laws of) the fruits of shvi’it.  Sword (war) comes to the world for the delay of justice (ruling improperly) and the perversion of justice, and for those who teach the torah not like (in a different manner than) halacha.

Tet: Evil animals come to the world for idle oaths and for the desecration of (Hashem’s) reputation.  Exile comes to the world for the worshippers of avoda zara, for inappropriate relations, for murder, and for (neglecting) shmitta (release) of the land.  At four periods the plague increases (each of which is after a time money must be given to the poor), the fourth year (of the shmitta cycle), the seventh year (shvi’it), motzei shvi’it, and on motzei chag every year.  The fourth year, because of the ma’aser ani (ma’aser to the poor instead or ma’aser sheni) in the third, in shvi’it because of ma’aser ani in the sixth, an motzei shvi’it because of the produce of shvi’it, and on motzei chag every year, because of robbing of the gifts to the poor (leket, shichicha, and pe’ah).

Yud: There are four types of people, one who says, (what is) mine is mine and yours is yours this is an average type, there are those who say, mine is yours and yours is mine, an am ha’aretz (ignoramus), mine is yours and yours is yours, pious, and min and yours are mine, wicked.

Yud Aleph: There are four types of thinking, easy to anger and easy to appease, his gain is cancelled by his loss, hard to anger and hard to appease, his loss is cancelled by his gain, hard to anger and easy to appease, pious, and easy to anger and hard to appease, wicked.

Yud Bet: There are four types of students, quick to listen (grasp) and quick to lose (forget), his gain is cancelled by his loss, hard to listen and hard to lose, his loss is cancelled by his gain, quick to listen and hard to lose, wise, and hard to listen and easy to lose, this is a bad portion.

Yud Gimmel: There are four types of givers of tzedaka (charity), one who wants to give and for others not to give his evil eye is on that of others (he wants to be raised above them), other should give and he will not give, his evil eye is on his (matters), he shall give and others shall give, pious, and he shall not give and others shall not give, wicked.

Yud Daled: There are four types who go to the Beit Midrash, he goes but does not do (learn), he has the merit for going, he does but does not go, he has the merit of doing, he goes and does, pious, and he doesn’t go or do, wicked.

Tet Vav: There are four types who sit before scholars, the sponge, the funnel, the strainer, and the sieve.  Sponge, for he absorbs everything, funnel for he enters from here and lets out with this (hears much but remembers little), the strainer which lest out the wine but retains the dregs (ignores the important points), and the sieve which lets out the flour and keeps the fine flour.

Tet Zayin: All love which depends on a thing, if the thing vanishes, the love vanishes.  And that which is not dependant on a thing never vanishes.  Which is a love dependant on a thing?  This is the love of Amnon and Tamar (as we see for Amnon stopped loving her).  Which is a lie that is not dependant on a thing?  This is the love of David and Yonatan (for we learned their souls were tied together).

Yud Zayin: Any dispute which is for the sake of heaven, its end will stand (as a productive decision).  And that which is not for the sake of heaven, its end will not stand.  Which is a dispute for the sake of heaven?  This is the dispute of Hillel and Shamay (whose disputes profoundly shaped halacha).  Which is no for the sake of heaven?  This is the dispute of Korach and his assembly (who rebelled against Moshe and Aaron to gain power and glory).

Yud Chet: All who merit for the many (lead the masses to virtue), sin does not come to his hands, as all who causes the masses to sin, there is not enough in his hands to repent.  Moshe merited and merited for the masses, for the merit of the masses was dependant on him, as it says, “the righteousness of Hashem he (Moshe) did and his law was with Yisra’el.”  Yeravam sinned and he caused the masses to sin, the sin of the masses was dependant on him, as it says, “for the sins of Yeravam which he sinned and which ha cases Yisra’el to sin.”

Yud Tet: Whoever has in his hand these three things are from the students of Avraham our forefather, but three other things, they are from the students of Bilam the evil.  (One who has) a good eye (looks at things positively), a low spirit (one who is humble), and a lowly soul (one who avoids focusing on the comforts of this world) is of the students of Avraham our forefather.  (One who has) a bad eye (a negative outlook), a high spirit (pride), and a wide soul (focuses on this world) is of the students of Bilam the evil.  What is (the difference) between the students of Avraham our forefather and the students of Bilam the evil?  The students of Avraham our forefather eat in this world and inheret in the world to come, as it says, “to have those who love me inherit, and I will fill their treasuries.”  But the students of Bilam the wicked inherit hell and descend to the well of destruction, as it says, “and you Hashem will bring them down to the well of destruction, people of blood and deception will not (live) half their days, but I will trust in You.”

Kaf: Yehuda ben Teima says, be strong like a tiger, light as an eagle run like a deer, and proud like a lion to do the will of your Father in Heaven.  He would say, strong faced (shameless) are for hell, and those who are of embarrassed faces are for the Garden of Eden (heaven).  May it be the will before You Hashem our God that You shall build Your city quickly, in our days, and give us our portion in your torah.

Kaf Aleph: He would say, (a person) five years old (is fit) to (learn) the written (torah), ten years old to mishna, thirteen years old to mitzvot, fifteen years old to talmud (gemara), eighteen years old to the wedding canopy, twenty years old to pursuit (a job), thirty years old to force (an entry age for temple service), forty years old to understanding, fifty years old to (giving) advice, sixty years old to age (being a sage), seventy years old to old age, eighty years old to heroism, ninety years old to converse, one hundred years old, it is as if he died, passed, and was annulled from this world.

Kaf Bet: Ben Bag Bag says, turn it (the torah) over and turn it over (repetitively) for all (knowledge) is in it, look to it, and grow old and frail over it, from it you shall not stir, for you have no measure (task) better than it.

Kaf Gimmel: Ben Hay Hay says, according to the suffering (grappling) is the reward.

Perek Vav

Introduction: The Chachamim taught the language of the Mishna, blessed is He who chose them and their Mishna (this comes as an introduction because the following perek was not originally not canonized with the Mishna but was later added with the custom of learning a perek of Mesechet, or Pirkei, Avot on the Shabbatot between Pesach and Shavuot so that there would be enough prakim).

Aleph: Rabi Meir says, whoever engages in torah for its own sake merits many things, and not only that, rather the whole world is fit (to have been created) for him.  He is called a friend, beloved, one who loves Hashem, one who loves the creations, one who gladdens Hashem, one who gladdens the creations, it clothes him in humility, in fear (awe), it trains him in being righteous, (to being) pious, upright, faithful, distances him from sin, draws him close to merit, people benefit from him advice, (people benefit) understanding, wisdom, and heroism (of character), as it says, “to Me is advice and understanding, I  am wisdom, and to Me is heroism.”  It (torah) gives him kingship, rulership, and discerning in judgment, it reveals for him the hints (secrets) of the torah, and it makes him like an overflowing spring and like a river which does not stop, he becomes modest, slow to anger, forgives his insults (those paid to him), it makes him greater and exalts him above all creations.

Bet: Rabi Yehoshua ben Levi said, every day a bat kol (heavenly voice) comes out from Mount Chorev (Sinai) and declares, saying, woe unto them the creations (comes from) their insulting of the torah.  For whoever does not engage in torah is called rebuked, as it says, “a gold nose ring in the nose of a pig is (like) a beautiful woman who is loose in reason (for this spoils her beauty).”  And it says, “the tablets were the work of Hashem and the writing was the writing of Hashem which was engraved on the tablets,” do not read engraved (charut) but freedom (cherut), for there is no free person other than one who engages in the study of torah, and whoever engages in torah regularly, behold this (person) is uplifted, as it says, “and from Matana (a gift) Nachliel (inheritance of Hashem), and from Nachliel Bamot (high places).”

Gimmel: One who learns from his friend one chapter, one law, one verse, one saying, or even one letter (of torah) needs to act towards him with respect, for so we found with David the king of Israel, for he did not learn from Achitofel other than just two things, and he called him his teacher, his guide, and his familiar (friend), as it says, “and you are a person as my commensurate, my leader, and my familiar one.”  And are these things not a kal vechomer?  Just as David the king of Israel who did not learn from Achitofel other than just two things called him his teacher, guide, and familiar one, one who learns from his friend one chapter, one law, one verse, one saying, even one letter, how much more so that he had to act toward him with respect.  And there is no respect other than torah, as it says, “wise ones will inherit respect,” “perfect ones will inherit good.”  And there is no good other than the torah, as it says, “for a good gift I have given to you, it is My torah, do not leave it.”

Daled: This is the way of (one who learns) torah, he will eat bread with salt, he will drink water by mesura (a small liquid measure), he will sleep on the earth, he will live a life of stress, and he will toil in the torah, but if you do this (to you applies the pasuk), “it is your fortune and good for you,” your fortune in this world and good for you in the world to come.  Do not ask for greatness for yourself and do not covet honor.  Do more than what you learn, do not desire the table of kings, for your table is greater than their table and your crown is greater than their crown.  And the master of your work (Hashem) is trustworthy, for He will pay you the wager of your work.

Hay: Torah is greater than kehuna and than kingship, for kingship is acquired with thirty degrees (has thirty aspects), kehuna with twenty-four (aspects) and torah is acquired with forty-eight things, with study, listening with the ear, lengthening (speech) with the lips, understanding of the heart, knowledge of the heart, awe, fear, humility, happiness, serving sages, exacting with friends, peppering students, settling (emotions), text (of the torah), review, sleeping little, speaking little, enjoying little, joking little, little worldly affairs, slowness to anger, a good heart, trust in the sages, and accepting sorrow.

Vav: (These things are complete the forty-eight things which are needed for torah study) one who knows his place, one who is happy with his portion, one who makes a fence for his words (expresses himself with caution), does not hold a good thing for himself, is loved, loves Hashem, loves the creations, loves justice, loves rebuke, loves straightening out, distances (himself) from honor, does not become haughty with his learning, is not happy to instruct (others what to do), bears a burden with his friend, judges him with favor, establishes him with truth (helps others act properly), stands him up in peace (helps settle arguments), settles his heart with his learning, asks and answers, hears and adds, learns in order to teach, learns in order to do, wisens (even) his teacher, sets his listening (takes care to not what he hears), and one who says something in the name of the one who said it (quotes sources).  Behold you have learned, whoever says something in the name of the one who said it brings salvation to the world, as it says, “and Esther said to the king in the name of Mordechai.”

Zayin: Torah is great for it gives life to those who do it in the word and in the world to come, as it says, “for they are life for those who find them and it heals all of their flesh,” is says, “it will be healing for your flesh and a tonic for your bones,” it says, “it is a tree of life for those who hold and all who grasp it are fortunate,” it says, “for they are a wreath of favor for your head and giant for your necklaces,” it says, “it will give for your head wreathes of favor, crown you with a circlet of splendor,” it says, “length of days are in its right (hand), in its right is wealth and honor,” and it says, “for length of days, years of life, and peace it will add for you.”

Chet: Rabi Shimon ben Menasia says in the name of rabi Shimon ben Yochai, beauty, strength, wealth, honor, wisdom, age, grey hair, and children is good for the righteous and good for the world, as it says, “a crown of splendor is grey hair, it will be found with the way of righteousness,” it says, “the crown of the wise is their wealth,” it says, “the crown of the elders are the children of children, and the splendor of children is their fathers,” it says, “the splendor of young men is their strength, and the beauty of elders is their grey hair,” and it says, “and the moon will was shamed and the sun was embarrassed, for Hashem, God of Legions, ruled on Mount Tzion and in Yerushalayim, and opposite his elders is honor.”  Rabi Shimon ben Menasia says, these are seven aspects which the Chachamim appointed for the righteous, and all of them were fulfilled with Rabi (Rabi Yehuda Hanasi) and his sons.

Tet: Rabi Yossi ben Kisma said, once I was walking on my way, and a man met me, greeted me, and I greeted him back.  He said to me, Rabi, where are you from?  I said to him, from a large city of wise men and scribes.  He said to me, Rabi, do you want to live with me in our place?  I will give you thousands of thousands of golden dinarim, precious stones, and pearls.  I said to him, my son, (even) if you all the silver, gold, precious stones, and pearls in the world, I will not live in a place other than that of torah, for in the time of a person’s departure (death) silver, gold, precious stones, and pearls do not accompany him, only torah and good deeds alone, as it says, “when you go it will lead you, when you lie down it will guard you, and when you awake it will be your conversation.”  “When you walk it will lead you,” in this world, “when you lie down it will guard you,” in the grave, and, “and when you awake it will be your conversation,” for the world to come.  And so too it is written in the book of psalms written by David the king of Israel, “better for you is the torah of your mouth than thousands of (pieces of) gold and silver,” and it says, “for me is the silver and for me is the gold, so said Hashem, Master of Legions.”

Yud: Hashem acquired His world with five acquisitions, and these are they; the torah, one acquisition; heaven and earth, one acquisition; Avraham, one acquisition; Yisra’el, one acquisition; and the Beit Hamikdash, one acquisition.  The torah is one acquisition, from where (do we know this)?  For it writes, “Hashem acquired me (the torah) at the beginning of His ways, before his makings of old.”  Heaven and earth is one acquisition, from where?  For it says, “so said Hashem, the heavens are My chair and the earth is My footstool, what house can you build for Me, and what place can be My resting place?” and it says, “how great are Your creations Hashem, You made them all in wisdom, the world filled with Your possessions.”  Avraham is one acquisition, from where?  For it writes, “and He blessed him and He said, blessed is Avram for the uppermost God Who acquires heaven and earth.”  Yisra’el is an acquisition, from where?  For it writes, “until they will pass, Your nation, Hashem, until they will pass, this nation which You acquired,” and it says, “for the holy ones who are on the earth, they are wonderful and all of My possessions are in them.”  The Beit Hamikdash is an acquisition, from where?  As it says, “the temple of God your hands have prepared,” and it says, “and He brought them to His holy border, this mountain His right (hand) acquired.”

Yud Aleph: All which the Holy one blessed be He created in His world, he did not create other than for His honor, as it says, “all which is called in My name, and for My honor I created it, I formed it, I also made it,” and it says, “Hashem shall reign for ever and eternity.”  Rabi Chanania ben Akashya said, the Holy one blessed be He wanted to merit for Yisra’el, therefore he increased for them torah and mitzvot, as it says, “Hashem desires for the purpose of his righteous ones, may torah be greatened and glorified.”

Mesechet Horayot

Perek Aleph

Aleph: If the court instructed to transgress upon one of any of the mitzvot in the torah, and an individual went and did (transgressed) unintentionally (for he was simply following their ruling), whether they (the judges) did it and he did it with them, they did it and he did it after them, or he did it but they didn’t do it, he’s patur (from bringing a korban) for he depended on the court.  If the court instructed (with an incorrect ruling) and one of them (a judge) knew that they made a mistake, or a student and he is fit to instruct (others), and he went and did based on them, whether they did it and he did it with them, they did it and he did it after them, or he did and they didn’t do it, behold he is chayav, because he did not depend on the court.  This is the general rule, one who depends on himself (his own opinion) is chaya, and on who depends on the court is patur.

Bet: If the court instructed, knew that they made a mistake, and retracted on what they said, whether they brought their atonement (a korban for making the public sin) or they did not bring their atonement, if one went and did based on them, Rabi Shimon says he’s patur, and Rabi Eliezer says it’s doubtful.  What is doubtful?  If he sat in his house (and did not listen to the unfolding of the court’s decision and retraction) he’s chayav, but if he went overseas (where he could not learn of the retraction), he’s patur.  Rabi Akiva said, I agree with this that he (one who went overseas) is close to patur from his obligation (to be punished).  Ben Azay said to him, how is this one different from one who sits in his house?  (Rabi Akiva responded,) for the one who was sitting in his house could have heard (of the retraction), and this one (who went overseas) could not have heard.

Gimmel: If the court ruled (that it is permissible) to transgress upon the whole body (of a specific mitzva, for instance,) if they said, there is no nidda (prohibition of sleeping with a menstruating woman) in the torah, there is no (concept of resting on) Shabbat in the torah, or there is no (prohibition against) avoda zara in the torah, behold these (courts) are patur (from bringing a korban, for the public should know not to listen to them).  If they instructed (to) annul part and uphold part (of a law), behold these (courts) are chayav (to bring a korban).  How?  If they said, there is nidda in the torah, but one who sleeps with one who keeps day by day (a woman who sees emissions outside of her normal menstruation keeps one day each time she has an emission) is patur, there is Shabbat in the torah, but one who takes from a private domain to a public domain is patur, there is avoda zara in the torah, but one who bows down (to avoda zara) is patur, behold these (courts) are chayav (to bring a korban), as it says (about bringing the korban), “and a thing disappeared (from their knowledge)”, a thing, and not a whole body.

Daled: If the court instructed and one of them knew they made a mistake, so he said to them, you are mistaken, (he says the court made a ruling) without the instructing (head) judge there, or one of them was a convert, a mamzer, a natin, or an elder who did not have children (all of whom are not allowed to serve on a court), behold these (courts) are patur, for it is written here (about bringing the korban), “assembly” (edah), and there (about judging a capital case) it says “assembly,” just as the assembly which is said there, (their decision is not valid) until all of them are fit to instruct, also the assembly said here, until they are all fit to instruct.  If the court instructed (wrongly) unintentionally and the congregation did (transgressed) unintentionally (based on the court), they bring a bull (as a korban).  (If they ruled wrongly) intentionally, and (the nation) did unintentionally, they (individuals in the nation) bring a sheep or a goat (as a chatat).  Unintentionally, and they did intentionally (the nation acted regardless of the court’s decision) they are patur (from bringing a korban, but the nation receives punishment for transgressing intentionally).

Hay: If the court instructed and the congregation or most of them did based on them, they bring a bull, and (in a case dealing with) avoda zara, they bring a bull and a goat, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, the twelve tribes bring twelve bulls, and in avoda zara they bring twelve bulls and twelve goats.  Rabi Shimon says, thirteen bulls (one for each tribe plus one for the court) and in avoda zara, thirteen bulls and thirteen goats, a bull and a goat for each tribe and a bull and a goat for the court.  If the court instructed and seven tribes did, or most of them (the tribes), based on them, they bring a bull and in avoda zara, a bull and a goat, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yehuda says, if seven tribes sinned, they bring seven bulls and the rest of the tribes who did not sin bring a (single) bull, for even those who did not sin bring because of the sinners.  Rabi Shimon says, eight bulls, and by avoda zara, eight bulls and eight goats, a bull and a goat for each tribe (that sinned) and one for the court.  If the court of one of the tribes instructed and that tribe did based on them, that tribe is chayav, and the rest of the tribes are patur, according to Rabi Yehuda.  The Chachamim say, they are not chayav except for an instruction of the great court, as it says, “and if al the assembly of Israel will err,” and not the assembly of that tribe.

Perek Bet

Aleph: If the anointed kohen (a kohen gadol who was initiated with the oil of anointing) instructs himself (wrongly) unintentionally, and did unintentionally (following the decision he made), he brings a bull (as a korban).  (If he decided wrongly) unintentionally and did (something wrong) intentionally (his action was independent of his wrong decision), or (decided) intentionally and did unintentionally, he’s patur, for the instruction of an anointed kohen for himself is like a instruction of the court for the public.

Bet: If he instructed for himself and acted by himself, he atones for himself alone.  If he instructed with the public and did with the public, he atones for himself with the public, for a court is not chayav until they instruct to annul part and to uphold part (of a law), and so to the one who is anointed (a kohen gadol).  And (the instructing body is) not (chayav) in avoda zara (as well) until the instruct to annul part and to uphold part.

Gimmel: They are not chayav other than a disappearing (forgetting) of a thing with an action done unintentionally (based on the instruction), and so the anointed one.  And not (only there, also) in avoda zara, they are not chayav except on the disappearing of a thing with an unintentional act.  The court is not chayav until they instruct (wrongly) about a thing which its intentional (transgression is punished) with karet and its unintentional (transgression is punished) with a chatat, and so too for the anointed one.  And not (only there, also) with avoda zara, until they instruct about a thing which intentionally (transgressing is punished with) karet and unintentionally (transgressing is punished) with a chatat.

Daled: They are not chayav for an ase (positive mitzva) or lo ta’ase (prohibition) which is (fulfilled) in the Beit Hamikdash, and they do not bring an asham talu’i (a guilt offering brought by one who has a doubt if he transgressed or not) for an ase or lo ta’ase in the Beit Hamikdash.  But they are chayav for an ase and a lo ta’ase by nidda, and one brings a asham talu’i on an ase or a lo ta’ase which is in nidda.  Which is a mitzvat ase by nidda?  (The commandment to) separate from a nidda (menstruant).  And a mitzvat lo ta’ase?  Do not sleep with a nidda.

Hay: One is not chayav on (improper instruction with regard to) the hearing of the voice (forcing testimony), the saying of the lips (oaths), or the tuma of the Beit Hamikdash or its holy things, and the nasi (if the ruler instructs improperly in these matters, he is not chayav), according to Rabi Yossi Hagelili.  Rabi Akiva says, the nasi is chayav in all of them except for the hearing of the voice, for the kind does not judge and is not judged, he does not testify and people do not testify about him.

Vav: All the mitzvot in the torah that one (who transgresses) intentionally is chayav karet and unintentionally a chatat, an individual brings a sheep or a goat (to atone) , the nasi, a goat, and the anointed one or a court bring a bull.  By avoda zara, the individual, the nasi, and the anointed one bring a goat, and the court (brings) a goat and a bull, the bull for an olah (burnt offering) and the goat for a chatat.

Zayin: An asham talu’i, an individual and the nasi are chayav, and the anointed one and the court are patur (they would bring a bull for instructing wrongly).  A certain asham, the individual, nasi, and anointed one are chayav, and the court is patur.  For (matters of) the hearing of the voice, the speaking of the lips, and the tuma of the Beit Hamikdash and its holy things, the court is patur, and the individual, the nasi, and the anointed one are chayav, except the kohen gadol is not chayav for the tuma of the Beit Hakidash and its holy thing, according to Rabi Shimon.  And what do they bring?  A graded korban (which is based on what the person can afford).  Rabi Eliezer says, the nasi brings a goat (for he should always be able to afford it).

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: An anointed kohen who sinned and then passed from his anointment (was replaced in his appointment), and so too a nasi who sinned and then passed from his greatness, the anointed kohen brings a bull and the nasi brings a goat.

Bet: An anointed kohen who passed from his anointment and then sinned, and so too a nasi who passed from his greatness and then sinned, the anointed kohen brings a bull and the nasi (brings) like a layman.

Gimmel: If they sinned before they were appointed and they were appointed, behold they are like laymen.  Rabi Shimon says, if they were informed (of their sin) before they were appointed, they are chayav (like a layman), and after they are appointed, they are patur.  Which is a nasi?  This is the king, as it says, “and he shall do on of all of the mitzvot of Hashem his God,” it (is referring) to a nasi who has nothing above him other than God.

Daled: And which is an anointed one?  One who anointed with the oil of anointment, not one who is increased in garments (the kohen gadol wore eight garments as opposed to the four of lay kohanim, and after the oil of anointment was hidden, this was their only distinction).  There is nothing (no difference) between a kohen anointed with the oil of anointment and a kohen who is increased in garments other than the bull which comes for all of the mitzvot (as a chatat).  And there is nothing between a kohen who is serving (as kohen gadol) and a kohen who passed (was removed from the position of kohen gadol) other than the bull of Yom Hakippurim and the tenth of the epha (a meal offering on Yom Hakippurim).  This and that are equal in the service of Yom Hakippurim, and are commanded about virgins (they may only marry virgins).  They are assur to a widow, do not become tame for (the death) of their relatives, do not loosen their hair (as a sign of mourning), do not tear their clothes (another sign of mourning), and (their death) returns a killer (who was exiled for killing accidentally).

Hay: A kohen gadol tears his clothes from below (this is an acceptable sign of mourning) and a lay (kohen) from above (the usual way).  A kohen gadol offers when grieving, but does not eat, and a lay (kohen) doe not offer and does not eat.

Vav: Whatever is more frequent than its friend comes before its friend, and whatever is holier than its friend comes before its friend.  If a bull of the anointed (kohen) and a bull of the assembly are standing (to be offered), the bull of the anointed one comes before the bull of the assembly for all of its actions.

Zayin: A man comes before a woman for keeping alive and for returning a lost object, and a woman comes before a man for being clothed and for removal from captivity, but in a time when both of them stand to be defiled (in captivity), the man comes before the woman.

Chet: A kohen comes before a levi, a levi (comes before) a yisra’el, a yisra’el (before) a mamzer, a mamzer (before) a natin, a natin (before) a convert, and a convert (before) a freedman.  When?  When they are all equal, but if the mamzer is a scholar and the kohen gadol is an am ha’aretz (ignoramus), a scholar mamzer comes before a kohen gadol (who is) an am ha’aretz.

Seder Kodashim

Mesechet Zevachim

Perek Aleph

Aleph: All zvachim (animal offerings) which were offered not for their sake (with intentions for an offering different from what was being offered) are valid, but the owners did not offer them for their obligation (if the owner was obligated to offer such a zevach, he did not fulfill his obligation), except for the pesach (paschal offering) and the chatat (sin offering, in both cases they are invalid if slaughtered not for their sake), the pesach (is invalid) in its time (if in any time where it invalid as a pesach anyway, it is considered a shlamim, peace offering, and is valid) and the chatat (is invalid) at any time.  Rabi Eliezer says, also an asham (guilt offering is invalid), (so) the pesach in its time and the chatat and asham at any time.  Rabi Eliezer said, the chatat comes (is brought) for a sin and the asham is brought for a sin, just as a chatat is pasul if not for its sake, so too an asham is pasul if not for its sake.

Bet: Yossi ben Choni says, (offerings) which are slaughtered in the name of a pesach or in the name of a chatat (though it is not one) are pasul.  Shimon Achi Azarya says, if he slaughtered them for the sake of something higher (a korban which is holier) than them, they are valid, but if for the sake of something lower than them, they are pasul.  How?  Holy of holies (the most holy korbanot) which he slaughtered for the sake of light holies (the less holy korbanot) are pasul, but light holies which he slaughtered for the sake of the holy of holies are kasher, a bechor (firstborn animal) and ma’aser (an animal tithe) which he slaughtered for the sake of a shlamim (peach offering) are kasher (for they are light holies and it is holy of holies), but shlamim which he sacrificed for the sake of a bechor or the sake of ma’aser, they are pasul.

Gimmel: A pesach which was slaughtered in the morning of the fourteenth (on Nissan, though it must be slaughtered after midday on the fourteenth) not for its sake, Rabi Yehoshua declares it valid, as id it was slaughtered on the thirteenth.  Ben Bteira declares invalid, as if it was slaughtered in the evening (which is a proper time).  Shimon ben Azay said, I have accepted (a ruling) from the seventy-two elders on the day that they in instituted Rabi Elazar ben Azarya (as head) in the yeshiva (study hall) that all zvachim which are eaten which were offered not for their sake are kasher, but the owners did not offer them for their obligations, except for the pesach and the chatat.  And Azay did not add anything other than the olah (elevation offering which is not eaten), but the Chachamim did not agree with him.

Daled: The pesach and the chatat which he slaughtered not for their sake, if he accepted (the blood), brought (to the mizbe’ach), or sprinkled (the blood) not for their sake or for their sake and not for their sake, they are pasul.  How is it for their sake and not for their sake?  If (he started his action) for the sake of a peach and (finished his action) for the sake of a shlamim.  (How is it) not for its sake and for its sake?  (If he stared) for the sake of a shlamim (and then) for the sake of a pesach.  A zevach can be invalidated with (having a different intention for any of) four things, slaughtering, accepting, bringing, and sprinkling.  Rabi Shimon validates (even if one had improper intention) in bringing, for Rabi Shimon would say, it is not possible (to have a korban) without slaughtering, without accepting, or without sprinkling, but it can be without bringing (as in a case where) he slaughters on the side of the mizbe’ach and sprinkles (right there).  Rabi Eliezer says, if one brings in a case where he has to bring, a though (of a different intention) invalidates, but in a place where it does not need to be brought, a thought does not invalidate.

Perek Bet

Aleph: All zvachim of which the blood was collected (for sprinkling) by a zar (non-kohen), one who is grieving, tvul yom (one who was tame, immersed, and has to wait until sundown to be tahor), one missing clothes, one missing atonement (for some sin), whose hands and feet were not washed, is uncircumcised, is tame, is sitting, is standing on a vessel, on an animal, or on the feet of his friend (for contact with the floor of the Beit hamikdash is needed for holiness), he invalidated it.  If he collected (the blood) with his left (hand), he invalidated it.  Rabi Shimon validates.  If it spilled on the floor and he collected it, he invalidated it.  If he put it on the ramp, not facing the base (an improper part of the mizbe’ach to sprinkle on), if he put what is to be put (sprinkled) on the bottom (half of the mizbe’ach) on the top, what is to be put on the top on the bottom, what is to be put inside (on the inner mizbe’ach) one the outer (mizbe’ach), or what is to be put on the outer on the inner, it is invalid, but there is no karet (for eating the korban).

Bet: One who slaughters a zevach (intending) to sprinkle its plod outside (of the Beit Hamikdash, which is invalid), (to sprinkle) part of its blood outside, to burn its portions (which are supposed to be burnt) outside (which is invalid), (to burn) its portions outside, to eat its meat outside (of Yerushalayim), (to eat) a kzayit of its meat outside, or to eat a kzayit of the tail (which is edible) outside, it is pasul, but there is not karet (for one who eats it).  (if he intends) to sprinkle its blood tomorrow, part of its blood tomorrow, to burn its portions tomorrow, part of its portions tomorrow, to eat its meat tomorrow, a kzayit of its meat tomorrow, or a kzayit of the skin of the tail tomorrow, it is  (called) pigul, and (one who eats it) is chayav karet for it.

Gimmel: This is the general rule, whoever slaughters, accepts, walks (the blood to the place of sprinkling), and sprinkles (with an intention) to eat the thing the way of which is to be eaten or to burn something the way of which is to be burnt, but outside its place, it is pasul but there is no karet, if outside its time, it is pigul and one is chayav upon it karet, as long has he offers (something) permitted in its way (there is not other problem with the korban).

Daled: How does he offer the permitted in its way (such that it can become pigul)?  He slaughtered in silence (with no improper intention), accepted, walked, and sprinkled (with an intention to do things) outside their time; he slaughtered (with intention) outside its time, accepted, walked, and sprinkled in silence; or he slaughtered accepted, walked and sprinkled outside its time, this is how he offered permitted in its time.  How does he not offer the permitted in its way?  If he slaughtered (with an intention for) outside its place, accepted, walked, and sprinkled outside its time; he slaughtered outside its time, accepted, walked, and sprinkled outside its place; he slaughtered, accepted, walked, and sprinkled outside its place; a pesach or chatat which he slaughtered not for their sake, accepted, walked, and sprinkled outside its time; (a pesach or chatat) he slaughtered outside its time, accepted, walked, and sprinkled not for their sake; or he slaughtered, accepted, walked, and sprinkled not for their sake, this is not offered the permitted in its way.

Hay: (If he intends) to eat a kzayit outside and (then intends to eat) a kzayit tomorrow, a kzayit tomorrow and then a kzayit outside, like half an olive outside and like half an olive tomorrow, or like half an olive tomorrow and like half an olive outside, it is pasul, but there is no karet in it (it is not pigul).  Rabi Yehuda said, this is the general rule, if the thought of the time came before the thought of the place, it is pigul and one is chayav karet on it, but if the thought of the place came before the thought of the time, it is pasul but there is not karet in it.  Chachamim say, this and that (either way it) is pasul and there is not karet.  (If he intended) to eat like half an olive (at the wrong time or place) and to burn like half an olive (at the wrong time or place) it is kosher, for eating and burning do not combine.  

Perek Gimmel

Aleph: All the ineligible (people) who slaughtered, their slaughtering is valid, for slaughtering is valid with zarim, women, slaves, and people who are tame, even for the holy of holies (most holy korbanot), as long as tame people do not touch the meat.  Therefore, they can invalidate with thought (an improper intention).  And all of them who accepted the blood (with an intention for) outside its time or outside its place, if there is lifeblood (blood in vital places) one who is valid must return and accept (again).

Bet: If a valid person accepted (the blood) and he gave it to an invalid person, he must return it to the valid person.  If he accepted it in his right (hand) and put it in his left, he must return it to his right.  Id he accepted in a holy vessel and put it in a normal vessel, it is valid.  If he put it on the ramp not opposite the base, put that which is to be put on the bottom on tom, that which is to be put on top on the bottom, that which is to be put inside outside, or that which is to be put outside inside, if there is lifeblood, a valid one must return and accept.

Gimmel: One who slaughters a zevach (with an intention) to eat a thing which it is not the way of to be eaten (outside of its time or place) or to burn something which it is not the way of to be burnt, it is valid.  Rabi Eliezer invalidates.  (If he intended) to eat something the way of which is to eat or to burn something the way of which is to burn (outside its time or place) less than a kzayit, it’s valid.  To eat like half an olive and to burn like half an olive, it is valid, for eating and burning do not combine.

Daled: One who slaughters a zevach (with an intention) to eat a kzayit of the skin, the broth (from cooking it), the jelly (from boiling the meat), the offal, the bones, the sinews, the hooves, or the horns outside of its time or outside of its place, it’s valid, and one is not chayav upon it from pigul, notar (meat left over past its time), or (consuming it) tame.

Hay: One who slaughters holy things (with an intention) to eat the embryo or the afterbirth outside (its time), he did not make it pigul.  One who does molek (the squeezing of blood onto the mizbe’ach from the neck of a bird korban) on turtledoves inside in order to eat their eggs outside, he did not make it pigul. The fat of holy things and the eggs of turtledoves, one is not chayav on them from pigul, notar, or tame.

Vav: If he slaughtered it in order to leave its blood or its portions until tomorrow, or to take them outside, Rabi Yehuda invalidates, and Chachamim validate.  If he slaughtered it in order to put it (the blood) on the ramp not opposite the base, to put that which is to be put below above, that which is to be put above below, that which is to be put inside outside, that which is to be put outside inside, that people who are tame will eat it, that people who are tame will offer it, that people who are uncircumcised will eat it, that people who are uncircumcised will offer it, to break the bones of a pesach and eat from it, or to mix its blood with the blood of invalid (korbanot), it is valid, so thought does not invalidate other than outside its time or outside its place, and a pesach and chatat not for their sake.

Perek Daled

Aleph: Beit Shamay says, all (korbanot the blood of) which are given (sprinkled) on the outer mizbe’ach, if one giving was given (they were sprinkled once), they atoned (fulfilled their purpose), but a chatat needs two (sprinklings).  Beit Hillel says, also a chatat which one giving was given it atoned, therefore, if he gave the first in the proper manner and the second (with an intention) outside of its time, it atoned, if he gave the first outside of its time and the second (with an intention) out of its place, it is pigul, and (those who eat it) are chayav karet for it.

Bet: All which are given on the inner mizbe’ach, if he missed on of the givings, he did not atone, therefore, id he gave them all properly, but one improperly, it is pasul, but there is no karet in it.

Gimmel: These are things which one is not chayav on because of pigul (they do not become pigul), the handful (taken from a meal offering), frankincense (burnt with the handful), incense (which was burned in the Beit Hamikdash every day), a mincha (meal offering) of kohanim (which they burnt), a mincha of the anointed kohen (brought every day and burnt), a mincha of (and) libation (brought with korbanot), blood (of a korban), and libations brought on their own, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, also (libations) which come with an animal (even without a mincha).  The log of oil of the metzora (brought when he recovered), Rabi Shimon says, one is not chayav on it because of pigul.  Rabi Meir says, one is chayav for pigul on it, for the blood of the asham (also brought by the metzora) allows it (to be used) and anything which has something which allows it, whether to a person (to be eaten) or to the mizbe’ach (to be burnt), one is chayav on because of pigul.

Daled: An olah (burnt offering), its blood allows its flesh for the mizbe’ach, and its skin to the kohanim.  An olah from fowl, its blood allows its flesh for the mizbe’ach.  A chatat of fowl, its blood allows its flesh for the kohanim.  Bulls that are burnt and goats that are burnt, their blood allows their portions for the mizbe’ach.  Rabi Shimon says, anything which is not on the outer mizbe’ach like a shlamim, one is not chayav on it because of pigul.

Hay: The holy things of non-Jews (which they donated to the Beit Hamikdash), one is not chayav on it for pigul, notar, or (consuming it) tame.  One who slaughters it outside it patur, according to Rabi Meir.  Rabi Yossi makes chayav.  Things which are not chayav because of pigul, one is chayav one because of notar and one is chayav on because of (consuming while) tame, except for blood.  Rabi Shimon says, by a thing the way of which is to be eaten, but like wood, frankincense, and incense, one is not chayav on them because of (consuming them) tame.

Vav: A zevach is offered for the sake of six things, for the sake of the zevach (the purpose that particular type has), for the sake of the one offering, for the sake of Hashem, for the sake of the fire (on the mizbe’ach one which it will be cooked or burnt), for the sake of the aroma (from being offered on the mizbe’ach), and for the sake of the pleasantness (for Hashem).  A chatat and an asham, for the sake of the sin.  Rabi Yossi says, also one who didn’t have in his heart for the sake of one of these, it is valid, for it is a condition of the court, for (an issur brought by) thought does not go after (matter) other than the worker (who is offering the korban).

Perek Hay

Aleph: Which is the place of zvachim?  The holy of holies, they slaughtering is in the north (side of the courtyard).  The bull and goat of Yom Hakippurim, their slaughtering is in the north, the accepting of their blood in a service vessel is in the north, and their blood requires spraying between the poles (of the ark), on the curtain (enclosing the holy of holies), and on the golden mizbe’ach.  One giving of them (if done improperly) hinders (the atonement).  The leftovers of the blood were spilled on the western base of the outer mizbe’ach, but if it wasn’t given, it doesn’t hinder.

Bet: The bulls which are burnt and the goats which are burnt, their slaughtering is in the north, the accepting of their blood in a service vessel is in the north, and their blood requires spraying on the curtain and on the golden mizbe’ach.  One giving of them hinders.  The leftovers of the blood were spilled on the western base of the outer mizbe’ach, but if he didn’t give, it didn’t hinder.  These and those are burned in the place of the ashes (a place outside of Yerushalayim where the ashes from the mizbe’ach were taken).

Gimmel: The chata’ot of the public or an individual, these are the chata’ot of the public, the goats of Rosh Chodesh (brought at the beginning of the month) and of festivals, their slaughtering is in the north, the accepting of their blood in a service vessel is in the north, and their blood requires four givings on the four corners (of the outer mizbe’ach).  How?  He would go up the ramp, turn and circle, he could come to the southeastern corner, the northeastern (corner), the northwestern, and the southwestern corner.  The leftovers of the blood were spilled were spilled on the southern base.  They were eaten within the curtains (encompassing the Beit Hamikdash), for the male kohanim, in any preparation, for one day and the night until midnight.

Daled: The olah (is) holy of holies, its slaughtering is in the north, the accepting of its blood in a service vessel is in the north, and its blood requires two givings (on two corners) which are (on) four (sides), it requires flaying, dissecting, and is all for the fire.

Hay: The zvachim of shlamim of the public and their ashamot, these are the ashamot, asham for theft (of one admits to have lied about stealing), asham for me’ila (brought if one benefits from holy property), asham of a engaged maidservant (due if one sleep with such a woman), the asham of a nazir (brought if he becomes tame during his nezirut), the asham of a metzora (after he is healed), and the asham talu’i (brought by one who has a doubt if he transgressed or not), their slaughtering is in the north, their blood is accepted in a service vessel in the north, and their blood requires two givings which are four.  They are eaten within the curtains, by male kohanim, for one day and one night until midnight.

Vav: The toda and the ram of a nazir, they are light holies, their slaughtering is anywhere in the courtyard and their blood requires two givings which are four.  They are eaten in all of the city (Yerushalayim), by anyone, with any preparation, for one day and one night until midnight.  What is taken up from them (for the kohanim), like them (the previous rules), except that what is taken up is eaten by kohanim, their wives, their sons, and their slaves.

Zayin: Shlamim, they are light holies, their slaughtering is anywhere in the courtyard, and their blood requires two givings which are four.  They are eaten in all of the city, by anyone, with any preparation, for two years and one night.  What is taken up from them is like them, except that what is taken up is eaten by the kohanim, their wives, their sons, and their slaves.

Chet: The bechor, ma’aser, and the pesach, they are light holies, their slaughtering is anywhere in the courtyard, and their blood requires one giving, as long as he gives opposite the base.  Their eating is different, the bechor is eaten by the kohanim, ma’aser, by any person; they are eaten in all of the city; with any preparation; and for two days and one night, but the pesach isn’t eaten other than the night, is not eaten after midnight, is not eaten other than in its groups (organized to eat the entire lamb), and isn’t eaten other than roasted.

Perek Vav

Aleph: The holy of holies which were slaughtered on top of the mizbe’ach, Rabi Yossi says, it is as if they were slaughtered in the north.  Rabi Yossi bar Yehuda says, from half the mizbe’ach and north is like the north, from half the mizbe’ach and south is like the south (which is invalid).  The menachot had handfuls (taken from them) anywhere in the courtyard, were eaten within the curtains, by male kohanim, with any preparation, for one day and one night until midnight.

Bet: The chatat of fowl was made (valid with melika by squeezing its blood) on the southwestern corner (of the mizbe’ach), it is valid in any place, but this was its (designated) place.  And for three things that corner was used on the bottom, and for three things on top.  On the bottom, the chatat of fowl, bringing near (a mincha before taking a handful), and (spilling of) the leftovers of the blood.  On top, the libation of water, (the libation) of wine, and the olah of fowl when it is much (too many) in the east (its usual place).

Gimmel: All who go up on the mizbe’ach go up on the right (part of the ramp), circle, and go down on the left, except those who go up for these three things (water libation, wine libation, and olah of fowl), for they would go up and return on their heels (turn around).

Daled: A chatat of fowl, how was it done?  He (a kohen) would do melika (kill the bird by making a slit) on its head near the back of its head, but not separating (tearing it apart).  He would sprinkle from its blood on the wall of the mizbe’ach.  The leftovers of the boll were drained at the base, and the mizbe’ach got nothing but its blood, it is all for the kohanim.

Hay: An olah of fowl, how was it done?  He would go up on the ramp, turn to circle (the mizbe’ach), come to the southeastern corner, and do melika on its head next to the back of its neck and separate.  He would drain its blood on the wall of the mizbe’ach.  He would take the head, circled the place of melika on the mizbe’ach, rubbed it (the head) with salt, and threw it in the fire.  The body came to him, he removed its crop, feathers, and entrails which came out with it (the crop), and threw it on the place of the ashes.  He would slit (the body) but did not separate, but if he separated, it’s valid.  He would rub it with salt and throw it in the fire.

Vav: If he did not remove the crop, the feathers, or the entrails which came out with it, did not rub it with salt, or did anything different after he drained its blood, it is valid.  If he separated (the head) with a chatat or did not separate with an olah, he invalidated it.  If he drained the blood of the head but didn’t drain the blood of the body, it is invalid.  If he drained the blood of the body but didn’t drain the blood of the head, it is valid.

Zayin: A chatat of fowl which he did melika on not (with an intention) for its sake, drained its blood not for its sake, for its sake and (then) not for its sake, not for its sake and for its sake, it is invalid.  With an olah of fowl, it is valid, only it did not go up for the owners (fulfill their obligation).  Whether a chatat of fowl or an olah of fowl which he did melika on or drained their blood (with an intention) to eat a thing the way of which it is to be eaten or to burn a thing which its way is to be burnt outside of its place, it is invalid and there is not karet.  (If he intention) was outside of its time, it is pigul and on is chayav karet on it, as long as he offered the permitted in its way (it has no other invalidation).  How does he offer the permitted in its way?  If he did melika in silence (with no intention) and drained the blood (with an intention for) outside of its time, he did melika out of its time and drained the blood in silence, of he did melika and drained the blood outside of its time, this is one who offered the permitted in its way.  How did he not offer the permitted in its way?  If he did melika outside its place and drained the blood outside its time, he did melika outside its time and drained its blood outside its place, he did melika and drained the blood outside its place, a chatat of fowl which he did melika on not for its sake and drained its blood outside its time, (a chatat that) he did melika outside its time and drained its blood not for its sake, or he did melika and drained its blood not for its sake, this is one who did not offer the permitted in its way.  (If he intended) to eat a kzayit outside and a (then) kzayit tomorrow, a kzayit tomorrow and a kzayit outside, like half an olive outside and like half an olive tomorrow, or like half an olive tomorrow and like half an olive outside, it is pasul but there is not karet in it.  Rabi Yehuda said, this is the general rule, if he thought about time came before his thought of the place, it is pigul and one is chayav karet from (eating) it, but id the thought of the place came before the thought of the time, it is pasul but there is no karet.  Chachamim say, this and that are pasul and there is no karet.  (If one intends) to eat like half an olive and to burn like half an olive, it is kasher, for eating and burning do not combine.

Perek Zayin

Aleph: A chatat of fowl which he (the kohen) did (melika on) below (on the bottom half of the mizbe’ach) in the way of a chatat for the sake of a chatat is kasher.  (If he did it) in the way of an chatat but for the sake of an olah, the way of an olah for the sake of a chatat, or like an olah for the sake of an olah, it is pasul.  If he did it above like the way of all of them (any korban), it is pasul.

Bet: An olah of fowl which he did above, like the way of an olah for the sake of an olah, it is kasher.  (If he did it) the way of an olah for the sake of a chatat, it is kasher, only it did not count for the owners.  The way of a chatat for the sake of an olah, it is pasul.  If he did it below like the way of all of them, it is pasul.

Gimmel: And all of them (pasul bird offerings) do not become tame from the place of swallowing (gullet, which is generally the source of tuma from a bird) and one can do me’ila with them, except the chatat of fowl which he did below, like the doing of a chatat for the sake of a chatat.

Daled: An olah of fowl which he did below (on the bottom half of the mizbe’ach), in the way of a chatat, and for the sake of a chatat, Rabi Eliezer says, there is me’ila with it.  Rabi Yehoshua says, there is no me’ila with it.  Rabi Eliezer says, just as a chatat (of fowl), which has no me’ila (if done) for its own sake, when he changes its sake (offers it for the sake of another korban), an olah (of fowl), which there is me’ila with, if he changes its name, isn’t it logical that there is me’ila by it?  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, no, if you say by a chatat which he changes for the sake of an olah, for he changed it for the sake of something which has me’ila, would you say such by an olah which he changed for the sake of a chatat, for he changed it for the sake of something which does not have me’ila.  Rabi Eliezer said to him, behold, holy of holies which he slaughtered in the south (part of the courtyard, whereas the north is their proper place) and he slaughtered for the sake of light holies (which may be slaughtered in the south) will prove (me right), for he changed their sake for something which does not have me’ila, but there is me’ila in them (what he slaughtered), so too you should not wonder by the olah, for even though he changed its sake for something which does not have me’ila, there is me’ila in it (his mistaken korban).  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, no, if you said by the holy of holies which he slaughtered in the south and he slaughtered them for the sake of light holies, for just as he changed their sake to a thing which has issur and heter (parts which have me’ila and parts which don’t), would you say it an olah which he changed its sake to something which is all heter (for it is all allowed to the kohanim)?

Hay: If he did melika with his left (hand), at night, if he slaughtered chulin (non-holy meat) within (the courtyard) or holies outside, they do not become take from the gullet (the source of tuma from a nevela bird, for while its melika was invalid, it makes the bird not a nevela).  If he did melika with a knife (not his nail), he did melika on chulin within, on holies outside, turtledoves which did not reach their (minimum) age, young doves which passed their (maximum) age, if its wing was withered, if its eye was blinded, or if its foot was cut off, it does become tame in its gullet.  This is the general rule, whatever was pasul in the kodesh (sanctuary) does not become tame in the gullet, but whatever wasn’t pasul in the kodesh becomes tame in the gullet.  And all the invalid things which had melika, their melika is pasul but they do not become tame in the gullet.

Vav: If he did melika and found it (the bird) to be a trefa, Rabi Meir says, it does not become tame in the gullet.  Rabi Yehuda says, it becomes tame in the gullet.  Rabi Meir said, just as with the nevela of an animal, which makes tame by touching and carrying, slaughtering makes its being a trefa tahor (meaning) that its (being a) trefa doesn’t (make things) become tame (even though it is a trefa, because it was slaughtered it does not make other things tame), a nevela of fowl, which does not make tame in touching and carrying, isn’t it logical that its slaughtering will make it tahor from its trefa.  Rabi Yossi says, it is enough for it to be like the nevela of an animal, its slaughtering makes it tahor, but not its melika.

Perek Chet

Aleph: All zvachim which are mixed up with a chatat left to die (for it was invalid but cannot be benefited from), or with an ox to be stoned, even if one (of those) mixed in with a ribo (ten thousand zvachim), they all die.  If it got mixed up with a with which a transgression has been done or which killed a person based on (the testimony of) one witness or the owner, a rove’a (animal a woman had sex with), nirba (which a man had sex with), one designated (for avoda zara), one worshipped (for avoda zara), one used to pay a prostitute, one worth the value of a dog, one of mixed breed, a trefa, or one born through Caesarian section (all of which are unfit for sacrifice), they graze until they become blemished, are sold, and he shall bring with its money (from selling it), the nicest of its kind (all the animals which were mixed up).  If it was mixed in unblemished chulin, the chulin shall be sold to those in need of that species.

Bet: If holies (got mixed in) holies (belonging to someone else), a type in its (same) type (of sacrifice), this one shall be offered for the sake of someone (unspecified) and that one will be offered for the sake of someone.  Holies in holies (but) a type not in its type, they will graze until they become blemished, will be sold, and with the money of the nicest among them he will bring one (a korban) of that (original) type, and the money of the nicest one he will bring one of that type, and he will lost the excess from his house (his money).  If a bechor (firstborn animal) and ma’aser (of animals) were mixed, they graze until they become blemished, and are eaten as a bechor and ma’aser.  Anything may be mixed other than a chatat or an asham.

Gimmel: An asham which become mixed with shlamim, they must graze until they become blemished.  Rabi Shimon says, they shall both be slaughtered in the north and eaten as the stricter of them.  They said to him, one does not bring holies to an invalid house (cause things which are valid to become invalid, for he puts more restrictions than necessary on the shlamim).  If pieces (of meat from one) were mixed with pieces (from another), if it was holy of holies in light holies, those that are eaten for one day (were mixed) in those that are eaten for two days, they are eaten like the stricter of them.

Daled: The organs of a chatat which mixed with the organs of and olah, Rabi Eliezer says, he puts them on top and I see the meat of the chatat above it as wood.  Chachamim say, let their shape (appearance) deteriorate and he’ll go out to the place of burning.

Hay: Organs (of an olah) in the organs of those which have blemishes, Rabi Eliezer says, if he offered the head of one of them, all the heads are offered, or the leg of one of them, all the legs are offered.  Chachamim say, they go out to the place of burning.

Vav: Blood which was mixed in with water, if it has the appearance of blood, it is valid (to be sprinkled).  If it (blood) was mixed with wine, they see it (the wine) as if it is water (and evaluate).  If it was mixed with (some other) blood of an animal of the blood of a wild animal, they see it as if it is water.   Rabi Yehuda says, blood does not annul blood.

Zayin: If it is mixed with the blood of invalid (korbanot) it is spilled in a water channel (sewer).  With blood for draining (from a bird which is not sprinkled), it is spilled in a water channel.  Rabi Eliezer validates it.  If he did not consult and gave (sprinkled without asking) it is valid.

Chet: If the blood of unblemished (animals was mixed with) the blood of blemished, it is spilled into a water channel.  A cup (of blood was mixed) with (other) cups (of blood), Rabi Eliezer says, if one cup is offered, all the cups are offered.  Chachamim say, eve if they offered all of the other than one of them, it must be spilled in a water channel.

Tet: Those which are given below (on the bottom half of the mizbe’ach) which were mixed in with those given above, Rabi Eliezer says, he gives above, and I see the bottom ones (ones that should be on the bottom) as if they are water, and then he goes back and gives below.  Chachamim say, they should be spilled into a water channel.  An fig he did not consult ad gave, it is valid.

Yud: Those which are given with one giving which mixed in with those which are given one giving will be given one giving.  Four givings with four givings, they are given with four givings.  Four givings with one giving, Rabi Eliezer says, they should be given in four givings.  Rabi Yehoshua says, they should be given in one giving.  Rabi Eliezer said to him, and behold, he is transgressing on (the prohibition of) you shall not diminish (from the mitzvot, for he is only doing on of the four givings for the ones which require four givings).  Rabi Yehoshua said to him, behold, he (with your ruling) is transgressing upon you shall not add.  Rabi Eliezer said to him, you shall not add is not said other than when it is by itself (and not building off a permissible act). Rabi Yehoshua said to him, you shall not diminish is not said other when it is by itself (for the blood requiring one is done properly).  And furthermore Rabi Yehoshua says, when you gave (more than once), you transgressed on you shall not add and you did an act with your hands, but when you didn’t give, you transgressed upon you shall not diminish, but you did not do an action with your hands.

Yud Aleph: Those which are given within which were mixed with those given outside, they should be spilled into a water channel.  If he gave outside and then returned and gave inside, it is valid.  (If he gave) inside and returned and gave outside, Rabi Akiva invalidates but Chachamim validate.  For Rabi Akiva would say, all of the blood which entered to atone in the sanctuary are invalid.  Chachamim say, only a chatat.  Rabi Eliezer says, also the asham, as it says, “just as the chatat just as the asham.”

Yud Bet: A chatat which one collected its blood in two cups and one of them went out (of the courtyard making it pasul), the inner one is (still) kasher.  If one of them went inside (the sanctuary), Rabi Yossi Hagelili validates the outer one (which was in the courtyard), but the Chachamim invalidate.  Rabi Yossi Hagelili said, just as a place where thought invalidates, outside (intention while slaughtering to sprinkle outside invalidates the animal), doesn’t make the rest like the (blood which is) leaving (invalid as well), a place where the thought doesn’t invalidate, inside (for such an intention does not invalidate an animal), isn’t it logical that it shouldn’t make the rest like the entering?  If it entered (the sanctuary) to atone, even if it didn’t atone, it is pasul, according to Rabi Eliezer.  Rabi Shimon says, (only) until it atones.  Rabi Yehuda says, if he brought it in accidentally, it is kasher.  All pasul bloods which are given on the mizbe’ach the tzitz (golden head plate of the kohen gadol) does not affect other than the tame, for the tzitz affects (acceptance) for the tame, but is does not affect for that which goes out.

Perek Tet

Aleph: The mizbe’ach sanctifies what is fit for it (anything fit for the mizbe’ach which touches it becomes holy).  Rabi Yehoshua says, whatever is fit for the fires (on the mizbe’ach) if it went up (on the mizbe’ach), it may not come down, as it says, “that is the olah (which says) on the flame on the mizbe’ach,” just as an olah is fit for the fires if it went up it may not come down, so too anything which is fit for the fires if it went up it may not come down.  Raban Gamliel says, whatever is fit for (offering on) the mizbe’ach, if it went up it may not come down, as it says, “that is the olah (which says) on the flame on the mizbe’ach,” just as the olah is fit for the mizbe’ach if it went up it may not come down, so too anything which is fit for the mizbe’ach if it went up it may not come down.  There is nothing (no difference) between the words of Raban Gamliel and the words of Rabi Yehoshua other than the blood and the libations, for Raban Gamliel says, they may not come down, and Rabi Yehoshua says, they may come down.  Rabi Shimon says, (even) if the zevach is kasher but the libations are pasul, the libations are kasher and the zevach is pasul, or if this and that (both) are pasul, the zevach may not come down, but the libations may come down.

Bet: And these, if they went up they may not come down, that which spent the night (without being offered, and is therefore unfit for offering), the (korban which became) tame, that which left (the courtyard), what was slaughtered (with an intention to eat) outside its time, (an intention for) outside its place, if unfit people accepted its blood, or of they sprinkled its blood.  Rabi Yehuda says, one that was slaughtered at night, its blood was spilled, or its blood went outside the curtains (of the Beit Hamikdash), if it went up, it may come down.  Rabi Shimon says it may not come down, for Rabi Shimon used to say, whatever became pasul in the kodesh (the courtyard) the kodesh accepts it, but if it didn’t become tame in the kodesh, the kodesh does not accept it.

Gimmel: These, their invalidation did not happen in the kodesh, an animal a woman has sex with, an animal which a man had sex with, one set aside (for avoda zara), that which was worshipped, one used to pay a prostitute, one with the value of a dog, one which is of mixed breed, a trefa (one which has internal blemishes), one born by Caesarian section, and those which are blemished.  Rabi Akiva validates ones which are blemished.  Rabi Chanina a sgan (assistant head) of the kohanim says, my father would push those with blemishes from atop the mizbe’ach.

Daled: Just as if these went up they may not come down, if they came down, they may not go (back) up.  But all of them that went up alive to the top of the mizbe’ach may come down.  An olah that went alive to the top of the mizbe’ach, it may come down.  If he slaughtered it on top of the mizbe’ach, he flays it and dissects it in its place (without bringing it down).

Hay: And these, if they went up, they may come down, the meat of the holy of holies, the meat of light holies, the leftover of the omer (any barley brought above the minimum is for the use of the kohanim), the two breads (brought on Shavuot), the showbreads, the leftovers of menachot (eaten by kohanim), incense, the wool that is on the head of sheep, the hair in the beard of goats, bones, sinew, horns, and hooves, when they are attached (to an animal), they may go up, as it says, “and the kohen shall burn everything (of an olah) on the mizbe’ach,” (but if) they were cut they may not go up, as it says, “and you shall do (offer) your blood the flesh and the blood.”

Vav: And all which sprang from atop the mizbe’ach should not be brought back.  And so too coals which sprang off from atop the mizbe’ach.  Organs which sprang from atop the mizbe’ach before midnight, he should return them (to finish burning), and there is me’ila by them, but after midnight, he should not return, and there is not me’ila by them.

Zayin: Just as the mizbe’ach makes that which is fit for it holy, so too the ramp makes holy.  Just as the mizbe’ach and the ramp make what is fit for them holy, all of the vessels make holy, the vessels for the moist make the moist holy, the measures of the dry make the dry holy.  But the vessels of the moist do not make the dry holy, and the measures of the dry do not make the moist holy.  The holy vessels which were pierced, if they do like the work they used to and are whole, they make holy, but if not, they do not make holy.  And all of them do not make holy other than in the kodesh (Beit Hamikdash).

Perek Yud

Aleph: Whatever is more common than its fellow comes before its fellow.  The temidim (daily offerings) come before the musafim (festive offerings), the musafim of Shabbat come before the musafim of Rosh Chodesh, and the musafim of Rosh Chodesh come before the musafim of Rosh Hashana, as it says, “next to the olah of the morning which is for (the sake of) the constant olah shall you do these.”

Bet: And whatever is holier than its fellow comes before its fellow, the blood of a chatat comes before the blood of an olah, because it makes atonement.  The organs of an olah come before the portions of a chatat because they are entirely for the fires.  A chatat comes before an asham because its blood is given (sprinkled) on the four corners (of the mizbe’ach) and the base.  An asham comes before a toda and (before) the ram of a nazir, because it is holy of holies.  The toda and the ram of a nazir come before the shlamim because they are eaten for (only) one day and require bread.  A shlamim comes before a bechor because they require giving (sprinkling) of four, leaning, libations, and waving of the breast and the thigh.

Gimmel: A bechor comes before (animal) ma’aser because its holiness is from the womb and it is eaten (only) by the kohanim.  Ma’aser comes before (sacrifices of) fowl because it is a zevach, and it has holy of holies (in the form of) its blood and its portions.

Daled: Fowl comes before menachot because they are kinds of blood (have blood).  The mincha of a sinner comes before the mincha as a donation because it comes for a sin.  A chatat of fowl comes before an olah of fowl, and so too with its hekdesh (when declaring two birds, the first is a chatat and the second an olah).

Hay: All of the chata’ot in the torah come before the ashamot except for the asham of the metzora because it comes in order to validate (finish his atonement).  All of the ashamot which are in the torah are brought two years old and are brought with (at least) the value of a shekel, except for the asham of the nazir and the asham of the metzora, for they come one year old and they do not come with the value of a shekel.

Vav: Just as these come first in their offering, so too they come first in their eating.  (If one has) shlamim from yesterday and shlamim from today, those of yesterday come first.  Shlamim from yesterday and a chatat or asham from today, those of yesterday come first, according to Rabi Meir.  Chachamim say, the chatat comes first, because it is the holy of holies.

Zayin: And in all of them the kohanim can change their way of eating, to eat them roasted, stewed, boiled, to put chulin spices into them, or to put truma spices into them, according to Rabi Shimon.  Rabi Meir says, he may not put in them spices of truma so that he will not bring the truma to the hands of being pasul (if they become notar).

Chet: Rabi Shimon said, if you saw oil which was being divided up in the courtyard, you don’t have to ask, what is it, rather, (it is) the leftovers of the wafers of menachot of a yisra’el or the log of oil of a metzora.  If you saw oil which was being put on the fire, you do not need to ask, what is that, rather, it is the leftover of wafers of menachot of kohanim and the mincha of the anointed kohen, for they (people) do not donate oil.  Rabi Tarfon says, one may donate oil.

Perek Yud Aleph

Aleph: Blood of a chatat which was sprayed on clothing, behold it (the clothing) requires washing (in the courtyard) even though the pasuk does not discuss other than those which are eaten (a chatat which is brought on the outer mizbe’ach), as it says, “it shall be eaten in a holy place.”  Whether it is eaten or whether it is an inner (chatat, which is not eaten) it requires washing, as it says, “the manner of the chatat,” one manner for all chata’ot.

Bet: A pasul chatat, its blood does not require washing, whether it was kosher at one time or if it never had a time it was kosher.  Which is that which had a time it was kosher?  One which stayed overnight  (the parts that had to be dealt with were not processed in time), one which became tame, and one which exited (from the courtyard before the sprinkling of the blood).  And which is that which did not have a time it was kosher?  One that was slaughtered (with an intention) out of its time, (was slaughtered with an intention) outside its place, one which invalid people accepted (its blood), or (invalid people) sprinkled its blood.

Gimmel: If it (blood) sprayed from the neck onto clothing, it does not require washing.  From the horn (of the mizbe’ach) or from the base (of the mizbe’ach, both where blood was sprinkled), it does not require washing.  If it fell on the floor and he collected it (and that got on his clothing), it does not require washing.  Nothing requires washing other blood which was accepted in a vessel and is fit for sprinkling.  If it sprayed on the leather (of the animal) before it was skinned, it (the leather) does not require washing.  (If blood sprayed on the skin of the animal) after it was skinned, it requires washing according to Rabi Yehuda.  Rabi Eliezer says, even after it is skinned it does not require washing.  It (a garment) does not require washing other than the place of the blood, that which is fit to become tame, and that which is fit to be washed.

Daled: Whether a garment, a sack, or leather, they require washing in a holy place.  And the breaking of an earthenware vessel (to purify it) is (done) in a holy place, and the scouring and washing of a copper vessel (to purify it) is in a holy place.  This (washing process) is a stringency by chatat more than holy of holies.
 
Hay: A garment (which was sprayed with chatat blood) which exited to outside the curtains (of the Beit Hamikdash) comes back in and one washes it in a holy place.  If it became tame outside the curtains, he tears it (to purify it), it comes back in, and he washes it in a holy place.  An earthenware vessel which exited to outside the curtains, it comes back in, and one breaks it in a holy place.  If it became tame outside the curtains, one makes a hole in it, it comes in, and one breaks it in a holy place.

Vav: A copper vessel which exited to outside the curtains, it comes back in and he scours it and washes it in a holy place.  If it became tame outside the curtains, he makes a large hole, it comes in, and he scours and washes it in a holy place.

Zayin: Whether he cooked (holy meats) in it (a pot) of if boiling (food which was holy) came upon it, whether the holies of holies or light holies, they (pots) require scouring and washing.  Rabi Shimon says, if he cooked in it from the beginning of the festival, he may cook with it the entire festival (without cleaning it each time), and the Chachamim say (he may put off washing and continue using it) until the time of eating (allowed for the korban which was cooked in it).  Scouring and washing, scouring is like the scouring of a cup (used for benching, on the inside) and washing is like the washing of a cup (on the outside).  Scouring is done with hot water and washing with cold water.  And a skewer and grill, one purifies them with hot water.

Chet: If he cooked in it (a pot) holy foods and chulin (non-holy foods), or holies of holies and light holies, if they (the holier foods) have enough to impart flavor, behold the lighter are eaten like the stricter, but they do not require scouring and washing (which is only required for holies of holies) and (if the stricter were invalid, the lighter) do not invalidate by touching.  A slice (which was invalid) which touched a (valid) slice, or a piece which touched a piece, not the entire slice and not all of the pieces are assure, it is only assur where it absorbed (from the invalid one).

Perek Yud Bet

Aleph: (A kohen who is) a tvul yom (one who immersed that day but has not yet become tahor) and one (a kohen) who lacks atonement (lacks sacrifices as the final step of becoming tahor) do not take a share in the holy (meats) to eat at night.  A griever (one with an unburied dead relative) may touch (korbanot) but does not offer and does not take a share to eat at night.  Those who have blemishes, whether permanent blemishes or temporary blemishes, they take a share and eat, but they do not offer.  Whoever is not fit for service does not take a share of the meat, and whoever has no share in the meat has no share in the hides.  Even is he was tame during the time of sprinkling the blood and he was tahor in the time of the burning of the fats, he does not take a share in the meat, as it says, “the one who offers the blood of the shlamim and the fat, of the children of Aharon, for him will the right shoulder will be a portion.”

Bet: Whatever the mizbe’ach did not merit in its meat (if it was not offered on the mizbe’ach), the kohanim did not merit in its hide, as it says, “the olah of a person,” and olah that went up (was offered) for a person.  An olah that was slaughtered not for its sake, even though it didn’t count for its owners, the hide is for the kohanim.  Whether the olah or a man or the olah of a woman, its hide is for the kohanim.

Gimmel: The hides of light holies are for the owners, and the hides of the holies of holies are for the kohanim.  (We could learn out from a) kal vechomer!  Just as with an olah, where they (the kohanim) did not merit in (having) the meat they merited in the hides, so too in the holies of holies where they merited in the meat, isn’t it logical that they should merit in the hides?  The mizbe’ach is no proof (one might think that just as in an olah the mizbe’ach merits in the meat but no hide, so too the kohanim with holies of holies could merit in meat but no hides) for the mizbe’ach doesn’t get hides from anyplace.

Daled: Any holy (korbanot) which became invalid before their flaying, their hides are not for the kohanim.  If it was after their flaying, their hides are for the kohanim.  Rabi Chanina sgan (vice) of the kohanim said, in all my days I never sat a hide going out to the place of burning,  Rabi Akiva said, from his words we learned that one who flays a bechor and it is found to be a trefah, that the hide is given to the kohanim.  The Chachamim say, there is no, ‘I didn’t see’ as a proof (it is not a valid proof), rather, it goes out to be burned.

Hay: The bulls which are burnt and rams which are burn, when they are burnt according to their procedure, they are burnt in the place of the ashes, and they cause clothes to be tame.  But if they are not burnt according to their procedure, they are burnt in the Beit Habirah (an ash heap in the Beit Hamikdash) and they do not make clothes tame.

Vav: They were carried on poles (to the place where they would be burnt).  If the first (carriers) went outside the wall of the courtyard and the last ones had not yet left, the first ones’ clothing was tame but the last ones’ clothing was not tame until they exited.  If they both left, the clothing of both of them became tame.  Rabi Shimon says, neither’s clothing becomes tame until the fire lights most of it.  If the flesh has burned, the clothes of the one who burned are not tame.

Perek Yud Gimmel

Aleph: One who slaughters and offers outside (of the Beit Hamikdash), he is chayav for slaughtering and chayav for offering.  Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, if he slaughtered inside and offered outside, he is chayav, but is he slaughtered outside and offered outside, he is patur, for he offered outside nothing other than something pasul.  They said to him, also one who slaughtered inside and offered outside, since when he brought it out he made it pasul.

Bet: A tame person who ate (kodesh meat) whether tam kodesh or tahor kodesh, he’s chayav.  Rabi Yossi Hagelili says, a tam who ate tahor (meat) is chayav, but a tame who ate tame is patur, for he ate nothing other than something tame.  They said to him, also a tam who ate tahor, since when he touched it, he made it tame.  And a tahor who ate tame is patur, for he is not chayav except on the tuma of the body (when he is tame).

Gimmel: (There is) a stringency by slaughtering more than offering, and by offering more than slaughtering.  The stringency by slaughtering is that one who slaughters for a layman (as opposed to for Hashem) is chayav, but one who offers for a layman is patur.  The stringency by offering is that two people who held a knife and slaughtered (inappropriately) are patur, but if they (each) grasped a limb and offered it, they are chayav.  If he offered (outside accidentally), returned (after removing the offering), offered (again accidentally), returned, and offered, he is chayav for each offering according to Rabi Shimon.  Rabi Yossi says, he is only chayav for one, and he isn’t chayav until it goes up to the top of an altar.  Rabi Shimon says, even if he offered it on a rock or a stone, he is chayav.

Daled: Whether kosher kodesh (meats) or pasul kodesh, if their invalidation was in the kodesh (Beit Hamikdash) , if he offered them outside, he’s chayav.  One who offers a kzayit of an olah or a kzayit of the portions outside is chayav.  The handful (taken from a mincha), frankincense, incense, a mincha of the kohanim, mincha of the anointed kohen, or a libation mincha, which one offered a kzayit of outside he’s chayav.  Rabi Elazar exempts until he offers all of it.  And all of them if he offered inside, left a kzayit, and offered that outside, he’s chayav.  And all of them which left out anything at all (part was lost before it was burned inside).  If he offered them outside, he’s patur.

Hay: One who offers holies and their portions outside is chayav.  A mincha which did not have a handful taken and was offered outside, is patur.  If he took the handful and the handful went back into it (the mincha), it’s chayav (if offered outside).

Vav: The handful and the frankincense that he offered one of them outside, he’s chayav.  Rabi Eliezer exempts until he offers the other (too).  (If he offered) one inside and one outside, he’s chayav.  Two dishes of frankincense one of which he offered outside, he’s chayav.  Rabi Eliezer exempts until he offers the second.  If one (was offered) inside and one outside, he’s chayav.  One who sprinkles a little blood outside is chayav.  Rabi Eliezer says, also one who pours (as a libation) the waters of Sukkot on Sukkot outside is chayav.  Rabi Nechemia says, the leftovers of the blood (after sprinkling) which he sprinkled outside, he’s chayav.

Zayin: One who does melika on fowl (squeezing the blood out from the neck on the side of the mizbe’ach) inside and offered it outside, he’s chaya.  If he did melika outside and offered outside, he’s patur.  One who slaughters fowl inside and offers it outside, he’s patur.  If he slaughtered outside and offered inside, he’s chayav.  If its way of readying (for it to be able to be a korban) is found to be inside (such that he will be chayav if he offers it outside), he is patur (if he readied it and offered it) outside.  If the way of readying is found to be outside, he is patur inside.  Rabi Shimon says, whatever one is chayav for outside, one is chayav for something similar inside which he (then) offered outside, except one who slaughters inside and offers outside.

Chet: A chatat which he collected the blood of in one cup, and he gave (sprinkled) outside and returned and gave inside, he is chayav, for all of it is fit (supposed) to come (be sprinkled) inside.  If he collected its blood in two cups, if he gave both of them inside, he’s patur, both of them outside, he’s chayav, one inside and (then) one outside, patur, or one outside and one inside, he’s chayav for the external, but the internal atones.  What is the thing similar to?  To one who separated (and animal to be) a chatat, it got lost, he separated another in its stead, and then the first one was found.  Behold, both of them are standing (he has two animals for one chatat).  If he slaughtered both of them inside, he’s patur, if he slaughtered both of them outside, he’s chayav, one inside and (then) one outside, he’s patur, or one outside and one inside, he’s chayav for the external, but the internal atones.  Just as the (sprinkling of the) blood exempts the flesh (from the rules of ritual misappropriation), so too he (one animal) exempts the flesh of his fellow.

Perek Yud Daled

Aleph: A chatat cow which one burned outside of its pit (for burning) and so too the sent-off goat (on Yom Hakippurim) which one offered outside, he’s patur, as it says, “and to the opening of the tent of meeting they were not brought,” whatever is not fit to come to the opening of the tent of meeting, one is not chayav for it (not being done in the proper place).

Bet: A rove’a (animal a woman had sex with), a nirba (that had sex with a man), one that is designated (for avoda zara), worshiped (by avoda zara), the hire of a prostitute, one worth the value of a dog, one that is kilayim (mixed species), a trefa (animal which has internal invalidations), or an animal delivered by Caesarian section which one offered outside, he’s patur, as it says, “before the Mishkan (tabernacle) of Hashem,” whatever isn’t fit before the Mishkan of Hashem, one is not chayav for.  Those (animals which are blemished, whether those which have permanent blemishes or those which have temporary blemishes, which one offered outside, he’s patur.  Rabi Shimon says, those which have permanent blemishes are patur, and those which have temporary blemishes, they transgress a lo ta’ase.  Turtledoves which did not reach their time (proper age) and young doves whose time has passed which he offered outside, he’s patur.  Rabi Shimon says, young doves whose time has passed, he’s patur, but turtledoves which did not reach their time, (he transgresses) a lo ta’ase.  One and its child (there is a prohibition against slaughtering a mother and child animal on the same day) and one which is missing time (is not old enough) is patur (if offered outside).  Rabi Shimon says, behold this is (transgressing) a lo ta’ase, for Rabi Shimon used to say, whatever is fit to be offered after time behold it is (transgressing) a lo ta’ase, and there is no karet in it.  But the Chachamim say, whatever has no karet has no lo ta’ase in it.

Gimmel: One (an offering) that is missing time is whether it itself (is missing time) or its owner (is missing time).  Which is missing time in its owner?  (An owner who is) a zav, a zava, one who just gave birth, or metzora, if they offered their chata’ot or ashamim outside, they are patur, but (if they offered) their olot or shlamim outside, they are chayav.  One who offers from the flesh of a chatat, the flesh of an asham, the flesh of the holies of holies, the meat of light holies, the leftovers of an omer, the two breads, the showbreads, the leftovers of menachot, pours oil (on a mincha), mixes in the oil, crumbles it, salts, brings to an altar, set a table (with showbread), fixes candles (on a menorah), takes a handful (of a mincha), or collects blood (from a korban) outside it patur,  One is not chayav for it because of being a zar (non-kohen), not because of being tame, not because of lacking garments (those of temple service), and not because of (not having) washed hands and feet.

Daled: Before the Mishkan was established, the bamot (private altars) were allowed, and service was done by firstborns.  After the Mishkan was established, bamot were prohibited, and the service was done by the kohanim.  The holies of holies were eaten within the curtains (of the Mishkan) and the light holies were (eaten) in any of the camp of Yisra’el.

Hay: When they came to the Gilgal (entered Israel with Yehoshu’a) the bamot became allowed.  The holies of holes were eaten within the curtains, and the light holies in any place.

Vav: When they came to Shilo (where the Mishkan was stationed in Israel), the bamot were prohibited.  There was no ceiling there, rather their was a house of stone below (comprising the building) and curtains above, and it was rested there.  The holies of holies were eaten within the curtains and the light holies and ma’aser sheni were eaten wherever could see,

Zayin: When they came to Nov (where they set up a Mishkan after Shilo was destroyed) and to Givon (which succeeded Nov) the bamot were allowed, the holies of holies were eaten within the curtains, and the light holies in any city in Israel.

Chet: When they came to Yerushalayim (the Beit Hamikdash), the bamot were prohibited and they din’d have another (period of) permission, and it (Yerushalayim) was its portion.  The holies of holies were eaten within the curtains and the light holies and ma’aser sheni within the wall (of Yerushalayim).

Tet: Any korbanot one made hekdesh in the time of prohibition of bamot and offered outside in a time of prohibition of bamot, behold these are (a transgression upon) an ase and a lo ta’ase, and one is chayav karet for them.  If he made them hekdesh in a time of allowance of bamot and offered them in a time of prohibition of bamot, behold these are an ase and a lo ta’ase, but one is not chayav karet for them.  If he made them hekdesh in a time of prohibition of bamot and offered them in a time of allowance of bamot, behold they are an ase, but there is no lo ta’ase in it.

Yud: These holies were offered in the Mishkan, holies which were made hekdesh for the Mishkan, public korbanot were offered in the Mishkan, but korbanot of the individual (were offered) on the bama.  The korbanot of an individual that were made hekdesh for the Mishkan should be offered in the Mishkan, but if he offered them on a bama, he’s patur.  What is the difference between an individual’s bama and a public bama (the Mishkan)?  Laying hands (on the korban), slaughtering in the north (part of the courtyard), giving (sprinkling blood) around (the bama), waving (a mincha), presenting (a mincha to the kohen), (though) Rabi Yehuda says there is no (offering of a) mincha on a bama, the service of the kohen, the clothes of service, the service vessels, the pleasant smell (burning of certain parts of a korban), the divider of blood (a red line which divided the top and bottom of the mizbe’ach), and the (need for) washing of hands and feet.  But (invalidation due to) time, leftovers, and (a korban becoming) tame are the same in both.


