	 
Mishnah. If he trained a vine or a gourd or ivy over [the sukkah] and covered it with the covering of a sukkah, it is not valid.   If [however] the sukkah-covering exceeds them in quantity, of if he cut them,   it is valid. This is the general rule. Whatever is susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness and does not grow from the soil may not be used for sukkah-covering, but whatever is not susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness and grows from the soil may be used for sukkah-covering.
Mishnah. Bundles of straw, bundles of wood, and bundles of brushwood may not serve as sukkah-covering, but all of them,   if they are untied, are valid. All materials, however,   are valid for the walls.
Mishnah. Planks may be used for the sukkah-covering. These are the words of r. Judah. R. Meir forbids them. If one places over it   a plank four handbreadths wide, it is valid provided that he does not sleep under it.  
Mishnah.if a roof [of timber]  has no plastering, r. Judah says that beth shammai ruled that  he should loosen [all the planks] and remove one from between each two,  while beth hillel ruled he should either loosen [the planks] or remove one from between two. R. Meir ruled, he should remove one from between two, but not loosed. 
Mishnah. If one roofs his sukkah with iron spits or the long boards of a bed,   and the space between them   equals them,   it   is valid. If he hollows out a haystack to make for himself a sukkah, it is no valid sukkah.
Mishnah. If one suspends the walls   from above downwards,   if they   are higher than three handbreadths from the ground, it is invalid. If he raises them from the bottom upwards, if they be ten handbreadths high, it is valid.   R. Jose says, just as from the bottom upwards a height of ten handbreadths suffices so from the top downwards does a height of ten handbreadths [suffice].
Mishnah. If one removed the sukkah-covering three handbreadths  from the walls, it is invalid.  If [the roof of] a house is breached,  and he placed a sukkah-covering over it, if there is a distance of four cubits from the wall to the covering, it is invalid.  Similarly in the case of a courtyard which is surrounded by an exedra.  If [the covering of] a large sukkah was surrounded with a material which is invalid for a sukkah-covering, if there is a space of four cubits  beneath it, it is invalid. 
	mishnah. If one makes his sukkah like a coneshaped hut or leaned it against a wall, r. Eliezer invalidates it since it has no [proper] roof, while the sages declare it valid.
Ishnah. A large reed mat   if made for reclining upon is susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness   and   is invalid as a sukkah-covering. If made for a covering,   it may be used for a sukkah-covering and is not susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness. R. Eliezer ruled, whether small or large, if it was made for reclining upon, it is susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness and is invalid as a sukkah-covering; if made for a covering, it is valid as a sukkah-covering and is not susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness.
Mishnah. He who sleeps under a bed in the sukkah   has not fulfilled his obligation.   R. Judah stated, we were accustomed to sleep under a bed in the presence of the elders, and they said naught   to us. R. Simeon said, it happened that tabi,   the slave of rabban gamaliel, used to sleep under a bed.   And r. Gamaliel said to the elders, ‘ye have seen tabi my slave, who is a scholar, and knows that slaves are exempt from [the law of] a sukkah, therefore does he sleep under the bed’, and incidentally we learned that he who sleeps under a bed   has not fulfilled his obligation.   Mishnah. If a man supports his sukkah with the legs of a bed, it is valid. R. Judah said, if it cannot stand by itself, it is invalid.
Mishnah. A disarranged  sukkah and one whose shade is more than its sun  is valid. If [the covering] is close knit like that of a house, it is valid, even though the stars cannot be seen through it.
	mishnah. If one erects his sukkah on the top of a waggon,   or on the deck of a ship,   it is valid   and they may go up into it on the festival. If he made it on the top of a tree, or on the back of a camel, it is valid,   but they may not go up into it on the festival.   If the tree [formed] two [walls] and one was made by the hands of man,   or if two were made by the hands of man and one was formed by the tree, it is valid, but they may not go up into it on the festival.   If three walls were made by the hands of man and one was formed by the tree, it is valid and they may go up into it on the festival.
	mishnah. If he makes his sukkah between trees, so that the trees form its walls,   it is valid.
	mishnah. Those who are engaged on a religious errand   are free from [the obligations of] sukkah.   Invalids and their attendants are free from [the obligations of] sukkah. Casual eating and drinking   are permitted outside the sukkah.
	mishnah. It once happened that they brought cooked food to r. Johanan b. Zakkai to taste, and two dates and a pail of water to r. Gamaliel and they said, ‘bring them up to the sukkah’.   But when they gave to r. Zadok food less than the bulk of an egg,   he took it in a towel,   ate it outside the sukkah and did not say the benediction after it.  
Mishnah. R. Eliezer said, a man is obliged to eat fourteen meals in the sukkah,  one on each day and one on each night. The sages however say, there is no fixed number  except on the first night of the festival alone.  R. Eliezer said in addition, if a man did not eat in the sukkah on the first night of the festival, he may make up for it on the last night of the festival,  while the sages say, there is no compensation for this, and of this was it said: that which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered. 
	mishnah. If a man's head and the greater part of his body were within the sukkah and his table within the house,   beth shammai declare it invalid and beth hillel declare it valid. Beth hillel said to beth shammai, did it not in fact happen that the elders of beth shammai and the elders of beth hillel went to visit r. Johanan b. Ha-horonith and found him sitting with his head and the greater part of his body within the sukkah and his table within the house, and they said naught to him?   Beth shammai answered, is that a proof? Indeed they said to him, if you have so conducted yourself, you have never in your life fulfilled the law of the sukkah.
Mishnah. All the seven days [of the festival]   a man must make the sukkah his permanent abode and his house his temporary abode. If rain fell, when may one be permitted to leave it?   When the porridge would become spoilt. They propounded a parable. To what can this be compared? To a slave who comes to fill the cup for his master, and he   poured a pitcher over his face.  

