Yoma, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses how a person can get atonement.  We should note that the Mishnah makes a seamless transition from how atonement was effected when the Temple still stood—through sacrifices, to how it is effected after the destruction—through atonement and Yom HaKippurim.  In Temple times, Yom HaKippurim itself did not effect atonement; rather Yom HaKippurim was the day upon which atoning sacrifices were offered.  By including repentance with the sacrifices, the Mishnah makes the strong ideological statement that repentance (teshuvah) is as effective as sacrifice, and would work even when sacrifices were no longer possible.  This was certainly a monumental statement for post-Second Temple Jews, one that would have given them great comfort.
Accordingly, we should note that the Torah doesn’t speak at all about repentance in connection with Yom Kippur.  Our modern conception of Yom Kippur as a day of repentance was shaped by the rabbis. Without their brilliant foresight, Yom Kippur, would probably have been lost.

Mishnah Eight
The sin-offering and the certain guilt-offering effect atonement.
Death and Yom HaKippurim effect atonement together with repentance.   
Repentance effects atonement for light transgressions: [the transgression of] positive commandments and negative commandments. 
And for severer transgressions [repentance] suspends [the divine punishment], until Yom HaKippurim arrives and effects atonement.

Explanation
Section one:  A “certain guilt-offering” is an “asham” sacrifice offered when a person knows that he has committed a certain type of sin, for instance he denied having stolen something and took a false oath over it.  An “uncertain guilt-offering” is brought when a person thinks he might have done something which he would be liable for karet if he did it intentionally, but isn’t sure if he really did it.  For instance, if he had relations with a woman and he doesn’t know if she was a menstruant or not, he brings an “uncertain guilt offering.”  This type of sacrifice doesn’t effect full atonement, because if he finds out that she really was a menstruant, meaning that he really did transgress, he will have to bring another sacrifice.  
The rabbis understand that the sacrifice causes the person who brings it to regret his sin and to make up his mind not to sin again.  In other words, sacrifices are like repentance.  Hence they effect atonement.
Section two:  Both death and Yom Kippur effect atonement, but only if the person repents either before his death or on Yom Kippur.  This is why convicted criminals who are about to be executed are given a chance to repent before their deaths.  For the rest of us who don’t usually know when we are going to die, we need to repent consistently.
Section three:  Repentance alone effects atonement for lighter sins, either positive or negative commandments.  For more serious sins, meaning those punishable by karet or by death, repentance alone is not sufficient but rather must be accompanied by Yom Kippur.       
