Arakhin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Houses in cities that are not surrounded by walls are not treated in the same way as house in walled cities. These are called “houses in courtyards” and we will the halakhot which govern them tomorrow. Our mishnah discusses what cities count as being walled. 

Mishnah Six
1) A city whose roofs [look as if] they form its wall, 
2) Or that was not encompassed by a wall in the days of Joshua ben Nun, is not considered like houses in a walled city. 
3) [A house in any of] the following counts a house in a walled city: [those in a city] of no less than three courtyards, having two houses each, which have been encompassed by a wall in the days of Joshua ben Nun, such as the old acroplis of Tzippori, the fort of Gush-Halav, old Yodfat, Gamla, G’dod, Hadid, Ono, Jerusalem and other similar cities.

Explanation
Section one: If the city does not really have a wall, but its houses are so close together that they look like a wall, it still does not count as a walled city. 
Section two: In order for a city to count as a walled city it has to have had a wall around it in the time of Joshua. In other words, the status of walled or not walled is determined by the status of the city when the land was first conquered and then divided up to the original tribes. This is probably because these laws refer to ancestral inheritance, and ancestral inheritance begins at the time of Joshua. 
Section three: In order to count as a walled city the city must fulfill two main conditions:
1) Firstly, it must be large enough to be considered a city. The mishnah requires the city to have at least three courtyards, each with two houses. 
2) Second, the city has to have been surrounded by walls at the time of Joshua. There are eight such cities listed here. Tzippori and Yodfat are in the Lower Galilee, and Gush-Halav and Gamla are in the Upper Galilee. G’dod (or in other versions, G’dor) is on the other side of the Jordan and Hadid and Ono are in Judea, near Lod. Jerusalem, I am assuming, is familiar to everyone. 
