Avoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
Since this mishnah contains two mishnayoth from two different sages, we will treat each one individually.
There were two Tannaitic sages by the name of Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob.  The first lived during the time of the Second Temple, and the second was a student of Rabbi Akiva.  This mishnah is from the latter sage.  

Mishnah Eleven—Part One
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob said: he who performs one commandment acquires for himself one advocate, and he who commits one transgression acquires for himself one accuser.   
Repentance and good deeds are a shield against punishment.  

Explanation—part one
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob uses a metaphor to show how important each one of a person’s good deeds and how destructive each transgression can be.  Whenever a person performs a commandment, it is as if he creates an advocate for himself, an advocate that will argue that he deserves a reward in the world to come.  Every deed, no matter how little, should be important in one’s eyes.  
Repentance and good deeds are as a shield against punishment: both repentance and good deeds keep away harm and tribulations.  Note that repentance is mentioned before good deeds.  According to the rabbis, a penitent was even greater than one who had never sinned.  Furthermore, repentance can reverse one’s previous transgressions into merits.   

Introduction—section two
Rabbi Yochanan Hasandlar was another student of Rabbi Akiva’s.  The word “hasandlar” either means that he was a sandal maker or that he was from Alexandria.
  
Section two
Rabbi Yochanan Hasandlar said: every assembly which is for the sake of heaven, will in the end endure; and every assembly which is not for the sake of heaven, will not endure in the end.

Explanation—section two
An example of an assembly for the sake of heaven was the assembly of Israel before Mount Sinai.  An example of an assembly not for the sake of heaven was the assembly of those who wished to build the Tower of Babel.  The first assembly still endures, whereas the second assembly ceased to endure.  
The assembly of Israel at Sinai can be seen as the paradigmatic assembly, searching for truth and righteousness.  The assembly which wished to build the Tower of Babel only gathered to lord it over one another.  Such an assembly will never endure.  

Questions for Further Thought:
 Which assemblies in our time are for “the sake of heaven” and which are not?  Do the former endure longer than the latter?  
