Avoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
Greater is learning Torah than the priesthood and than royalty, for royalty is acquired by thirty stages, and the priesthood by twenty-four, but the Torah by forty-eight things—
1) By study, 
2) Attentive listening,   
3) Proper speech,   
4) By an understanding heart,   
5) By an intelligent heart,   
6) By awe,   
7) By fear,   
8) By humility,   
9) By joy,   
10) By attending to the sages,   
11) By critical give and take with friends,   
12) By fine argumentation with disciples,   
13) By clear thinking,   
14) By study of Scripture, 
15) By study of mishnah, 
16) By a minimum of sleep,   
17) By a minimum of chatter,   
18) By a minimum of pleasure,   
19) By a minimum of frivolity,   
20) By a minimum of preoccupation with worldly matters,   
21) By long-suffering, 
22) By generosity,   
23) By faith in the sages,   
24) By acceptance of suffering.  

Explanation
This mishnah begins by stating that the crown of Torah is greater than that of the priesthood or royalty.  This message has been one of the central themes of all of tractate Avoth.  The hereditary position of the priest and the king, two of the central figures of leadership in the Bible and in the Second Temple period, is surpassed, according to the rabbis, by the exalted position of the Torah scholar.  Indeed this is one of the revolutions wrought by the rabbis.  Jewish leadership was open not just to those born into a certain class, but to any person who worked hard enough to earn it through the study of Torah.
The mishnah states that royalty is earned through thirty “stages”.  This is understood by commentators to mean thirty special rights that only a king has.  Some of these were listed in chapter two of Mishnah Sanhedrin and some are in the Bible.  We will not list these here, because, in my opinion, this is only an aside in the mishnah.  The twenty-four stages of the priesthood are the twenty-four different types of things they receive as gifts from other Israelites (agricultural and sacrificial gifts).
With regard to Torah, the mishnah contains the first twenty-four of a list of forty-eight ways in which Torah is acquired.  Since most are self-explanatory, I will only comment on things that require further explanation. 
Proper speech:  this means that he must put his learning into proper order, much in the same way that the Mishnah is ordered in an organized fashion.      
By awe:  this refers to fear of one’s teacher.   
By fear:  this refers to fear of God.
By humility:  humility prevents the student from being too afraid to ask a question.
By joy:  only by enjoying learning can a student hope to be good at what he is doing or learning.   
By attending to the sages:  a student of Torah does not only learn from a sage’s words, but from his actions as well.  This is why the student must serve as an apprentice to his teacher.   
By critical give and take with friends:  Torah cannot be studied alone.     
By fine argumentation with disciples:  once a person acquires the status of Teacher, he must learn from the questions his students/disciples ask him.  From personal experience I can testify that I have to teach what I am learning to others.  Indeed, as much as you may be learning from Mishnah Yomit, I guarantee that I am learning more by being your teacher.     
By a minimum of sleep:  too much sleep is a waste of time and leads one to be lazy.  However, not enough sleep also can be damaging to the study of Torah, for it weakens the body and mind.  The ancient rabbis recommended eight hours of sleep a night.    
By long-suffering:  an angry person will have great difficulty in learning.  In order to learn a person must be tolerant and patient.
By acceptance of suffering:  this refers to one who accepts his fate in life and does not challenge God.  
