Avoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The first statement in our mishnah is from Rabbi Elazar of Bartotha, a colleague of Rabbi Akiva’s.  
The second statement in this mishnah is attributed to Rabbi Shimon, but this is probably a mistake in the printed edition of the mishnah.  The real author of the statement is Rabbi Jacob, who was one of Rabbi Judah Hanasi’s teachers.

Mishnah Seven
1) Rabbi Elazar of Bartotha said: give to Him of that which is His, for you and that which is yours is His; and thus it says with regards to David: “for everything comes from You, and from Your own hand have we given you” (I Chronicles 29:14).  
2) Rabbi Jacob said: if one is studying while walking on the road and interrupts his study and says, “how fine is this tree!” [or] “how fine is this newly ploughed field!” scripture accounts it to him as if he was mortally guilty.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Elazar preaches that one should not be stingy in giving any form of charity (tzedakah), be it charity to the poor or any of the potential donations to the Temple (or nowadays Jewish organizations) for in the end everything comes from God.  According to a story in the Talmud, Rabbi Elazar did not only preach this, but fulfilled it himself.  Whenever the charity collectors saw him they would run away because he would always give them everything that he owned.  
Section two:  Rabbi Jacob’s statement is one of the more memorable statements (at least in my mind) in all of Avoth.  What seems to be an innocuous appreciation of nature or human agricultural work, is turned by Rabbi Jacob into a mortal sin.  Studying Torah is so important in the eyes of the rabbis that one must allow no distractions, even something as innocent as a tree or field.  
Note that the term “mortally guilty” was also used above in mishnah four.  However, there, where the person woke at night or walked alone on the road and didn’t learn Torah, he was actually “mortally guilty”. Here in our mishnah it is only “as if he was mortally guilty”.  For at least this person mixed the studying of Torah with other things, as opposed to the one mentioned in mishnah four who neglected Torah study altogether.
