Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Sixteen

Introduction
After completing the teachings of the “pairs” Mishnah Avoth turns to the teachings of the patriarchs, the leaders of the Jewish people who were from the family of Hillel.  Rabban Gamaliel of our mishnah is Rabban Gamaliel the elder, who was the grandson of Hillel.  He was the patriarch during the final years of the Second Temple.  He is also the first who is called by the title “Rabban” a title reserved (with one exception) for the patriarchs from Hillel’s family.  
Another interesting thing to note is that almost all of the remainder of Avoth does not use the terminology “received from him/them”.  While this change in terminology in the mishnah is certainly significant, it is hard to know exactly what the significance is.  One thing is clear:  Rabban Gamaliel, the first person to be called Rabban, and the first person in Avoth not to “receive”, opens a new era in the history of the Oral Torah.

Mishnah Sixteen
Rabban Gamaliel used to say: 
appoint for thyself a teacher, 
avoid doubt, 
and do not make a habit of tithing by guesswork.  

Explanation
The first statement of Rabban Gamaliel is the same statement taught by Rabbi Joshua ben Perahiah, in mishnah six.
“Avoid doubt” means that if a person should be confronted by a doubtful halachic case, for instance he doesn’t know whether something is pure or impure, he should not decide for himself, but rather he should ask a higher authority, a rabbi whose knowledge is greater.  For if the person says that something is impure and it was really pure, he will cause a financial loss to the owner.  And if he says it was pure and it was really impure, he will cause someone to transgress.  Note how this statement connects to the previous one.  In order to avoid doubt a person must have a teacher.
Before one eats his produce he must give two tithes.  The first tithe goes to the Levite and the second tithe must either be consumed in Jerusalem (during the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th years of a Sabbatical cycle) or be given to the poor (during the 3rd and 6th years).  Rabban Gamaliel teaches that one should not tithe by estimate, but rather should make sure that his tithes are precise.  This also connects with the previous statement, that one should avoid doubt.  If one tithes by estimate, his food is considered “doubtfully tithed produce”, which is forbidden.  
This final statement is also understood by commentators as meaning that a person should not make any halachic decisions by guesswork.  Rather he should carefully check his sources to make sure that his decision is not only reasonable, but correct. 
