Avoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Thirteen

Introduction
Rabbi Judah, the author of the first saying in this mishnah, was the son of Rabbi Ilai, and was a student of Rabbi Akiva and of Rabbi Tarphon.  Rabbi Judah is the most prevalent sage in the entire Mishnah.  When he disputes with Rabbi Meir or Rabbi Shimon (two sages with whom he often disputes) the halakhah is always according to his view.
Rabbi Shimon is Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, the famous sage who according to legend wrote the Zohar.  He is also a student of Rabbi Akiva’s.

Mishnah Thirteen
1) Rabbi Judah said: be careful in study, for an error in study counts as deliberate sin.
2) Rabbi Shimon said: There are three crowns: the crown of torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of royalty, but the crown of a good name supersedes them all.  

Explanation
Section one:  The study of Torah, of which Rabbi Judah speaks, is one in which the one studying compares different traditions and strives to learn the matter deeply, its reasons and its details, all in order to know what the correct halakhah should be.  One who errs in this type of learning, and therefore makes an incorrect halakhic ruling, is considered as if he did so intentionally, and therefore has intentionally caused someone else to sin.  A rabbi must be very careful in his rulings, and carelessness is considered to be as sinful as intentionally making a mistake. 
Note that in this mishnah we can detect the tension between tradition and innovation.  The “study of Torah” referred to does not mean the mere recitation of the learning one has received.  The “study of Torah” means delving into Torah to come up with rulings that have not been made before.  One who passes down his tradition word for word as it was received does not have to worry as much, because he is not adding anything of his own.  However, one who adds his own reasoning, must be extremely cautious, and if he carelessly makes an error, it is counted against him as if he did so intentionally.  While innovation, according to Rabbi Judah, is important and possible, it requires more caution than mere transmission.
Section two:  There are three crowns that the Torah teaches us to respect:  1)  one who has learned Torah; 2) the priest; 3) the King.  These are representative of the three types of leadership in Israel, the sage/prophet, the priest who is connected to the Temple and the king who governs the people.  However, Rabbi Shimon says there is a crown greater than all three, and that is the crown of a good name.  This can be proven by the fact that if any of these three, the sage, the priest or the king behaves badly by sinning and thereby gains an ill reputation, we are no longer obligated to respect that person.  This is a statement of the responsibility of leaders.  A leadership position in society does not automatically entitle one to respect, without any connection to actions.  A leader who wishes to be respected must earn that respect by his deeds.
An interesting commentary on the three crowns is that they are representative of three types of qualities that leaders often have:  the king is wealthy, the priest is from an aristocratic family, and the sage is intelligent.  In all of these cases the crown is meaningless, without the crown of a good name.    
