Avoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
Akabyah ben Mahalalel lived in the time of Hillel, before the destruction of the Temple.  We learned about the conflicts that this sage had with the other sages in Eduyoth 5:6-7.

Mishnah One
Akabyah ben Mahalalel said: mark well three  things and you will not come into the power of sin: 
Know from where you come, and where you are going, and before whom you are destined to give an account and reckoning. 
From where do you come? — From a putrid drop. 
Where are you going? — To a place of dust, of worm and of maggot.  
Before whom you are destined to give an account and reckoning?  — Before the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he. 

Explanation
Akabyah ben Mahalalel teaches a strategy whereby a person can avoid the clutches of sin.  A person should first of all remember his humble origins, a drop of semen.  In Avoth de-Rabbi Nathan, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar teaches a parable:  to what may this be likened?  To a king who built a large palace and decorated it, but a tannery pipe led through it and emptied at its doorway.  Says every passerby: “How handsome and magnificent this palace would be if it were not for the tannery pipe coming through it!”  So too is man.  If then, with a foul stream issuing from his bowels, he exalts himself over other creatures, how much the more so would he exalt himself over other creatures if a stream of precious oil, balsam or ointment issued from him!.
Where are you going? — To a place of dust, of worm and of maggot:  remembering that the end of all human beings is the same, and that in the end we will all go to our graves, keeps a person humble and prevents him from greedily seeking material gain.  
About this mishnah Maimonides comments, “Reflection on his origin will lead a man to humility.  When he contemplates his ultimate end, he will get to despise mundane matters.  And when he contemplates the majesty of the Commander, he will come to obey His commandments speedily.  And when a person succeeds in keeping his mind on these three things, he will sin no more.”
