Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah contains the teaching of Yose ben Yochanan, the second Sage of the first “pair”.  Midrash Shmuel makes an interesting note on the order of the chapter so far.  Shimon the Righteous (mishnah two) stated that the world depends on three things:  1)  Torah; 2) Worship (which is the same word as servitude); 3)  acts of piety. Antigonus (mishnah three) spoke of servitude, Yose ben Yoezer (mishnah four) spoke of Torah and now Yose ben Yochanan will speak of acts of piety, namely helping the poor.

Mishnah Five
Yose ben Yochanan (a man) of Jerusalem used to say: 
1) Let thy house be wide open, and let the poor be members of thy household.
2) Engage not in too much conversation with women. 
a) They said this with regard to one’s own wife, how much more [does the rule apply] with regard to another man’s wife. 
b) From here the Sages said:  as long as a man engages in too much conversation with women, he causes evil to himself, he neglects the study of the Torah, and in the end he will inherit gehinnom.  

Explanation
Section one:  If in the previous mishnah we learned that one should open his house to Sages, in this mishnah we learn that one should open his house to the poor. 
Section two:  This section strikes a strongly misogynistic note. This Mishnah’s opinions on women does not (and in my humble opinion, should not) agree with our modern sensibilities.  In our society women are treated as equals to men (or they should be treated as equals to men).  Needless to say, women were not seen as equal to men two thousand years ago (or even 50 years ago!).  We should keep in mind that women did not receive the education that men received, and in general were not considered to be as intelligent as men.  Therefore it is not surprising that Yose ben Yochanan warns men to avoid talking to women. Talking to women was considered the antithesis of Torah learning, because they assumed that women could not talk Torah.  
If we were to translate the advice in this section to our situation, the advice is not to waste one’s time away with idle chat, for such chat limits the time that one has to learn Torah.  
Note that sections 2a-b are not from Yose ben Yochanan himself but rather are the words of later Sages appended to his statement.   They both explain the statement and expand upon it.  
