Avoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
The Mishnah now begins to list the sayings of the students of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai, each of whom said three things.  The first student is Rabbi Eliezer.  The second half of this mishnah is not part of the original list but a later addition to the mishnah.  This is why there are actually four sayings in the mishnah.  

Mishnah Ten
They [each] said three things:
1) Rabbi Eliezer said:
a) Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own;   
b) And be not easily provoked to anger;   
c) And repent one day before your death.
2) And [he also said:] warm yourself before the fire of the wise, but beware of being singed by their glowing coals, for their bite is the bite of a fox, and their sting is the sting of a scorpion, and their hiss is the hiss of a serpent, and all their words are like coals of fire.

Explanation  
Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own:  this is similar to the famous saying of Rabbi Akiva, “what is hateful to you, do not do to others.”  A person should be as careful about the honor of his fellow as he is about his own honor.  Another explanation of this statement is that if one sees that his close friend is being honored, instead of being jealous of his friend, he should enjoy that honor as if it was his own.     
And be not easily provoked to anger:  according to the rabbis, anger brings one to sin and to forget one’s Torah learning.    
And repent one day before your death:  since a person does not know when he will die, this statement means that one should constantly be repenting, lest he die.  One commentator explains that this is the reason that people do not know how long they will live.  If a person knew he was about to die, he would not engage in anything useful in this world; if he knew his day of death was far off, he would not engage in good works, for he would say, “There is still time”.  
Section two:  If a person comes to learn Torah, he must treat that Torah as if it were a dangerous, yet beneficial fire.  Just as a person who sits by a campfire sits as close as he can without getting burned, so too a student of Torah should draw as near as possible without coming too close and thereby being burned.  Mixing his metaphors, Rabbi Eliezer likens the words of the sages to the bite of a fox, the sting of a scorpion, the hiss of a snake and flaming coals.  This mishnah points out the awesome power of Torah, which can both heal and warm a person, and yet at the same time burn and destroy.  
