Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Fifteen

Introduction
This mishnah contains Shammai’s teaching. Note that the mishnah contained several teachings of Hillel and only one of Shammai.  This demonstrates how much more dominant Hillel and his school were in the world of the rabbis.

Mishnah Fifteen
Shammai used to say: 
make your [study of the] Torah a fixed practice; 
speak little, but do much; 
and receive all men with a pleasant countenance.

Explanation
Shammai had a reputation for being severe, perhaps even irritable.  This is exemplified in the famous story of a non-Jew who came before him and asked him to teach him the whole Torah on one foot.  Shammai promptly threw him out of the study hall, whereas Hillel eloquently told the non-Jew, “‘love your neighbor as yourself’, the rest is all commentary, go and learn.”  Despite Shammai’s reputation, his teaching does not laud such qualities, but rather Shammai emphasizes that one should act pleasantly to others.
Shammai’s first statement is that a person should make his Torah learning a fixed practice.  In other words, he should not study only in his spare time, when he finds a free moment, but set aside fixed times to learn, and make them the focal point of his life.  Another interpretation of this line is that when someone learns something new, he should make it a fixed part of his consciousness and not allow himself to forget what he has learned, so that he could teach it to others.  
The second statement is that one should speak little and do much.  This is learned through the example set by Abraham, who told his guests that he would bring them “a morsel of bread” (Genesis 18:5).  In the end, Abraham brought them much more than a morsel of bread; he brought them butter and milk and a calf which he had prepared (vs. 8).  
The third statement teaches that when one helps others he must do so cheerfully. Visiting the sick, giving charity to the poor, welcoming guests into one’s home and giving presents to friends must all be done with joy, for if he does so with a downcast face, his good deed will be spoiled.  
