Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah contains the teachings of Judah ben Tabbai, the first sage of the third “pair”.  The subject of his teaching is the proper attitude of the judge to the litigants who come before him.

Mishnah Eight
Judah ben Tabbai and Shimon ben Shetach received [the oral tradition] from them.
Judah ben Tabbai said: do not [as a judge] play the part of an advocate; and when the litigants are standing before you, look upon them as if they were [both] guilty; and when they leave your presence, look upon them as if they were [both] innocent, when they have accepted the judgement.

Explanation
Judah ben Tabbai teaches three things concerning the attitude of the judge.  The first is that the judge should not be an advocate for either side.  If a litigant does not make the best claim that he could make, the judge is not allowed to make such a claim on his behalf. In other words the judge cannot act the part of the lawyer, but he must judge based on the claims actually made.  We should note that lawyers were not usual participants in trials in the time of the mishnah.  
Another version of this teaching is that the judge should not make himself like “the chief of the judges” (in Hebrew there is only a one letter difference between “chief of the judges” and “advocate”, the former beginning with an aleph and the latter with an ayin.  The reading “chief of judges” is found in the better manuscripts of the mishnah).  This means that a judge should not make himself like the chief justice who does not actually look into the details of the case.  Rather the judge has the responsibility to carefully check all of the facts before he makes his ruling.  
The second two teachings are basically the flip side of the coin of each other.  Before the judgement is delivered the judge must examine both parties as if both are guilty.  Even if he thinks that one side is telling the truth, he must examine both impartially and with a skeptical eye, for if he favors one side before the trial, justice will not be served.  However, when the sides accept the judgement, he must look at both sides as innocent.  This may be for two reasons: first of all, the fact that the one found guilty accepts his judgement means that in the end he was willing to do the right thing.  His acceptance of the judgement is a form of repentance.  Second, the judge can never be one hundred per cent of the correctness of his sentence.  
