Avoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah continues to list calamities that come to the world as a result of sin.

Mishnah Nine
1) Wild beasts come to the world for swearing in vain, and for the profanation of the Name.   
2) Exile comes to the world for idolatry, for sexual sins and for bloodshed, and for [transgressing the commandment of] the [year of the] release of the land.   
3) At four times pestilence increases: in the fourth year, in the seventh year and at the conclusion of the seventh year, and at the conclusion of the Feast [of Tabernacles] in every year. 
a) In the fourth year, on account of the tithe of the poor which is due in the third year.   
b) In the seventh year, on account of the tithe of the poor which is due in the sixth year; 
c) At the conclusion of the seventh year, on account of the produce of the seventh year; 
d) And at the conclusion of the Feast [of Tabernacles] in every year, for robbing the gifts to the poor.

Explanation
Section one:  A vain oath is one taken unnecessarily (see Shevuoth 3:8).  Profaning God’s name refers to one who sins in public, thereby giving not only himself a bad name but all of Judaism.  It can also refer to the sin committed by a respectable person, from whom others learn.  When such a person sins it causes a greater profanation of God’s name than when a regular person sins.  The Meiri draws a connection between the punishment and the crime.  By taking a vain oath and profaning God’s name, the person attempts to bring God’s holiness down a level.  As a punishment God brings him down to the level of an animal and wild animals come and attack him.
Section two:  Exile, which is the ultimate punishment, comes from a trio of the worst crimes: idol worship, sexual crimes (incest and adultery) and murder.  Generally, if a person is told that he must sin or he will be killed, he is supposed to commit the sin.  The three exceptions are idol worship, sexual crimes and adultery.  When people willingly commit these sins, God will exile them from their land.  According to Jewish legend, it is for these three sins that the first Temple was destroyed.  
During the seventh year Jews are not allowed to work their land.  The punishment for not observing this law is that the land itself will exile you from living on it.  This is another case of “measure for measure”; the punishment fits the crime.
Section three:  This section expands on section four of the previous mishnah, where we learned that “Pestilence comes to the world for …neglect of the law regarding the fruits of the sabbatical year.”  Fruits of the sabbatical year (which grow on their own without the field having been worked) should be left in the field to be collected by the poor.  One who collects them is actually stealing from the poor.  Our mishnah teaches that pestilence can come as a result of other crimes committed involving food intended for the poor, and that the punishment comes after immediately after the sin has been committed.  In the third and sixth years, the second tithe goes to the poor.  When people don’t give those tithes, there will be pestilence in the fourth and seventh years.  The punishment that comes at the end of the seventh year was already mentioned above.  The pestilence that comes after the Feast of Tabernacles (Sukkoth) is retribution for not leaving parts of the harvest for the poor.  According to the Torah the corners of the field, things that have fallen and things that have been forgotten must be left for the poor.  Since the main harvest time in Israel is in the fall, the punishment for not leaving these things to the poor comes after Sukkoth.  

