Avoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
The first half of the mishnah is another statement of Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa, the author of the previous mishnah.  The second half of the mishnah is from Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas, a contemporary of Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai.

Mishnah Ten
1) He used to say: one with whom men are pleased, God is pleased.  But anyone from whom men are displeased, God is displeased.
2) Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas said: morning sleep, midday wine, children’s talk and sitting in the assemblies of the ignorant put a man out of the world.

Explanation
Section one:  God’s approval or disapproval with a person is dependent upon the way that person acts with other human beings.  If the person helps his fellow neighbor and performs acts of charity and loving kindness, not only are people pleased with him, but God is as well.  However, if a person is not kind to others, and does not speak with them in a gentle manner, God is displeased with him even if he is a great scholar.  
One interesting note that a commentator on the mishnah made is that the mishnah speaks of him “with whom men are pleased” and not “all men are pleased” for there is no person who is pleasing to everyone.  
Section two:  According to Rabbi Dosa, a person should not sleep late in the morning, for that is a waste of time.  Keep in mind that before electric light was invented people went to sleep much earlier than they do now.  Sleeping late in the morning was therefore truly oversleeping and a waste of time.  Drinking wine during the middle of the day is also a sign of laziness, for it will make one sluggish and less productive during his waking hours.  Speaking with children, while it may be fun, diverts one from engaging in higher pursuits (note that this is not directed at those educating the children).  Finally, engaging in pointless gatherings of the uneducated is not proper behavior for one who wants to lead a life of Torah.  This would include something like sitting and loitering on street corners.  All of these things “take a person out of the world”.  This is a phrase we saw in chapter two, mishnah eleven.  I understand this as meaning that they cause a person to lose the precious time he has on this earth, by wasting it with meaningless activity.  
