Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
Abtalion is the second sage of the fourth “pair”.

Mishnah Eleven
Abtalion used to say: Sages be careful with your words, lest you incur the penalty of exile, and be carried off to a place of evil waters, and the disciples who follow you drink and die, and thus the name of heaven becomes profaned.  

Explanation
Abtalion’s teaching deals with the accountability of the Sage, one who is responsible for continuing the tradition and teaching the world the proper interpretation of Scripture.  Abtalion warns the Sages to be careful with their words, to make them clear so that their students will not misunderstand their intention.  In many places the rabbis teach how dangerous the words of Torah can be if not understood in the right contexts, by people with the correct intentions in their application.  A teacher has a responsibility not only to teach by reciting what he knows, but he must make sure that it is understood by the listener as well.  
Improper teaching will eventually force the teacher to leave his place in exile and go to a place of “evil waters”.  This is probably a euphemism for heretical beliefs.  If a teacher is not careful with his words, his students may end up as heretics.  This certainly occurred in the times of Abtalyon, when many students left the path of the Sages and joined other sects, such as the Sadducees or Essenes. 
A disciple of a Sage leaving the path of Torah and joining other sects is not just a loss for the disciple himself, but it is a profaning of God’s name, and may lead to even worse consequences.  People are very conscious of where people learned.  For instance in Israel a person who grew up in a secular home and considers himself an atheist is not news.  However, when, as has happened on occasion, a person who grew up in a Hasidic or ultra-orthodox home, and perhaps was even related to a famous rabbi, becomes an atheist and is politically active for a secular party—that is news.  The fact that the person knows the tradition and rejects it is makes his rejection more consequential than that of one who rejects the tradition out of ignorance.  His rejection reflects badly on the tradition and its source as well, God.  It will lead others to think that if one who knew the Torah so well, said that it was not true, than why should we even bother to learn.  For this reason teachers must be very careful that students do not misinterpret their words.  
I might add that this is especially difficult with learning over the internet, in situations where the teacher has no idea of who is reading what s/he writes.  When sitting face to face with students, a teacher can directly answer their questions, and clarify misunderstood points.  When these words which I write on a computer in my home in Israel, go up on the internet, billions of people, none of whom I know, will have access to them.  I guess the advantages of having such a large potential audience are also balanced by some of the inherent dangers.  
