Avoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah contains a teaching of Rabbi Hanina who was the vice-high priest, (he would fill in for the high priest when he couldn’t serve).  Rabbi Hanina lived through the destruction of the Second Temple.  Perhaps there is a connection between his statement and the great political turmoil he witnessed during his lifetime.
The second section contains the teaching of Rabbi Hananiah ben Teradion, who was a contemporary of Rabbi Akiva’s.  He was martyred by the Romans during the Bar-Kochva revolt.  Legend has it that he was wrapped with a Torah scroll and then burned alive.  This legend is part of the Yom Kippur liturgy, contained in a section called the martyrology.

Mishnah Two
1) Rabbi Hanina, the vice-high priest said: pray for the welfare of the government, for were it not for the fear it inspires, every man would swallow his neighbor alive.   
2) R. Hananiah ben Teradion said: if two sit together and there are no words of Torah [spoken] between them, then this is a session of scorners, as it is said:  “nor sat he in the seat of the scornful…[rather, the teaching of the Lord is his delight]” (Psalms 1:1); but if two sit together and there are words of Torah [spoken] between them, then the Shekhinah abides among them, as it is said: “then they that feared the Lord spoke one with another; and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before Him, for them that feared the Lord and that thought upon His name” (Malachi 3:16).
a) Now I have no [scriptural proof for the presence of the Shekhinah] except [among] two, how [do we know] that even one who sits and studies Torah the Holy One, blessed be He, fixes his reward? — As it is said: “though he sit alone and [meditate] in stillness, yet he takes [a reward] unto himself” (Lamentations 3:28).

Explanation
Section one:  One should pray for the welfare of the government, even a non-Jewish government.  For without government anarchy reins, and people could not peacefully pursue their course of life.  Rabbi Hanina is aware that governments are not perfect, as he certainly was witness to the tyranny of being ruled by a foreign government.  Nevertheless, in this statement he recognizes that even the sometimes oppressive rule of the Roman is preferable to anarchy.
Section two:  From the verse in Psalms used as a prooftext we can see that the opposite of a gathering of scorners (synonymous with sinners) is a gathering for the study of Torah.  Therefore any gathering in which Torah study is completely absent is considered a gathering of scorners.  Furthermore, the statement is that there must be between them words of Torah. It is not sufficient that each studies or meditates upon Torah on his own. The words of Torah should be shared with others.  
However, even two people who gather to study Torah cause the Shekhinah, the Divine Presence, to abide amongst them.  This is learned from the verse in Malachi, which implies that when the group of God-fearers gathered, God hearkened to their words, for He dwelled amongst them. Finally, even one who studies on his own, receives a reward for such study.  
