Avoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
This mishnah lists five things that are mentioned in the Torah as having been “possessed” or acquired by God.  The Hebrew root for this word is knh, which can also mean, in Biblical Hebrew, “create”.  Hence you will note that some of the verses quoted are usually translated as “create”.  However to make the connections between the verses and their use in the mishnah more clear, I have translated the word as “possess”. 
Since this mishnah is simple and self-explanatory, I have refrained from commenting. However, it may be worthwhile to think about what these five things have in common, beside the fact that the verb knh is used in connection with them in various places in the Bible.

Mishnah Ten
Five possessions did the Holy Blessed One, set aside as his own in this world, and these are they: 
1) The Torah, one possession; 
2) Heaven and earth, another possession;
3) Abraham, another possession;
4) Israel, another possession;
5) The Temple, another possession. 
1a) The Torah is one possession.  From where do we know this? 
i) Since it is written, “The Lord possessed (usually translated as ‘created’ me at the beginning of his course, at the first of His works of old” (Proverbs 8:22).  , 
2a) Heaven and earth, another possession. From where do we know this? 
i) Since it is said:    “Thus said the Lord:  The heaven is My throne and the earth is My footstool;  Where could you build a house for Me, What place could serve as My abode? (Isaiah 66:1)    
ii) And it says: “How many are the things You have made, O Lord; You have made them all with wisdom; the earth is full of Your possessions” (Psalms 104:24).
3a) Abraham is another possession. From where do we know this?  
i) Since it is written: “He blessed him, saying, “Blessed by Abram of God Most High, Possessor of heaven and earth” (Genesis 15:19).    
4a) Israel is another possession. From where do we know this?
i) Since it is written: “Till Your people cross over, O Lord, Till Your people whom You have possessed” (Exodus 15:16).
ii) And it says:  “As to the holy and mighty ones that are in the land, my whole desire (possession) is in them” (Psalms 16:3).    
5a) The Temple is another possession. From where do we know this?
i) Since it is said: “The sanctuary, O lord, which your hands have established” (Exodus 15:17”,    
ii) And it says: “And He brought them to His holy realm, to the mountain, which His right hand had possessed” (Psalms 78:54).
