Avoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya was a colleague of Rabbi Judah Hanasi.  He and another rabbi were part of a group called “the holy assembly” for one of two reasons.  Either they split their day into three parts, one third in study, one third in prayer and one third working.  Alternatively they worked during the summer and learned Torah all winter.
Similar to the previous mishnah, this mishnah employs mostly verses from Proverbs.  

Mishnah Eight
Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yohai:    Beauty, strength, riches, honor, wisdom, [old age], gray hair, and children are becoming to the righteous, and becoming to the world, 
1) As it is said: “Gray hair is a crown of glory (beauty); it is attained by way of righteousness” (Proverbs 16:31),    
2) And it says: “The ornament of the wise is their wealth” (ibid. 14:24),    
3) And it says: “Grandchildren are the glory of their elders, and the glory of children is their parents” (ibid. 17:6),    
4) And it says: “The glory of youths is their strength; and the beauty of old men is their gray hair” (ibid. 20:29),    
5) And it says:  “Then the moon shall be ashamed, and the sun shall be abashed.  For the Lord of Hosts will reign on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and God’s Honor will be revealed to his elders” (Isaiah 24:23).
Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya said: these seven qualities, which the sages have listed [as becoming] to the righteous, were all of them fulfilled in Rabbi and his sons.   

Explanation
Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya lists seven qualities that when possessed by a righteous person, are beneficial to him and beneficial to the whole world.  In this list I have placed the words “old age” in parentheses, for they should not be part of the source.  Old age is synonymous with “gray hair” (my apologies if this insults those who have gone prematurely gray).  Furthermore, if this were part of the list there would be eight qualities and not seven.  It is obvious from the end of the mishnah that there are supposed to be only seven. 
1.  Beauty—although we may not like to admit this, good-looking people are more admired and listened to than not good-looking people.  The righteous person’s good looks benefit him and the rest of the world for others will listen to his sage advice.
2. Strength—with strength the righteous person will be able to vanquish the wicked.
3. Wealth—to be used to support the poor.
4. Honor—when the righteous person is honored, others will listen to his words.
5. Wisdom—to learn what it is that God wants him to do.
6. Gray hair—with gray hair and the accompanying onset of old age comes the important quality of experience, which is so essential to any teacher.
7. Children—who will hopefully inherit his righteous ways.

In order to facilitate the understanding of the texts brought as support, I have highlighted the appearance of each of these qualities in the various verses.

At the end of the mishnah Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya testifies that all of these characteristics were fully present in Rabbi [Judah Hanasi], the editor of the Mishnah, and his sons.  
