Bava Batra, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Mishnah four continue to deal with the measurement of fields for purposes of selling.

Mishnah Four
1) If a man said to his fellow, “I will sell you half of the field”, it must be divided between them into portions of equal value, and the buyer takes half of the field [which the other allots to him].
2) [If he said, “I will sell you] the southern half”, the field must be divided between them into portions of equal value, and the buyer takes the southern half.
3) He accepts responsibility for [providing the ground] for the dividing wall and the large and small ditches.
a) How large is the large ditch?  Six handbreadths.
b) And the small ditch?  Three handbreadths.

Explanation 
Section one:  When a man sells half a field to another, they must divide the field into equal portions of monetary value.  In a one hundred square meters field worth one hundred dollar, there may be a thirty square meter portion which is worth 50 dollars and a seventy square meter portion that is worth 50 dollars.  In such a case the seller has a choice which piece of the field to keep.  If he wishes he may keep the smaller, better field, or he may keep the larger, but of lesser quality field.
Section two:  If, however, the seller stated which portion of the field he was selling, then they again divide the field into two, but this time the seller must give the specified portion.  Since he specified which portion he was selling, he loses the right to decide which portion to give to the buyer.
Section three:  The buyer is responsible for providing part of his land to make a dividing fence (as we learned in the first mishnah in Bava Batra) as well as part of his land to build ditches.  These ditches would have surrounded the fence and would have prevented animals from jumping over the fence.  The buyer’s part of land given for fences and ditches should be equal to the part given by the seller.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Section three:  If the mishnah had not stated that the buyer must provide a share of his land on which to build the fence and dishes what might you have thought?  In other words, is there grounds to think that the seller must solely provide the ground?
