Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnah One 

Introduction
The first two mishnayoth of chapter four deal with what constitutes the finalizing of a transaction of movable property (movable property includes things and animals and does not include land).  The importance of this halacha is that when the transaction is final neither side may retract the sale.  For instance if an animal is sold and then dies before the seller can bring it to the buyer it is important to know if the sale was final.  If the sale was final then the buyer’s animal died. If it was not final than the seller’s animal died.  The general rule that is important to note in the outset is that the transfer of money does not cause the acquisition to be final.  In other words if Reuven gave Shimon 100 zuz for his cow the cow does not belong to Reuven until he takes possession of it (this can be done in various ways).  

Mishnah One
1) Gold acquires silver, but silver does not acquire gold.
2) Copper acquires silver, but silver does not acquire copper.
3) Bad coins acquire good coins but good coins do not acquire bad coins.
4) An unminted coin acquires a minted coin, but a minted coin does not acquire an unminted coin.
5) Movable property acquires coined money, but coined money does not acquire movable property.
6) This is the general rule:  movable property acquires other movable property.

Explanation—Mishnah One
As explained in the introduction, money does not acquire movable property, but the transfer of movable property does obligate the buyer to give the money.  Our mishnah defines what money is in relation to movable property.  To understand this mishnah one must keep in mind that in those times coins were based on their weight in silver and the authority of the government who had minted the coin.  Most coins were made of silver but there were gold and copper coins as well.  Silver coins were more easily accepted in the marketplace than gold or copper coins.  Section one teaches that gold is “movable property” in relation to silver which is “money”.  Therefore if the owner of the silver takes the gold from its owner he is obligated to give him the silver, even if he were to change his mind.  If, however, the owner of the silver gave the silver to the owner of the gold, the sale is not final and the owner of the gold may still retract the exchange. 
The remainder of the mishnah similarly defines property vis a vis money.  Copper is “property” compared to silver.  Bad, worn out and unminted coins do not fall into the category of “money” but are rather closer on the spectrum to being “movable property”.  Finally, if two pieces of movable property are being exchanged, the acceptance of one creates an obligation for the other to be given as well.  
Examples relevant to this mishnah will be given in the next mishnah.  
 What might be a possible connection between those of the generations of the Flood and the Dispersion and those who don’t keep their word?

  
