Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishna Seven

Introduction
Mishnayoth seven and eight deal with the reductions in the quantity of certain deposited products (produce, wine, olive oil etc.) that a guardian is permitted to make when he returns the products to their owner.  

Mishnah Seven
1) When a man leaves produce for his fellow, [and his fellow returns it to the owner] he may exact reductions [due to natural depletion of the produce].
a) For wheat and rice, nine half kabs to the kor.
b) For barley and durra nine kabs to the kor.
c) For spelt and linseed three seahs to the kor.
2) All is in proportion to the quantity and according to the time [it is left].
a) Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri said:  “But what do the mice care about [the quantity]?  Won’t they eat [the same amount] whether there is a lot or a little?
i) Rather, he may exact a reduction from only one kor.
3) Rabbi Judah says:  “If the quantity was great he may not exact any reduction, since the produce increases in bulk.”  

Explanation
In our mishnah Reuven left his produce with Shimon and is now coming back to reclaim it.  Shimon need not return exactly that amount that Reuven left but is legally permitted to reduce some of the quantity, on the assumption that mice would have eaten some of the produce.  The mishnah then proceeds to list how much can be reduced for different types of produce. 
According to the anonymous opinion in section two the amounts listed in section one can be reduced for each kor (a measure of volume) for each year that the produce was left with Reuven.  Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri raises a difficulty on this opinion.  He points out that the mice will eat the same amount whether there is a lot or a little.  In other words if there are 10 kor or 1 kor the mice will still eat only nine half kabs of wheat or rice.  Therefore, according to Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri no matter how many kabs of produce there are, Shimon may only reduce from one of them.
Rabbi Judah states that if the amount of produce was large than Shimon may not reduce at all.  According to Rabbi Judah, large amounts are measured in heaping imprecise measurements.  Therefore the extra that was heaped on top of a strict measurement is enough to compensate for the loss to the mice.


Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven, section two:  Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri’s statement (section 2a) seems to be very logical.  What might be the logic behind those who disagree with him (section 2)?
