
Mishnah Four
1) So, too, if an olive press was built in a rock and another had a garden on top of it, and [the olive press] was in part broken down, the owner of the garden may come down and sow below until the other rebuilds the ceiling of his olive press.
2) If a wall or a tree fell into the public domain and caused damage, the owner is not liable to make restitution.  
a) If a set time had been given to him to cut down the tree or pull down the wall, and they fell down within the time, he is not liable.
b) If after that time, he is liable.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  This scenario is similar to the scenario in the previous mishnah, but instead of a house with an upper room, this mishnah deals with an olive press that has a garden growing on top of it.  Should the roof of the olive press collapse, the owner of the garden is permitted to plant below until the owner of the olive press rebuilds the ceiling.  
Note how valuable space was in the Land of Israel.  People would use any possible land to garden, even land which had on olive press beneath it.  Much of the land of Israel is not arable, particularly the mountainous regions and the desert.  This is still true in Israel today.
Section two:  This section of the mishnah does not deal with shared property as in the previous portions of the chapter but rather with a property owner’s responsibilities and liabilities with regards to the public domain.  According to the mishnah if a person’s wall or tree fell into the public domain and thereby caused damage he is not liable.  This is a case where he had no way of knowing that his tree or wall would fall, and therefore he cannot be held accountable.  If, however, he had been given a warning by the court and told to either remove his tree or wall, or make them safer, and the time for doing so had elapsed, he will be subsequently liable for any damage done by the tree in the public domain.  
 
Questions for Further Thought: 
Mishnah four, section one:  What is the difference between the scenario in this section and that in the previous mishnah?    
