Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishna Eight 

Introduction
Mishnah eight deals with a finder must care for the lost object while it is in his possession.
Mishnah nine deals with the definition of lost objects which the finder must return.  The mishnah also deals with the finder’s rights to claim lost wages while taking care of the lost object.

Mishnah Eight
1) If he found scrolls he must read them once every thirty days, and if he does not know how to read he should unroll them.
a) But he may not learn from them something he has not yet learned, nor may another read with him.
2) If he found clothing he must shake it out once every thirty days, and spread it out for [the clothing’s] own good, but not for his own honor.
3) [If he found] silver or copper vessels he must use them for their own good but not so as to wear them out.  
a) [If he found] vessels of gold or glass he may not touch them until Elijah comes.
4) If he found a sack or a large basket or anything that is not generally carried about, he may not carry it.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
This mishnah is concerned with the proper care given to lost objects.  The finder has a responsibility to return the object to its owner in as best condition as possible.  Therefore our mishnah tells us which things must be done with certain objects for their upkeep. In addition the mishnah lists certain things that shouldn’t be done lest the lost object is damaged.  
Section one:  Scrolls (made of parchment) must be unrolled once every thirty days in order to air them out and prevent them from becoming brittle.  If he wishes to read from it while he unrolls it he may.  He may not however learn with another person lest they both pull the scroll and tear it.  Nor may he learn something new which would require more intense and longer reading and a greater likelihood of damage to the scroll.
Section two:  Clothing must be shaken out once every thirty days.  He may spread it out in his house but he should not do so to improve the way his home looks (for his honor) but only to air out the garment.
Section three:  Silver and copper vessels should be used occasionally to prevent rust.  They may not however be used in a way that would wear them out.  Glass and gold vessels, which are the most expensive and fragile, may not be used at all.
Section four:  Finally, containers that are not generally carried need not be carried in order to air them out.  The implication is that things that are generally carried about should be aired out.

Questions for Further Thought:
 How does the subject of mishnah eight differ from the subject at the end of mishnah seven?
