Bava Kamma Chapter Seven Mishnayoth Three



Mishnah Three
1) If a man stole [an ox or a sheep] according to the evidence of two witnesses, and killed or sold it according to their evidence, and they are found to be false witnesses, they must pay the whole penalty.
a) If he stole it according to the evidence of two witnesses, and killed it or sold it according to the evidence of two others, and both pairs are found to be false witnesses, the first pay twofold restitution and the last pay threefold restitution.
b) If the second [only] were found to be false witnesses, the thief must make twofold restitution and they threefold restitution.
c) If one of the second set of witnesses was found to be a false witness, the evidence of the other is void.
d) If one of the first set of witnesses was found to be a false witness, the entire evidence is void, since if there is no evidence for stealing there is no evidence for slaughtering or selling.

Explanation
This entire mishnah deals with the result of false witnesses who have testified against a thief.  As stated in the introduction above, false witnesses are punished by whatever punishment the thief would have received.  In the first clause, one set of witnesses stated the whole testimony:  that the alleged thief stole and slaughtered or sold.  Since if they were telling the truth, by their testimony alone he would have been obligated for fourfold or fivefold restitution, that is their punishment.  In clause 1a two sets of witnesses testify to the two separate actions:  stealing and selling/slaughtering.  The first set is punished by the punishment that the alleged thief would have received from their testimony alone, twofold restitution.  The second set is punished by the additional punishment the thief would have received from their testimony, a further twofold or threefold restitution.  In clause 1b again two sets of witnesses testify to the two separate actions:  stealing and selling/slaughtering.  This time only the second set is found to be false.  The thief therefore pays twofold, since valid witnesses testified to his thievery.  The second set of witnesses still pay the threefold restitution.
In the final two clauses again two sets of witnesses testify to the two separate actions:  stealing and selling/slaughtering. If one of the two (or more) witnesses in the second set was found to be a false witness, the testimony of the first set, that the thief stole, is still valid and he will be obligated for twofold restitution.  If, however, one of the two (or more) witnesses of the first set is found to be false the thief is not liable at all.  Without testimony that he stole, there is no validity to the subsequent testimony of the second set that he sold or slaughtered.
