Mishnah Six
1) One may not accept a flock from an Israelite on “iron terms” [that the one who tends the flock shares the profits from the flock and accepts full responsibility for their value].
2) But one may accept a flock from a gentile on “iron terms” and money may be borrowed from them and one may lend them money.
a) The same is true with a resident alien.
b) An Israelite may lend the money of a gentile with the knowledge [and consent] of the gentile but not with the knowledge of an Israelite.

Explanation
Section one:  A person may not give his flock to another person on condition that the receiver accept full responsibility and that the two will share in the profits.  Since the person giving the flock is guaranteed to receive back his flock and will also receive half of the profit this is a form of usury.
Section two:  According to Deuteronomy 23:20-21 a Jew (Israelite) may lend and borrow with interest from a gentile but not from another Jew.  In order to understand this difference between gentiles and Jews we must understand that lending and borrowing with interest is not an immoral act.  It is actually fair and logical that the one who gives his money to others should receive a wage in return, just as one who gives his horse to others receives a wage in return.  The reason that the Torah forbids lending with interest to other Jews is that this is a form of charity.  A loan without interest is in actuality one of the highest forms of charity, and has been a practice of Jews throughout the ages.  According to Jewish law charity begins within one’s own community.  While it might be an ideal that one should be charitable to the whole world, it is impossible to obligate one community to support all communities.  A Jewish community is legally obligated to support the Jews within the community.  This obligation is not extended outside the community.  Since lending is not immoral it is permitted to do so with non-Jews.  
At the end of the mishnah we learn that if Reuven had borrowed money from a non-Jew he may loan that money to Shimon if the non-Jew consents.  He may not however lend the money to Shimon without the non-Jew’s consent since this would be a loan from one Jew to another. 


