Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishna Eleven

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of chapter three continue to deal with the laws of things left in another person’s guard.  Mishnah eleven deals with coins left for another person to guard.  Mishnah twelve deals with a guardian who uses something deposited with him, even though he does not have permission to do so.

Mishnah Eleven
1) If a man left coins with a money-changer:
a) If they were tied up [in a bag], he may not use them.
(i) Therefore, if they were lost, he is not responsible.
b) If they were loose, he may use they were.
(i) Therefore, they were was lost, he is responsible.
2) [If a man left coins] with a householder,
a) Whether they were loose or tied up, he may not use them.
(i) Therefore, if they were lost he his not responsible.
3) A shopkeeper is like a householder, according to Rabbi Meir.
a) Rabbi Judah says a shopkeeper is like a money-changer.

Explanation
This mishnah deals with two laws, one being directly related to the other.  The first law is the legality of a guardian using coins deposited with him.  The second is his responsibility if the coins were lost or stolen (in a case where the loss was not due to his negligence).  The rule is that if the guardian has the right to use the coins than he is responsible if they are lost (even if he was not negligible with them).
Section one:  If a person leaves coins with a money-changer and the coins are tied up, assumedly the person does not want the money-changer to use the coins.  Therefore he may not use them and is not responsible if they were lost.  If, however, the coins were not tied up, the money-changer may use them.  The fact that the owner left the coins with a money-changer who frequently needs coinage, means that the owner gave them to him assuming that the money-changer would use them.  Since he may use the coins, he is responsible for their loss.
Section two:  A regular householder does not use coins nearly as much as a money-changer and therefore when the owner gives them to him he assumes that the householder will not use them.  Therefore he cannot use them, even if they were loose.  He is also not obligated if they are lost.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Meir the laws regarding a shopkeeper are like those regarding a householder and according to Rabbi Judah they are like those regarding a money-changer.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eleven, section three:  Explain the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah.  Why does Rabbi Meir think that a shopkeeper is like a householder and Rabbi Judah think he is like a money-changer?
