Bava Kamma Chapter Ten Mishna Four

Mishnah Four
1) If one came with his jar of wine and the other came with his jug of honey and the jug of honey cracked, and the other poured out his wine and saved the honey [by receiving it] into his jar, he can claim no more than his wages.
a) But if he had said, “I will save what is yours and you will pay me the value of mine,” [the owner of the honey] is liable to pay him back.
2) If a flood swept away a man’s donkey and his fellow’s donkey, and his own was worth 100 [zuz] and his fellow’s was worth 200 [zuz], and he left his own and saved that of his fellow, he can claim no more than his wages.
a) But if he had said, “I will save what is yours and you will pay me the value of mine,” he is liable to pay him back.

Explanation
Both sections of our mishnah deal with what is essentially the same scenario.  A person who has something of lesser value helps rescue the greater-valued property of another person, thereby losing his own property.  The person who helped wants to receive full payment for what he had lost.  For instance in section two, the owner of the donkey worth 100, who lost his donkey, wants the owner of the donkey worth 200, whom he had saved, to pay him 100.  He might say to him that if he had not helped, he would have lost his donkey, and therefore he saved him 200 and all he wants back is the 100 which he lost.  The same is true in the case of the wine and honey:  the owner of the wine who rescued the honey wishes to recover the value of his lost wine .  Honey is a more expensive item than wine (think about how much harder it is to produce).  The wine owner, realizing that his wine was of lesser value, dumped out his wine in order to rescue the other person’s honey.  All he asks in return is that the person repay him for the loss of the wine.  In both cases the mishnah says that if the rescuer saved the other person’s property without being asked he only receives a minimum wage for his work.  If, however, he told the other person before he rescued his property, that he was doing so on the condition that he be fully compensated for his own loss of property, then he does receive full compensation for his loss. 

Questions for Further Thought:
 Why does mishnah four need to teach both examples?  Could we not have learned one from the other?  What might we have said had only one example been included in the mishnah?


      
