Bava Batra, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Mishnah two continues to deal with error’s made in the measurements of a field and the rules regarding returning the difference in such cases.

Mishnah Two
1) [If he said, “I will sell you] a kor’s space of soil as measured by a rope”, and he gave him less, the buyer may reduce the price; and if he gave him more, the buyer must give it back.
a) But if he said, “Whether less or more”, even if he gave the buyer a quarter-kab’s space less in every seah’s space, or a quarter kab’s space more in every seah’s space, it becomes his; if [the error] was more than this, a reckoning must be made.
2) What does he (the buyer) give him back?
a) Its value in money; but if the seller wants, he gives him back the land.
b) And why did they say that he could give back its value in money?
c) To strengthen the power of the seller, for if, in a field [containing a kor’s space] there would still have remained to him nine kab’s space, or, in a garden, a half-kab’s space, or according to Rabbi Akiva a quarter-kab’s space, the buyer must give back to him land.
3) And not only must he give back the quarter-kab’s space, but all of the surplus.

Explanation
Section one:  If a person sold a piece of land by the measure of a rope, the expectation is that the land must be sold precisely.  Hence, if the land was smaller the buyer may reduce the price and if the land was larger the buyer must give it back.  As we shall see later in the mishnah, the buyer may under such circumstances, be required to pay more money for the extra land.  If, however, the seller said that he was selling more or less a piece of land the size of a kor, than the margin of error is a quarter-kab.  This works out to 1/24 of the land sold.  If the error was under that margin, then the sale stands as is.  If the error was greater then the buyer must return the surplus if the plot was larger or the seller must lower the price if the plot was smaller.
Section two:  When the buyer returns the surplus sold to him, under certain circumstances he gives the seller extra money and does not return the land itself.  This is considered to be a benefit to the seller.  According to the strict letter of the law, if a kor’s space was sold, the buyer should not be forced to buy more land and he should therefore return the extra land itself.  However, if the buyer were to return to him a very small piece of land, it would be unusable.  Therefore, if the seller should so desire he can ask for money in return for the extra land.  If, on the other hand, the land was large enough, as listed in the end of section 2c, then the seller can take back the land.
Section three:  If the margin was slightly over the accepted margin of error, the buyer does not only return a small portion to place the error under the margin of error.  Rather he returns the entire surplus.  In other words if the margin of error is a quarter-kab per seah, and the surplus was a half-kab, the buyer returns the entire half-kab and not just a quarter.

Questions for Further Thought:
 What is the difference between the subject of mishnah one and the subject of mishnah two?  
 The mishnah presents a leniency on the seller, namely that he has a choice to receive the surplus in money or in land.  Why is the mishnah lenient on the seller, even though it might force the buyer to pay for more land than he intended?



