Bava Batra, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six returns to discuss the major topic of the chapter, inheritance law.  The specific subject of this mishnah is laws governing a person who gives away his property while on his death bed and then recovers from his illness.  The question is can he recover his property. 

Mishnah Six
1) If a man who lies dying wrote over his property to others [as a gift] and kept back any land whatsoever, his gift remains valid [even should he not die].
a) If he did not keep back any land whatsoever, his gift does not remain valid [if he should not die].
2) If it was not written in the document, “who lies dying”, but he said that [he had written the document] while he lay dying and they (those who received the gift) said that he was healthy [when he wrote the document], he must bring proof that he had been dying, according to Rabbi Meir.
a) But the sages say:  “He who makes a claim against his fellow bears the burden of proof.” 

Explanation
Generally speaking when a person gives another person a piece of property the giver cannot change his mind once the document is written and signed.  However, if the giver was a dying man he may change his mind and recover his property should he recover from his illness.  Since we assume that he intended to give the gift only if he were to die, if he were not to die the gift is annulled.  
Section one:  If, when he wrote the gift document he retained some land for himself, then we can assume that this is not truly the gift of a dying man.  A dying man does not retain any land for himself.  Therefore, if he should recover from his illness, the gift is not recoverable.  If, however, he did not retain any land for himself, then this is the gift of a man who believed himself about to die.  In such a circumstance the gift is recoverable should he recover from his illness.
Section two:  In the scenario in this section the document did not state that he was a dying man and the man did recover from his illness.  At that point he claimed that he had written the document as a dying man and therefore the gift is retracted.  The recipients of the gift claim that he gave it as a healthy man and therefore the gift is not retractable.  According to Rabbi Meir the gift goes to the recipients.  Since the person’s last confirmed status is as a healthy man (his current status), we can assume that he was healthy when he wrote the document, and therefore the gift is not a gift given by a dying man.  According to the sages, the burden of proof lies on the pursuant, in this case the recipients who wish to receive their promised gift from the giver.  Since they cannot prove that he was healthy when he wrote the document he is not obligated to give them the gift.   

Questions for Further Thought:
 Why does the dying man have to divide up his property before he dies?  Why can’t he just say that the gift will not be transferred until after he dies, thereby avoiding the problem of recovering from his illness after having given away his property?

