Bava Metziah, Chapter Seven, Mishna Eight 

Introduction
The first line of mishnah eight introduces the laws concerning of guardians, which will continue to be the topic throughout the remainder of the chapter and the beginning of chapter eight.  Some of these laws were discussed in chapter three of Bava Metziah. 

Mishnah Eight
1) Those that guard [gathered] produce may eat from it because that is the custom of the land and not because that is the law of the Torah.
2) There are four kinds of guardians:  an unpaid guardian, a borrower, a paid guardian and a hirer.  
i) An unpaid guardian may take an oath [that he had not been neglectful] in every case [of loss or damage and be free of liability].  
ii) A borrower must make restitution in every case.
iii) A paid guardian or a hirer may take an oath if the beast was injured, or taken captive or dead, but he must make restitution if it was lost or stolen.

Explanation
Section one:  A guardian is not considered by the law of the Torah to be the type of worker who may eat from the produce with which he is working.  Therefore, according to the law in the Torah a guardian may not eat of this produce.  However, since local custom permits him to do so, he is allowed.  Note, in this mishnah we see two important sources of Jewish law, the Torah and local custom.
Section two:  This section lists the four types of guardians in Jewish law.  The general principle is that the more benefit a guardian receives and the less benefit he gives to the owner of the object, the more liable he will be if the object is ruined.  Therefore a borrower, who does not pay and gets use of the object pays in any case that the object is ruined.  On the other hand, an unpaid guardian only gives benefit to the owner and receives no benefit in return.  Therefore in all cases in which something occurs to the object that he is guarding he may take an oath that he was not neglectful and be exempt from liability.  Paid guardians and hirers are in-between cases.  The hirer gets use of the object but he pays for such use.  The paid guardian is not allowed to use the object but he gets paid for watching it.  Therefore both of these guardians are sometimes allowed to take an oath and thereby be exempt from liability and sometimes they are liable to pay the owner. If the animal was lost or stolen and is no longer in front of us, they must pay the owner the value of the animal.  If, however, it died a natural death, was taken captive or injured then they may take an oath and exempt themselves from liability.


Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eight:  What is the difference between something being Torah law or the custom of the land?
