Bava Kamma Chapter Nine Mishna Eight 

Introduction 
Mishnah eight is a continuation of the second part of mishnah seven.  There we learned that if a guardian swore that the deposit which his friend had given him was lost and then witnesses testified that the guardian actually consumed the deposit, he must restore only the value of the deposit to the original owner.  If, however, he admitted to his crime on his own, without witnesses testifying against him, he is obligated to restore the original value of the deposit plus an added fifth and to bring a sacrifice.  Our mishnah deals with a similar circumstance involving a guardian who steals the deposit (as opposed to consuming it).

Mishnah nine deals with a person who stole from his father, whose money would have eventually become at least partly his through inheritance.

Mishnah Eight
1) [If a man said], “Where is my deposit?” and the other said, “It is stolen,” [if the one says,] “I adjure thee”, and the other says, “Amen!”, and witnesses testify against him that he stole it, he must make twofold restitution.  
a) But if he confessed it of himself, he must repay the value and the [added] fifth and bring a Guilt-offering.

Explanation
In the scenario presented in this mishnah a person received a deposit from another person.  When the owner came back to claim his deposit, the guardian claimed that it was stolen, and when asked, he swore to his words.  If witnesses were to come and testify that the guardian had actually stolen the object, he will be obligated for twofold restitution, as are all thieves.  However, if he confessed of the crime himself, he is not judged as a thief but as a robber who swore falsely and therefore must pay back the principle plus a fifth and bring a sacrifice.  This distinction is again based on the Biblical passage of which we learned in mishnah seven.  For further clarification see our explanation there.


Questions for Further Thought:
 What is the difference between the law in mishnah eight and the law in mishnah seven?  Why?
