Bava Batra Chapter Nine Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
The final three mishnayoth of chapter nine deal with cases of doubtful inheritances where both the inheritor and the one from whom he inherits die in one incident.  We will explain this scenario in our explanation to each individual mishnah.

Mishnah Eight
1) If the house fell down on a man and his father, or upon a man and any from whom he inherits, and he was liable for his wife’s ketubah or to a creditor:  the father’s heirs say, “The son died first and the father died afterward”, and the creditors say, “The father died first and the son died afterward.”
a) The School of Shammai says:  “Let them split [the property].”
b) The School of Hillel says:  “The property remains in its former status [in the hands of those who inherit the father].”

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
In the scenario in our mishnah a man and his father (or someone else from whom he inherits) die in one accident (a house falls on them).  We do not know who died first, Jacob, the father or Reuven, the son.  The son had creditors to whom he owed money or a wife with a ketubah, a marriage contract, guaranteeing her money upon death or divorce.  If Jacob died first, then Reuven would inherit and the wife or the creditors could collect their debts from Jacob’s estate.  Since Reuven owned his father’s estate upon his death it is subject to Reuven’s debts.  This will be especially important if Reuven died without any money of his own.  Only if Jacob died first will Reuven’s creditors or wife be able to claim any money.  Since this scenario is best for the creditors and for the wife, they claim that Jacob died first.  If, however, Reuven died first, then he never inherited from Jacob.  Jacob’s property will go in such a case to his other inheritors and the creditors or wife will not be able to claim anything from Reuven.  Since this scenario is best for Jacob’s inheritors, they claim that Reuven died first.
The School of Shammai says that in such a scenario the creditors, wife and inheritors of the father split the disputed inheritance of the father.  The School of Hillel holds that the money remains with under the assumption of belonging to its previous verifiable owner until proven otherwise.  Since the last verifiable owner of the property is the father, his inheritors receive the property until the creditors or wife can prove that the father died first.  

Question for Further Thought:
 Upon what abstract principle is the School of Shammai’s decision based?  
 Upon what abstract principle is the School of Hillel’s decision based?
