
Mishnah Two
1) If one hired craftsmen and they retracted, they are at a disadvantage. 
2) If the householder (the employer) retracted he is at a disadvantage.
3) Whosoever changes [the conditions of a contract] is at a disadvantage.
4) And anyone who retracts is at a disadvantage.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  If one hired craftsmen and they retracted in the middle of fulfilling their contract, for instance painting a house, they are at a disadvantage.  In such a case the householder who wants to have the rest of his house painted will need to hire more workers.  If the second set of workers are more expensive than the first set the householder is allowed to reduce the wages paid to the first set of workers in order to compensate for paying more to the second set.  If the second set are cheaper the first set of workers cannot ask for more money for doing the first half of the work, even though in the end the householder will pay a smaller total amount for the work.  In this way the first workers who reneged in the middle of a deal can lose money but not gain.  
Section two:  If, however, the employer changed his mind in the middle of the painting of the house, he is at a disadvantage.  If the price of workers has gone up, he still must pay the first set of workers the full wage for the work they had done. If the price of workers has gone down he must pay the first workers the full total wage, minus what he has had to pay to the second workers.  In such a way the employer will lose money, if the price of workers has gone up, but he will not gain, even if the price of workers has gone down.
Section three:  If a person hires someone to do a certain piece of work in a certain way, for instance to color his wool red, and the employee did it in a different way, for instance he colored it green, the employee is at a disadvantage.  If the cost of the dye was higher than the improvement in the price of the wool, from non-dyed wool to green wool, then the employer pays him the lower amount, that is the amount of improvement.  If the amount that the wool was improved was higher than the cost of the dye than the employer only pays for the cost of the dye.  (See Bava Kamma 9:4).
Section four:  This section summarizes what was in the first section of the mishnah.

Questions for Further Thought:
 According to mishnah two does an employee have a right to stop working in the middle of a job?  Compare this with contract law in modern times.  How are they similar and how are they different?
