
Mishnah Twelve
1) A merchant may buy from five threshing floors and put the produce into a storage chamber, or from five wine-presses and put into one jug, as long as he doesn’t intend to mix them [for purposes of fraud].
2) Rabbi Judah says:  “A storekeeper should not distribute parched corn or nuts to children, for that accustoms them to come [only] to him.”
i) But the Sages permit.
a) And he may not lower the price.
i) But the Sages says:  “Let him be remembered for good [if he lowers the price].”
b) He may not sift crushed beans, according to Abba Shaul.
i) But the Sages permit.
(1) But they agree that he should not sift them [only] at the entry of the storage chamber, since he would be a deceiver of the eye.
(a) He should not beautify what he sells, whether humans, cattle or utensils.

Explanation
Section one:  This section is a continuation of the previous mishnah.  There we learned that a person may not mix produce that comes from different fields.  Here we learn that someone who purchases from different fields may place the produce or wine in the same storage chambers, as long as he doesn’t intend to mix good and bad produce.  
Section two:  Rabbi Judah states that certain competitive business practices are forbidden.  A shopkeeper may not give parched corn or nuts to children (they didn’t have candy back then) since that will make the kids want to come back and bring their parents along with them, thereby damaging the competing businesses.  (I’m sure parents can identify with this mishnah.  How many times have you been at the checkout counter of the store and your kids begs you to buy him/her the toy or candy blatantly displayed out front?).  Rabbi Judah also forbids a seller to lower a price in order to compete with his fellow sellers. Both of these practices were permitted by the Sages.
Abba Shaul forbids a seller to sift the crushed beans and thereby remove the waste.  This would raise the price and again probably cause competition with the other sellers.  Again, the Sages permit.  They do, however, forbid a seller to sift the crushed beans that are on the outside of a container.  The buyer would see sifted crushed beans and think the entire container is sifted.  This is indeed a deceptive business practice, and not merely competitive.  Similarly, it is forbidden to artificially improve something’s appearance in order to sell it.  The modern example would be to put wall paper over walls of a house in order to hide the fact that they are in truth rotting away. 

Questions for Further Thought:
 Mishnah twelve:  What types of business practices are forbidden to the Sages and what types are permitted? 
