Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches that one who wishes to advance money to a merchant in order for the merchant to provide him with produce at a later time may not fix a price for the purchase if the produce is not currently in the hands of the merchant or the market-price for the produce has not been set.  The fear is that the buyer will give money to the merchant and then the produce will rise in value and it will be as if the buyer received a discount for having advanced the money.  This is a form of interest since in return for giving his money in advance and letting the seller use them the buyer will get a greater deal of merchandise in return.  If, however, the market-price was set or the merchant had the produce in hand this type of purchase is permitted since the buyer could have currently bought and taken hold of the produce but just chose not to.

Mishnah Seven
1) One may not set a price for produce before its market-price is known.
a) After its market-price is known, one may set a price, for even though this one does not have [the produce] another does have it.
2) If he was the first to harvest his crop, he may set a price with his fellow over grain stacked in a heap, or over grapes in their harvesting basket, or over olives in a vat, or over the clay-balls of the potter, or over lime as soon as the limestone is sunk in the kiln.  
3) One may set a price for manure at any time of the year.
a) Rabbi Yose says:  “One may not set a price over manure unless the seller has manure on the dungheap.”
b) But the Sages permit it.
4) One may set the price at the cheapest rate [that will be at the time of delivery].
a) Rabbi Judah says:  “Even if he didn’t set the price at the cheapest rate he may say, “Give me at the such a price or give me back my money.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  Reuven may not set a fixed price to provide Shimon with produce at a future time unless there is an established market-price for the produce.  The problem is that if the produce goes up in value then Shimon will have prepaid in return for a lower price.  In such a case Shimon will receive in return more than he gave, which is a form of interest.  If, however, the market-price has been set, and many people in the  market are selling this type of produce, they may set a price even though Reuven does not currently have the produce.  Since Shimon could have bought from others he is not benefiting by prepaying for the produce.
Section two:   The aforementioned arrangement is also permitted if Reuven already has the produce in hand, even though the market-price has not yet been set.  Since Shimon could have taken the produce at the time when he paid for it, it is not a problem of interest for Shimon to pay and then take it later.  This is true even if the produce is not totally ready, such as wheat that has only just been harvested but not processed or any of the other examples in the mishnah.  Although it is not completed Shimon still could have nevertheless acquired it in the present.
Section three:  According to the first opinion in this section it is always permitted to set a price for manure, since manure is always available.  Rabbi Yose disagrees and states that the one providing the manure must have it available.  Otherwise we fear that the price of the manure may rise and the buyer will profit from having advanced the money, which is interest.  The Sages agree with the first opinion and disagree with Rabbi Yose.
Section four:  Although one may not set a fixed price since if the price rises the buyer will receive interest for advancing the money, they may strike a bargain that the buyer will pay the lowest price when the market-price is set.  In such a manner the buyer will definitely not receive a benefit for having advanced the money.  
Rabbi Judah states that in general if the buyer prepaid for his produce and the produce later goes down in price, he may give the seller a choice of providing the produce at the lower amount or of returning the money.  Since the buyer did not actually take the produce and thereby legally acquire it, he is not legally obligated by the sale (Bava Metziah 4:2).  [The buyer is also not sanctioned by the clause of “the one who exacted punishment” (ibid.) since his acquisition was from the outset a delayed acquisition].  

  
