Bava Kamma Chapter Six Mishnayoth Five 

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of chapter six continue to deal with damages caused by fire. We learned in the previous mishnah that a person who sets a fire is liable not just for the destruction of crops but also for the damage done to the field itself.  Mishnah five deals with damages done to various things that may be on a field.  Mishnah six deals with fires that may have been set accidentally.

Mishnah Five
1) If a man set fire to a stack and in it there were utensils and these caught fire:
a) Rabbi Judah says:  “He must make restitution for what was therein.”
b) But the Sages say:  “He need only pay for a stack of wheat or barley.”
2) If a kid was fastened to it [to the stack] and a slave stood near by, and they were burnt with it, he is liable.
a) If there was a slave fastened to it [to the stack] and a kid stood near by and they were burnt with it, he is not liable.
3) The Sages agree with Rabbi Judah that if a man set fire to a large building, he must make restitution for everything therein; for such is the custom among men to leave [their goods] in their houses.


Explanation
Section one of mishnah five contains a dispute between Rabbi Judah and the sages with regards to fire damage done to utensils that were placed inside a stack of wheat.  According to Rabbi Judah one is liable for the damage done to the utensils as well as the wheat (or barley) itself.  According to the Sages the kindler’s liability is limited to the wheat.  For the damage done to the utensils he is exempt.  Section three can help us understand the basis for this dispute.  There we learn that the Sages agree with Rabbi Judah that if one burns a building he is obligated also for the things left inside, because it is customary for people to leave things in buildings.  In comparison, we can see that the Sages think it is not customary for people to leave things in stacks of hay.  Therefore a person who burns a stack of hay is exempt if someone left in there an item that is not usually left in a stack of hay.  Rabbi Judah probably assumes that it does not make a difference if people normally leave things in the place that was burnt.  Since the person caused the damage he is liable in any case.
Section two deals with a case where a kid (small goat) and/or slave were found near or tied to the stack of hay and were burnt and killed in the fire.  We will discuss the second clause first.  Here the slave is tied to the stack of hay when he was burnt and killed.  When the mishnah says that the person is not liable, the meaning is that he is not liable for monetary remuneration.  The reason is that he will receive a more severe penalty for killing the slave.  In Jewish law there is a principle that one cannot receive two punishments for one crime.  In this case the person killed another person and caused damage to property at the same time.  For killing, the person is obligated for the death penalty and therefore he cannot also receive a monetary fine.  (For a different example see Bava Kamma 3:10).  In the first clause the slave was only near the stack but not tied to it.  Since the slave could have run away the kindler is not liable for the death penalty and therefore he will be liable for damages.

Questions for Further Thought:
 What is the basis of the Sages opinion in mishnah five?  What is the relevance of the fact that people generally leave things in their homes but not in their stacks of hay to the question of liability in this case?
