Bava Metziah Chapter Six Mishnah Three

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with one who hires an donkey to carry a load in a certain type of terrain and then takes the donkey to a different terrain, against the terms of the contract.  

Mishnah Three
1) If one hires a donkey to drive it through hill country and he drove it through a valley, or to drive it through the valley and he drove it through the hill country, even though the distance of each was ten miles, if the donkey died the hirer is liable.
2) If a man hired a donkey and it went blind or was conscripted into the king’s service, the owner may say to the hirer, “Here is yours before you” [and he need not replace the donkey].
a) [But] if it died or was broken, he must give him a new donkey.
3) If one hires a donkey to drive it through hill country and he drove it through a valley, if it slipped he is not liable, but if it overheated he is liable.
a) [If one hires a donkey] to drive it through a valley and he drove it through hill country, if it slipped he is liable, but if it overheated he is not liable.  
i) But if [it overheated] due to the ascent he is liable.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  If one hires a donkey with the explicit condition that the donkey will be driven through a certain type of terrain he is only allowed to drive the donkey through that type of terrain, be the terrain hilly or a valley.  If, therefore, he drives the donkey into a different terrain and the donkey dies, he is obligated to compensate the owner for the lost donkey.  Although in general hirers are not responsible if the animal that they have hired dies a natural death, since in this case the hirer did not abide by the terms of the contract, he is liable.  This is true even though he didn’t drive the donkey any further than he was supposed to.
Section two:  If one hires a donkey and the donkey goes blind or is conscripted for use by the king, the owner of the donkey does not have to supply the hirer with a new donkey.  He does not even have to return the money to the hirer.  Since the donkey still exists the owner of the donkey can say to the hirer that he should keep using the donkey even though it is blind.  If the donkey was conscripted the owner can tell the hirer that he must either wait until the term of conscription is over or try to bribe the animal back into his possession.  Again, since the donkey still exists he need not supply the hirer with a new one.  
On the other hand, if the animal died the owner must give the hirer a new donkey. 
Section three:  A donkey walking in hill country has a greater chance of slipping than a donkey walking in a flat valley.  On the other hand, a donkey walking in the valley has a greater chance of becoming overheated than a donkey walking in the cooler hill country.  Therefore, if one hired a donkey to walk in the hill country and he took it through the valley and it slipped he is not liable.  Since the owner rented him the donkey with the intention that the donkey would walk in a place where it is likely to slip the hirer is not liable if the donkey slips while walking where it is even less likely to slip.  If, however, the donkey overheated while being driven through the valley, the hirer is liable.  The owner gave him the donkey assuming that he would take it through the hill country where overheating is unlikely.  Since he took it to the valley where overheating is likely, he is liable.  
The opposite is true if one hired a donkey to walk through the valley and instead took it to the hill country.  If it slipped the hirer is liable, since he took it to a place where it was more likely to slip.  If, however, it overheated he is exempt since it is less likely to overheat in the hill country than in the valley where it was allowed to go.  This is true with one caveat.  If the donkey overheats due to an overly strenuous uphill climb, then the hirer is liable in any case.  Since he should have been more careful about climbing so strenuously, he is liable for the damages caused.

Questions for Further Thought:
 What is the relationship between what is taught in section one and what is taught in section three? 
 Section two deals with a subject different from the subject discussed in sections one and three.  Why do you think this clause is placed in this mishnah?
