Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three 

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with a lender who uses an agent to deliver the object to be borrowed to the borrower. 
Mishnah four deals with disputes in sales where it is either unknown whether the cow being sold gave birth before it was sold (in which case the calf belongs to the seller) or after it was sold (in which case the calf belongs to the buyer).  Similarly this mishnah deals with a dispute between a buyer and a seller over which field or slave was sold, the larger or the smaller one.

Mishnah Three
1) If one borrowed a cow and the owner sent it by the hand of his son or his slave or his agent, or by the hand of the borrower’s son or slave or agent and it died [on the way], the borrower is not liable.
2) But if the borrower said, “Send it to me by the hand of my son or my slave or my agent, or by the hand of your son or your slave or your agent”, 
a) or if the lender said, “I am sending it to you by the hand of my son or my slave or my agent”, or “by the hand of your son or your slave or your agent”, and the borrower said, “Send it”, and he sent it and it died [on the way], the borrower is liable.
3) So, too, when the cow is returned.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
The issue in this mishnah is the liability of the borrower during the time when the borrowed animal is being delivered from the lender to the borrower. If the lender sent it with a third party, be it his own son, slave or agent or even the borrower’s son, slave or agent, without being asked to do so by the borrower then the borrower is not liable for the animal until it reaches him.  The borrower can say to the lender that he did not agree to accept liability until the animal reached his hand.  
If, however, the borrower requested that the lender send the object with someone else or the lender told him that he was going to do so and the borrower agreed, then the borrower is liable for the object as soon as the animal leaves the hand of the lender.  Since the borrower agreed that the animal could be delivered by a third party, it is as if he has accepted responsibility immediately.
All that was stated in the previous part of the mishnah is also true at the time when the animal is being returned.  If the borrower sends the animal back through a third party without being asked he is responsible for the animal until it reaches the lender.  If, however, the lender told him to return it through a third party or the borrower told him that he was returning it through a third party and the lender agreed, from the moment it leaves his hands the borrower is no longer liable for the animal.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  Why does the mishnah need to state that the same law is true whether or not the deliverer is the lender’s son, slave or agent or the borrower’s son, slave or agent?  If the mishnah had not stated all of the possibilities what might you have thought?
