Bava Kamma Chapter Eight Mishna Three

Mishnah Three
1) If a man struck his father or his mother and inflicted no wound, or if he wounded his fellow on Yom Kippur, he is liable for all five counts.
2) If he wounded a Hebrew slave, he is liable on all five counts, except loss of income if it was his slave.
a) If he wounded a Canaanite slave (non-Jewish slave) he is liable on all five counts.
b) Rabbi Judah says:  “Slaves do not receive compensation for indignity.”

Explanation
Section one teaches a few laws, for which we will find the opposite scenario in mishnah five.  There we will learn, as we have learned in other places, that a person cannot receive two punishments for the same crime.  Inflicting a wound on one’s father or mother is a capital crime (Exodus 21:15) as is inflicting a wound on the Sabbath.  Therefore if he were to perform one of these acts he would be obligated for the death penalty and therefore exempt from a monetary fine.  However, in our mishnah he did not commit a crime for which he could receive the death penalty, and therefore he is liable for the monetary fine.  Striking one’s parents without causing a wound is not a crime for which one would receive the death penalty.  Likewise, inflicting a wound on Yom Kippur, as all forbidden acts on Yom Kippur is punishable by “kareth” (cutting off) and not the death penalty.
Section two deals with injuring slaves.  There are two kinds of slaves in Jewish law, a Jewish slave and a non-Jewish slave. If one injures a Jewish slave he is obligated for all of the payments unless he injured his own slave.  His own slave performs work for him and therefore there would be no sense in paying the slave for loss of work.  If one injures a non-Jewish slave he is obligated for all of the payments.  Rabbi Judah disagrees. In his opinion slaves do not receive payment for indignity since they are already in a position of constant indignity.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Why do you think that when an ox injures a human its owner is only obligated to pay for the injury, whereas when a human injures another human, he must make five different types of payment?
 What do you think Rabbi Judah would say about indignity payments for Jewish slaves?
 
