Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, Mishna Five 

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with a situation where one sold olive trees to another person to cut them down as firewood, but he did not sell the land.  The issue is to whom do the olives belong:  to the one who owns the trees or to the one who owns the land.
Mishnah six begins to discuss the laws of renting, a topic which will be discussed from now until the end of the tractate.  The first topic of discussion is the renting of houses and specifically the laws of eviction.

Mishnah Five
1) If one sold his olive trees as firewood and they bore fruit that gave less than a quarter-log of oil per seah, this belongs to the [new] owner of the olive trees.
a) If they bore fruit that gave a quarter-log of oil [or more] per seah, and the one said, “It was my trees that produced it”, and the other said, “It was my land that produced it”, let them share the produce.
2) If a flood washed away a man’s olive trees and set them in the midst of his fellow’s field [where they bore fruit], and the one said, “It was my trees that produced it”, and the other said, “It was my land that produced it”, let them share the produce.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
The scenario in section one of our mishnah is that Reuven sold his olive trees to Shimon but did not sell him the land.  The intent was for Shimon to cut down the trees and use them as firewood.  However, before Shimon did so the olive trees bore some olives with which it was possible to make olive oil.  If the olive oil was of a poor quality, in other words it came from olives that produced less than a quarter-log of oil per seah, then the owner of the trees can keep the oil.  Since there is not much oil and it is of a low quality, we can safely assume that Reuven does not care about it and therefore Shimon may keep it.  However, if the trees produce a better quality and higher quantity of olive oil there may be a dispute.  Reuven may justly claim that the olives grew from his ground and Shimon may justly claim that they grew from his tree.  In such a case they split the value of the olive oil.
The scenario in section two is different from that in section one but it has the same law.  In this case Reuven’s trees were washed up in a flood and landed on Shimon’s property where they took root and bore fruit.  Again, Reuven claims that his trees bore the fruit and Shimon that his land bore the fruit. Again, they split the value of the oil.


Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  What is the similarity between the cases in sections one and two?  What are the differences?  
