Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnah Four

Introduction
Mishnah four deals with business partnerships that are forbidden because one partner is in essence lending with interest to the other partner.

Mishnah Four
1) One may not set up a shopkeeper on the condition of receiving half the profit, or give him the money to buy produce on the condition of receiving half the profit, unless he pays him his wage as a laborer.
2) One may not set out his hens [for another to raise them and hatch their eggs] in order to share the profits, nor evaluate calves or foals [and give them to his fellow to raise] in order to share the profit, unless he pays him a wage for his labor and cost of the food.
3) But one may receive the care of calves and foals in return for half the profits, and rear them until they reach a third of their growth, and donkeys until they can carry a burden.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  In the case in our mishnah Reuven gives either produce or money with which to buy produce to Shimon in order for Shimon to sell the produce and share the profits.  After having sold all of the produce Shimon will owe Reuven both the value of the produce originally given or the money given to buy the produce, plus half of the profits from the sales.  In other words this is a typical investment loan made by the one who has the capital, Reuven, to the entrepreneur who is willing to turn the capital into a profit.  The problem is that this is a form of lending with interest.  In return for letting Shimon use his money or goods Reuven will receive half of the profits.  Therefore, the mishnah states that this type of deal is forbidden unless Reuven pays Shimon as a laborer.  If he does so then the share of the profits that Shimon will keep is actually wages which is of course permissible.
Section two:   This section is similar to the scenario in section one.  Reuven gives Shimon either hens and eggs to raise and hatch, or young animals to raise until they mature.  When the eggs hatch or the young animals mature Shimon will pay back the value of the original investment and share in the profit.  Since Shimon has worked in raising these animals, unless he is paid for his wages he will in essence be giving Reuven interest on his loan.  If he is paid for his work then he is acting as a wage earner which is entirely permissible.
Section three:  The difference in this scenario that makes it permissible is that Shimon, who receives the animals to raise from Reuven, does not take responsibility over the animals should they die.  In other words, if the animals live Shimon will return them to Reuven and split the profit (their gain in value as they mature).  However, if they die Shimon will not be responsible to return the value of the animals, as he was in the scenarios in sections one and two.  Since this is so, it is as if the risk involved in raising the animals is the wage that Shimon receives and when he returns a profit it is not considered interest.  
There is another interpretation of this clause.  According to this interpretation, in the scenario in this clause Shimon is only responsible for returning half the value of the original animal plus half of the profit.  In other words if Reuven gives him an animal worth 200 zuz and when it is raised it is worth 500 zuz.  Shimon pays back half the value of the original animal, 100, and receives half of the profit, 150.  Although Reuven in essence gave an animal worth 200 and receives back a total of 250 (500 zuz for the animal minus 250 which was paid to Shimon) this is not considered interest.  In this case Shimon and Reuven are true partners who are allowed to split profits.  In the previous cases mentioned in the mishnah Reuven was an investor, in which case taking interest in order to make a profit is forbidden.      
