Mishnah Two
And these must be proclaimed:  if a man found fruit in a vessel, or an empty vessel; or money in a bag, or an empty bag; piles of fruit or piles of money; three coins one on top of the other; small sheaves in the private domain; home-made loaves of bread; wool shearings as they come from the craftsman’s shop; jugs of wine or jugs of oil, these must be proclaimed.

Explanation
Since this list is the opposite of the list mishnah one, it will help to line them both up in a table. 

Found objects which need not be proclaimed.
Found objects which must be proclaimed.
1) scattered fruit, 

2) scattered money, 

3) small sheaves in the public domain, 
4) cakes of figs, 
5) bakers’ loaves, 
6) strings of fish, pieces of meat, 
7) wool shearings [as they come] from the country of origin, 
8) stalks of flax and strips of purple wool
1) fruit in a vessel, or an empty vessel; 
2) or money in a bag, or an empty bag; piles of fruit or piles of money; three coins one on top of the other; 
3) small sheaves in the private domain; 
4) 
5) home-made loaves of bread;
6)  
7) wool shearings as they come from the craftsman’s shop; 
8) 
9) jugs of wine or jugs of oil

1+2)  Scattered fruit and money cannot be identified by the owner.  However, if the fruit or money is in a container or piled up, the owner may be able to identify the container or the size and place of the pile and therefore the finder must proclaim.
3) Small sheaves in the public domain cannot be identified by where they were found, because people may have moved them.  However, in the private domain they can be identified by the place where they were found.
4) Bakers loaves are of standard size and shape and therefore cannot be identified.  Home-made loaves will all look different and therefore the owner could identify them.
7) Wool which has not been processed, nor imported will all look the same and therefore could not be identified.  However, if it has been processed by a craftsman, it would be identifiable and therefore must be proclaimed.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Try to translate some of the categories of the mishnah into modern day items.  For instance, if one found a wallet, must he proclaim it?  What about a book?  A grocery bag full of groceries?  A computer? 
