Bava Batra, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The mishnah which we will learn today is similar to yesterday’s mishnah, except it discusses access to a garden instead of a cistern.

Mishnah Six
1) If he had a garden behind his fellow’s garden, he may go in and out only at the time when others are accustomed to go in and out.  
a) And he may not bring in merchants, or enter through it into another field.
b) [The owner of] the outer garden may plant seeds on the path.
2) But, if with the other’s consent, he has been given a path at the side [of the other’s garden] he may go in and out when he wishes.
a) And he may bring in merchants, but he may not enter through it into another field.
b) And neither of them has the right to plant seeds on the path. 

Explanation
This mishnah deals with a person who owns a garden behind another person’s garden.  In other words in order to get to his garden he must go through the other person’s garden.  The mishnah says that he is allowed to do so, but with certain limitations, similar to those we saw in the previous mishnah.  First of all, he must go in and out at the time when people are accustomed to going to their gardens.  Second, he may not bring merchants through his fellow’s property in order to buy his produce.  Rather he must carry the produce out and the merchants can buy outside.  Third, he may not use the path as a shortcut to other fields. Since the path was designated only to reach a certain field he is not allowed to use it to reach others.  Finally, the owner of the outer garden is allowed to plant seeds on the path, even though this will make it more difficult for the owner of the inner garden to use the path.  Since the path belongs to owner of the outer garden, he can do with it as he pleases.
If, however, the owner of the inner garden was given (possibly by the court) a path on the side of the outer garden, and the owner of the outer garden consented, then he may go there whenever he please.  He may also bring in merchants to buy the produce, but he still may not use the path as a shortcut to other fields.  Again, since the path was designated for reaching a certain field, he may not use it to reach others.  Finally, since the path is intended only for walking, neither of them may plant on the it. 

Questions for Further Thought:
 What are the similarities between today’s mishnah and yesterday’s and the situations described in them, and what are the differences?


