Bava Kamma Chapter Six Mishna
Two


Mishnah Two
1) If he left the flock in the sun, or he delivered it to the care of a deaf-mute, an idiot or a minor, and it came out and caused damage, he is liable.
a) If he delivered it to a shepherd, the shepherd takes the place of the owner. 
2) If the flock fell into a garden and derived any benefit, he pays for the benefit.  
a) If the flock went down [into the garden] in its usual way and caused damage, he must pay for the damage it caused.
3) How does he pay for the damage it caused?
a) They assess what a seah’s space of ground in that field was worth before and what it is worth now.
b) Rabbi Shimon says:  “If they consumed fully grown produce he must repay with fully grown produce; if they destroyed on seah he must repay one seah, if two seah, two seahs.  


Explanation
 Section one deals mostly with the owner of the flock turning his flock over to another person.  If he should turn it over to someone who cannot take proper responsibility for the flock, he will still be liable for damages.  However, if he turns it over to a shepherd, the shepherd now becomes liable for any subsequent damages.  In the beginning of the mishnah we additionally learn that if he leaves the flock in the hot sun and they break out, he is liable, even if he properly enclosed them.  Leaving animals in the sun, where they will overheat, will drive them to go crazy and break out.  Since he should have anticipated the consequences, he is liable.
 Section two deals with a flock that entered a garden and ate the produce.  If the flock fell into the garden, the owner is not liable for damages because it was an unavoidable accident.  (Note, that in Israel crops are often grown on the sides of hills.  Falling into a garden is not, therefore, an unlikely circumstance.)  In this case he will be liable to pay only for what the animal benefited.  (See Bava Kamma 2:2 for a definition of this assessment).  If, however, the flock entered the garden in a normal fashion, he is obligated to pay for actual damages, which will be a higher payment.  Section three contains a dispute on how to assess payment for crop damages.  According to the first opinion one estimates how much an area of the field that could grow a seah was worth before the flock ate the row of crops and how much it was worth after.  The difference is the damage payment.  Rabbi Shimon holds that we assess damages based on the crops actually eaten.  His assessment will certainly be higher than the assessment based on the previous opinion.


Questions for Further Thought:
 In mishnah two why is Rabbi Shimon’s assessment of damages a higher assessment?
