
Mishnah Four
1) If one swapped a cow for a donkey, and it gave birth,
a) So too if one sold his slave and she gave birth,
i) [And] one (the seller) says, “It was born before I sold her”, and the other (the buyer) says, “It was born after I bought her”, they shall divide [the value of what was born].
2) If one had two slaves, one large and the other small, or two fields, one large and the other small,[And he sold one of them], 
i) If the buyer says, “I bought the large one” and the other says, “I don’t know”, the buyer can rightly claim the large one.
ii) If the seller said, “I sold the small one” and the buyer said, “I do not know”, he may only take the small one.
iii) If one said, “It was the large one” and the other said, “It was the small one”, the seller must take an oath that it was the small one that he sold [and the buyer can only take the small one].
iv) If one said, “I do not know”, and the other said, “I do not know”, they shall divide the value [of both slaves or fields].

Explanation—Mishnah Four
The principles learned in this mishnah are strikingly similar to those learned in mishnah two of this chapter, so it may help to look at the explanation to that mishnah as well.  Basically, the mishnah teaches that when two people are both certain about a claim (and there is no corroborating evidence) they split the disputed amount.  The caveat to this rule is that if there is a previous assumption of possession favoring one of the parties, the other party must prove his claim in order to win the dispute.  If one party claims that he is certain and the other party that he is unsure, the one who claims certainty wins the dispute.  If both are uncertain they also split the disputed amount.  We will now go through the examples in this mishnah.
Section one:  If this scenario a person exchanged a donkey for a cow and the cow gave birth but it is unknown when it gave birth.  The one who acquired the cow will claim that the cow gave birth after the swap and therefore the calf belongs to him, and the one who gave his cow will claim that the birth was prior to the swap and therefore the young cow belongs to him.  In this case, since there is no previous assumption of ownership over the young cow, the two parties split its value.  The same principle is true if the seller sold a female slave and the dispute is over when she gave birth, before or after the sale.
Section two:  In this scenario a person sold one of two slaves or fields to his friend, and the two parties are disputing whether it the larger or smaller slave or field was sold.  There are four possibilities for the two claims.  1)  If they buyer claims that he is certain that he bought the large one and the seller is uncertain which he sold, the buyer gets the large one.  2)  If the seller claims that he is certain that he sold the small one and the buyer is uncertain, the buyer receives only the small one.  3)  If they are both certain then the seller must take an oath that he sold the small one and the buyer only receives the small one.  4)  If both are uncertain they split the value of both of the fields or both of the slaves. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four:  In section one and section 2iii, both parties claim certainty.  Nevertheless in section one they split the value and in section 2iii, the seller takes an oath and the buyer gets only the smaller field or slave.  Why is the law in these two sections different?  What is essentially different about the two situations?
