Bava Kamma Chapter Ten Mishna Ten

Mishnah Ten
1) Shreds of wool which the laundryman pulls out belong to him, but those which the woolcomber pull out belong to the householder.
2) If the laundryman pulled out three threads, they belong to him, but if more than this they belong to the householder.
a) If there were black threads among the white, he may take them all and they are his.
3) If the tailor left over thread sufficient to sew with or a piece of cloth three fingerbreadths by three fingerbreadths, these belong to the householder.
4) What a carpenter takes off with a plane belongs to him; but what [he takes off] with a hatchet belongs to the householder.
a) And if he was working in the householder’s domain, even the sawdust belongs to the householder.

Explanation
The central idea in this mishnah is that a craftsman may keep any material which the householder would not expect to get in return or would not care if he did not get.  With this principle we can explain all of the sections of the mishnah.  
Section one—a laundryman will not generally find a lot of shreds and therefore the owner does not expect to recover what little thread the laundryman does find.  Therefore the laundryman may keep them.  In contrast a woolcomber finds many shreds and therefore the owner will wish to recover them.  In that case the woolcomber is obligated to return them.
Section two—a householder does not generally care if he loses one, two or three threads while the laundryman cleans his clothes. If, however, the laundryman should find more, he must return them to the owner because the owner would expect to get them back.  Black threads found on a white garment are undesirable to the owner of the garment and therefore the laundryman may keep them.
Section three—a tailor who receives cloth and thread from his customer in order to sew a garment will inevitably not use all of the materials.  If more than a minimal amount of thread or garment is left he must return it to the owner.
Section four—a carpenter’s work by nature creates sawdust and splinters and other left over material from the wood.  The owner may want this material back in order to light his oven or to do with it some other type of work.  Again, if the material is minimal, such as is left by a plane, the carpenter need not return it. Since an owner does not expect to receive this minimal material, the carpenter need not give it back.  If, however, the material is more substantial, than he must return it.  Finally, all of this was only with regards to someone working at his own home.  If he was working at the householder’s home, he must give over everything to him.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Mishnah ten, section two:  What would the law be if the laundryman found more than three black threads on a white garment?

Congratulations!  We have finished Bava Kamma.  
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us to finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.  
For those of you who have learned with us the entire tractate, a hearty Yasher Koach (congratulations).  You have accomplished a great deal in a short time and you should be proud of yourselves.  Of course, this is just the beginning.  We will begin Bava Metzia tomorrow!
