Bava Batra, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six deals with a father’s ability to declare that a certain person is either his son or his brother in order that he should be his legal inheritor.

Mishnah Six
1) If a man said, “This is my son”, he is believed.
a) If [he said], “This is my brother”, he is not believed, yet the other may join him in his portion.
b) If he died the property returns to its place.
c) If he inherited property from elsewhere the other’s brothers inherit it together with him.
2) If a man died and a testament was found bound to his thigh, this counts as nothing.
a) But if [he had delivered it and] through it granted title to another, whether of his heirs or of those who are not his heirs, his words are valid.

Explanation
Section one:  If a man states that a certain person is his son, and therefore should inherit his property along with his other sons, he is believed.  Since he could give his property to this person in any case, we allow him to claim that the person is his son so that he may receive a portion of the inheritance.  However, he is not to believed to say that a person is his brother and therefore should share in the inheritance from his father.  Since, by saying that a person is his brother and deserves part of the inheritance he would be taking away from the shares of the other brothers, he is not believed.  Suppose a case in which Reuven and Shimon come to split an inheritance and Shimon claims that Levi is his brother.  If they were to split equally, Reuven would receive a third of the inheritance and not the half, which would be his had Shimon been his only brother.  Therefore Reuven takes half and Shimon and Levi split the other half.  If Levi were to die, the money would revert to Shimon. Since the money was taken out of Shimon’s share in the first place, the money would eventually revert to him and not to Reuven.  If Levi were to receive money from somewhere else (i.e. not from his father’s inheritance) and then die, Reuven and Shimon would both inherit.  Since Shimon claimed that Levi was his and Reuven’s brother he must share the inheritance from Levi with Reuven.    
Section two:  If a man died and a testament (will) was found on him, the will is invalid.  Although we may assume that the man wrote the document we do not know if he intended to give it to the intended person.  Since he may have written it and changed his mind, the document is not valid.  If, however, he gave the document to someone else before he died the document is valid.  Since it was given while the person was alive, it is a proper will and it will be carried out. 
 
