Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnah One

Introduction
The fifth chapter of Bava Metziah deals with the Torah’s prohibition of lending money to another Jew with interest.  Leviticus 25:35-37 states (JPS translation):  “If your kinsman, being in straits, comes under your authority, and you hold him as though a resident alien, let him live by your side.  Do not exact from him advance (neshech) or accrued interest (tarbit), but fear your God.  Let him live by your side as a your kinsman.  Do not lend him your money at advance interest (neshech), or give him your food at accrued interest (tarbit).”
Our mishnah deals with the Rabbinic definitions of “neshech” and “tarbit”.

Mishnah One
1) What is usury (neshech) and what is increase (tarbit)?  
a) It is usury (neshech) when a man lends a sela for five dinars, or two seahs of wheat for three, because he bites (noshech) [off too much].
2) And what is increase?
a) When a man increases [his gains] by [selling] produce.
i) How is this so?
(1) [If] one bought wheat at a golden dinars [=25 silver dinars] for a kor when such was the market price, and then wheat rose to thirty [silver] dinars [per kor].
(2) [If] he said to him, “Give me my wheat since I would sell it and buy wine with the proceeds” and the other said, “Let your wheat be reckoned with me at thirty dinars and you now have a claim on me for wine [to that value], although the creditor has no wine.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one defines “neshech”.  This is a simple form of loaning with interest, where a person gives another person a loan of either money or goods and expects to get back more in return.  The mishnah understands that the Biblical word “neshech” derives from the word “noshech” which means to bite.  Interest “bites” because the creditor bites off from the debtor more than he gave.
Section two defines the word “tarbit”.  This situation is more complicated.  Reuven buys from Shimon wheat at 25 dinars (=one silver dinars) per kor (a unit of volume) which was the market price of wheat.  Shimon does not immediately provide the wheat but rather will provide it at a later time.  After the sale the market price of wheat rises to 30 dinars.  Reuven requests from Shimon his wheat so that he can sell the wheat and buy wine.  Reuven is allowed to purchase the wheat at the lower price since he bought it at what was at the time market value.  Shimon says to Reuven that he will sell him wine in return for the wheat that he owes him.  In other words Shimon promises to provide Reuven with 30 dinars worth of wine, since that is the current value of the wheat.  If Shimon does not currently have this wine in his possession this is forbidden.  The reason is that if the price of wine goes up Reuven will have in effect loaned Shimon 30 dinars (the amount of wheat that Shimon owes Reuven) and when he gets the wine that has gone up in price he will receive back more than he loaned.  If Shimon had had the wine at the time when he said this to Reuven it would have been permitted, since by trading his wheat for wine, the wine would be in Reuven’s possession when it rose in price.  The problem is that if Shimon doesn’t own the wine he is in essence borrowing Reuven’s money.  If the price of wine should rise Shimon will end up returning interest to Reuven.
