Bava Kamma Chapter Seven Mishna Seven


Mishnah Seven
1) It is forbidden to rear small herd animals in the Land of Israel, but it is permitted to rear them in Syria or in the wildernesses of the Land of Israel.
2) It is forbidden to rear fowls in Jerusalem because of the “Holy Things”, nor may priests rear them [anywhere] in the Land of Israel because of [the laws concerning] clean foods.  
3) It is forbidden to rear pigs anywhere.
4) One should not rear a dog unless it is tied with a chain. 
5) It is forbidden to set snares for pigeons unless it be thirty ris from an inhabited place.

Explanation
Section 1—raising small herd animals in the Land of Israel is forbidden because of the damage that they will do to the crops. Sheep and goats can eat a tremendous amount of crops and they are hard to control.  Therefore, if a Jew should wish to raise them he must allow them to graze only in the wilderness or in Syria, which is not in the Land of Israel.
Section 2—Wild fowl have a tendency to pick in the garbage.  The mishnah is concerned that they will find dead animals in the garbage which are ritually impure and they will carry them to places which need to be kept in a state of ritual purity.  Therefore one should not allow them in Jerusalem, which needs to stay in a higher state of ritual purity due to the Temple.  Neither should priests, who need to eat much of their food while they are in a state of ritual purity, raise fowl due to the same concern.
Section 3—It is forbidden for a Jew to raise pigs.  Evidently this is due to the fact that pigs are not kosher and there is no other reason to raise them.  In contrast, horses and camels are also not kosher to eat, but one usually raises them not for their meat but for riding purposes.  Therefore Jews are allowed to raise them.
Section 4—Dogs can be a menace to society and therefore if one wishes to raise one, he must keep it properly leashed.
Section 5—Pigeons were a commonly raised in Israel both for food and to offer as sacrifices in the Temple.  Setting traps for pigeons could allow a person to steal those belonging to his neighbor.  Therefore the mishnah states that one must set the trap thirty ris (about four miles) from the nearest settlement.     

Questions for Further Thought:
 What are some rules in our society that may be similar to those in mishnah seven?  
 
