Bava Kamma Chapter Nine Mishna Six


Mishnah Six
1. If he had repaid the value but had not paid the [added] fifth, or if he had forgiven him the value but not the [added] fifth, or if had forgiven him both except for less than a perutah’s worth of the value, he need not go after him.
2. If he had repaid him the [added] fifth but not the value, or if he had forgiven him the [added] fifth but not the value, or if he had forgiven both except for a perutah’s worth of the value, he must go after him.

Explanation
Our mishnah is taught in a classic style where all of the examples in section one are opposite of those in section two.  This can easily be demonstrated by a chart:
Section One 
Section Two
a) If he had repaid the value but had not paid the [added] fifth, 
b) or if he had forgiven him the value but not the [added] fifth, 
c) or if had forgiven him both except for less than a perutah’s worth of the value, 
d) he need not go after him.

a) If he had repaid him the [added] fifth but not the value, 
b) or if he had forgiven him the [added] fifth but not the value, 
c) or if he had forgiven both except for a perutah’s worth of the value,
 
d) he must go after him.
 Seen in this manner we can easily learn the abstract principle taught by the mishnah’s mentioning of concrete cases.  If a person has returned to another person the value of the stolen object but not the added fifth, he need not chase after the person in order to restore the object, as we learned in mishnah four.  However, if he paid the fifth and not the value of the object itself, he must still chase after him.  The same is true if the person who had the object stolen from him forgave him the value but not the fifth, or vice versa.  Finally, in section c we learn that if he (the person from whom the object was stolen) forgave most of the value but didn’t forgive a perutah’s or more worth, than he (the robber) still must chase after him.  However, if he remains obligated less than a perutah, he need not chase after him.


