Bekhorot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with blemishes to an animal’s genitalia.

Mishnah Six
1) If [a first born] has no testicles or if it only has one testicle, [it is a blemish]. 
2) Rabbi Ishmael says: if it has two pouches, then it has two testicles, but if it only has one pouch, then it only has one testicle. 
3) Rabbi Akiva says: [the animal] is placed on its buttocks and he squeezes [the pouch]. If a testicle is [in there, inside the pouch] it will eventually come out. 
4) It happened that one squeezed it and [the testicle] did not come out, but when it was slaughtered [the testicle] was found attached to the loins, and Rabbi Akiva permitted [the animal] while Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri prohibited it. 

Explanation
Section one: The lack of one or both testicles is considered a defect.
Section two: The remainder of the mishnah deals with how one determines if an animal has both testicles [since this is not a test that I have ever administered, I will assume that how many testicles an animal has is not readily apparent.]
Rabbi Ishmael says that one simply counts the pouches. If it has two pouches, then it has two testicles and is not defective. 
Section three: Rabbi Akiva does not believe that if there are two pouches there are necessarily two testicles. Rather one must test the animal to see if there are really two inside there.
Section four: It seems that this story supports Rabbi Ishmael’s view, because Rabbi Akiva’s test does not work. The animal is tested and the testicle does not come out, even though it is later revealed to have been there.
This animal had both testicles and therefore it should not have been slaughtered. Generally, if a first-born is slaughtered when it shouldn’t have been, the meat is prohibited. However, Rabbi Akiva allows the animal to be eaten, because according to Rabbi Akiva if the testicle does not emerge when squeezed it is blemished. Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri prohibited the animal because it was not blemished and should not have been slaughtered.  
