Bekhorot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with a person who is suspected of not treating his first born animals as holy. For instance, he slaughters an unblemished first born, or he intentionally blemishes it. The problem with such a person is that we must be concerned that many of the products that he might sell are actually derived from first borns who were illicitly slaughtered (or sheared). 

Mishnah Seven
1) If one is suspected in connection with first borns, one must not buy from him even deer's flesh or unprocessed hides. 
2) Rabbi Eliezer says: one may buy from him female hides we may buy from him. 
3) One may not buy from him washed or dirty wool, but one may buy spun wool or garments.

Explanation
Section one: The law of the first born applies only to domesticated animals—cows, sheep and goats. Seemingly, one could buy deer’s flesh from a person suspected of slaughtering his first born animals without concern. However, the mishnah rules that we must be concerned even with this because the meat of a calf can look like the meat of a deer. We must be concerned that he is really selling the meat of a calf and just telling people it is deer meat. 
One also can’t buy from him unprocessed hides, lest they come from a first born. However, one may buy from him a processed hide because if he had slaughtered a first born he would want to sell it is quickly as possible so that he would not be caught. 
Section two: Rabbi Eliezer says that one can buy hides from him if it is obvious that the hides come from a female, because females are not treated halakhically as first borns. We are not concerned that he would make hides from a male look like hides from a female, assumedly because this is not easy to do.
Section three: We cannot buy from him wool, whether it has been washed or is still dirty, because we must be concerned lest it come from a first born. As we have learned, it is forbidden to shear a first born, even one that is blemished.
However, we can buy wool that has been more fully processed for the same reason that we can buy processed hides. A person who illicitly shears his first born animal is going to want to sell the wool as soon as possible in order to hide his crime from the authorities. 
