Bekhorot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
According to Leviticus 25, if a person grows poor and sells his ancestral lands, the lands return to him during the Jubilee year. From here we can learn that if a person receives land as an inheritance and then he sells that land, the land is returned to him during the Jubilee year. 

Mishnah Ten 
1) The following do not return [to their owners] in Jubilee year:  
2) The share of the first-born, 
3) [The inheritance of] one who inherits his wife's [estate] 
4) [And of] one who performs yibbum with his sister-in-law  
5) And a present, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
a) But the sages say: a present is like a sale.
6) Rabbi Elazar says: all of these return in the Jubilee. 
7) R. Johanan ben Berokah says: if one inherits his wife's estate, he returns it to the members of the family and he deducts from the purchase money. 

Explanation
Section one: Our mishnah deals with cases where a person inherits land, it does not go back to its original owners to be divided up again during the Jubilee, in the same way that land that a person inherits does not leave his possession during the Jubilee. 
Section two: The extra portion that a son receives for being the first born. When the Jubilee year comes, this portion stays with the first born.
Section three: One who inherits his wife’s estate. Although this is not his own ancestral land, when the Jubilee years comes, it stays with him and does not go back to his wife’s family. 
Section four: As we learned in mishnah nine, when a brother performs yibbum, he inherits his brother’s estate. Again, this property stays with him at the Jubilee.
Section five: There is a debate over whether a present is restored during the Jubilee year. According to Rabbi Meir, if a person gives a piece of land to someone else as a present, the land does not revert to its original owner during the Jubilee year. The other sages disagree and hold that a present is just like a sale.
Section six: Rabbi Elazar takes a more radical approach and holds that all of this property returns during the Jubilee to its original owners.
Section seven: Rabbi Yohanan ben Berokah disagrees with Rabbi Meir as well and holds that a man must return his wife’s inheritance to her family at the Jubilee. However, he seems to hold that the family pays him back for the property. From this amount, he should reduce the amount that he benefited by owning the property for the years that he owned it. In this way, he doesn’t unduly profit. 
