Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The final mishnah of the tractate deals with a case where the person erred when counting his animal tithes or a case where multiple animals came out of the pen at the same time. An interesting phenomenon to note in this mishnah is the power of words—if he calls something the tenth animal, it is often holy, even if it was not actually the tenth animal that came out of the pen. This matches the typical rabbinic emphasis on the power of language to actually transform the status of real things.  

Mishnah Eight
1) If two [lambs] came out at the same time, he counts them in pairs.   
2) If he counted [the two] as one, the ninth and the tenth are spoiled.   
3) If the ninth and the tenth came out at the same time, the ninth and the tenth are spoiled.   
4) If he called the ninth the tenth, the tenth the ninth and the eleventh the tenth, all three are holy: the ninth can be eaten when it becomes blemished, the tenth is the tithe and the eleventh is sacrificed as a shelamim, and it can make a substitute, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
a) Rabbi Judah said: can one substitute make another substitute?   
b) They said in the name of Rabbi Meir: if it were a substitute, it would not have been sacrificed.   
5) If he called the ninth the tenth, the tenth the tenth and the eleventh the tenth, the eleventh is not holy.   
a) The following is the rule: wherever the name of the tenth [animal] has not been taken away from it, the eleventh is not consecrated. 

Explanation
Section one: If all of the animals come out in pairs (kind of like Noah’s ark!) then he counts them in pairs. When he gets to the tenth pair, which are the 19th and 20th animals, both are holy. Another explanation for this section is that if two come out at the same time he counts them as two, as if they came out one at a time.
Section two: If he counted two as one, then both the ninth and tenth have been spoiled. The animal that he calls ninth is the tenth and should have been the tithe. The animal that he calls tenth is not the tenth but rather the eleventh. In other words, one actually is the tenth and one is called the tenth. Therefore both animals have to go out to pasture and can be eaten only when they are blemished. 
Section three: If the ninth and tenth both come out at the same time then both are potentially the tenth and as in the previous section, both must go out to pasture until they become blemished at which point they may be eaten. 
Section four: Here he really messed up the counting. The ninth, which he called the tenth, can be eaten when it becomes blemished. The tenth is the actual tithe, even though he called it the eleventh. The eleventh, which he also called tenth, has to be offered up as a shelamim offering. 
There is now a debate whether or not it is possible for the eleventh animal that is offered as a shelamim to make another animal into its substitute. Making a substitute means that if one tries to substitute the holy animal for another animal, the substituted animal becomes holy, even though the original one remains holy. Rabbi Meir says that this eleventh animal can make a substitute. Rabbi Judah questions this because in his opinion this animal is itself a substitute for the tenth animal, the real tithe. Since we hold that a substitute animal cannot make another substitute (and if one tries to do so, the substitution has no validity) this shelamim cannot effect a substitute. 
Rabbi Meir responds that the eleventh animal offered as a shelamim is not a “substitute” for if it was it couldn’t be sacrificed as a shelamim. Rabbi Meir holds that if an animal is substituted for a tithed animal, the substituted animal cannot be sacrificed. Since this is not a substitute but rather a regular shelamim, it can make another animal into a substitute.
Section five: If he makes a mistake, but does call the tenth the tenth, then the eleventh is not holy. The general rule explains—if the tenth receives its proper appellation, then anything that follows it is not holy. However, the ninth, which he accidentally called the tenth is still holy and must go out to pasture until it is blemished at which point it can be eaten.

Congratulations!  We have finished Tractate Bekhorot!
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Although Bekhorot was mostly full of technical information, we should not lose sight of the religious idea that stands behind the idea of the holiness of the bekhor. As is well-known, the final plague on Egypt was the slaying of the first-born. The loss of every first-born, animal and human, was so great in the eyes of the Egyptians that they finally allowed the children of Israel to leave Egypt. I have often wondered why this plague caused them to finally let the people go? Surely many, perhaps even more, people died in the other horrible plagues. What was it about this plague that made it so much worse than the others? Regardless of how we answer that question, after that event, the first-borns of Israel owed God their lives and in order to express this debt, they had to be redeemed. As a first-born male, I was redeemed when I reached thirty days, and since my first child is a male, I redeemed him when he reached thirty days. While I don’t remember the first event, I remember the redemption of my own son as being a meaningful event in his life, as well as mine and my wife’s.
Again, congrats on making it through Bekhorot. Tomorrow we begin Tractate Erkhin.  

  




