Bekhorot, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with a person who bought an animal from a non-Jew and doesn’t know whether it had yet given birth. If it had not, then the first animal born in Jewish possession would be considered a first born and would have to be treated accordingly.

Mishnah One
1) If one buys an animal from a non-Jew and it is not known whether it had given birth or had not given birth: 
a) Rabbi Ishmael says: that born of a goat in its first year certainly belongs to the priest; after that, it is a questionable case [of a first-born].  
b) That born of a ewe two years old certainly belongs to the priest; after that, it is a questionable case [of a first born]. 
c) That born of a cow or a donkey three years old certainly belongs to the priest; after that, it is a questionable case [of a first born].  
2) Rabbi Akiva to him: if an animal were exempted [from the law of the first born] only with the birth of [actual] offspring, it would be as you say. 
a) But they said: the sign of offspring in small cattle is a discharge [from the womb].  In large cattle, the after-birth; in a woman, the signs are the fetus and the after-birth. 
3) This is the general rule: 
a) Whenever it is known that it had given birth, the priest receives nothing. 
b) Whenever it had never given birth, it belongs to the priest. 
c) If there is a doubt, it shall be eaten blemished by the owners.
4) Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: if a large domestic animal has discharged a clot of blood, it [the clot] shall be buried, and it [the mother] is exempted from the law of the first born.

Explanation
Section one: Rabbi Ishmael says that we can estimate whether the animal had given birth by checking the age of the animal. If the goat gives birth within its first year, we can assume that it is a first born. If the goat is beyond its first year, then it is a case of a doubtful first born. As we have seen previously, doubtful first borns go out to pasture until they become blemished, at which point they may be eaten by their owners.
Rabbi Ishmael proceeds to give ages in which we can expect that a ewe and a cow would give birth. 
Section two: Rabbi Akiva disagrees with Rabbi Ishmael because the rabbis taught that if an animal or woman miscarries before having her first born, the next animal/child is not considered the first born, at least not to be treated as holy. Therefore, even if the animal gives birth within that time period, there is no way of knowing if it had previously miscarried. Rabbi Akiva now gives signs by which we can know whether an animal or woman had miscarried. This would be important to distinguish between a true miscarriage and non-miscarriage discharge. 
Section three: Having rejected Rabbi Ishmael, Rabbi Akiva must provide an alternative way to treat the animal bought from the non-Jew. He relies on general rules of certain/doubtful property cases. If we know for a fact that the animal had never given birth, then the first born in Jewish possession must be treated as a first born and given to the priest. If the animal definitely had given birth before, then obviously the priest doesn’t receive anything. Finally, if it is doubtful, then the animal must go out to pasture, become blemished and then it can be eaten by its owners. 
Section four: As an addendum to our mishnah, Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov states that if a large animal discharges a blood clot, the blood clot should be buried. This will allow people to know that the clot is being treated as a miscarriage and that the next born animal is not the first born. 
