Bekhorot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) A priest is trusted to say, “I have shown this first born [to an expert] and it is blemished.”   	
2) All are trust worthy with regard to the blemishes of a tithed animal.
3) A first born whose eye was blinded or whose fore-foot was cut off, or whose hind-leg was broken, may be slaughtered with the approval of three [persons] of the synagogue.   
a) But Rabbi Yose says: even if a high priest were present, it must not be slaughtered except with the approval of an expert.

Explanation
Section one: In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that priests were suspected of blemishing their first born animals so that they could eat them. Today’s mishnah teaches that they are not suspected of completely lying and saying that they showed a first born to an expert who declared it blemished, when in reality they did not. 
This is actually a very interesting insight as to the mentality of the priests. They will not eat an unblemished first born, because the Torah clearly states that an unblemished first born must be sacrificed. However, they might intentionally blemish a first born, because all this amounts to is “cheating the system.” It does not seem to be a direct violation of the prohibition of eating an unblemished first born.
Section two: A tithed animal is brought to Jerusalem, its innards are sacrificed and the remainder of its meat is eaten by its owners. In contrast, a tithed animal that becomes blemished after it has been set aside as tithe is not sacrificed and can simply be eaten by its owners. An Israelite is not suspected of intentionally blemishing his tithed animals because had he wanted to lie, he could have blemished the entire herd before he set aside one of them as a tithe, and then the whole herd could have been exempt. Whenever a person could have achieved his goals without lying, he is trusted to not lie.
Section three:  Generally, a person must bring his first born to a qualified rabbinic expert for him to determine whether the blemish renders the animal unfit for sacrifice. However, if the blemish is completely obvious, such as the loss of an eye or a limb, then there is a leniency, according to the first opinion in the mishnah. He can bring the animal to three “people of the synagogue.” These are people who are generally cautious in their performance of mitzvoth, they are not “amei haaretz,” but they are not experts in the laws of blemishes. It seems that their function is to certify that he brought the animal to them, but not actually have to render a ruling whether or not the animal was blemished.  
Rabbi Yose does not suspend the usual rules. Even if one of these people was the high priest, someone who should know what counts as a blemish and what does not, he still cannot approve the blemish. The animal must be brought in front of a rabbinic expert. 
This is an instance in rabbinic literature where we find a rabbi making a not so subtle slight against the priests. Only the rabbis have the authority to determine what animal might be sacrificed. And when priests are trusted, it is only because the rabbis grant them that trust. Once an only imagine what the priests response to such a halakhah might have been.  
