Bekhorot, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah deals with cases where the offspring of an animal is not the same species as the mother. 

Mishnah Two 
1) If a cow gave birth to a species of donkey, or a donkey gave birth to a species of horse, it is exempt from [the law of] the firstling, for it is said, “the firstling of a donkey,” “the firstling of a donkey,” twice [to teach that the law of the firstling does not apply] until that which gives birth is a donkey and that which is born is a donkey. 
2) And what is the law with regard to eating them?   
a) If a clean animal gave birth to a species of unclean animal, it is permitted to be eaten. 
b) But if an unclean animal gave birth to a species of a clean animal, it is forbidden to be eaten, for that which comes out of the unclean is unclean and that which comes out of the clean is clean.
3) If an unclean fish swallowed a clean fish, it is permitted to be eaten. 
a) But if a clean fish has swallowed an unclean fish, the latter is forbidden to be eaten, because it is not [the clean fish's] growth.

Explanation
Section one: In order for the owner of the animal to be liable to redeem the first-born donkey, it must be a donkey (at least look like a donkey) and be born from a donkey. If a cow gives birth to a donkey (I don’t really know if this is possible) or a donkey gives birth to a horse (perhaps the reference is to a mule) then there is no liability. This is derived from the fact that the Torah twice states “the first-born of a donkey”—once in Exodus 13:12 and again in Exodus 34:20. The Torah repeats itself, according to the midrashic way of thinking, in order to teach that both the mother and the offspring must be donkeys. 
Section two:  When it comes to determining whether an animal is kosher, the status of the animal follows its mother. Anything that comes out of a clean (kosher) animal is clean. So if a cow gives birth to a horse, one can eat the horse, but if a horse gives birth to a cow, the cow is not kosher. This is the matrilineal principle in the animal world. As an aside, some scholars surmise that the source of the idea that a child’s ethnicity/religion is determined by his mother is derived from the idea that an animal’s species is determined by its mother. While there is no conclusive proof of this, it is an intriguing theory. 
Section three: The rule works differently if the animal coming out of another animal was not born but rather swallowed. If a clean fish swallows an unclean fish, and the unclean fish is found in the clean fish’s stomach, one may not eat the unclean fish. The opposite also holds true—if one finds a clean fish in the stomach of an unclean fish, it may be eaten.     
  



