Bekhorot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah continues to deal with the prohibition of shearing a first born, even a blemished first born that may be slaughtered and eaten. We should note that not only is it forbidden to shear the animal, but if it is sheared, it is forbidden to derive benefit from its wool. However, this prohibition is in effect only if the animal was sheared while it was alive. Once dead or slaughtered the wool that is subsequently removed can be used. Specifically, our mishnah deals with wool that fell off the animal while it was alive. 

Mishnah Four
1) If [a portion of] the hair of a blemished first born fell out and he placed it in the window, and then he slaughtered the animal, Akavya ben Mahalalel allows it.
a) But the sages forbid it, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
2) Rabbi Yose said to him: Akavya ben Mahalalel did not allow [only] in this case, but [even] in the case where the hair of a blemished first born which fell out and he placed it in the window, and the animal died subsequently, [even] in this case Akavya ben Mahalalel allows, but the sages forbid. 
3) If the wool of a first born is hanging loose, that part which appears [on a level] with [the rest of] the wool is permitted, whereas that which does not appear [on a level] with [the rest of] the wool is forbidden.

Explanation
Section one: Wool that falls off when the animal is alive is forbidden as long as the animal is alive. In the case in this mishnah, the person put the wool that fell out of the animal in a hole in the window to store it so that he could use it after he slaughtered the animal. Akavya ben Mehalalel allows the use of that wool after the animal was slaughtered. Since the slaughtering allows the wool that is on the animal when it is slaughtered, it also allows wool that fell out of the animal while it was still alive. Note that Akavya would not allow wool that was sheared when the animal was alive, because shearing is a prohibited action.
The other sages forbid this wool. 
This is the version of the debate according to Rabbi Judah.
Section two: Rabbi Yose has a different version of the debate. According to Rabbi Yose if the animal was slaughtered, then even the rabbis agree that the wool that fell off when it was alive may be used. Rabbi Yose holds that they debated a case where the wool fell off and then the animal died on its own. In this case, it is prohibited to derive benefit from both the meat and the wool that is on the animal. Therefore, the wool that fell off the animal is also prohibited. According to Rabbi Yose, Akavya allows the wool even in this case. 
Section three: Here we deal with some wool that has become detached from the animal but is still stuck to the rest of the animal’s wool. When he slaughters the animal, the part that is seen on level with the rest of the wool is permitted, because it does not look like wool that fell off while the animal was alive. However, if it is noticeable that the wool fell off when the animal was still alive, then it is forbidden. This is according to Rabbi Judah’s opinion, that the sages prohibit wool that fell off the animal when it was still alive, even if the animal was properly slaughtered. Rabbi Yose would hold that this wool is permitted in any case. 
