Bekhorot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with blemishes that do not disqualify human beings, even though they do disqualify animals from being sacrifices. 

Mishnah Seven
The following are fit in the case of human beings, but unfit in the case of animals: 
1) A father with his son,   
2) A terefah; 
3) One born by means of a caesarean section.
4) One with which a sin has been committed or has killed a person;   
5) A priest who contracts an illegal marriage is unfit [for the priesthood] until he vows not to derive any benefit from the woman.   
6) One who makes himself unclean through contact with the dead is unfit, until he undertakes that he will no longer make himself unclean through the dead.

Explanation
Section one: It is forbidden to slaughter an animal and its offspring on the same day. If one does slaughter both on the same day, the second one cannot be used as a sacrifice (see Hullin, chapter five). However, a priest and his son can both serve in the Temple on the same day.
Section two: A terefah is an animal that has been wounded or is sick and is going to die from the wound or illness (see Hullin, chapter three). If a priest has the signs of being a terefah, he may still serve in the Temple.
Section three: An animal born through a caesarean section cannot be sacrificed, but a person born of a caesarean section can still serve in the Temple.
Section four: An animal with which a sin (such as a sexual sin) has been committed or an animal has killed a person cannot be offered as a sacrifice (see above 6:12). However, these do not disqualify a priest from serving in the Temple.
Section five: Leviticus 21 lists women whom a priest may not marry. If a priest marries such a woman he must divorce her. Marrying such a woman disqualifies him from serving at the altar until he takes a vow not to derive any more benefit from the marriage, neither sexually nor financially. Once he takes the vow he can serve again, even before he divorces her.
Section six: A priest is forbidden from intentionally coming into contact with the dead, except for his seven close relatives. If a priest intentionally defiles himself by coming into contact with the dead, he cannot serve at the altar until he promises to stop doing so. In this case, he need not take a vow, probably because it is less tempting for him to continue to defile himself, then it is for him to continue to be with his prohibited woman. 
