Bekhorot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Ten

Mishnah Ten
1) One who is suspected of ignoring the sabbatical year is not suspected of ignoring [also] the tithes.  
2) One who is suspected of ignoring tithes is not suspected of ignoring [also] the sabbatical year. 
3) One who is suspected of ignoring both is suspected of ignoring the rules of purity. 
4) And it is possible for one to be suspected of ignoring the rules of purity and yet not be suspected of ignoring the two laws [cited above]. 
5) This is the general rule: one who is suspected of [transgressing] something must not give judgment on it or testify concerning it.

Explanation
Section one: Someone who is suspected of not properly observing the sabbatical year is not automatically suspected of not tithing his food. This would mean that when it is not the sabbatical year, a person could buy or eat his produce without concern that the food is not tithed.
Section two: Similarly, one who is generally suspected of not tithing, is not automatically suspected of not observing the sabbatical laws. The two are not connected, even though they are in the same general set of prohibitions.
Section three: However, one who is suspected of transgressing both the sabbatical year laws and of not tithing is suspected of not observing the purity laws. What this would mean is that he cannot be trusted to state that the food that he is selling is pure. This would have ramifications only for a person who is interested in eating all of their food in a state of purity, a custom that was attributed to the Pharisees.
Section four: The opposite of section three is not true—one can be suspected of not observing the purity laws, but trusted with regard to the sabbatical laws and tithing. It seems that certain purity matters were easily ignored, perhaps because fewer people observed them in the mishnaic period or perhaps because it is not really a transgression to eat food without it being pure. Therefore, one who transgresses more consequential laws such as tithing and the sabbatical year, is suspected of transgressing the less consequential matter of purity.  
Section five: A person is suspected of transgressing a certain law cannot give testimony or render judgment concerning this law. We shall see this statement again below in 5:4. 
