Bekhorot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah discusses cases where the ewe seems to give birth to two first-borns at the same time.

Mishnah Six
1) If a ewe which never before had given birth bore two males and both heads came forth simultaneously:
a) Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: both belong to the priest for scripture says: “The males shall be the Lord’s” (Exodus 13:12).   
b) But the sages say: it is impossible, therefore one remains [with the Israelite] and the other is for the priest. 
i) Rabbi Tarfon says: the priest chooses the better one.   
ii) Rabbi Akiva says: we compromise between them.
2) The second one [in the Israelite's possession] is left to pasture until it becomes blemished and the owner is liable for the [priest's] gifts.
a) Rabbi Yose exempts him. 
3) If one of them died: 
a) Rabbi Tarfon says: they divide [the living one]. 
b) Rabbi Akiva says: the burden of proof is upon the claimant. 
4) If it gave birth to a male and a female, the priest receives nothing [in such circumstances]. 

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Yose the Galilean both males are considered to be first-borns and both are given to the priest. This is derived midrashically from the plural use of “males” in Exodus 13.
The other rabbis, however, disagree with Rabbi Yose and say that this is impossible (doesn’t sound too pleasant for the sheep either). Rather, one must have been the first-born, even if we don’t know which one it was. 
Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva debate about how we determine which of the two animals goes to the priest. According to Rabbi Tarfon, the priest can choose which of the twins he wants. Rabbi Akiva says that they estimate the value of the two kids, and the priest and the owner divide the amount. However, the Tosefta and the Talmud state that the owner keeps the fatter, more valuable of the two kids. This is because of the principle, “the burden of proof is upon the claimant.” Since the priest cannot prove that the better of the two is his, he can only take the lesser. 
Section two: The animal kept by the owner cannot simply be eaten, because it might be a first-born. Therefore, the solution is to let it become blemished and then it can be eaten by its owners. When he slaughters it he must give the priestly gifts, the shoulder, the cheeks and the stomach, to the priest. For if the animal was a first-born then he should have given it all to the priest. And if the animal is not a first-born, then he is liable to give the priestly gifts, as is always the case when one slaughters animals (see chapter ten of Hullin). Rabbi Yose exempts. We will see Rabbi Yose’s reasoning below in mishnah eight.  
Section three: If one of them dies, Rabbi Tarfon says that they can split the value of the living one. Rabbi Akiva holds that since the priest cannot prove that the one that died was the second born he has no right to claim the live one. Again, Rabbi Akiva employs the principle of “the burden of proof is upon the claimant.”
Section four: In this case, when a male and female were born, it is possible that there is no first-born because the female might have been born first. Therefore, the priest doesn’t receive anything. The male animal must go out to pasture until it becomes blemished and after that point, the owner can eat it. He can’t eat it beforehand because it might be a bekhor.   
