Bekhorot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the laws concerning the human firstborn. There are two special rules with regard to the human first born: 1) he gets a double portion of his father’s inheritance (see Deuteronomy 21:17); 2) he must be redeemed from the priest for five shekels (see Numbers 18:16). Determining who is a firstborn is, however, different for these two matters. Our mishnah defines what firstborn counts as a firstborn for which of these two laws.

Mishnah One
1) There is one who is [counted as] a firstborn [with respect to] inheritance but not with respect to redemption from a priest; a firstborn with respect to redemption from a priest but not a firstborn [with respect] to inheritance; a firstborn [with respect to both] inheritance and redemption from a priest; and a firstborn [in respect] to neither inheritance nor redemption from a priest. 
2) Which is a firstborn [with respect] to inheritance but not to redemption from a priest? 
a) One which follows one which was not viable whose head came forth alive, or one born in the ninth month whose head came out dead, or when a woman aborts something that looks like an animal, beast or bird, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
b) But the sages say: [it is not considered an opening of the womb] until [the abortion] has the form of a human being.  
3) If [a woman] aborts a sandal or a placenta or a fetus having an articulated shape, or if an embryo came out by pieces, [the infant] which follows after them is a first-born [with respect] to inheritance but not a first-born for redemption from a priest. 
4) If one who never had children married a woman who had already given birth, even if she had given birth when she was a slave but is now free, or [had given birth] when she was a non-Jew but has since converted, if after coming to the Israelite she gave birth, [the infant] is considered a first-born [with respect] to inheritance but not a first-born for redemption from a priest.   
a) Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: [the infant] is a firstborn [with respect] to inheritance and for redemption from a priest, as it says: “Whatever opens the womb in Israel” (Exodus 13:2), meaning only if it opens the womb in Israel.   
5) If one had children already and married a woman who had never given birth previously
6) Or if she converted when pregnant, or if she was freed when pregnant, and she gave birth; 
7) If she and a priestess gave birth, she and a Levite’s daughter, she and a woman who had already given birth;
8) And similarly [if a woman] who did not wait three months after her husband's death, married and gave birth and it is not known if the infant was born in the ninth month since the death of the first [husband] or in the seventh month since she married the second, it is a firstborn for redemption from a priest but not a first-born [with respect] to inheritance.
9) Which is a firstborn both [in respect] of inheritance and for redemption from a priest? 
a) If [a woman] miscarries a sac full of blood or full of water or full of pieces of flesh; or if [a woman] miscarries something with the shape of fish or locusts or reptiles, or creeping things, or if she discharges on the fortieth day [of conception], [the infant] which follows after [these discharges] is a firstborn both [in respect] of inheritance and for redemption from a priest.  

Explanation
Section one: This is an introduction to the remainder of the chapter. When it comes to who is considered a firstborn for the two relevant matters, all possibilities are open. 
Section two: This section lists infants that count as being the firstborn for matters of inheritance but do not need to be redeemed from the priest.
The first case seems to be that of twins. The first child is not viable, meaning that he is premature. This child’s head emerges from the womb and then it goes back into the womb, after which the other child is born. The child that is born counts as the first born for inheritance, but does not need to be redeemed. A firstborn male needs to be redeemed only if he “opened his mother’s womb” and since the other child opened his mother’s womb, the second child need not be redeemed. However, he does inherit because he is the first child actually born.
There are some problems with this interpretation, namely that it is impossible for one of a set of twins to be premature whereas the other is ready to be born. Nevertheless, it seems possible, in my mind, that the rabbis believed that a pregnant woman could become pregnant again and therefore have “twins,” one of whom is more mature than the other.
The second case is where a fully mature child (a nine months child) has his head emerge from the womb but is dead. Then his head goes back into the womb and the other twin is born. The live twin counts as the first born for inheritance but since he didn’t open the womb, he need not be redeemed.
Finally, if a woman aborts a fetus that has the shape of an animal or bird, the first opinion counts this as “opening the womb” and therefore the next born male need not be redeemed. However, since the miscarriage did not have a human form, it does not count as the first born for matters of inheritance and the second child receives the double portion. This is Rabbi Meir’s opinion. The other sages hold that if the miscarriage does not have a human form it does not count as having opened the womb. The next child is a first-born for both matters.
Section three: In all of these cases the woman aborts something that is considered as having opened the womb, but does not count as a firstborn. Therefore, the next born child receives the double inheritance but does not need to be redeemed. 
The first case is a “sandal.” This seems to be a flat piece of flesh that resembles a sandal. It seems to either accompany a fetus or once was a fetus. 
The second case is a placenta that inevitably accompanies a fetus, so it is a sign that there was at some point a fetus. The third case is a fetus that has a human shape, and the fourth case is where the aborted fetus is recognizably human but is cut up into pieces. In all of these cases the fetus counts as having opened the womb, but does not count as being the first born for matters of inheritance. 
Section four: In these cases a man who has never had children marries a woman who has had children. This is his firstborn but not hers. In general, this means that the child gets the double inheritance from the father, but does not need to be redeemed because he did not open the mother’s womb. This is true even if the first child was conceived and born while the woman was not Jewish (or not free). Since her first free, Jewish child did not open the womb, he is not the first born for redemption.
Rabbi Yose the Galilean holds that the child does not count as having opened his mother’s womb unless he is born while she is Jewish and free. He interprets “opens the womb in Israel” to mean that the child opens the womb of a woman who is alread “in Israel,” of Jewish status.
Section five: Sections five, six, seven and eight describe cases where the child counts as a firstborn with regard to being redeemed by a priest but not for the sake of inheritance. We will start with section five. In this case, the man has already had kids so the first-born with his next wife cannot be the first born for matters of inheritance. 
Section six: If a woman became pregnant for the first time while a non-Jew or a slave and was then converted or freed and then gave birth, since her child was born while she was already an Israelite, the child counts as a first-born for matters of redemption. However, it does not inherit from its father because the child was conceived while the woman was still not a Jew.
Section seven: This section deals with kids who get mixed up at birth. If a child of a woman who has never given birth is mixed up with a child of a woman who is exempt, such as the son of a priestess, woman of Levite descent or a woman who already gave birth, both children need to be redeemed, because either of them could be the true first born. 
Section eight:  A widow should wait three months to remarry after her first husband has died in order to determine whether her next child is the first husband’s or the second’s. If she does not wait, and she becomes pregnant immediately, the child does not inherit from either father, because the “certain” inheritors can claim that the child cannot prove who his father was. The child does need to be redeemed because he is a first-born to his mother. However, he will have to redeem himself when he gets older, because he has no “certain” father who is obligated to do so on his behalf. 
Section nine: Finally the mishnah lists some cases where the child is a first-born for both matters, even though there might be reason to think otherwise. In all of these cases the woman has either a very early miscarriage or some sort of discharge that does not have the shape of a human fetus. These various types of discharges do not count as having opened her womb and therefore the child born afterwards is considered to be the first-born for both inheritance and redemption. 

