Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
A person must tithe the tenth animal of each of his “herds.” The question is how far apart can animal’s be and still be considered as belonging to the same herd?  Our mishnah deals with this issue.

Mishnah Two
1) Animals are combined for purposes of tithing so long as they can still pasture within the distance that cattle wander.   
2) And what is the distance over which they wander while pasturing? Sixteen mils.   
3) If there was between two groups of animals a distance of thirty-two mils, they do not combine for the purpose of tithing. 
a) If however there was one in the middle [of the distance of thirty-two mils] he brings them into the middle and tithes them.   
4) Rabbi Meir says: the [river] Jordan is regarded as forming a division as regards the tithing of animals.

Explanation
Section one: If the animals are close enough together such that the shepherd can keep an eye on them while they are out pasturing, they are considered as one herd. 
Section two: This distance is determined to be 16 mils. A mil is about a kilometer, so 16 mils is equivalent to about 10 miles. If an owner has animals wandering around and grazing at less than this distance, they all count as one herd. But if they go beyond this distance, they don’t count as one herd and if there are ten of them born in one year, they do not join together for the purpose of tithing.
Section three: Animals separated by 32 mils, are considered to be at a “wandering distance” from one another, but not a “pasturing distance.” If all of the animals are separated by more than 16 mils, they do not join together for the sake of tithing. However, if there is one animal exactly in between the two separate herds, this animal can join the two separate herds together, and they are tithed together. In other words, if the herd to the east is 16 mils from the one in the middle which is 16 mils from the herd to the west, the middle animal joins the other two herds together.
Section four: Rabbi Meir says that if one has herds on opposite sides of the Jordan, they do not join together for tithing, because the Jordan separates them.      
