Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with when a person is supposed to tithe his animals. The concept is that one tithes one out of every ten animals born in a given year, not one out of every ten animals. Therefore, our mishnah and tomorrow’s mishnah must determine when this year begins. 

Mishnah Five
1) There are three periods [lit. threshing floors] for the tithe of cattle: in the peras of Pesah, in the peras of Atzeret (Shavuot) and in the peras of the Feast [of Sukkot], the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
2) Ben Azzai says: on the twenty-ninth of Adar, on the first of Sivan and on the twenty-ninth of Av. 
3) Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon say: on the first of Nisan, on the first of Sivan and on the twenty-ninth of Elul. 
4) And why did they say the twenty-ninth of Elul and not the first of Tishrei?   
a) Because it is a Yom Tov and you cannot tithe on a Yom Tov. Consequently they moved it up to the twenty-ninth of Elul. 
5) Rabbi Meir says: the first of Elul is the New Year for the tithe of cattle.   
6) Ben Azzai says: those born in Elul are tithed by themselves. 

Explanation
Section one: “Peras” means “before” and it is interpreted in the Talmud as being fifteen days. According to Rabbi Akiva, a few weeks before all three of the pilgrimage holidays it becomes forbidden to eat any of the animals that were born since the previous holiday until he first separates any necessary animal tithes. These periods are referred to as “threshing floors” which is the end of the processing of grain. At the threshing floor produce becomes liable for tithing. The language is borrowed from that context.
Section two:  Ben Azzai lists the three dates in a slightly different manner. The twenty-ninth of Adar is about two weeks before Pesah, the first of Sivan is less than a week before Shavuot, and the twenty-ninth of Av is one month before Rosh Hashanah.
Section three: Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon also provide slightly different dates—the first of Nissan (the month with Pesah), the first of Sivan (the month with Shavuot) and the twenty-ninth of Elul, the day before Rosh Hashanah. One needs to tithe before Rosh Hashanah because Rosh Hashanah is, according to these two rabbis, the new year for animal tithes. We shall learn more about this in mishnah six (see also Rosh Hashanah 1:1). 
Section four:  One cannot tithe on Rosh Hashanah because it is a festival (Yom Tov). Therefore, they moved the day up to the last day of the preceding month, Elul.
Section five: Rabbi Meir disagrees with Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon with regard to the date for the new year for animal tithes. While they hold that it is on the first day of Tishrei, he holds that it is on the first of Elul. The anonymous opinion in the first mishnah of Rosh Hashanah accords with Rabbi Meir.
Section six: Ben Azzai doubts whether the halakhah is according to Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon or Rabbi Meir. The result of this doubt is that animals born in Elul are tithed on their own, because we don’t know if they should be tithed with those born before them (Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon’s opinion) or those born after them (Rabbi Meir’s opinion). 
