Bechorot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses a Jew who receives a flock of sheep or goats from a non-Jew under “iron terms.” What this means is that all responsibility for the flock lies with the Jew, and he pays the non-Jew a fixed sum per year in return for use of the flock and the use of the offspring. Alternatively, instead of paying a fixed sum, the Jew and the non-Jew split the profits and the offspring.

Mishnah Four
1) If one receives flock from a non-Jew on “iron terms” their offspring are exempt [from the law of] the first born.  
2) But the offspring of their offspring are liable [to the law of the first born].  
3) If [the Israelite] put the offspring in the place of their mothers, then the offspring of the offspring are exempt, but the offspring of the offspring of the offspring are liable. 
4) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: even for ten generations the offspring are exempt [from the law of the first born] since they are pledged to the non-Jew.

Explanation
Section one: In mishnah one we learned that the flock itself is exempt from the laws of the first born. Our mishnah teaches that if one of the offspring of the original flock gives birth, that offspring is also exempt from the law of the first born, meaning its first born is not holy. The reason for this exemption is that if the Jew reneges on his payment to the non-Jew, the non-Jew can take the offspring as part of his payment. This means that they are in some sense owned by the non-Jew and as we have learned, animals owned by non-Jews are not subject to the law of the first-born.
Section two: However, the offspring of the offspring are liable—meaning that the first born offspring born of this offspring are holy and must be treated as such. 
Section three: If the Jew tells the non-Jew that he is going to pay him back not with the original flock but with its offspring, then the exemption is extended another generation, to the first born of the offspring of the offspring. (It might help you to use names here, Debbie, born of Charlene, born of Becca, born of Alice—apologies to those with these names!). Again, since the non-Jew can claim these animals (Charlene), they are considered to be in his possession in order to exempt their offspring (Debbie).
Section four: Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that all subsequent offspring are pledged to the non-Jew, no matter how many generations removed. Therefore, they are all exempt from the laws of the first born (so Eunice is exempt, as if Freda, and Gladys and Harriet, and Iris—would you like me to go to Z for Zoey, my daughter’s name?). 
  
