Bekhorot, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
When a first born is born into an Israelite’s herd, the Israelite is not allowed to immediately give it to the priest. Rather, he must take care of it for a period of time and then transfer the animal to the priest. Our mishnah discusses how long he needs to take care of the animal. 
As background to this mishnah, we must remember that after the Temple was destroyed, the priest would have to hold on to the first born until it became blemished, at which point he could slaughter it and eat it. During this period he couldn’t use it for anything else. When the Temple was still standing, he could sacrifice it whenever he wanted to, as long as it was already eight days old.  

Mishnah One
1) For how long is an Israelite bound to take care of a first born? 
a) In the case of small cattle, for thirty days, and large cattle, fifty days. 
b) Rabbi Yose says: in the case of small cattle, three months. 
2) If the priest says [to the Israelite] during this period “Give it to me,” he must not give it to him. 
3) But if the first born was blemished and the priest said to him “Give it to me so that I may eat it,” then it is allowed.  
4) And in Temple times, if [the first born] was in an unblemished state and the priest said to him “Give it to me, and I will offer it up it was allowed.” 
5) A first born is eaten year by year both in an unblemished as well as in a blemished state,   for it is said: “You shall eat it before the Lord your God year by year” (Deuteronomy 15:20).   

Explanation
Section one: It is in the priest’s interest for the Israelite to take care of the animal as long as possible, to feed it and fatten it up. Therefore, the mishnah sets a mandatory period in which the Israelite must take care of the animal. According to the first opinion, this time period is longer for large cattle such as oxen, because they need to be fattened up more. According to Rabbi Yose the opposite is true. The period is longer for small cattle such as goats and sheep because their survival is more precarious. 
Section two: One would think that if the priest is willing to take the animal at an earlier period, the Israelite would be allowed to give it to him. The mishnah rules that this is forbidden. The problem is that if priests start helping Israelites out in preparing that which they must give them, then there is a danger of a quid pro quo situation being created—“you take the animal earlier, and I will give it to you and not another priest.” Ultimately, this would be against the priests’ best interests, so the mishnah makes such behavior prohibited. Also, the Torah says that these must be given to the priests, and not that the priests should have to work in order to receive their gifts.  
Section three: However, if the animal is blemished already, then the priest can eat it immediately, as opposed to holding on to it until it becomes blemished. Therefore, in this case the Israelite can immediately give it to the priest.
Section four: When the Temple still stood the priest could sacrifice the animal immediately. Therefore, the Israelite can give it to him as soon as the priest asks for it.
Section five: The first born must either be eaten or sacrificed (when the Temple still stood) within its first year. If it is not blemished within this year, then the priest must sacrifice it. This is derived from the verse in Deuteronomy. Obviously, once the Temple was destroyed, the priest might have to wait longer for it to become blemished. 
	
