Bekhorot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
1) If one woman had given birth before and the other had never before given birth, the two women belonging to two husbands, and they gave birth to two males, the one whose wife had never before given birth gives five selas to the priest. 
2) If they gave birth to a male and a female, the priest receives nothing.  
3) If the son dies within thirty days although he gave the priest [the five selas], he must return them.   
4) If he dies after thirty days, although he has not yet given the five selas, he (the father) must give them.
5) If he dies on the thirtieth day, it is as if he died on the previous day.   
a) But Rabbi Akiva says: if he gave [the five selas] he cannot reclaim them, but if he had not yet given, he need not give.
6) If the father dies within thirty days, [the infant] is under the presumption of not having been redeemed until proof is brought that he has been redeemed. 
a) If the father dies after thirty days, the infant is under the presumption of having been redeemed until he [the son] is told that he was not redeemed.   
7) If both he and his son need to be redeemed, the father takes precedence over his son. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: his son comes first for the command to redeem him was upon his father, and the command of his son is upon him.

Explanation
Section one: In this case, two men each have one wife and one wife has previously given birth and one has not. If they both give birth to a male, it is obvious that the husband of the wife who has never given birth owes five selas. 
Section two: If one woman gives birth to a boy and the other to a girl, the priest doesn’t receive anything because it is possible that the boy was born to the woman who had already given birth.
Section three: This section refers to a son who is certainly a first born. If he dies before he is thirty days old, then there was never any obligation for him to be redeemed, and if the father has already given the money to the priest, the priest must return it. 
Section four: If the son dies after thirty days, the father is still obligated to redeem his son. In other words, the obligation to redeem comes into existence when the son hits thirty days. The fact that the son has died before the father gave the money to the priest does not annul this obligation.
Section five: According to the first opinion, the obligation to redeem doesn’t exist until the thirty days are completed. Therefore, if the son dies on the thirtieth day, the priest does not receive the five selas and if he has already received them he must return them.
Rabbi Akiva says that the status of the thirtieth day is doubtful. If the father has already given the money, then the priest does not need to return it. But if the father has not yet given the money, then the priest cannot make his claim.
Section six: The obligation for the son to be redeemed doesn’t change just because his father dies. However, there is a chance that we don’t know if the father had given the money or not. Therefore, we must make an educated guess. If the father dies within thirty days after his son’s birth, the assumption is that he did not redeem his son, because this would not be typical. Therefore, the son must redeem himself, unless he can prove that his father already did. If, however, the father dies after thirty days, we can assume that he did redeem his son, and the son is exempt, unless people know that he was not redeemed.
Section seven: If a man grows up and then has a son, and realizes that he himself has not yet been redeemed, he must first redeem himself and then his son. Perhaps this is because his debt is longer overdue. Alternatively, the reason may be that if he doesn’t redeem himself, who will? 
Rabbi Judah disagrees. First the father must redeem his son, because that is a mitzvah incumbent upon him. Only afterwards, when he has enough money, must he redeem himself, for his redemption was supposed to be his father’s mitzvah.   
