Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah continues to discuss in what situation animals born at different times of the year combine for matters of tithing.   

Mishnah Six
1) All those born from the first of Tishrei until the twenty-ninth of Elul combine [for matters of tithing].   
a) Five lambs born before Rosh Hashanah and five born after Rosh Hashanah do not combine. 
2) But five lambs born before the period [of tithing] and five after the period [of tithing] do combine [for tithing]. 
3) If so, why did they speak of three periods for the tithe of cattle?   
a) Until the arrival of the [tithing] period it is permitted to sell and slaughter [the animals], but when the period has arrived he must not kill, but if he killed, he is exempt.

Explanation
Section one: The new year for tithing begins on Rosh Hashanah, the first of Tishrei and goes all the way to the 29th of Elul, the end of the year. Any animals born that year can and must be tithed together. This means that if ten sheep, for instance, are born that year, the owner must set aside one sheep as a tithe. However, as the mishnah illustrates, if five are born before Rosh Hashanah and five after, he need not set aside a tithe at all. To be even more extreme, if nine were born on the twenty-ninth of Elul and one was born on the first of Tishrei, no tithe must be given.
Section two: In mishnah five we learned about periods of the year in which one is liable to tithe. These three periods are not significant with regard to animals joining together to become liable for tithing. So if five are born before one of these periods, when the period comes he need not yet tithe. When another five are born, when the next period comes along he will have to tithe, as long as they were all born in the same calendar year. 
Section three: The mishnah asks the logical question—if the tithing periods do not effect the combining of animals, then what significance do they have? The answer is that when a tithing period comes, one must tithe one out of every ten animals that has been born from the time of the last tithing period. It is forbidden to slaughter or sell the animals until they are tithed, or at least counted for purposes of tithing. However, if he transgresses this and does slaughter the animal, there is no punishment, nor is the animal prohibited.  
