Bekhorot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah is similar to yesterday’s mishnah except that today’s mishnah deals with two sheep that had never given birth before, whereas yesterday’s mishnah dealt with one ewe that had twins. Most of this mishnah is the same as that which we learned yesterday, so I refer the reader to my commentary there. 

Mishnah Seven
1) If two ewes which had never previously given birth bore two males, both belong to the priest. 
2) [If they gave birth] to a male and a female, the male belongs to the priest. 
3) [If they gave birth] to two males and a female, one remains with him, and the other belongs to the priest. 
i) Rabbi Tarfon says: the priest chooses the better one.   
ii) Rabbi Akiva says: we compromise between them.
4) The second one [in the Israelite's possession] is left to pasture until it becomes blemished and the owner is liable for the [priest's] gifts.
a) Rabbi Yose exempts him. 
5) If one of them died: 
a) Rabbi Tarfon says: they divide [the living one]. 
b) Rabbi Akiva says: the burden of proof is upon the claimant. 
6) [If they gave birth to] two females and a male or two males and two females, the priest receives nothing in such circumstances. 

Explanation
Section one: If both of the first-borns are males, then obviously, both go to the priest.
Section two: If one is a male and the other is a female, then we know that the male is a first-born and it goes to the priest.
Section three: In this case, one male is certainly a first-born, but we don’t know which one. Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva again debate how we determine who gets which of the two. For an explanation, see yesterday’s mishnah.
Section four: This is identical to the debate in yesterday’s mishnah. 
Section five: See yesterday’s mishnah.
Section six: If they gave birth to two females, it is possible that there was no male first-born. Therefore, the priest doesn’t receive anything. The Tosefta adds that the males must go out to pasture and become blemished before they can be eaten. This is because they might be first-borns and all doubtful first-borns must become blemished before they can be eaten.  
