Bekhorot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of yesterday and the previous day’s mishnah. Much of the explanation for the mishnah can be found there. 

Mishnah Eight
1) If one [of the ewes] had given birth and the other had never previously given birth and they bore two males, one remains with him and the other belongs to the priest. 
a) Rabbi Tarfon says: the priest chooses the better one.   
b) Rabbi Akiva says: we compromise between them.
2) The second one [in the Israelite's possession] is left to pasture until it becomes blemished and the owner is liable for the [priest's] gifts.
a) Rabbi Yose exempts him. 
i) For Rabbi Yose says: wherever the priest receives [an animal] in its place, he is exempt from the priestly gifts.   
ii) Rabbi Meir however makes him liable. 
3) If one of them died: 
a) Rabbi Tarfon says: they divide [the living one]. 
b) Rabbi Akiva says: the burden of proof is upon the claimant. 
4) If they gave birth to a male and a female, the priest receives nothing [in such circumstances]. 

Explanation
Section one: Again, we have here a situation where we know that one of two males is a first-born and one is not. One goes to the priest and again Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva argue about how we determine who gets which animal. See mishnah six for an explanation.
Section two: Most of this section is the same as in mishnah six. We learn here, finally, the reason that Rabbi Yose exempts the animal that stays with the owner from being liable for the priestly gifts. Whenever a priest receives one animal in return for another, the animal that is exchanged is exempt. In this case the priest receives one animal in return for giving away the other animal. It is as if he received the animal and then exchanged it for another. Any animal owned by a priest is exempt from the priestly gifts, and therefore the animal that goes to the original owner is exempt. Rabbi Meir disagrees and says that he is still liable. 
Sections three and four: These are the same as the end of mishnah six. See there for an explanation.
