Bekhorot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a case where twins are born, but it is unclear which child came out first.

Mishnah Three 
1) If a man's wife had never before given birth and she gave birth to two males, he gives five sela's to the priest.  
2) If one of them dies within thirty days [of birth] the father is exempt.  
3) If the father dies and the sons survive:
a) Rabbi Meir says: if they gave the five sela's before the property was divided up, then what they gave is given; but if not, they are exempt. 
b) But Rabbi Judah says: there is a claim on the property. 
4) If she gave birth to a male and a female, the priest receives nothing.

Explanation
Section one: One of these boys is certainly the first born and one is certainly not. Therefore, the father pays five selas to the priest, but does not pay twice.
Section two: A child who dies before he reaches thirty days never has a chance to be redeemed and his father is exempt. In this case, since we don’t know if the first or second born died, the father is exempt, because he can say to the priest, “prove to me that the first born survived and I will give you your five selas.” This accords with the general principle that the burden of proof is upon the claimant.
Section three: If the father dies before he has a chance to redeem one of the sons, then legally the sons must redeem themselves. However, the problem is that each son can claim that he is not the first-born and therefore doesn’t need to be redeemed. According to Rabbi Meir, if they already gave five selas to the priest before the property was divided up, then they cannot get their money back. However, if their father’s property was divided up before the five selas were given to the priest, they are exempt because each son can claim that he is not the first born. 
Rabbi Judah disagrees and holds that there is a debt hanging over the father’s property and that debt must be paid off, regardless of the fact that we don’t know which of the sons is a first born. 

