Bekhorot, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches that donkeys owned, or even partially owned, by non-Jews are exempt from the obligation to have their first-born redeemed. 

Mishnah One
1) [An Israelite] who buys a fetus of a donkey belonging to a non-Jew or who sells one to him, although this is not permitted, or who forms a partnership with him, or who receives [an animal] from him to look after or who gives [his donkey] to him to look after, is exempt from the [law of the] bekhor, for it says: [“I sanctified to me all the firstborn] in Israel,” (Numbers 3:13) but not in non-Jews.
2) Priests and levites are exempt through [an argument made by a] kal vehomer: if they exempted the first-born belonging to the Israelites in the wilderness, it follows all the more so that they should exempt their own.

Explanation
Section one: In order for a Jew to be liable to redeem the first-born of a donkey, a non-Jew cannot have any ownership or partial ownership over the donkey. So if a Jew buys a fetus (assumedly he buys a pregnant donkey) from a non-Jew it is exempt from the laws of the first-born, because it was conceived under non-Jewish ownership. Similarly, if he sells the fetus to the non-Jew, it is exempt. The mishnah notes that selling a donkey to a non-Jew is not permitted because it is forbidden to sell a large animal to a non-Jew (see Avodah Zarah 1:6). Nevertheless, if one does sell the donkey, it is exempt. 
If a Jew and a non-Jew are partners in owning a donkey it is exempt.
If a Jew receives a donkey to take care of, and in return he keeps some of the offspring, or if he gives the donkey to the non-Jew to take care of and the non-Jew keeps some of the offspring, in both of these cases, the donkey is exempt because the non-Jew has some level of ownership over the animal. 
The exemption of non-Jews from these laws is derived from the word “in Israel,” which means that the law of the bekhor applies only to animals fully owned by Israelites.
Section two: In Numbers 3:45 God instructs Moses to take the Levites in place of the first-born and to take the cattle of the Levites in place of the cattle of the first-born. From here the mishnah derives a kal vehomer (a fortiori) argument. If the Levites exempted the cattle of the first-born in the desert, then their own first-born animals are all the more so exempt from the law of the bekhor. Thus animals owned by priests and Levites are exempt from these laws. As we shall see, the same holds for children of priests and Levites. 
