Bekhorot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
As often happens with the Mishnah, the most important information is placed last. The final two mishnayot of the tractate discuss how the animal tithe is actually done.

Mishnah Seven
1) How does one tithe animals? 
a) He brings them to a shed and makes for them a small opening so that two cannot go out at the same time. 
b) And he counts them with a rod: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. 
c) And the one that comes out tenth he marks with red chalk and he says: “Behold, this is [the tithe].” 
2) If he did not mark it, or if he did not count them with a rod, or if he counted them while they were crouching or standing, they are still considered tithed. 
3) If he had one hundred [lambs] and he took ten or if he had ten and he took one [without counting], this is not [a valid] tithe.   
a) Rabbi Yose bar Judah says: this is a [valid] tithe. 
4) If one [of the lambs] already counted jumped back into the flock [in the shed] they are all exempt.   
5) If one of the lambs that was a tithe jumped back into the flock [in the shed], they all go to pasture until they become unfit for sacrifice, and the owners may eat them in their unfit state. 

Explanation
Section one: This section explains the basic procedure for tithing animals. This seems to be related to the description of the animal tithe in Leviticus 27:32, “All tithes of the herd or flock—of all that passes under the shepherd’s staff, every tenth one—shall be holy to the Lord.” In order to fulfill this mitzvah, there must be a formal counting, and it is preferable that this formal counting be done with a rod, counting the animal’s one at a time. 
Section two: As long as he counts the animals that he is tithing, he has fulfilled his duty and the animal that comes out tenth is tithed. It is better to count them with a rod, while they are passing through the opening and to mark the tenth one, but as long as he counts them one at a time, everyone agrees that the tithe counts.
Section three: However, if he takes out the tithed animals without formally counting, then the tithe does not count. Rabbi Yose bar Judah disagrees and says that even in this case, the tithe counts. 
Section four: If one of the lambs that has already been counted jumps back into the flock that has not yet been counted, then there will be a mixture of animals exempt from tithing with those liable for tithing. In such a case the law is lenient and the entire group is exempt.
Section five: However, if one of the animals that were set aside to be tithed gets mixed up with untithed animals, then every animal in the pen is potentially tithe. In such a case all of them must go out to pasture until they become blemished. A blemished tithe animal can then be eaten by its owners. 

