Berakhot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
According to Leviticus 15:16 a man who has had a seminal emission is impure for one day.  This does not, however, impede his ability to recite blessings and study Torah.  According to the rabbis, Ezra added to the Torah’s ruling that men who had a seminal emission could not recite the words of the Torah or pray until they had immersed. The intention of this decree seems to have been to keep talmud scholars from having too frequent sex with their wives.  The Talmud states that this decree was already no longer observed by Talmudic times.  
Our mishnah talks about how one who has had a seminal emission should act when it comes to reciting the Shema and other prayers and blessings.  

Mishnah Four 
1) One who has had a seminal emission utters the words [of the Shema] in his heart and he doesn’t say a blessing, neither before nor after. 
2) Over food he says a blessing afterwards, but not the blessing before. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: he blesses both before them and after them.

Explanation
Section one:  One who has had a seminal emission and has not yet had the opportunity to go to the mikveh should recite the Shema in his heart and not say it out loud.  Since he can recite it “in his heart,” as we learned in 2:3, there is a way to recite it without transgressing Ezra’s decree.  However, the blessings before and after are only considered to be “derabanan”, of rabbinic authority. Hence, the rabbis did not require him to recite them at all, neither the blessings before the Shema nor those after.
Section two: The blessings after the Shema are considered to be “deoraita”—or Toraitic origin, due to Deuteronomy 8:10, “And you shall eat, and you shall be satisfied and you shall bless the Lord your God.” Since they are “deoraita” the authority of Ezra’s decree, considered to be “derabanan” does not uproot them. They must be recited by the one who has had a seminal emission.  In contrast, the blessing before is only derabanan and hence is not recited.
Rabbi Judah disagrees with both of the above rules—that the one who has had a seminal emission does not recite the blessings before or after the Shema.  He holds that he is still obligated to recite these blessings.  Commentators disagree over whether or not Rabbi Judah thinks that he recites the Shema out loud.  
