Berakhot, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
At the end of the last chapter we learned that some people might be exempt from reciting the Shema because they couldn’t have proper intention. There the mishnah referred to bridegroom’s celebrating his wedding night.  The first two mishnayot of the third chapter deal with exemptions due to participation in a funeral.

Mishnah One
1) One whose dead [relative] lies before him is exempt from the recital of the Shema and from the tefillah and from tefillin. 
2) The bearers of the bier and their replacements, and their replacements’ replacement, both those in front of the bier and those behind the bier—those needed to carry the bier, are exempt; but those not needed to carry the bier are exempt.   
3) Both, however, are exempt from [saying] the tefillah.

Explanation
Section one:  A person who has not yet buried his dead is called an “onen.”  He is exempt from reciting the Shema, the tefillah (the Amidah) and putting on tefillin.  In the Talmud they add that he is exempt from all of the mitzvoth in the Torah.  It is as if he, along with his unburied dead relative, are considered to be out of the realm of normal human beings who are obligated to the commandments.  Until he buries the dead, he can’t really participate in other normal societal interactions, including mitzvot. 
Section two: The onen is exempt from the Shema and other mitzvoth because there is just no way he can concentrate on fulfilling them until he has buried his dead. The pallbearers are exempt because they are too busy and concentrating on other matters and would not be able to have the proper intention.  The mishnah does not distinguish between those walking in front of the bier (the stretcher with the dead body on it) and those walking behind it. The only distinction it makes is between those who are needed to carry the bier and those not needed. The pallbearers are exempt from Shema only if they are needed. If they are not needed they can recite the Shema while walking with the bier.
Section three:  In contrast, even those not needed to carry the bier are exempt from reciting the tefillah (the Amidah).  Some explain that this is because the Amidah is not from the Torah while the Shema is.  A different explanation, one that I think is more cogent, is that the tefillah requires greater concentration than does the Shema (see above, mishnah 2:4).  A third explanation is that one cannot walk while reciting the Amidah but one can stop long enough to recite the first line of the Shema and then recite the rest while walking with the bier.    
