Berakhot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
The first half of the mishnah continues to deal with various halakhot concerning a man who has had a seminal emission.
The second half teaches that one must distance oneself from foul-smelling things before one recites the Shema.

Mishnah Five
1) If a man was standing saying the tefillah and he remembers that he is one who has had a seminal emission, he should not stop but he should abbreviate [the blessings].   
2) If he went down to immerse, if he is able to come up and cover himself and recite the Shema before the rising of the sun, he should go up and cover himself and recite, but if not he should cover himself with the water and recite. 
3) He should not cover himself either with foul water or with steeping water until he pours fresh water into it. 
4) How far should he remove himself from it and from excrement? Four cubits.

Explanation
Section one:  A person is in the middle of reciting the Amidah when he realizes that at some previous time he had a seminal emission and that he had not yet immersed.  According to Ezra’s decree he should not have recited the Amidah until he immersed.  Nevertheless, he shouldn’t stop his Amidah, because he has already started.  Rather he should recite a shorter version of each blessing, and just recite the introduction and the closing words.  
Section two:  A person who has had an emission goes down to a mikveh to immerse in the morning. When he comes up he is pure and can recite the Shema. The question is should he wait until he is dressed to do so, or is the covering provided by the water sufficient. The mishnah rules that if he can cover himself up properly before the rising of the sun, then he should do so before he recites the Shema. The best, or perhaps even mandated, time to recite the Shema is at the rising of the sun (see 1:2 above, which also implied that the Shema should be recited before the rising of the sun).  If he will not have enough time, then he can cover himself with the water and recite the Shema while still in the mikveh.
Section three:  One shouldn’t recite the Shema near any foul smelling thing, and one certainly shouldn’t stand in foul-smelling water and recite the Shema. If one is standing in foul-smelling water or in steeping water (water used to soften flax) he must add in fresh water until the smell has dissipated.
Section four:  It is forbidden to recite the Shema while standing within close distance of feces or other noxious objects. Note that this must have been quite difficult in a time when they didn’t have indoor plumbing or any easy means to clear waste.  One must distance oneself four cubits (about 2 meters) from the feces or foul water before one recites the Shema.  
