Berakhot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Until now the Mishnah has been discussing blessings recited before eating.  This mishnah and the next chapter deal with the Birkat Hamazon, the blessing after food (I don’t really like the term, “Grace After Meals”). The concept of Birkat Hamazon is derived from Deuteronomy 8:10, “When you eat and you are satisfied you will bless the Lord your God.”  Today the Birkat Hamazon contains four blessings, but the Mishnah refers to it as “three blessings”—the fourth blessing was a later addition.
The full Birkat Hamazon, all three blessings, is recited only after eating certain foods or after eating a “meal”. After eating other foods which don’t constitute a “meal,” one blessing is recited.  This one blessing includes the themes in the three blessings of the full Birkat Hamazon. In our mishnah there is a debate over when one recites the full version of the Birkat Hamazon and when one recites the abbreviated one blessing version.

Mishnah Eight
1) If one has eaten grapes, figs or pomegranates he blesses after them three blessings, the words of Rabban Gamaliel. 
2) The sages say: one blessing which includes three. 
3) Rabbi Akiva says: even if one ate only boiled vegetables and that is his meal, he says after it the three blessings. 
4) If one drinks water to quench his thirst, he says “By Whose word all things exist.” 
5) Rabbi Tarfon says: “Who creates many living things and their requirements.”

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabban Gamaliel the full Birkat Hamazon is recited over grapes, figs or pomegranates, all of which are among the seven species mentioned in Deuteronomy 8:8. This is the verse to which the blessing in verse 10 (see above in introduction) refers, and hence one recites the full Birkat Hamazon over these foods.  Rabban Gamaliel would also hold that the full Birkat Hamazon is recited over the other foods that are referred to in the verse, including bread.  
Section two:  According to the sages, one recites an abbreviated version of the Birkat Hamazon over these foods. Today this blessing is called, “Brakhah Acharonah”—the “last blessing.”  One would recite the full Birkat Hamazon only over bread, because only bread constitutes a proper meal.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Akiva what foods are eaten does not determine whether one recites a full or abbreviated Birkat Hamazon.  Rather what is determinative is whether or not something constitutes a “meal” or a “snack.”  If one eats boiled vegetables as one’s meal, then one says Birkat Hamazon.  This would have many ramifications for today’s practice, where many people don’t necessarily eat bread with every meal.  For instance, according to Rabbi Akiva, if one sat down for a meal of steak and potatoes, a hearty meal by most accounts, one would recite Birkat Hamazon afterwards, whereas according to the other sages in this mishnah, he would not.
Section four:  The final section of this chapter returns to briefly discuss blessings recited before eating.  Water was sometimes drunk to quench thirst, and sometimes drunk merely in order to help digest food.  Our mishnah implies that if its function was just to clear the food from one’s throat, then no blessing is recited.  In such a case water is not “food” and therefore no blessing is recited. However, if the function was to quench thirst, then the water counts as food and a blessing must be recited. The first opinion holds that the blessing recited is, “By Whose word all things exist,” the default blessing referred to above in mishnayot 2-3.  Rabbi Tarfon says that a different blessing is recited, one which we today recite after eating foods over which we don’t recite a full Birkat Hamazon or even an abbreviated Birkat Hamazon. This blessing is generally called today “Bore Nefashot.”    
