Berakhot, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the blessings that come before and after the Shema in the morning and evening. It will help you understand this mishnah if you open a siddur while learning it.

Mishnah Four 
1) In the morning he recites two blessings before it and one after it; in the evening two before it and two after it, one long and one short.   
2) Where they [the sages] said that a long one should be said, he may not say a short one; where they said a short one he may not say a long one 
3) [Where they said] to conclude [with a blessing] he is not permitted to not conclude; where they said to not conclude [with a blessing], he may not conclude.

Explanation
Section one:  In the morning the Shema is preceded by two blessings. The first is called “Yotzer Or” and it deals with the creation of light and darkness. The second is called “Ahavat Olam” (in the Sephardi tradition) or “Ahavah Rabbah” (in the Ashkenazi tradition) and in it we thank God for choosing us as worthy of the Torah.  The blessing after the Shema is called “Emet veYatziv” and it finishes with “Goel Yisrael.”  The general theme is one of gratitude to God for redeeming Israel. 
In the evening there are two before the Shema, both of which are similar in theme to the two morning blessings.  The first is “Hamaariv Aravim”, “who causes the sun to set” and the second is “Ahavat Olam,” similar to that in the morning.  The blessing after the Shema is also similar in theme to the blessing after the Shema in the morning.  It is called “Emet veEmunah” and it finishes with “Goel Yisrael” as does the morning’s blessing.  The major difference between the morning and the evening is that in the evening there is a second blessing after the Shema called “Hashkivenu” whose theme is peace and wellbeing and mentions going to sleep at night.  Of these two blessings the first is a long blessing and the second is short (according to Rashi’s explanation; for another explanation of “long and short” see below).
Section two:  The mishnah now proceeds to give some general rules concerning blessings.  The basic gist is that if the sages said to recite a blessing in a certain way, the supplicant may not deviate from this prescribed manner.  If the sages said that the blessing should be long, then it must be long. Rashi explains that long refers simply to the length of the blessing—hence the first blessing recited after the Shema is long and the second is short.  However, Maimonides explains that long refers to a blessing that begins and concludes with a blessing. This would be characteristic of the first blessing recited before the Shema in both the morning and evening but not of any of the other blessings. The first blessing of Birkat Hamazon would also be a long blessing.
Section three:  Some blessings conclude with a blessing formula—“Barukh At Adonai.” This is true for all of the blessings surrounding the Shema.  However, other blessings begin with a blessing formula but do not end with an additional “Barukh” formula. This is true of blessings recited over food and other pleasures (smell, seeing things and others—we will explore these blessing in chapter nine).  Again, one cannot deviate from these formulas.    
