Berakhot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
In today’s mishnah we learn what words were recited as the “zimun,” the invitation to recite Birkat Hamazon.

Mishnah Three
How do they invite [one another to recite the Birkat Hamazon]? 
1) If there are three, he [the one saying Birkat Hamazon] says, “Let us bless [Him of whose food we have eaten].” 
a) If there are three and him he says, “Bless [Him of whose food we have eaten]” 
2) If there are ten, he says, “Let us bless our God [of whose food we have eaten].” 
a) If there are ten and he says, “Bless.” 
3) It is the same whether there are ten or ten myriads (ten ten thousands).  
4) If there are a hundred he says, “Let us bless the Lord our God [of whose food we have eaten].
a) If there are a hundred and him he says, “Bless.” 
5) If there are a thousand he says “Let us bless the Lord our God, the God of Israel [of whose food we have eaten].”  
a) If there are a thousand and him he says “Bless.” 
6) If there are ten thousand he says, “Let us bless the Lord our God, the God of Israel, the God of hosts, who dwells among the cherubim, for the food which we have eaten.” 
a) If there are ten thousand and him he says, “Bless.” 
7) Corresponding to his blessing the others answer after him, “Blessed be the Lord our God the God of Israel, the God of hosts, who dwells among the cherubim, for the food which we have eaten.” 
8) Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: According to the number of the congregation, they bless, as it says, “In assemblies bless God, the Lord, O you who are from the fountain of Israel.”
a) Rabbi Akiba said: What do we find in the synagogue? Whether there are many or few the he says, “Bless the Lord your God.”  
b) Rabbi Ishmael says: “Bless the Lord your God who is blessed.”

Explanation
This mishnah is structured on two basic principles. The more people that join together in the zimun, the more elaborate the zimun is. Second, if the number of people is exactly the quota, three, ten, one hundred, a thousand or ten thousand, the leader includes himself in the zimun. But when there are more than the required quota, the leader tells the others to “Bless,” and he doesn’t include himself.  This shall become clearer as we proceed.
Section one:  As stated above, the minimum number for a zimun is three.  If there are exactly three he says, “Let us bless [Him of whose food we have eaten].” He does not say the word for God.  However, if there are three besides him, then he instructs the others to “Bless [Him of whose food we have eaten].”  
Section two:  When there are ten they add in the word “our God.”  
Section three:   This section is an introduction to what follows and to what has already been stated.  It matters not whether there are ten or ten thousand, the rule that if there is the precise number the leader say, “Let us bless” whereas if there is more than the number he says, “Bless,” remains the same.
Section four: When there are one hundred they add the word “the Lord.”
Section five: When there are a thousand they add, “the God of Israel.”
Section six:   When there are ten thousand (don’t ask me if this ever happened) the fullest version is recited, “Let us bless the Lord our God, the God of Israel, the God of hosts, who dwells among the cherubim, for the food which we have eaten.”
Section seven:  The response of the community is always a repetition of the instructions of the leader.  The mishnah illustrates this through the fullest version recited when there are ten thousand people, but the same would be true for the shorter versions of the zimun.
Section eight:  Rabbi Yose the Galilean affirms that which was stated above. The zimun goes according to the number of people who have joined together in a meal.  
Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael disagree with the set up in the first seven sections. They both hold that the same zimun is stated no matter how many people participate. This is patterned after the “Barkhu,” the call to prayer recited in the synagogue. The prayer leader says, “Bless the Lord” or Rabbi Ishmael’s version, “Bless the blessed Lord,” whether there are ten or one thousand people present.  So too when it comes to the zimun, it matters not whether there are ten or ten thousand, the zimun is always the same. We should note that Rabbis Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael still agree that with less than ten one does not mention God’s name, because ten is the number required for a minyan.   

