Betzah, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
Even though carrying is allowed on Yom Tov, he should not carry things the same way that he carries things during the week because this makes it look like “business as usual.”

Mishnah One
1) One who carries jars of wine from place to place, he may not carry them in a basket or in a large basket, but he may carry [them] on his shoulder or in front of him. 
2) Similarly, one who brings straw, he may no drape a large basket over his back, rather he must carry it in his hand. 
3) And one may start [using] a heap of straw, but [one may] not [start using wood] from the back-yard. 

Explanation
Section one:  It is permitted to carry jars of wine from place to place on Yom Tov, as long as one is within the Shabbat border limit.  However, when carrying them he should not carry them in the same manner that he does during the week (non-Yom Tov). What he should do is carry them with his hands on his shoulder or in front of him, held against his body. This looks less like he is delivering merchandise and more like he is just bringing wine to a friend’s house.
Section two:  Basically, the same holds true for carrying straw used for lighting a fire or for animal feed.
Section three:  This third section deals with the concept of muktzeh—something is prohibited if it was not designated for use on Yom Tov. He may use the heap of straw even though he did not specifically designate it and has never used that heap before. This is because heaps of straw are automatically set aside for use and do not require any special and intentional designation that they will be used on Yom Tov.  
In contrast, wood which is in the backyard is not necessarily designated to be used for something that can be done on Yom Tov and one cannot begin to use from that wood on Yom Tov.  Indeed, the Hebrew word in this mishnah for backyard is muktzeh because in that area one sets aside things that one doesn’t have a specific intention to use (for those of you learning modern Hebrew, muktzeh is most definitely not a word for backyard.)
