Betzah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with immersing things on Yom Tov in order to purify them.

Mishnah Three
1) They agree that one may effect surface contact for [unclean] water in a stone vessel in order to purify it, but one may not immerse [it]; 
2) And one may immerse [to change] from one intention to another or from one company to another.

Explanation
Section one:   Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel agree that one may purify water on Shabbat that falls the day before Yom Tov. Drinking water was purified by putting it into a stone vessel (a stone vessel cannot become impure). The vessel was then immersed in a pure mikveh until the top of the vessel just touched the water from the mikveh.  
The reason that a stone vessel was used was to make sure that this was not done in order to purify the vessel, which as we learned yesterday, both Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel prohibit.  
They both agree that one should not fully immerse the vessel because that would be similar to immersing an unclean vessel in order to purify it.  In other words, only the water may be purified but not the vessels.  This is also taken to mean that one should not do this with a wooden vessel because wooden vessels become impure through the contact with the unclean water and then they would require immersion.
Section two:  If a vessel is already pure it will still need to be immersed if it is going to be used for a “holier” purpose. For instance, if one immersed his vessels to purify them with the intent of using them for non-sacred things, such as regular oil, and then decided he wanted to use them to make terumah wine, he needs to immerse the vessels again.  Our mishnah teaches that this is permitted on Shabbat before Yom Tov because the vessels were in any case pure before they were immersed.  
A person who is pure and is eating non-sacred food with one eating company and then wants to eat terumah with another company must first immerse.  Again, this immersion is permitted on Yom Tov even according to Bet Shammai because the person was already pure.  
