Betzah, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with preparing food on Yom Tov to use on Shabbat which falls the day after.  While cooking on Yom Tov is permitted, it is only permitted to cook on Yom Tov for that day.
This mishnah discusses what is called “eruv tavshilin.”  This is a type of “eruv” whereby one begins to cook a meal for Shabbat on the day before Yom Tov which falls before Shabbat.  Beginning to cook this meal allows him to cook on Yom Tov for Shabbat.  This halakhah is still observed to this day, and if you look in siddurim you will even find a blessing which one recites before setting aside the food.

Mishnah One
1) Yom Tov which fell on the eve of Shabbat, one should not begin to cook on Yom Tov for Shabbat. 
2) But he may cook for Yom Tov, and if any is left over it is left over for Shabbat. 
3) And he may prepare a dish on the eve of Yom Tov and rely upon it [to prepare food] for Shabbat. 
4) Bet Shammai says: two dishes. 
a) But Bet Hillel says: one dish. 
b) Yet they [both] agree that a fish and an egg upon it are [considered as] two dishes. 
5) [If] he ate it or it was lost, he may not begin to cook [relying] on it.
a) But if he left over any [small] portion of it, he may rely on it [to cook] for Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  Although one is allowed to cook on Yom Tov, one may not cook food on Yom Tov that will be eaten on the next day, even if the next day is Shabbat.  We should note that this would have presented a bigger practical problem in the ancient world than it does today.  They did not have preservatives or refrigeration (or those fantastic lock-top plastic containers) and hence it would not have been simple to prepare food for Shabbat on Thursday.  Therefore, the remainder of the mishnah seems to present some ways of avoiding this problem. 
Section two:  If he cooks on Yom Tov with the intention of eating some of the food on that very day, he may eat on Shabbat whatever food was left over. It would even seem possible to make a large meal on Yom Tov knowing that there would be leftovers and to eat those leftovers on Shabbat.
Section three:   This is the section that deals with “eruv tavshilin.”  A person may begin to make a meal on the day before Yom Tov and then on Yom Tov “continue” to cook the meal.  In this way he will not be starting to cook a meal on Yom Tov for Shabbat but rather just continuing a meal that he already began to cook the day before.
Section four:  The two houses debate how many different food items he needs to begin to prepare on the day before Yom Tov in order for it to count as an “eruv tavshilin.”  According to Bet Shammai a meal consists of at least two dishes—therefore he must begin to cook two dishes for it to count.  Bet Hillel thinks that a meal need consist of only one dish and hence one dish is sufficient for eruv tavshilin.  Bet Shammai however is lenient in what counts as two dishes—even a fish with an egg on top of it counts as two dishes.
Section five:  If the eruv tavshilin is eaten or lost before he begins to cook for Shabbat, then he may not rely on it to begin cooking a meal for Shabbat.  However, if even a little bit of the eruv still remains before he begins cooking he may rely on it to cook for Shabbat.  
