Betzah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah teaches that it is forbidden to produce new fire on Yom Tov.  This is related to the prohibition of “muktzeh” which was the topic of yesterday’s mishnah.  The second half of the mishnah continues to deal with the laws of muktzeh. 
 
Mishnah Seven
1) One may not produce fire either from wood, or from stones, or from dirt, or from water (gas).
2) Nor may one make tiles red-hot in order to roast on them.
3) Rabbi Eliezer further said: A man may stand near his “muktzeh” on the eve of Shabbat in the sabbatical year and say: “From here I will eat tomorrow.”  
a) But the sages say: [This doesn’t work] unless he marks it out and says, “From here to there.”

Explanation
Section one: While one is allowed to use fire on Shabbat, one is not allowed to create a new fire by “bringing it out” of a substance such as wood (rubbing sticks together) or from stones (striking a stone against another) or dirt (I  don’t really know how this was done) or from water, which is the mishnah’s word for gas.  We should remember that today creating new fire is exceedingly easy— one just flicks a lighter or strikes a match.  In ancient times starting a new fire would have been difficult.  Most fire was probably just passed from one existing fire to another.  The rabbis prohibited creating a new fire because it didn’t exist before Yom Tov began, much as they forbid the egg that was laid on Yom Tov in the first mishnah of this tractate.
Section two:  It is also forbidden to heat up tiles to cook on them because by heating them up he is forging them. This is considered like completing the making of a vessel which is forbidden on Yom Tov.
Section three: These words of Rabbi Eliezer are a continuation of his words above in mishnah six, which dealt with muktzeh.  The word “muktzeh” here refers, according to its accepted interpretation, to a place where a person has set his fruit to dry out (dates, figs and grapes).  In order for these fruits to be available for use on Yom Tov, in other words in order for the things in the “muktzeh” to not be “muktzeh”, one must designate them for use before Yom Tov.  Furthermore, this can only happen on the Sabbatical year during which one doesn’t have to separate tithes.  During the other years because the fruit in the muktzeh has not generally been tithed, and it is forbidden to tithe on Yom Tov, one cannot eat them on Yom Tov even if he had designated them for use. He could only eat them if they had already been tithed.  
The mishnah now brings a debate concerning how one designates drying fruit for use.  According to Rabbi Eliezer all one needs to do is say “From here I will eat.”  The rabbis are stricter and rule that he must point specifically to the area of fruit from which he will eat.  Just as Rabbi Eliezer was more lenient in mishnah six, so too he is more lenient than the other sages here.   
