Betzah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six contains three cases in which Rabban Gamaliel ruled like Beth Shammai in connection with the laws of Yom Tov.  This mishnah is also found in its entirety in tractate Eduyot 3:10.
 
Mishnah Ten
In three cases Rabban Gamaliel was strict like the words of Beth Shammai. 
1) One may not cover up hot food on Yom Tov for Shabbat; 
2) And one may not join together a lamp on a festival; 
3) And one may not bake [on Yom] thick loaves but only wafer-cakes.  
4) Rabban Gamaliel said:  “In all their days, my father’s house never baked large loaves but only wafer-cakes.” 
a) They said to him: “What can we do with regards to your father’s house, for they were strict in respect to themselves but were lenient towards Israel to let them bake both large loaves and even charcoal-roasted loaves.”

Explanation
This mishnah lists three cases in which Rabban Gamaliel ruled strictly, as had Bet Shammai.  Although later Sages generally ruled like Beth Hillel, there were some exceptions, and some of those are listed in our mishnah.  
Section one:  As we learned above, it is forbidden to prepare food on Yom Tov for Shabbat, since that would be considered an insult to the honor of the festival.   In our mishnah we learn that Bet Shammai and Rabban Gamaliel prohibit one from hiding food in a warm place to preserve its heat for Shabbat (see Shabbat 4:1). This is true even if he made an “eruv tavshilin” because in this case everyone can tell that he is putting food aside just for Shabbat.  In contrast, when one cooks, one might be cooking to eat the food on Yom Tov.  Bet Hillel would allow one to put food in something that preserves its warmth.  For a somewhat different explanation see my commentary on Eduyou 3:10. 
Section two:  The Talmud explains that this is a case where a lamp made of several parts breaks on Yom Tov. Rabban Gamaliel forbids one to fix it, since this is a type of “building” which is forbidden on the Sabbath.  Beth Hillel holds that there is no prohibition of “building” with regards to erecting vessels, and therefore this is permitted.
Section three:  Rabban Gamaliel holds that it is forbidden to bake large loaves on Yom Tov, and that only thin loaves are permitted.  This is meant to prevent one from making too much bread on the festival, lest he make some for after the festival.  Beth Hillel holds that it is permitted to bake large loaves, since bread cooks better when the oven is full.  Furthermore, Bet Hillel in general is far more lenient when it comes to cooking on Yom Tov.
Section four:  The final section of the mishnah contains some interaction between Rabban Gamaliel and the other sages, who hold like Beth Hillel. Rabban Gamaliel testifies that his father’s house indeed acted in this manner, and only baked wafer-cakes on the festival.  The other sages accept this testimony of Rabban Gamaliel as being an accurate description of what Rabban Gamaliel’s father’s house used to do, but they understand its significance differently.  The sages say that Rabban Gamaliel’s father’s house was strict upon themselves, but allowed the rest of Israel to cook large loaves, even charcoal roasted loaves which are very difficult to make.  The strict actions of Rabban Gamaliel’s father’s house were only meant for themselves and were not meant to set precedent for everyone else.  

