Betzah, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues with four more debates between Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel on the laws of Yom Tov.
 
Mishnah Five
1) Bet Shammai says: one may not remove shutters on Yom Tov.
a) But Bet Hillel permits even to return them to their place.
2) Bet Shammai says: one may not take a pestle even to cut up meat on it.
a) But Bet Hillel permits [it]. 
3) Bet Shammai says: one may not place a hide in front of one who treads upon it nor may he even lift it up unless there is an olive’s worth of flesh on it. 
a) But Bet hillel permit it.
4) Bet Shammai says: one may not carry out an infant or a lulav or a Torah scroll into the public domain.
a) But Bet Hillel permit [it].

Explanation
Section one:  In mishnaic times the shutters which were used to close windows and closets were removable.  Bet Shammai forbade removing them because they considered this similar to tearing down a building, a forbidden labor on Shabbat and Yom Tov.  All the more so they would hold that putting the shutters back in their place is forbidden because it is similar to “building”.  Bet Hillel holds that it is permitted even to put the shutters back in their place.  Bet Hillel’s general principle is that if an activity is permitted because it is done in the preparation of food, then it is permitted even when it is done for another purpose.  Removing a shutter to take food out of a closet is permitted—therefore removing shutters is always permitted, even if it is not for the sake of removing food.   Bet Hillel even allows returning the shutter to its place, because if it were prohibited people would hesitate to remove them, knowing that they would not be able to put them back in their place afterwards.  
Section two:  A pestle is a wooden board used to grind things which cannot be ground on Yom Tov because they can be ground the day before.  Bet Shammai says that the pestle cannot even be used for things that can be done on Yom Tov such as cutting up meat.  The pestle is completely muktzeh because its general use is for something that is prohibited.  Bet Hillel disagrees and holds that even though it is usually used during the week for things that cannot be done on Yom Tov, it may be used on Yom Tov for something that is permitted.  
Section three:  Once one has slaughtered and skinned an animal Bet Shammai prohibits one from giving the hide over to someone who will tread on it to prepare it for processing.  Indeed, Bet Shammiai add that he may not even touch the removed hide. Since the hide is not food, it becomes muktzeh.   One may touch the hide only if it has some flesh on it, because then it is considered “food.”  Bet Hillel however allows one to give a hide over to someone who will tread on it since if this was not permitted people wouldn’t slaughter animals on Yom Tov because the valuable hides would be ruined by waiting until the next day to begin working on them.  This would result in a reduction of the rejoicing on Yom Tov because there would be no fresh meat.  It is noteworthy that Bet Hillel allows activities that would seemingly be prohibited if they contribute to the celebration of Yom Tov.
Section four:  According to Bet Shammai carrying something through the public domain is permitted on Yom Tov only in a case where one carries in order to prepare or eat food.  Carrying a child, a lulav or a Torah scroll is not done for eating and hence it is prohibited.  Bet Hillel again permits this.  Since carrying is permitted in some cases (for food) it is permitted in other cases as well.  However, Bet Hillel limits this to cases which involve a mitzvah or some other benefit.  Taking a child for a stroll is pleasurable (as long as they’re not screaming their little heads off).  The lulav and the Torah scroll are for mitzvot.  To carry something with no purpose is however forbidden even according to Bet Hillel.    
