Betzah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
The final three mishnayot of the chapter discuss Shabbat border limits, a topic which was discussed in far greater length in tractate Eruvin.  The Shabbat border limit is 2000 cubits to each side of the city. One can set up an eruv, a meal, at the end of the limit and thereby extend it another 2000 cubits in that direction. This extension only works in extending is Shabbat border limit in one direction and causes him to lose a matching amount of distance on the opposite side of the city.  Hence, one who sets up an eruv at the end of 2000 cubits on the western side of the city can now go 4000 cubits in that direction but cannot go outside the city at all on the eastern side.  Our mishnah teaches that these limits apply not only to the person himself but to his animals and his utensils as well. 

Mishnah Three
1) A beast and utensils are [restricted to the same limits] as the feet of the owners.   
2) One who gives his cow over to his son or to a cowherd [to tend], they are [restricted to the same limits] as the feet of the owner. 
3) Vessels which have been set apart for [the use or] one of the brothers in a house, are [restricted to the same limits] as his feet, but [those utensils] which have not been so set apart, can be taken [only] to a place where [all the brothers] may go.  

Explanation
Section one:  As stated in the introduction, just as a person cannot go past his own personal Shabbat border limit, so too the things that belong to him cannot beyond that point.  
Section two:  The mishnah adds that if a person gives his cow over to someone just to watch it, then the cow stays under the possession of the owner and may only go as far as the owner may go on Shabbat. Therefore, if the owner set his eruv to the west side of the city, his son or his cowherd may not take the cow outside the city on the eastern side.
Section three:  If a vessel (in Hebrew the word for “vessel” includes clothing, bedding and many more objects than the word connotes in English) belonged jointly to some brothers but one brother generally used it, then it can go on Shabbat to any place where that brother may go. So if that brother set his eruv to the west, that vessel can go to the west.  
However, if all brothers make use of the vessel than it can only go to a place where all of the brothers can go. So if one brother set his eruv to the north and one to the south then the vessel can’t leave the city at all because each brother prevents the other one from bringing the vessel to “his” side.    
