Betzah, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah continues with two more debates between Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel over what types of food preparations one can do on Yom Tov. Today’s mishnah again deals with muktzeh, the concept that something that was designated for use on Yom Tov or Shabbat may not subsequently be used then.  The specific topic is fetching pigeon-doves from a dovecote in order to eat them on Yom Tov.

Mishnah Three
1) Bet Shammai says: one may not carry a ladder [on Yom Tov] from one dovecote to another, but he may incline it from one pigeon-hole to another. 
a) But Bet Hillel permits [this]. 
2) Bet Shammai says: one may not take [doves] unless he has shaken [them] the day before [Yom Tov]: 
a) But Bet Hillel says: he stands and declares: this one or that one I am taking.

Explanation
Section one:  In ancient Israel dovecotes were typically underground caves with many holes carved into the walls, each hole housing a dove.  There would be ladders inside the dovecote so that the owner could reach the doves situated high up.  According to Bet Shammai one may not move a ladder from one dovecote to another on Yom Tov, however one may move the ladder from one hole to the other within the dovecote.  Bet Hillel is more lenient in this case and permits one to move the ladder even from one dovecote to the other.  One cogent explanation for this debate is that Bet Shammai prohibits moving the ladder from one dovecote to another lest it look like he is bringing the ladder to the shop to get it fixed.  Bet Hillel is not concerned since everyone should know why he would be moving the ladder.
Section two:  Doves that were not set aside to be slaughtered and then eaten on Yom Tov are muktzeh and may not be used on Yom Tov.  However, if they are designated before Yom Tov to be slaughtered on Yom Tov, one may use them.  In this mishnah Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel debate how one designates before Yom Tov that he will slaughter certain birds on the next day.  According to Bet Shammai one must designate the birds by physically lifting each one up and moving it around. This demonstrates that he intends to use that specific pigeon the next day (if only the pigeon knew that tomorrow won’t be such a Yom Tov for him).  Bet Hillel says that the designation is verbal—he stands in front of the pigeons and says that he will use these pigeons (good thing they don’t know Hebrew).  
