Betzah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the places where a person can collect kindling wood in order to cook on Yom Tov.

Mishnah Two
1) One may not take wood from a sukkah but only from [what is] next to it. 
2) One may bring in from the field wood that is gathered together, and from a karpef [an enclosure] even though it is scattered about.  
3) What is a karpef?  Any [enclosure] next to the town, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
a) Rabbi Yose says: Any [enclosure] which one enters with a key, even if it is [only just] within the Shabbat border.

Explanation
Section one: The “sukkah” referred to here is not a sukkah used on the festival of Sukkot, but rather a sort of hut used for shade by farmers out in the field.  It is forbidden to take wood that was used in building the sukkah because this is considered “tearing down” which is forbidden on Shabbat and Yom Tov.  However, he may take the wood gathered next to the sukkah.
Section two:  He can bring in wood from the field if it has already been gathered together.  However, if it is scattered then it is muktzeh because there was no intent to use that wood for building a fire, and therefore he may not bring it in. From a karpef, a type of enclosure used for storage (see also Eruvin 2:3, 2:5 and 5:2) he may gather even loose wood.  Since this wood was put into an enclosure, it has already been designated for use and it is not muktzeh.
Section three:  In this section Rabbi Judah and Rabbi Yose debate from what kind of a karpef he can bring in wood.  According to Rabbi Judah the karpef has to be close to the city, since only if it is close to the city does he intend to use it on Yom Tov. Rabbi Yose says that the criterion is that the karpef is locked and can only be opened with a key. The wood in such a karpef is not muktzeh, even if the karpef is not next to the city.  However, the karpef must be within the Shabbat limit (2,000 cubits in all directions), otherwise he won’t be able to even get there.   
