Eduyoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Mishnayoth nine (and ten) contain further statements of Rabbi Akiva.  These statements are not about halakhah, but rather about aggadah, or Jewish legend. 

Mishnah Nine
1) He used to say: the father transmits to the son beauty, strength, wealth, wisdom and years.
2) And the number of generations before Him, that shall be their appointed end:   For it is said, “calling the generations from the beginning” (Isaiah 51:4)   
a) Although it is said, “And shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years” (Genesis 15:13), it is also said, “And in the fourth generation they shall come hither again” (Genesis 15:16).

Explanation
Section one:  This mishnah contains a popular saying by Rabbi Akiva, that a son inherits from his father, beauty, strength, wealth, wisdom and years, which is length of life.
Section two:  This section has been explained in many different ways and is very difficult to understand.  I will explain it the way that Albeck explains.  Rabbi Akiva is dealing with the issue of fate:  if a father controls the number of years that his son will live, how is that God has already determined how long the world will last.  The answer that Rabbi Akiva gives is that the number of generations is fixed, as the verse in Isaiah says, but the number of years in each generation is not fixed.  Although one verse from Exodus seems to say that God counts years, a few verses later generations are mentioned.  According to Rabbi Akiva’s interpretation of these verses and his theology, a person’s years are determined by his actions and by his father’s actions, and not predetermined by God.  It is only the number of generations until redemption that is known by God.  Of course, human beings do not know this number.
It is important to note that when we deal with issues such as fate and the end of the world, we are dealing with issues about which many different Jewish answers have been given.  This is not an issue that human beings can fully understand.  
