Eduyoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
In this mishnah Rabbi Yose ben Yoezer testifies concerning three things.  One unusual feature of this mishnah is that it is all in Aramaic, as opposed to Hebrew which is the language of nearly all of the Mishnah.   

Mishnah Four
1) Rabbi Yose ben Yoezer, a man of Zereda, testified concerning the ayal-locust, that it is pure; 
2) And concerning liquid in the slaughter-house (of the Temple), that it is pure;
3) And that one who touches a corpse is impure.   
4) And they called him “Yose the permitter”.

Explanation
Section one:  The Torah permits eating certain types of locusts and forbids others.  However, it is very difficult to tell which locusts are permitted and which are not.  Therefore, today we don’t eat locusts (I’m sure you’re disappointed!).  Rabbi Yose ben Yoezer testifies that a certain type of locust, called the “ayal-locust” is pure, meaning one is allowed to eat it.  Bon Appetit.
Section two:  The liquid which would be found on the floor of the slaughter-house of the Temple, which is assumedly a mixture of blood and water, is pure and cannot become impure.  One explanation of this is that the concept of the impurity of liquids is a Rabbinic innovation (derabanan).  The Rabbis did not include in this innovation the liquids found in the Temple, so as not to increase the impurity of things found in the Temple.  
Section three:  This section is puzzling.  Seemingly Rabbi Yose makes the simple statement that one who touches a corpse is impure.  This law is stated clearly in Numbers 19:11, 16, and there is no need for a “testimony” to restate that which is obvious.  One explanation given is that according to the Torah one who touches a dead body is impure for seven days and one who touches this person is only impure for one day.  However, the Rabbis were stricter and ruled that also one who touches a person who has touched a dead body is impure for seven days.  Rabbi Yose disagreed with this ruling.  When he states that one who touches a dead body is impure for seven days, he excludes one who touches a person who has touched a dead body.  Another possibility is that Rabbi Yose ruled that one who definitely touched a dead body is impure, but one who may or may not have done so is not impure.  
An intriguing possibility that Albeck brings up is that this ruling of Rabbi Yose is against the Essenes, a Jewish sect that existed towards the end of the Second Temple period.  The Essenes, who are likely the same group that occupied the Dead Sea settlement where the Dead Sea Scrolls were found, were extremely strict in matters of purity and impurity.  They ruled that a person could be impure for seven days under certain circumstances by touching a live human being.  Rabbi Yose rules against this overly strict position; only a corpse can transmit seven day impurity.  
Section four:  For these rulings, Rabbi Yose ben Yoezer was called, “Rabbi Yose the permitter”.  This was probably said with a certain degree of derision; Rabbi Yose was overly permissive.  The fact that they called Rabbi Yose a “permitter” proves that section three also contained a permissive ruling.      
