Eduyoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction
Mishnah twelve begins a series of mishnayoth in which Beth Hillel and Beth Shammai initially disagree, until Beth Hillel changes their minds and teaches according to the opinion of Beth Shammai.  Aside from the specific content of these mishnayoth, Beth Hillel’s willingness to admit that their rivals, Beth Shammai were correct, and even to subsequently teach their opinions, teaches a lesson of humility for all generations.  Beth Hillel did not allow their personal glory to supersede their search for truth; when they recognized their own mistakes, they admitted them and changed their opinions accordingly.

Mishnah Twelve
These are subjects concerning which Beth  Hillel changed their mind and taught according to the opinion of Beth Shammai: 
1) A woman who came from overseas and said: “My husband died” — may be married again; “My husband died [without children]” — she must be married by her husband’s brother (the levir).   
a) But Beth Hillel says:  “We have heard so only in the case of one who came from the harvesting.” 
b) Beth Shammai said to them:  “It is the same thing in the case of one who came from the harvesting or who came from the olive-picking or who came from overseas; they mentioned harvesting only because that is how it happened.”   
c) Then Beth Hillel changed their mind and taught according to Beth Shammai. 
2) Beth Shammai says:  “She may be married again and take her kethubah payment.” 
3) But Beth Hillel says: “She may be married again but may not take her kethubah payment.” 
a) Beth Shammai said to them:  “You have permitted the graver matter of a forbidden marriage, should you not permit the lighter matter of property?” 
b) Beth Hillel said to them: “We have found that brothers do not inherit on her statement.”   
c) Beth Shammai said to them:  “Do we not infer it from her marriage document in which he writes to her ‘That if you be married to another you shall take what is written for you’?” 
d) Then Beth  Hillel changed their mind and taught according to the opinion of Beth  Shammai.

Explanation—Mishnah Twelve
Our mishnah discusses a woman who returns from overseas and claims that her husband has died.  The woman cannot bring any documentation to her husband’s death, and therefore the issue arises, is she to be believed?  If she is believed, then there are four consequences to her statement discussed by our mishnah:  1)  she may remarry, as a widow; 2)  if the husband did not have children, she must be married to the husband’s brother (levirate marriage) or have him perform halitzah, the release from levirate marriage; 3)  she may collect her kethubah, her marriage document which is paid upon death of the husband or divorce; 4)  the husband’s brothers or other inheritors would divide his estate.  
Section one:  According to Beth Shammai she is believed and may remarry.  If the husband had no children she must either undergo levirate marriage or halitzah.  Beth Hillel responds that the precedent for this law was a case where a woman had gone harvesting with her husband and she returned claiming that he had died.  In such a case we don’t suspect that the woman would lie, for if she did her husband would return and contradict her.  Since “harvesting” is close to the city, if the husband was alive he would return. However, if she was returning from abroad, she is not believed, for the husband may still be alive and she might lie assuming that he will not turn up.  Beth Shammai responds that she is always believed, no matter where she had been.  The case of “harvesting” was how the event really happened, but the Rabbis would have allowed her to remarry under any circumstance.  In other words, from where she was returning is immaterial.  Beth Hillel accepted Beth Shammai’s opinion and taught according to them.
Section two:  Beth Shammai further stated that this woman may not only remarry but may collect her marriage payment from her husband’s estate.  Beth Hillel responded to Beth Shammai that although she may remarry, we do not allow her to collect the money, lest the husband is still alive.  Beth Shammai then raised a difficulty with Beth Hillel’s opinion:  generally speaking the law is more strict with regards to issues of personal status than with issues of money.  If you are going to allow her to remarry, as we have already done, for which there are serious consequences (if it turned out that her husband had not died), all the more so should she collect the kethubah payment, for which there are not such serious consequences (at worst she will have to pay it back).  Beth Hillel responded that with regards to monetary results of the alleged death, the brothers do not share in his inheritance.  In other words, Beth Hillel brings proof from another area of law that with regards to monetary issues, this man’s death is not considered confirmed.  To this Beth Shammai responds that we can learn that she collects her kethubah payment from the language written in the kethubah itself.  The kethubah states that if she remarries, she may collect her kethubah payment.  From this wording Beth Shammai concludes that any time she is allowed to remarry, she may collect her kethubah.  Beth Hillel thereby accepted Beth Shammai’s point and taught according to them.

Questions for Further Thought:
 What does Beth Shammai hold with regards to the division of the allegedly dead husband’s estate:  do the brothers divide the inheritance?  If they do not inherit, why not?  Why would Beth Shammai on the one hand believe the woman enough to allow her to remarry, but not in order to allow the dead husband’s brothers to inherit?
 In all of these cases why do you think Beth Hillel changed their minds?  
