Eduyoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Mishnah seven contains three things that other Sages said in front of Rabbi Akiva:  two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and one in the name of Rabbi Joshua. 

Mishnah Seven
They said three things before Rabbi Akiva, two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and one in the name of Rabbi Joshua. 
Two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: 
1) A woman may go out [on the Sabbath adorned] with a “golden-city”;   
2) And they that fly pigeons are unfit to bear evidence.   
And one in the name of Rabbi Joshua: 
3) If there was a creeping thing in the mouth of a weasel when it walked over loaves of terumah, and it is doubtful whether it touched them or whether it did not touch them, that about which there is doubt remains pure.

Explanation
Two things were said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer in front of Rabbi Akiva.
Section one:  A woman may go out of her house on the Sabbath wearing a tiara of gold, stamped with the imprint of Jerusalem.  This is called a “golden city”.  The general reason why women are not allowed to wear jewelry in the public domain on the Sabbath is that she might take off the piece to show it to others and will thereby transgress the prohibition of carrying in the public domain on the Sabbath.  However, Rabbi Eliezer holds that since a woman who has such a tiara must be wealthy, and wealthy women do not take off their jewelry to show it off, we need not be concerned that they will do so.  By the way, this phrase is reminiscent of the “Jerusalem of Gold”, the “Yerushalayim shel Zahav” given by Rabbi Akiva to his wife, and made famous by the modern song.  Evidently it was a well known piece of jewelry in ancient times.
Section two:  Those that race pigeons are unfit to testify, since this is a form of gambling.  We learned this law in Sanhedrin 3:3.
Section three:  There was one law stated in the name of Rabbi Joshua.  If a weasel has a dead creepy crawly thing (which is a source of impurity) in its mouth, and the weasel walks on loaves of terumah, and we are unsure whether the creepy crawly thing touched the terumah, the terumah remains pure.  This is due to a general rule that if a source of impurity is moving, and it is doubtful whether it touched anything, the thing it might have touched remains pure.  Since the weasel was moving and it is doubtful whether what was in its mouth touched the terumah, the terumah remains pure. 

