Eduyoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah contains two disputes between Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel, the first over the impurity of olives inside a barrel and the second over the impurity of the oil dripping off a person who had entered the mikveh (ritual bath).  

Mishnah 
1) A barrel of pickled olives:  Beth Shammai says: one need not perforate it,   
i) And Beth Hillel say: one must perforate it.   
a) But they agree that if it was perforated and the dregs stopped it up, it is not liable to receive impurity.   
2) One who had anointed himself with clean oil and [then] became unclean, and he went down and immersed himself, Beth Shammai says: although he still drips [oil], it is clean.
i) And Beth Hillel says: [only while there remains] enough for anointing a small limb.   
a) And if from the beginning it was unclean oil, Beth Shammai says: [it is unclean as long as there remains] enough for anointing a small limb, 
i) And Beth Hillel says: [even if there remains as much] as a moist liquid. 
(4) Rabbi Judah says in the name of Beth Hillel: [provided it remains] moist [itself] and [can also] moisten [other things].

Explanation
Section one:  Leviticus 11:38 teaches that food cannot receive impurity unless it has come into contact with water.  The Rabbis taught that not only water but other liquids as well can cause food to become receptive to impurity.  However, if the owner of the food did not wish the liquid to touch his food the liquid does not cause the food to become receptive to impurity.  In this section of our mishnah Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel disagree with regards to the liquid that oozes out of olives that have been pickled in salt.  Everyone agrees that this liquid is not desired by the owner; all he wants are the edible olives.  However, according to Beth Hillel the owner must put a hole in the barrel to let the liquid seep out in order to make it clear that he does not want the liquid.  If he does not do so the olives will be made receptive to impurity by the liquid which oozes out of them.  Beth Shammai does not require one to put this hole.  According to them we can generally assume that a person does not want such liquids and therefore they do not cause food to become receptive to impurity.
Both houses agree that if one put a hole in the barrel and then it was closed up by the dregs that the olives are not receptive to impurity.  Since he put a hole in the barrel he has made it clear that he does not want the liquids inside and therefore their contact with the olives do not cause the olives to receive impurity.
Section two:  The first part of this section discusses one who anoints himself with pure oil and then becomes impure.  [Anointing with oil was part of the bathing process].  If he enters the mikveh (ritual bath) to purify himself, according to Beth Shammai, he also purifies any remaining oil on his body.  Although oil is cannot generally be made pure through a mikveh, in this case the oil becomes pure by being part of his body, which does become pure.  Beth Hillel holds that if there is only enough oil remaining on his body to anoint a small limb, it is pure.  In this case we can say that the oil is not of significance in and of itself and therefore is part of the body.  However, if there is more than that, it is impure.
If the oil was impure from the outset, and then the person became impure through another source of impurity (the oil itself cannot cause the person to become impure), and went into the mikveh, then both houses are stricter with regards to the purity of the oil remaining on his body.  According to Beth Shammai if only enough remains to anoint a small limb, it is pure.  If more remains it is impure. According to Beth Hillel if enough remains to moisten the hand that touches the oil, it is impure; if less, then it is pure.  Rabbi Judah teaches a different version of Beth Hillel’s words.  According to him if enough remains to moisten the hand that touches the oil and to moisten another area as well, it is impure.  

Questions for Further Thought:
 Section two:  Why are both houses stricter in the second case (where the oil was impure before he anointed himself with it) than they are in the first (where it only became impure when he became impure)?   
