Eduyoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Mishnah four contains three testimonies of Rabbi Yishmael, which he gave in front of the other Sages in Yavneh.  As I stated in the introduction to Eduyoth, this is where the Sages gathered after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem.

Mishnah Four
1) Rabbi Yishmael declared three things before the Sages in the vineyard at Yavneh: Concerning an egg which was beaten together, and placed on vegetables of terumah — that it acts as a connection; but if it was in the form of a helmet it does not act as a connection. 
2) And concerning an ear of corn in the harvesting, the top of which reached the standing corn — that if it can be reaped together with the standing corn, it belongs to the owner; and if not, it belongs to the poor.   
3) And concerning a small garden which was surrounded by a row of vines — that if it has space for the grape-gatherer and his basket on one side, and space for the grape-gatherer and his basket on the other side, it may be sown with seed; but if not, it may not be sown with seed.

Explanation
Section one:  In the situation in this section a mixed egg is on top of a vegetable which is terumah (only eaten by priests).  If a tevul yom, one who was been in the mikveh (bath of ritual purity), and who is considered to carry second degree impurity (see above mishnah one) touches the mixed egg it is as if he also touched the vegetable, and he conveys third degree impurity to the vegetable.  In other words, the egg is part of the vegetable and touching the egg counts as touching the vegetable.  Since third degree impurity makes terumah impure, the vegetable is impure.  If however the egg has been cooked and rose to form a type of covering over the vegetable, it does not connect the tevul yom with the vegetable and the vegetable remains pure.  In other words the central question asked is:  does touching the egg make the vegetable impure.
Section two:  When a farmer is harvesting his wheat, if he forgets a stalk he may not go back and reap it.  Rather he must leave it for the poor (see Deuteronomy 24:19).  Rabbi Yishmael defines what is a forgotten stalk.  If a person leaves a stalk and it is close enough to another stalk at which he has not yet arrived, that if he were to bend the first stalk it could touch the other stalk, then it is not considered to have been forgotten and he may reap it.  If it is not close enough to bend it and touch the other stalk, it is considered forgotten and he must leave it for the poor.
Section three:  According to Deuteronomy 22:9, it is forbidden to plant seeds in a vineyard.  Rabbi Yishmael testifies that if a small garden surrounded by one row of grape vines is big enough on each of its sides for a grape-gatherer to stand there with his basket then he may plant the garden with seeds.  In such a case the garden is large enough to be considered separate from the vineyard.  If, however, the garden is smaller, then it is merely a bald patch inside a vineyard, and it is forbidden to plant there seeds. 
