Eduyoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah and the mishnah that we will learn tomorrow contain the last lists of disputes between Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel in tractate Eduyoth.  

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Eliezer says:  there are two instances of lenient rulings by Beth Shammai and strict rulings by Beth Hillel. 
1) The blood of a woman after childbirth who has not immersed herself,   
a) Beth Shammai says: [it is] like her spittle and her urine.   
b) But Beth Hillel says: it causes impurity whether wet or dry.   
i) However, they agree in the case of the blood of a woman who gave birth when she had non-menstrual discharge, that it causes defilement whether wet or dry.

Explanation
According to Leviticus, chapter 12, after a woman gives birth to a male she is impure for seven days and after giving birth to a female she is impure 14 days.  After this time she is supposed to go to the mikveh (ritual bath) and she will be pure.  Any blood that flows after this time is pure (up to 33 days for a boy and 66 days for a girl). Our mishnah discusses a woman who had not gone to the mikveh after the initial seven or 14 day period.  
According to Beth Shammai the blood of this woman is not totally impure.  Rather it is impure only when it is wet, like her spittle and urine.  When dry the blood is pure.
Beth Hillel disagrees and holds that it is impure whether wet or dry.
The two Houses agree that if the woman was a “zavah”, a woman with an unnatural discharge (such as gonorrhea) at the time of childbirth, that her blood remains impure both when wet and when dry.  A “zavah” must count seven clean days (free from any blood) for her to be able to go to the mikveh and become pure. Since she has not been able to do so, her blood remains impure, both wet and dry, as blood normally is.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Now that we have learned the last list of disputes between Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel, can you discern any order to their appearance in the mishnah?

  
