Eduyoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three (part two)

Introduction
This is the second half of the mishnah which we began to learn yesterday.

Mishnah Three
1) They said to Rabbi Eliezer: what reason have you found for dividing your standards? Either pronounce them both impure, or pronounce them both pure!
a) He said to them: greater is the impurity of flesh than the impurity of bones, for the defilement of flesh applies both to (animal) carcasses and to creeping things, but it is not so in the case of bones. 
b) Another answer:  a limb which has on it the proper quantity of flesh causes impurity by touching and by carrying and by being under the same roof-space (ohel); if the flesh is diminished it is still impure, while if the bone is diminished it is pure.   
2) They said to Rabbi Nehunia: what reason have you found for dividing your standards? Either pronounce them both impure, or pronounce them both pure! 
a) He said to them: greater is the impurity of bones than the impurity of flesh, for flesh severed from a living man is pure, whereas a limb severed from him, while in its natural condition, is impure. 
b) Another answer: an olive’s quantity of flesh (from a corpse) causes impurity by touching and by carrying and by being under the same roof-space (ohel); and a majority of a corpse’s bones causes impurity by touching and by carrying and by being under the same roof-space (ohel); if the flesh is diminished it is pure, but if a majority of the bones is diminished, although it does not cause impurity by being under the same roof-space, it yet causes defilement by touching and by carrying.
c) Another answer:  any flesh of a corpse less than an olive’s quantity is pure, but bones forming the greater portion of the body’ build or the greater portion of the number of the corpse’s bones, even though they do not fill a quarter-kav are yet impure.   
3) They said to Rabbi Joshua: what reason have you found for pronouncing them both pure? 
a) He said to them:  No! When you pronounce impure in the case of a corpse, it is because the rules of “majority”,  “quarter-kav”, and “decayed matter” apply to it.  But how can you say the same of a living man, seeing that the rules of “majority”, “quarter-kav”, and “decayed matter” do not apply to him?

Explanation
Section one:  The first question asked is to Rabbi Eliezer, why did he pronounce that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated a limb severed from a living body is impure but that a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from such a limb is pure.  He should have declared either both pure or both impure.  Two answers to this question are provided.  The first answer is that flesh is more impure than bone, for the flesh of creeping things is impure while the bones of creeping things are pure.  
The second answer also points at an aspect of flesh that is more impure than bone.  A limb severed from a human being, if it has on it enough flesh that if it was still attached to the human being the limb would be viable, causes impurity through touching, carrying and by being underneath the same roof space.  If some of the flesh falls off of this limb, it is still impure.  If however, some of the bone falls off of this limb, the entire limb is pure.  Therefore, Rabbi Eliezer was more lenient with regards to bone impurity than with regards to flesh impurity.
Section two: The second question asked is to Rabbi Nehunia, why did he pronounce that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated a limb severed from a living body is pure but that a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from such a limb is impure (the opposite of Rabbi Eliezer).  He should have declared either both pure or both impure.  This time three answers to the question are provided, all of which show ways in which bones are more impure than flesh.  
The first answer is that flesh that is separated directly from a living body is pure, whereas an entire limb separated from a living body, with its sinews and bone, is impure.  
The second answer is that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a corpse transmits impurity by contact, carrying and by sharing the same roof-space; so too a majority of a corpse’s bones transmit impurity by contact, carrying and by sharing the same roof-space.  If there is less than an olive’s quantity of flesh, it doesn’t transmit impurity at all; however, if there is less than a majority of the corpse’s bones, although they no longer transmit impurity by sharing roof-space, they do transmit impurity by contact and by carrying.  In this way, bone impurity is more serious than flesh impurity.  
The third answer is that less than an olive’s quantity of flesh is always pure.  However, with regards to bones there is the possibility that even less than a quarter-kav (the usual minimum quantity of bones needed to cause impurity for things sharing the same roof space) can cause impurity.  If the bones were either a majority of the structure of the body, or a majority of the quantity of bone’s in the body, they still cause roof-space impurity, even though there is less than a quarter-kav.  This situation could arise in the case of the corpse of an infant.  Again, we see that bone impurity is in some ways more serious than flesh impurity.
Section three:  The final question asked is to Rabbi Joshua, who was consistent and declared both the olive’s quantity of flesh and the barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a limb severed from a living person to be pure.  The Sages are asking why he doesn’t see the analogy between an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a limb severed from a living body and olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a corpse; alternatively why doesn’t he see the analogy between a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a limb severed from a living body and a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a corpse.  Rabbi Joshua answers that one cannot compare things separated from a corpse with things separated from a limb severed from a living person.  For with regards to a corpse three rules apply:  a majority of the bones can cause impurity; a quarter-kav of bones can cause impurity, and dust from the decayed corpse can cause impurity.  None of these three rules apply with regards to a limb severed from a living person.  Since we see that limbs severed from a living person are less likely to cause impurity than a corpse, Rabbi Joshua holds that things separated from such limbs are also less likely to be impure than things separated from a corpse.  

