Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with someone who fell asleep on the road on Friday afternoon and then woke up after nightfall.  This traveller did not intend to spend Shabbat in the place where he was when Shabbat began and therefore we will see that the sages disagree over whether or not he may move 2000 cubits in all directions.  

Mishnah Five
1) If one slept on the road and was unaware that night had fallen, he may move two thousand cubits in any direction, the words of Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri. 
2) But the sages say:  he has only four cubits within which to move. 
3) Rabbi Eliezer says: and the man is deemed to be in the middle of them.  
4) Rabbi Judah says: he may move in any direction he desires. 
a) And Rabbi Judah agrees that once chosen his direction he may not go back on it. 

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri holds that even though he didn’t intend to spend Shabbat in the place where he was when Shabbat began, he still may move 2000 cubits in any direction.  
Section two:  The sages say that one must have intention in order to set one’s “place” when Shabbat begins.  Since this person was asleep, he certainly cannot have such intention.  
Section three: Rabbi Eliezer explains what the sages mean when they say that he has four cubits in which to move.  In actuality he may move only two cubits in each direction, forming a circle around himself with a diameter of four cubits.  According to the Talmud, the “sages” mentioned in section two, refers to Rabbi Meir, who holds that he may move 4 cubits in each direction, forming a circle with a diameter of eight cubits. 
Section four: Rabbi Judah is slightly more lenient than Rabbi Eliezer and allows the person to move four cubits in one direction, at least at the outset.  However, once he moves four cubits, he has now set his circle and he may not move four cubits to the opposite direction of where he was at the outset. Put in other words, according to Rabbi Eliezer the position of his body at the outset is what defines his circle, whereas Rabbi Judah says that the person himself may define his circle.  However, both agree that the circle has a diameter of only 4 cubits.   
