Eruvin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses how one sets up an “alley partnership”, which in Hebrew is called a “shittuf mavoi”.  This type of eruv (common meal) allows people from different courtyards to carry within the alley which leads from the courtyards out to the public domain.  There are a few differences between courtyard eruvin and alley partnerships.  A courtyard eruv must consist of bread, whereas any food will suffice for an alley partnership.  Secondly, all members of the courtyard must participate in the eruv, whereas one person who lives off the alley can confer ownership of some food to all who live in the alley and thereby render it effective as a commonly owned meal without the financial contribution of others.  

Mishnah Six
How does one make an “alley partnership”? 
One [of the residents] places a jar and declares, “Behold, this belongs to all the residents of the alley”, and he confers possession upon [the other residents] through his adult son or daughter, through his Hebrew servant or maidservant or through his wife.
But he may not confer possession through his minor son or daughter or through his Canaanite slave or female slave, because their hand is as his hand.  

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah describes two stages ways in setting up an alley partnership. The first stage is to take a jar of any type of food and to declare that he confers joint ownership of the food on all of the residents of the alley.  The announcement serves to let everyone know what he is doing so that they will know that they can carry in the alley. He then takes this jar of food and gives it to another person who will accept it on behalf of all of the residents of the alley.  However, in order for this transfer to be valid the other person must be independent of the giver.  A man’s adult children, wife and Hebrew servants are all independent of him and therefore he may transfer through them ownership of the food to the other people in the alley.  This is true even if he provides food and shelter for these people.  The mishnah need not state that he could confer ownership through other people to whom he is not related. 
However, he may not transfer ownership through his non-Jewish (called Canaanite) slaves since he owns them.  When he gives them something it does not leave his possession since they too are in his possession.    
