Eruvin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
This mishnah discusses one person’s ability to set up an eruv for someone else.  

Mishnah Eleven
1) A man may give a ma’ah to a shopkeeper or a baker in order to acquire a share in the eruv, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. 
2) The sages say: his money acquires no share for him  
3) They agree that in the case of all other men his money may acquire [an eruv for him],
4) Since they do not prepare an eruv except with one’s consent.  
5) Rabbi Judah says: To what does this apply? To Shabbat border eruvin, but in the case of courtyard eruvin they prepare an eruv with his consent and without his consent, since they confer a benefit on a person in his absence but they do not confer a disability on a person except in his presence.

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Eliezer, a person can give a small amount of money (a ma’ah, which is a small coin) to a baker or shopkeeper in order that they will contribute from their food toward the eruv on his behalf.  The coin acquires for him the food for the eruv and it is as if he is contributing directly toward the eruv.
Section two:  The sages disagree because money cannot acquire movable property (things—see the first chapter of Kiddushin).  In order to acquire something, one must lift it up or at least pull it towards himself.  Therefore, he has not acquired the food that the shopkeeper gives for the eruv.  Therefore, he has not effectively contributed to the eruv.
Section three:  The sages agree with Rabbi Eliezer that if he gives the money to a different person, meaning some sort of agent, and the agent buys the food from the shopkeeper or baker, this is an effective means to set up an eruv.  This is effective because the person’s agent validly acquires the food from the shopkeeper or baker by actually taking it from him.  Similarly, a person can ask a shopkeeper to set up an eruv on his behalf, since the shopkeeper will give the food to another person, causing the other person to acquire the food, and therefore the shopkeeper is acting as the person’s agent.  The only problematic situation is if the person says to the shopkeeper that his money should acquire the eruv—since money cannot effect acquisition, this type of eruv setup is invalid.  
Section four:  Although this section seems attached to the previous one, it is actually separate.  According to the first opinion, one cannot set up an eruv without the consent of the person who will benefit from the eruv.  This is true, according to this opinion, for both Shabbat border eruvin and courtyard eruvin.  Rabbi Judah, on the other hand, says there is a difference between the two types of eruvin.  Consent is required to set up a Shabbat border eruv for someone because there is some “disability” in this as well.  Namely, if the Shabbat border eruv extends his ability to travel outside the city toward one direction, he loses a commensurate amount in the other direction.  Hence, one cannot set up a Shabbat border eruv for someone without his permission.  However, one only gains by having a courtyard eruv set up on his behalf and therefore, one can set up a courtyard eruv for someone without their consent.     
