Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah begins to discuss how one sets up an eruv (either for a courtyard or to extend the Shabbat border) or shittuf mavoi (alleyway partnership).  An “eruv” refers to the common meal shared by those who share a courtyard and a “shittuf mavoi” is the common meal shared by those who share an alleyway.  An “eruv” can also refer to a meal set up at the end of the limit where one can go on Shabbat, so that one can go another 2000 cubits.  For more info, see in the introduction.

Mishnah One
1) With all [kinds of food] they may make an ‘eruv and a shittuf, except water and salt. 
2) And all [kinds of food] may be purchased with money of the second tithe, except water and salt. 
3) One who vowed to abstain from food is allowed [to consume] both water and salt.
4) An eruv may be prepared for a nazirite with wine and for an Israelite with terumah,  
a) But Symmachus says: with unconsecrated produce only. 
5) [An eruv may be prepared] for a priest in a bet hapras.
a) Rabbi Judah says: even in a cemetary, because he can put up a partition and thus enter [the area] and eat [his eruv].

Explanation
Section one:  Any type of food may be used to constitute the meal for an eruv or for a  shittuf.  An eruv refers to either a courtyard eruv or a Shabbat border eruv.  A 
shittuf refers to the alleyway partnership.  The only exception is salt and water which do not count as food.
Section two:  Second tithe is redeemed by its owners with money, the money is brought to Jerusalem and there it is used to buy food.  It cannot be used to buy non-food products.  We should note that food includes drink.  However, as in the previous section, it does not include salt and water.
Section three:  If a person vowed to abstain from eating, he may still drink water and eat salt because neither is considered food.
Section four:  Although a nazirite cannot have wine and an Israelite cannot have terumah, both may use them to make their eruv, since other Jews can eat them.  We see from here that the meal is symbolic.  It does not have to be edible by the one who sets it up, it just has to be food that can be eaten by a Jew.  
Symmachus disagrees and holds that the eruv must be edible by those who participate in it.  Therefore, an Israelite cannot use terumah as his eruv.  However, a nazirite can still use wine since it is possible for him to ask a sage to release him from his nazirite vow.  In other words, the prohibition of terumah to Israelites is immutable while the prohibition of wine to any given nazirite is not.
Section five:  A bet hapras is a place that used to have a grave in it and now has been plowed over.  It is rabbinically prohibited for a priest to enter such a place, lest there be a bone that remains or was spread out somewhere in the vicinity.  However, in some ways the rabbis were lenient with the laws governing a bet hapras, since the prohibition is not toraitic.  One of these leniencies is that a priest’s eruv may be set up there.  This eruv refers to a Shabbat border eruv (eruv tehumin), since a bet hapras would not be within the courtyard or alley.  
Rabbi Judah is even more lenient and allows the priest’s eruv to be set up in an actual cemetery.  This is because the priest can set up a partition to get to his eruv.  
