Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with a cistern situated between two courtyards, when the two courtyards have set up separate eruvin.  In other words, the wall that separates the courtyard goes over the well, leaving half the cistern on one side and half on the other. The mishnah teaches how they can set up the cistern so that people from both courtyards can draw water from it on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Six
1) A cistern between two courtyards—they do not fill up from it on Shabbat, unless they made for it a partition ten handbreadths high, whether above, below or from its rim.   
2) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: 
i) Bet Shammai say: below, 
ii) And Bet Hillel say: above. 
3) Rabbi Judah said: the partition could not be more effective than the wall between the two courtyards.

Explanation
Section one:  Without a partition, it is forbidden for residents of either courtyard to draw from the cistern, since it belongs partly to other people, since half of the cistern is in other people’s domains.  The only way that both sides can use the cistern is if they make a special partition, more than just the wall that separates the two courtyards.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, it doesn’t matter whether or not the partition is above or below the water, it is effective.  In the Talmud, Rav Judah explains that “below the water” means that most of the partition is below the water, whereas “above the water” means that most of the partition is above the water, but there is at least some partition, at least one handbreadth, in the water.
Section two:  According to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel, this question was debated by Bet Hillel and Bet Shammai.  Bet Shammai holds that the partition must be below the water, a more stringent position.  The partition must actually divide the water between the two courtyards so that the residents of different courtyards are not really sharing any of the water.  In contrast, Bet Hillel is lenient and allows the partition to be above or below the water.  The anonymous opinion in section one was according to Bet Hillel.  
Section three:  According to Rabbi Judah, the wall that separates the two courtyards is sufficient in and of itself to allow the residents of both courtyards to draw from the cistern.  The wall which is above the cistern is fictionally drawn down through the cistern and is considered as if it divides the cistern in half, even if in reality it does not.       
