Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses a hinge that has fallen off a door and whether or not one may reinsert it on Shabbat.  The language and structure of this mishnah closely follows yesterday’s mishnah.  

Mishnah Twelve
1) A lower hinge [of a door] may be reinserted in the Temple but not in the country.   The upper one is forbidden in both.   
2) Rabbi Judah says: the upper one may be re-inserted in the Temple and the lower one in the country.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion, it is forbidden to reinsert the lower hinge in the country [anywhere outside the Temple], lest while doing so he puts in a nail and strikes it, which would be an act forbidden according to the Torah.  In the Temple this is permitted since in the Temple certain rabbinic prohibitions do not apply.  As we shall see, outside of the Temple it is all the more so forbidden to reinsert the upper hinge.
It is forbidden to reinsert the upper hinge in all regions even in the Temple.  The upper hinge is more essential towards holding the door in its place and without it, the entire door would fall.  The prohibition is still only of rabbinic origin, lest he come to strike a nail, but since it is more likely that he might violate a toraitic prohibition, the act is prohibited in the Temple as well.  
Section two:  Rabbi Judah is again more lenient, as he was in yesterday’s mishnah,.  In the Temple, reinserting the upper hinge is permitted, and all the more so reinserting the lower one is permitted.  According to Rabbi Judah, we need not be strict inside the Temple for fear that someone will violate a toraitic law, since those observing in the Temple will ensure that this does not happen.  
Outside of the Temple reinserting the upper hinge is still prohibited lest he come to strike a nail, but reinserting the lower one is permitted, and we are not concerned that by permitting this he might come to violate the toraitic prohibition of striking a nail.  
