Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with setting up a Shabbat border eruv for two consecutive days, one of which is Shabbat the other of which is a festival.  As an aside, we learn in this mishnah that just as it is prohibited to go beyond the Shabbat border (2000 cubits) so too on a festival it is prohibited to go beyond the same distance.  This is somewhat of an innovation for the verse in the Torah which implies that people must not travel refers only to Shabbat.  
  
Mishnah Six 
1) Rabbi Eliezer says: if a festival day immediately precedes or follows Shabbat a man may prepare two eruvs and make the following declaration: 
a) “my eruv for the first day is that of the east and for the second day is that of the west”; 
b) “the one for the first day is that of the west and the one for the second day is that of the east”; 
c) “my eruv is for the first day, and for the second day I will be as the people of my town”; 
d) or “my eruv is for the second day, and for the first day I will be as the people of my town”. 
2) But the sages say: he either prepares an eruv for one direction or none at all; he either prepares one eruv for the two days or none at all. 
3) How should he act?  
a) He brings [the eruv] on the first day, he lets it get dark and then he takes it and goes away.  On the second day [he again carries the eruv to the same place] and lets it grow dark and then he may eat it.  He thus benefits both in his going and in [eating] his eruv.  
4) If the eruv was eaten up on the first day it remains effective for the first day but not for the second. 
a) Rabbi Eliezer said to them: you do then agree with me that they are two distinct holinesses.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Eliezer allows one to make two separate eruvin, one for Shabbat and one for the festival. These two eruvin can function differently. That is to say each can work on opposite sides of the city. Alternatively, he can set up an eruv for one day and have it not be effective for the next day.  Rabbi Eliezer holds that Shabbat and the festival are two distinct entities of holiness, and therefore he can set up two different eruvin.
Section two: The sages hold that it is impossible for a person to set up two different eruvin for two consecutive days.  Either he sets up an eruv for both days, in which case he loses his ability to leave town on the side for which he did not set up an eruv, or he just doesn’t set up an eruv at all and is limited to going 2000 cubits outside of the city in each direction.
Section three: The sages now explain how one should set up an eruv if he wishes it to work for two days.  What he needs to avoid is the eruv being eaten up before the second day begins, for this will mean that the eruv is not effective on the second day, as we shall learn in the next section.  What he should do is take the eruv to wherever he wants it to be (assumedly 2000 cubits outside of the city so that he can later go another 2000 cubits from there) and make sure it is there at dusk on the eve of the first day. This is the time which “sets” the eruv, and it must be in place at this time.  As long as it is there at this time, it need not remain there all day.  Therefore, he may take it back with him into town, or anywhere he wants to go within the limit.  At the second day, he should again make sure that the eruv is in the same place at dusk.  Once it is there through dusk, he may eat it.  In this way, he gets to extend his Shabbat limit and still eat his eruv (you can have your eruv and eat it too!). 
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer now responds to the sages by saying that they have in essence admitted that the two days are distinct.  He knows this because the sages agree that if he set up an eruv for the first day and it didn’t exist when the second day began, the eruv is not valid.  If the sages agree that the two days are distinct entities of holiness, then they should agree that one could set up two different eruvin.  If they weren’t then the eruv which was good for the first day should also be good for the second, even if it has been eaten up.  
The mishnah does not provide an answer from the sages.  In the Talmud it is explained that the sages don’t know whether the two days are distinct or not, and therefore they are strict in both cases.  They don’t allow two different eruvin to be set up, lest they are not distinct.  On the other hand, they say that the eruv which was set up for the first day must exist on the second day lest they are distinct holinesses and the eruv for one is not effective for the other.  
