Eruvin, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
A well ten handbreadths deep which is found in the public domain is considered to be a private domain, and hence one is not allowed to draw water from the well on Shabbat.  Our mishnah teaches that the rabbis allowed people to make a special arrangement around the well so that they could draw water from the well on Shabbat.

Mishnah One
1) They may make posts for wells, [by setting up] four corner-pieces that have the appearance of eight [single posts], the words of Rabbi Judah. 
a) Rabbi Meir says: eight that have the appearance of twelve, four corner-pieces and four single [posts].  
2) Their height must be ten handbreadths, their width six, and their thickness [may be] of any size whatsoever. 
3) Between them [there may be] as much [space as to admit] two teams of three oxen each, the words of Rabbi Meir.
a) Rabbi Judah says: [two teams] of four [oxen each] .
b) [These teams being] tied together and not untied, [enough for] one to enter while the other goes out. 

Explanation
Section one:  The rabbis said that around the well they could set up a pseudo-fence, one which would prevent the area from being a public domain but still allow easy access.  According to Rabbi Judah, this is done by setting up corner-posts at each of  four corners.  Each corner post would have two pieces of wood set at a right angle so that it would look as if there were four walls. Rabbi Meir says that it is not sufficient for there to be four corner-posts.  There must also be four single pieces around each side.  These form pseudo-walls which give the structure more of an appearance of a fenced in area.
Section two:  The height of the posts must be ten handbreadths in order for them to constitute a separate domain.  Their width must be six handbreaths, which makes a cubit.  There thickness is not important.  
Section three:  In between the posts they can leave room for cattle to come in and out and drink from water drawn from the well.  It was necessary for the cattle to come into the area because it was forbidden to take the water out from the area and bring it into the public domain.  Again, the sages debate how much space may be left between the posts. According to Rabbi Meir, they may leave enough room for two teams of three cattle to enter and exit.  In the Talmud it is explained that each cow is a cubit and two-thirds thick, making a total of 10 cubits.  Rabbi Judah is again more lenient and allows a gap large enough for two teams of four cows, which adds up to 13 1/3 cubits.  
The end of the mishnah notes that these teams of cattle are to be tied to each other, and not walking separately.  When they are untied the distance between them is even greater.  Furthermore, the reference is not to two teams entering simultaneously, but rather to one team coming in and one going out.  This is slightly larger than two teams of cattle going in the same direction.  
