Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
In this mishnah we learn of a debate concerning the measuring of the 2000 cubits which a person may walk on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Eight
If he does not recognize [any tree or fence], or if he is not familiar with the halakhah, and said, “Let my present position be my Shabbat place”, his position acquires for him the right of movement two thousand cubits in any direction. 
In a circle, the words of Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonus. 
But the sages say: the distances are square, in the shape of a square tablet, so that he may gain the area of the corners.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah deals with a person who is traveling on the road and doesn’t recognize anything in the distance (as the person did in yesterday’s mishnah) or with a person who doesn’t know that the halakhah allows him to establish his Shabbat place at a distance by making an oral statement.  He thinks that because he is far away from the point he recognizes that he can’t set up his 2000 cubit ring from there.  The person then says that his present position is where he will spend Shabbat.  He now has 2000 cubits within which to move in all directions. This halakhah is actually obvious; even if he didn’t make any statement he still has 2000 cubits in which to move. The halakhah is probably here as an introduction to the next section.
Section two:  According to Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonus, the 2000 cubits form a circle.  That is to say one simply draws a circle with a 2000 cubit radius around the person and that is the area within which he may walk.
The Sages hold that this area is actually a square, drawn around the 2000 cubit radius circle. The advantage to the sages’ position is that the corners of the square increase the area.  The square’s total area is 4004 x 4004=16,032,016 cubits.  Note that the additional four cubits takes into account the person’s personal four cubits which his body occupies. In contrast the circle’s area is 10022 (radius, including 2 for his own body) x 3.14 (pi)= 12,585,132 (approximately).   

