Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Thirteen

Introduction 
There are three independent sections to this mishnah.  What is common to all three is that they mention actions which are permitted on Shabbat in the Temple but not permitted outside of it.  As we learned in the previous two mishnayot, in the Temple certain rabbinic prohibitions are waved, under the assumption that even if one performs the activity, one will not come to violate a toraitic prohibition.  Another similarity is that in all three cases, under certain circumstances the activity would be prohibited even in the Temple.  

Mishnah Thirteen
1) One may replace a plaster bandage on a wound in the Temple but not in the country.   
a) At the outset, it is prohibited in both.  
2) A harp string may be tied up in the Temple but not in the country.
a) At the outset, it is prohibited in both.  
3) One may remove a wart in the Temple but not in the country.   
a) If [the operation must be performed] with an instrument it is forbidden in both.  

Explanation
Section one:  This section refers to a priest who has a wound and enters the Temple with a bandage over the wound.  Under the bandage is a poultice.  If the bandage falls off he may replace it, because the prohibition of putting on a bandage on Shabbat is only of rabbinic origin (shevut), and rabbinic prohibitions are permitted in the Temple.  It is prohibited outside the Temple lest one come to prepare a poultice, which is a toraitic prohibition. Finally, the mishnah notes that to put on a new bandage is prohibited in either place because when making a new bandage it is very likely that he will come to prepare a poultice.  
Section two:  If a harp string breaks on one of the harps (or other string instruments) in the Temple, it may be tied.  Since this prohibition is only of rabbinic origin, it is permitted in the Temple.  Outside the Temple it is prohibited.  Both in and outside of the Temple, it is forbidden to tie a new harp string to the harp.  The commentators explain that this string is tied in a place where it will not remain permanently, for if it was tied permanently it would be a toraitic violation, and hence prohibited in the Temple as well.  Finally, if the harp string was not there before Shabbat, he may not tie it there on Shabbat even in the Temple because he should have tied it there before Shabbat.  
Section three:  A priest who has a wart (a yabelet) may not serve in the Temple (Leviticus 22:22).  However, this wart may be removed in the Temple on Shabbat either by picking it off with his hand or biting it off with his teeth, since this is not the normal means by which to remove a wart (sounds quite painful).  We have noted on several occasions that if an activity that would normally be prohibited by the Torah is done in an unusual manner, it is only prohibited by rabbinic decree.  Since the prohibition is only rabbinic, it is permitted in the Temple.  Outside the Temple it remains prohibited. Finally, the wart may not be removed using an instrument in either place, since this would be a toraitic violation.  
