Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
In the previous mishnayot we learned that the sages and Rabbi Judah debate whether or not one day of Rosh Hashanah is the real day and the other is only observed because we don’t know which day Rosh Hashanah really is, or whether both days of Rosh Hashanah are treated as one extended day, neither of which is considered to be of doubtful status.  In the final mishnah of this chapter we see that this debate has ramifications for the prayers recited as well.

Mishnah Nine
Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas says: the person who goes in front of the ark on [the first day of] of Rosh Hashanah says: “Strengthen us, o Lord our God, on this first day of the month, whether it be today or tomorrow”; and on the following day he says: ‘[Strengthen us...] whether it be today or yesterday.” 
But the sages did not agree with him. 

Explanation
According to Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas, in the prayers themselves one must include a mention of the fact that it is uncertain which day Rosh Hashanah really is.  The prayer to which the mishnah refers is the Amidah, also called the Shmonah Esrei (the Eighteen).  On the first day he must mention “whether it be today or tomorrow” and on the second day “whether it be today or yesterday.”  
Again, the sages disagree because they hold that we don’t treat the two days as if one was certain and one was doubtful but rather we treat them as one long extended holiday.  
In the Talmud it teaches that this debate is not only about Rosh Hashanah but Rosh Hodesh (the first of the new month) as well.  The sages hold that prayer is not the time for making legal stipulations.  While the status of these two days may indeed be somewhat doubtful, at least to certain sages, it doesn’t seem appropriate to mention this doubt in prayer, at the point where a person is pouring one’s heart out to God and asking for strength.  
The expression of such doubts during prayer might lead to doubts concerning the rabbis’ ability in general to dictate when holidays are, or at least lead to doubts concerning the efficacy of the community’s prayers.     
