Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Fourteen

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with things which may be done on Shabbat in the Temple but not outside of it.

Mishnah Fourteen
1) A priest who was wounded in his finger may wrap some reed-grass round it in the Temple but not in the country.   
a) But if he intended to draw out blood it is forbidden in both cases.  
2) They scatter salt on the altar’s ramp so that the priests shall not slip. 
3) They draw water by means of a wheel on Shabbat from the cistern of the exiles and from the great cistern, and on a festival day from the Hakar cistern.  

Explanation
Section one:  The reed-grass mentioned in this mishnah was a type of bandage that also had medicinal properties.  As we have learned previously, it is forbidden to heal on Shabbat; therefore it is forbidden to use this reed-grass on Shabbat outside of the Temple.  However, the rabbis allowed it to be used in the Temple since it was necessary to cover the wound while the priest performed his service in the Temple.
Drawing blood from a wound on Shabbat is a toraitic violation—it is derived from the prohibited labor of “squeezing.”  Therefore, if the reed-grass was put on the wound with the intention to draw out blood, it is prohibited even within the Temple.  As we have stressed many times, only rabbinic violations are waived in the Temple, not toraitic ones.
Section two:  In the Temple it was permitted for them to scatter salt on the altar’s ramp so that the priests would not slip while going up and down to offer sacrifices.  Outside of the Temple this is prohibited because it is considered “fixing.”
Section three:  The mishnah mentions two cisterns that were situated within the Temple confines from which it was permitted to draw water using a wheel.  However, outside of the Temple the rabbis forbade drawing water by means of a wheel, since this might lead to large quantities of water being drawn and a person might use the water to irrigate his field, an activity prohibited on Shabbat.  
Unlike the previous two cisterns, the “Hakar” cistern was not in the Temple.  Nevertheless, in contrast to all other cisterns outside of the Temple it was permitted to draw from it using a wheel on festivals. The Hakar cistern was used by the pilgrims during the Second Temple period that came for the festivals.  The prophets and Jewish leaders at the time allowed the Jews to draw from it by means of a wheel on the festival because of the necessity for large quantity of waters for the many pilgrims.  Since it was justifiably permitted in the past the rabbis allowed Jews to continue to use it even after the destruction.  
