Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
In today’s mishnah we see another essential debate about how the Shabbat border eruv works.  The debate is whether one has to put a meal in the place which he wants to establish as his Shabbat place, or whether his physical presence in that place is sufficient.

Mishnah Nine
1) This is what [the rabbis] have said:  “a poor man makes his eruv with his feet.”  
2) Rabbi Meir said: we can apply this law to a poor man only.  
3) Rabbi Judah says: it applies to both rich and poor; they only said that an eruv is prepared with bread in order to make it easier for the rich man, so that he does not have to go out and make the eruv with his feet.

Explanation
Section one:  In the previous mishnayot we have seen several instances where a person traveling on the road says “Let this be my Shabbat place” and that statement alone has been sufficient to establish that place as the point from which he may walk 2000 cubits in each direction.  Our mishnah applies to this halakhah the early rabbinic statement that “a poor man makes his eruv with his feet.”  This means that the poor man traveling on the road need not have bread or a meal with him at the place which he establishes as his Shabbat place.  
Section two: According to Rabbi Meir, only a poor man can establish his Shabbat place by mere physical presence.  A rich person, sitting in his house, must establish his Shabbat place with bread.  He must bring the bread out to where he wants to set up his Shabbat place; his physical presence is not sufficient.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Judah, the halakhah that a person may make his eruv by mere physical presence without bread applies to all people, both rich and poor.  The sages allowed a rich person to set his Shabbat place with bread (a meal) in order to make it easier for him.  He may send some of his bread outside of the city and set his Shabbat place there, without him actually having to go there. However, bread is a leniency and not a requirement. 
In the Talmud they explain that Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah only debate whether a rich person sitting in his home can go outside of the city and establish his Shabbat place by being there when Shabbat begins. Rabbi Meir says he needs to set up a meal there as well.  However, Rabbi Judah agrees that only a poor person traveling on the road can see a far away place and say that his Shabbat place will be there (see mishnah seven).  A rich person in his house must either send a meal there or go there himself.   
