Eruvin, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
From here until the end of the ninth chapter the Mishnah will discuss courtyard eruvin (eruve hatzerot) and alley partnerships (shittufe mevuoth). These allow people to carry in courtyards and common alleys respectively.  The eruv or shittuf is a common meal, which creates the legal fiction that the entire courtyard or alley is one person’s domain. For a more general introduction, see the introduction to the tractate.
In general, everyone who lives in the courtyard or alley must participate in the eruv, meaning they must contribute to the common meal.  If one does not, he causes the entire courtyard or alley to be prohibited from carrying for all of the residents. Our mishnah teaches about a case where one of the residents is a non-Jew or a Jew who doesn’t admit to the validity of eruvin in general.  
 
Mishnah One 
1) One who lives in a courtyard with a non-Jew or with one who does not acknowledge the [principle of] eruv, behold this one restricts him [from making use of the eruv], the words of Rabbi Meir.   
2) Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: one can never restrict another [from making use of the eruv] unless there are two Jews who restrict each other. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, if a non-Jew or a Jew who doesn’t believe in eruvin (perhaps a Sadducee or Samaritan) lives in a courtyard or alley with other Jews, his lack of participation in the eruv makes it forbidden for other Jews to use the eruv.  As stated above, the eruv must be jointly owned by all of the residents—if even one resident does not own it, it doesn’t work.  The Talmud teaches a way to remedy this problem.  The non-Jew can rent to the Jew the part of the courtyard that he owns, and in this way it is as if on Shabbat he doesn’t own it.  Admittedly this is a legal fiction but if it did not exist, it would have been exceedingly difficult to set up eruvin in many, if not all towns, in the mishnaic period, since Jews did not live totally separate from non-Jews.
Section two:  According to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov, a non-Jew’s residence in the courtyard or alley does not affect the eruv for the other Jews.  Indeed, his residency doesn’t in essence count.  Only a non-participatory Jew can cause another Jew’s eruv to be ineffective.  If one of the Jewish residents does not participate in the eruv with the other residents, the eruv is ineffective for all of them.      
