Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with bolts, this time referring to a bolt that does not have a knob on it.  

Mishnah Eleven
1) A bolt that drags along the ground:  it is permitted to lock [a door] with it in the Temple but not in the country;   
2) But one that rests on the ground is forbidden both here and there.   
3) Rabbi Judah says: one that rests on the ground is permitted in the Temple but one that drags on the ground is permitted [even] in the country.  

Explanation
Section one:  The bolts were usually attached to the door with a rope and put into their place when one wanted to lock the door.  The first section deals with a bolt attached to the door by a rope, but a rope long enough to let one end of the bolt drag on the ground.  The first opinion holds that use of this bolt is prohibited, but its prohibition is only “derabannan”—of rabbinic origin.  Rabbinic prohibitions do not generally apply within the Temple and hence this type of bolt may be used to lock a door in the Temple.  However, it is forbidden in the rest of the country, because it looks as if he is building.  Since it is attached to the door already, it is not actually building and hence the prohibition is only of rabbinic origin.  If it were attached to the door and not dragging it would have been completely permitted but since it is dragging one who looks at it may not notice that it is actually attached to the door and therefore it is prohibited.  
Section two:  In this case the bolt is totally detached from the door and it is resting on the ground.  Since it is not attached to the door at all, he is considered to be building and the prohibition is deoraita, or toraitic origin.  Toraitic prohibitions are still prohibited even in the Temple.
Section three:  Rabbi Judah is more lenient than the first opinion.  He holds that a bolt that rests in the ground is also only prohibited derabanan (from the rabbis) and hence it is only prohibited outside of the Temple.  The bolt that drags on the ground and is attached to the door is not prohibited at all since everyone can see that this is not actually building.  
