Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with drawing water on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Eight
1) A balcony that was situated above the water, they do not draw water from there on Shabbat, unless they made for it a partition ten handbreadths high either above or below [the water].   
2) So also two balconies, one on top of the other.   
3) If they made [a partition] for the upper one but not for the lower one, they are both prohibited until they make an eruv.  

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah is dealing with a balcony which is situated over a stream that runs below it.  There is a hole in the floor of the balcony from which they normally draw water.  The mishnah says that they cannot draw water because the stream is a “karmelit” (a domain which is neither public nor private) and the balcony is a private domain.  However, if they made a partition which surrounds the balcony and the stream they may draw water from the stream because we consider the water to be within the private domain of the balcony.  The partition needs to be ten handbreadths high to be a valid partition, but it may be either above or below the water.  Others explain that the partition is either hanging below the floor of the balcony or is on the balcony itself, around the hole in the floor.  
Section two:  In this case there are two balconies, one above the other, and below the lower one is the stream, from which they draw water through a hole in the floor.  If they wish to draw water on Shabbat, they must make a partition for both the upper and lower balconies. 
Section three:  If they made a partition for the upper balcony but not for the lower balcony, neither may draw water.  This is because the people from the upper balcony draw their water through the lower balcony, which does not have a partition.  The same would be true if they set up a partition for the lower balcony, but not for the upper balcony.  Since the people of the upper balcony have usage rights to the hole in the floor of the lower balcony, their lack of a partition prohibits those of the lower balcony from drawing as well.  
However, all of these prohibitions refer only to a case where they didn’t set up a joint eruv.  If they set up a joint eruv, then it is all one domain and they may all draw water.    
