Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that according to Rabbi Judah, a person may make make two separate eruvin for the two days of Rosh Hashanah because they are distinct entities.  In today’s mishnah we learn other halakhot concerning the two days of Rosh Hashanah, which Rabbi Judah considers to be two distinct days. 

Mishnah Eight
1) Rabbi Judah further said: a man may stipulate concerning a basket [of produce] on the first festival day [of Rosh Hashanah] and may then eat it on the second day, 
2) And so also if an egg was laid on the first [festival] day it may be eaten on the second. 
3) But the sages did not agree with him. 

Explanation
Section one:  On the first day of Rosh Hashanah a person finds himself with a basket of produce from which terumah and tithes have not been separated.  It is forbidden to eat the produce without separating the tithes and terumah but on Rosh Hashanah it is forbidden to separate them.  Rabbi Judah offers a halakhic solution to this problem, one that would at least allow him to eat the produce on the second day.  On the first day, he takes out the tithes and terumah and declares, “If today is not Rosh Hashanah and tomorrow is, then behold I am separating terumah and tithes for this produce.  But if today is Rosh Hashanah, then my declaring these to be tithes and terumah is invalid.”  On that day he cannot eat them, lest that day actually be Rosh Hashanah, in which case his declaration was invalid.  The next day he again picks up the tithes and terumah and declares, “If today is Rosh Hashanah and yesterday was not, then behold I already separated them yesterday.  And if today is not Rosh Hashanah and yesterday was, then behold I am now separating the tithes and terumah.”  He may now eat the produce since he either separated yesterday (if yesterday was not Rosh Hashanah) or today (if today was not Rosh Hashanah.
Section two:  One cannot eat an egg laid on a festival because it was not available to be eaten when the festival began.  However, Rabbi Judah says that on the second day of Rosh Hashanah one could eat an egg laid on the first day.  If the first day was really Rosh Hashanah, then he can eat it on the second day because Rosh Hashanah is over.  If the second day is Rosh Hashanah then he can eat it then because it was laid before Rosh Hashanah began.
Section three:  Again the other rabbis disagree with Rabbi Judah and claim that the two days are not distinct, one being the actual Rosh Hashanah and the other not being Rosh Hashanah at all, but rather are to be treated as one long day.  Therefore, things cannot be permitted on the second day if they were prohibited on the first.  
