Eruvin, Chapter Six, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a family that eats in one home but the children have their own homes and sleep there.  The question is does the father’s contribution to the eruv count for his children since they eat together or do they each have to individually contribute to the eruv since they live separately.

Mishnah Six
1) Brothers or partners who were eating at their father’s table but slept in their own homes must each have an eruv.   
2) Hence, if any one of them forgot and did not [contribute] to the eruv, he must annul his right to his share in the courtyard. 
3) When does this apply?  When they bring their eruv into some other place but if their eruv is deposited with them or if there are no other tenants with them in the courtyard they need not prepare any eruv.

Explanation
Section one:  Since each of these brothers has his own home and lives in that home, they don’t count as part of their father’s household anymore.   Each must contribute separately to the eruv.
Section two: If one of the brother’s did not contribute to the eruv, then he must do the same thing that all people do when one did not contribute to his courtyard’s eruv.  He must annul his partial ownership in the courtyard.  If he does not do so then all of the other courtyard’s residents may not carry from their homes into the courtyard.
Good manuscripts of the Mishnah read “he annulled his share” instead of “he must annul his share”.  In this case, the meaning is that we assume that he annulled his share, and not that he had to have done so in actuality.  
Section three:  The halakhot in the previous two sections apply only when the eruv (the common meal) is not placed in the father’s house and there are other residents in the courtyard besides the brothers and the father.  The house in which the eruv is placed does not need to participate in the eruv because the fact that it is in his house and he is letting them put it in his house counts as his participation.  Therefore, if the eruv is in the father’s house his children need not participate in paying for the eruv, because they receive their support from their father.
Furthermore, if there are no other residents in the courtyard besides the father and his children, then it is all one domain and there is no need for any eruv at all.  Think of it this way:  the meals that they eat at their father’s home are in essence the same as the eruv—they make the entire courtyard into one domain.
The word “partners” in the first clause of the mishnah means that the same laws which refer to the father and his children also refers to partners all of whom are receiving their food from one provider.  This is a situation exactly parallel to that of the father and the five sons.  Rashi and some other commentators did not have this word in the mishnah which was in front of them, but it appears in good manuscripts of the Mishnah.

