Eruvin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses how they actually go out and measure the Shabbat limit.

Mishnah Four
1) They measure the Shabbat limit only with a rope fifty cubits long, neither less nor more.
2) And one should measure only while holding the end of the rope on a level with his heart.   
3) If he was measuring and he reached a valley or a wall he spans it and resumes his measuring.
4) If he reached a hill he spans it and resumes his measuring, provided he does not go beyond the Shabbat limit. 
5) If he is unable to span it — in connection with this Rabbi Dostai ben Yannai stated in the name of Rabbi Meir:  “I have heard that they pierce the hills.”

Explanation 
Section one:  The mishnah mandates the use of a fifty cubit rope in measuring the Shabbat limit.  A shorter rope will stretch and yield to large of an area, whereas too long of a rope will not stretch enough the area will be too small.
Section two: Measuring with a rope requires two people, one to hold each end of the rope.  If the two hold the rope in different places the measurement will be off.  Therefore, the rabbis said that the rope should be held at the level of one’s heart.
Section three: If when measuring they come to a small valley (we might call this a large ditch) or a wall, the elevation of the wall or the descent into the ditch should not count as part of the measuring of the Shabbat limit.  What they should do is span the rope over the valley, with one person standing on one side and the other person standing on the other.  Similarly, if they get to a wall they do not run the rope over the wall, measuring the incline and decline leading up to the wall.  Rather they measure up to the wall, then the thickness of the wall and then they proceed from the other side.
Section four:  The same way they measure the wall and valley is how they measure a hill.  However, in all of these cases they cannot go beyond the Shabbat limit.  What this means is that if the valley, wall or hill were wide within the limit (too wide for a fifty cubit rope), but narrower outside the limit, they should not walk out of the Shabbat limit to perform their measurements and then set a place parallel to that point within the limit.  The Talmud explains that the problem would be that if others saw them doing this, they might think that the point where they went to measure was the Shabbat limit, and not realize that they were measuring outside of the border in order to set up a parallel point within the border.  
Section five:  The mishnah now deals with a valley or hill which were too big to measure with a fifty cubit rope, or were narrow only outside of the Shabbat limit.  Rabbi Dostai says that we look at the mountains as if they were pierced.  In other words, their ascent and descent are not taken into account.  The Talmud explains how this is done.  They use a small rope of four cubits, and the person holding below puts the rope next to his heart and the person holding above puts the rope next to his feet.  In this way the four cubits are lessened a certain percentage for every four cubits.  This is the size of the mountain’s ascent and descent, according to the rabbis.  If you are having trouble picturing this, imagine a right triangle with its slope ascending, as if it was going up the mountain.  If the top line is four cubits (the length of the rope) and the person hold the rope below is 3 cubits (the size of an average person), then you have a triangle whose sides are 4, 3 and 5, the side of 5 being the slope going up the hill (all of this is remembered from 10th grade geometry—thank you Mr. Formica!).  Thus the five cubits up the mountain are spanned with a four cubit rope, thereby gaining one cubit for every four.  [I hope this helped!].  

 
