Eruvin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction 
This mishnah returns to the subject of Shabbat border eruvin.

Mishnah Seven
1) If one was in the east and said to his son, “Prepare for me an eruv in the west”, or if he was in the west and he said to his son, “Prepare for me an eruv in the east”, if the distance between him and his house was no more than two thousand cubits   and that between him and his eruv was more than this, he is permitted to go to his house but forbidden to go to his eruv.   
a) If the distance to his eruv was no more than two thousand cubits and that to his house more than this, he is forbidden to go to his house but permitted to go to his eruv.   
2) One who puts his eruv within the extension of a town, he has done nothing.   
3) If he put it even one cubit only beyond the limit he loses what he gains.

Explanation
Section one:  Before this person left his home on Friday, he told his son to set up for him an eruv to either the west or east of the city.  At dusk on Friday eve, he finds himself on the opposite side of the city.  If he is two thousand cubits or less from his home but more than two thousand cubits from his eruv, he may go to his home but not to his eruv.  In other words, his eruv is ineffective and he may not go two thousand cubits beyond it.  Since when Shabbat began he could not reach his eruv, which was more than two thousand cubits away from him, we say that his intention was that his home would be his “Shabbat place” and from his home, and not the eruv, we measure a Shabbat limit of 2000 cubits.
If, on the other hand, he is 2000 cubits or less from his eruv but more than that from his home, he may go to his eruv but not to his home.  Again, since he couldn’t get to his home when Shabbat began, we assume that he wished that his eruv would be his “Shabbat place” and from that point and that point only he can travel 2000 cubits.  
Section two:  If a person puts his eruv within the extensions of the city, his eruv doesn’t help him at all.  Even without the eruv, he can go 2000 cubits beyond the extensions of the city.  Rather an eruv should ideally be put 2000 cubits beyond the city and its extensions.  In this way it extends the distance a person can travel in that direction.  The “extensions of the city” refer to the inns and shops which are outside of the city but count in measuring the city’s borders.
Section three:  This refers to a person who sets up his eruv outside the city, but within the 2000 cubit border which surrounds it.  This is where an eruv should be set up.  The mishnah teaches that every cubit he gains in his ability to travel on one side of the town, he loses on the other.  So if he puts the eruv 1000 cubits outside the town on the west, he may now travel 3000 cubits to the west but only 1000 cubits to the east.     
