Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with an eruv that was put somewhere where he might not be able to retrieve it.  To help in understanding this mishnah I should explain that the eruv must be accessible and existent at twilight (between sunset and darkness) when Shabbat begins.  This is the period in which an eruv is “set”.  It is also a period in which it is halakhically doubtful whether it is Shabbat.  

Mishnah Three 
1) If he put [the eruv] in a tree above [a height] of ten handbreadths, his eruv is not valid; below ten handbreadths, his eruv is valid. 
2) If he put it in a cistern, even if it is a hundred cubits deep, his eruv is valid.
3) If he put it on the top of a reed or on the top of a pole, if it had been uprooted and then inserted in the ground, even though it was a hundred cubits high, the eruv is valid. 
4) If it he put it in a chest and the key was lost, the eruv is [nevertheless] valid.  
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: if he does not know that the key is in its place, the eruv is invalid.

Explanation 
Section one:  This section refers to a person who put his eruv in a tree that stands in the public domain, and he intends to dwell underneath the tree for at least part of the Shabbat.  If the tree is four handbreadths by four handbreadths and the eruv is ten handbreadths high, then the eruv is in a private domain, while he is in the public domain.  He cannot take his eruv down from the tree for that would be carrying from a private domain to a public domain.  The rule is that he and his eruv must be in the same place at twilight, so that he could get to it legally on Shabbat.  
If the eruv is below ten handbreadths, then it is in a “karmelit”, which is neither a public nor a private domain.  It is still prohibited from rabbinic law to take something from a karmelit to another domain.  However, when it comes to an eruv, it need only be in its place at twilight and the prohibition to carry at twilight is in itself only of rabbinic origin.   Therefore, you have a rabbinically prohibited act which occurs only at a time where all prohibitions are only rabbinic.  Hence, the halakhah can be lenient and allow him to retrieve his eruv.  The eruv is therefore effective.  
Section two:  There are two explanations of this section.  The Yerushalmi explains that the cistern is in the public domain but that he intends to actually dwell in the cistern on Shabbat, at least at twilight. Therefore, the eruv is effective.  The Bavli explains that the cistern is in an area that is a karmelit.  Hence, this is not a situation where he would be taking out from a private to a public domain, as we encountered in the first section.   We cannot explain, however, that the cistern is in the public domain but that he wishes to dwell outside of the cistern at twilight, for then his eruv and he would be in different domains.
Section three:  This section discusses an eruv that was placed on top of a type of pole or reed.  The pole is not four handbreadths wide, hence it does not constitute its own domain, as does the tree.  Even if the pole is very high, it is still not a separate domain.  If the pole or reed was detached from the ground, meaning it had been part of a tree but then he detached it and stuck it back in the ground, the eruv is valid.  However, if the pole or reed is still attached to the ground, then the eruv is invalid, since we are concerned lest he might chop down part of the pole or reed to get to his eruv.  Cutting down part of a plant attached to the ground is a violation of the laws of Shabbat.  
Section four:  In this section, he puts the eruv into a chest, locks the chest and then loses the key.  According to the first opinion, the eruv is still valid as long as he can break the chest and enter during twilight, the critical moment for establishing the eruv.  
Rabbi Eliezer holds that the chest may only be opened with the key.  His ability to break the chest would not make the eruv valid.  However, if he knows that the key is in certain place, but he can’t remember exactly where that place is, the eruv is valid, under the assumption that he will at some point remember.  The eruv is invalid only if he thinks he truly lost the key.    
