Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who was reading a scroll while in one domain and the end of the scroll rolled out of his hand and went into another domain.  He is left holding only one end of the scroll. The question is:  can he roll it back to himself?

Mishnah Three 
1) If one was reading a scroll on a threshold and the scroll rolled out of his hand, he may roll it back to himself.   
2) If he was reading on the top of a roof and the scroll rolled out of his hand: 
a) Before it reached ten handbreadths from the ground, he may roll it back to himself;
b) But after it had reached ten handbreadths from the ground he must turn it over with its writing downwards.   
3) Rabbi Judah says: even if it was removed from the ground by no more than a thread's thickness he may roll it back to himself. 
4) Rabbi Shimon says: even if it touched the actual ground he may roll it back to himself, since no prohibition that is due to “Shabbat rest” stands before the Holy Writings. 

Explanation
Section one:  This person is not in the house but on the threshold of the house. The threshold is considered a “karmelit”—a place that is neither a public nor a private domain.  The scroll’s end rolls out of his hand and goes into the public domain.  The mishnah allows him to roll it back to himself due to two factors: 1) he still holds one end of the scroll.  Therefore, the scroll has not totally gone into the public domain.  2) The threshold is a karmelit and not a private domain.
Section two: In this case he is on the roof which is considered a private domain, and the scroll’s end falls down toward the ground.  According to the first opinion, if the scroll gets to within ten handbreadths of the ground he may not roll it back.  The area within ten handbreadths of the ground is considered to be part of the public domain, and it is forbidden to roll something back from the public domain into a private domain.  What he should do in such a situation is turn the scroll over on its face in order to protect the side which has the writing.  As we shall see below, this isn’t just any scroll, it’s a biblical scroll (a Scroll!) whose writing must be protected.  
If the scroll did not reach ten handbreadths within the ground then he may roll it back because it has not yet reached the public domain.  
Section three:  According to Rabbi Judah, even if the scroll has reached ten handbreadths of the ground, it is still permissible to roll it back, as long as it has not touched the ground itself.  Rabbi Judah seems to disagree with the previous opinion concerning whether or not the area ten handbreadths from the ground has the same status as the ground itself.
Section four:  Rabbi Shimon holds that in all cases this is permitted since this is a prohibition that is not “deoraita” from the Torah, but rather due to “Shabbat rest” (shevut).  This term denotes an prohibition that the rabbis added to those of the Torah, the point of which is to preserve the character of Shabbat as a day of rest.  In this case, rolling the scroll back is only a violation of “Shabbat rest” and not a deoraita violation.  The reason for this is that he holds one end of the scroll in his hand—when he rolls it back he is not taking something that is completely in the public domain and bringing it into the public domain.  According to Rabbi Shimon, the respect and concern for the Holy Writings outweighs the rabbinic prohibition, and therefore he may roll it back.     
