Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Our mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, which dealt with the problem of pouring out waste water on Shabbat.  Today’s mishnah deals with a person who is in a courtyard and wants to pour his waste water into a sewage drain which leads out to the public domain.  

Mishnah Ten
1) Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: a sewage drain which is covered over four cubits in the public domain, it is permitted to pour water into it on Shabbat.   
2) But the Sages say: even where a roof or a courtyard was a hundred cubits in area, he may not pour water over the mouth of the drain, but he may pour upon the roof, and the water will flow into the drain. 
3) The courtyard and the portico combined to make up the four cubits.

Explanation 
Section one:  The person is in his courtyard and wants to pour water out into the sewage drain.  If the drain is four cubits long in the public domain but is covered, then he may pour out the water, according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov.  This is because an area four cubits long and four cubits wide is sufficient to absorb the average amount of water a person uses during the day. The covered drain has the same status as the courtyard itself, and therefore, it is as if the water remains in the courtyard.  Even though the water will afterwards leave the covered part and go into the non-covered part of the drain, he is still allowed to do so because he initially put the water into the covered part. 
Section two:  The Sages are more strict than Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov and say that he should never pour water into a sewage drain, even if 100 cubits of it are covered by a roof or if he is 100 cubits from the exit to the public domain.  The Talmud explains that this is prohibited lest people think that he is pouring directly into the public domain, and think that just as it is permitted to pour water from the private domain into the public domain, so too it is permitted to carry things from one domain to the other.
However, the sages do allow one to pour water on a roof or on the ground in the courtyard, even though the water will then flow to the sewage drain, since this is more indirect.  
Section three: This section refers back to yesterday’s mishnah which taught that if the courtyard was smaller than four square cubits, it is forbidden to pour water out onto the ground unless there is a drainage trough.  The mishnah now states that the portico (an area with columns supporting a roof) counts towards the size of the courtyard, so that if the two together add up to four cubits, one may pour out water there.     
