Eruvin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with an area in which it was permitted to carry when Shabbat began but then in some way the area changed during Shabbat such that had it been that way when Shabbat began it would have been forbidden to carry in the area.  

Mishnah Three
A courtyard [whose walls] were breached from two sides, and so also a house [whose walls] were breached from two of its sides, or an alley from which the cross-beam or side-post was removed: 
1) They are permitted for that Shabbat but prohibited for the future, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
2) Rabbi Yose says: if they are permitted on that Shabbat they are also permitted for the future and if they are prohibited in the future, they are also prohibited for that Shabbat. 

Explanation
The mishnah describes three situations in which it was permitted to carry in an area when Shabbat began and then during Shabbat the area changed such that it became an area in which it is prohibited to carry. The first is a courtyard whose walls broke down from two directions, opening it up either to a karmelit or to a public domain. The Talmud explains that this refers to a corner of the courtyard and not two opposite directions.  Even if this breach is smaller than 10 cubits it is still not considered an “opening” to the courtyard (if it were considered an opening it would be permitted to carry), nor can this type of breach in the wall be repaired with a cross-beam or post (see above 1:6).
The second situation is a house whose wall broke down from two directions, meaning at its corner.
The third situation is an alley which had been properly enclosed with either a cross-beam or side-post (see again 1:6) but they were removed.  When the cross-beam or side-post was in place it allowed people to carry in the alley, if an eruv had been set up.  
Section one:  According to Rabbi Judah, since it was permitted to carry in these areas when Shabbat began, it is permitted to carry there for all of Shabbat.  However, in future Shabbatot it will be prohibited unless the problems are fixed.
Section two:   Rabbi Yose does not allow a situation where it would be permitted for the current Shabbat but prohibited in future Shabbatot.  Perhaps this would be too confusing for people and they would come to think that if they can carry this Shabbat, then they can carry on subsequent Shabbatot as well, not realizing that when this Shabbat began the walls or cross-beam/side-post was still in place.  Hence, Rabbi Yose holds that since it will be prohibited in the future (without repairs), it is prohibited for the current Shabbat as well.  
