Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah One

Introduction
The final chapter of Eruvin is a sort of appendix to all of tractates Shabbat and Eruvin.  It contains assorted rules which deal with both topics.  
Today’s and tomorrow’s mishnah deals with a person who finds a pair of tefillin in the public domain and wishes to bring them into the private domain to protect them.  

Mishnah One 
1) One who finds tefillin should bring them in one pair at a time.   
a) Rabban Gamaliel says: two pairs at a time.   
2) To what does this apply?  To old ones but in the case of new ones he is exempt.   
3) If he found them arranged in a set or in bundles he shall wait by them until it is dark and then bring them in. 
4) In a time of danger, he should cover them and walk away.

Explanation
Section one:  One who finds tefillin in a place where they may come to be damaged should not just leave them there.  However, on Shabbat he cannot just carry them to safety because of the prohibition against carrying.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, he should put on a pair at a time and wear them until he can get them to a safe place.  Then he should remove the pair he is wearing and go out and bring in another pair.  The reason that this is allowed is that he is considered to be “wearing” the tefillin and not to be carrying them.  A “pair” refers to a set—one box for the head and one for the arm.  Rabban Gamaliel holds that he can put two pairs on at the same time, because there is room on one’s head for two boxes and on one’s arm for two as well.  
Section two:  The previous halakhah refers only to old sets of tefillin, tefillin which we know were made properly and are valid.  However, new pairs of tefillin may not even actually be tefillin (they could be amulets), and even if they are tefillin, they may have been made improperly. Therefore, he is neither mandated to carry them in nor even allowed to do so.
Section three:  If he finds many sets of tefillin in one place, he can’t bring them in because there are just too many to carry in one (or two) sets at a time.  Neither should he just leave them there because they could be damaged.  His only option is to sit and guard them until Shabbat is over.
Section four:  Guarding or wearing lost tefillin in a time of danger is not mandated.  One shouldn’t endanger one’s life to protect a pair of tefillin. Therefore, if it is dangerous to either wear or guard them, the mishnah gives one permission to first cover them up so that they will not be noticed, and then to walk away and leave them there.  The “danger” referred to in our mishnah refers to a time when the Roman authorities forbade the observance of commandments.  This is probably the Hadrianic persecutions which preceded and followed the Bar-Kokhba revolt in 135 C.E.  
We should note that the Talmud ties the debate in section one to the issue of whether or not one is commanded to wear tefillin on Shabbat.  Some tannaim hold that one does not wear tefillin on Shabbat and some hold that they are worn. The accepted halakhah is that they are not worn.  
