Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Fifteen

Introduction
The final mishnah deals with removing a dead creeping thing, which is a primary source of impurity, from the Temple.  

Mishnah Fifteen
1) If a [dead] creeping thing was found in the Temple, a priest should carry it out in his girdle in order not to keep the impurity there any longer than is necessary, the words of Rabbi Yohanan ben Beroka. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: [it should be removed] with wooden tongs in order that uncleanness shall not increase.   
2) From where must it be removed?   
a) From the sanctuary, from the hall, and from between the hall and the altar, the words of Rabbi Shimon ben Nanas. 
b) Rabbi Akiva says: from any place where karet is incurred for entering intentionally and a sin-offering for entering in error—from there it must be removed, and from any other place they cover it with a large pot.   
c) Rabbi Shimon says:   wherever the sages have permitted you anything they have only given you what is really yours, since they have only permitted you that which is forbidden as shevut.

Explanation
Section one:  In this section we see two different strategies concerning how to respond to a dead creeping thing that found its way into the Temple.  According to Rabbi Yohanan ben Baroka the priest should pick it up with his girdle in order to remove it as fast as possible.  However, he should not pick it up with his hands because that would cause him to become impure.  Even though when he picks it up with the girdle the girdle will become impure, the girdle will not in turn cause him to become impure because clothes don’t impurify people.  The main goal is to get the creeping thing out of the Temple as quickly as possible. 
Rabbi Judah says that he should pick it up with wooden tongs which cannot become impure.  The problem with this is that it will be harder to catch the creeping thing with wooden tongs than with his girdle.  Nevertheless, according to Rabbi Judah it is preferable not to increase the things which it causes to be impure.  
Section two:  The second section of the mishnah deals with the question of from where must the creeping thing be removed if it is found in the Temple on Shabbat.  The problem is that by removing the creeping thing he is moving something from one domain to another, which is a violation of carrying on Shabbat, although as we shall see below, it is only a rabbinic violation.
According to Rabbi Shimon ben Nanas, it must be found from within the sanctuary and inwards.  However, if it is found in the courtyard they cover it with a pot and leave it there until after Shabbat.  
Rabbi Akiva expands this area to include any area which makes a person liable for karet if he intentionally enters it impure and for a sin-offering if he unwittingly enters it impure.  Practically speaking, this means that Rabbi Akiva includes the entire courtyard, from within the Nikanor Gate.
According to both sages, if the creeping thing is found in another area, one from which it may not be removed, they cover it with a pot so that nothing comes into contact with it.    
Rabbi Shimon’s comment does not directly relate to this topic but is really a remark meant to complete all of tractate Shabbat and Eruvin, two tractates which are really only one.  Rabbi Shimon explains that all of the leniencies which we have found strewn throughout the two tractates, cases where we thought something would be prohibited but the rabbis allowed one to do the action because there was some necessity, are only cases of the sages giving to the people what is really theirs. This means that the prohibition was only of rabbinic origin in the first place—under certain circumstances the rabbis allow what they would otherwise prohibit.  However, Rabbi Shimon is adamant that one not construe these leniencies as rabbis allowing one to abrogate or even circumnavigate toraitic law.  
It seems to me likely that Rabbi Shimon’s comment is directed at those who doubt the entire validity of eruvin—what gives the rabbis the right to allow a person to carry from domain to domain on Shabbat, they ask.  Rabbi Shimon responds that an eruv allows one to carry only in cases where the prohibition is only “derabanan”—of rabbinic origin, and not cases which would be prohibited by toraitic law.

Congratulations!  We have finished Eruvin.  
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us to finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.  
Eruvin is known as one of the most difficult of tractates, its laws and rules are intricate and very precise.  Perhaps in a more “midrashic” interpretation of the tractate, we saw how one builds a community—by sharing a common meal and by sharing Shabbat together.  While the Mishnah Yomit community does not eat together nor spend Shabbat together, I hope that our common Torah learning will serve us all as “spiritual food” (I hope I’m not surprising you all too much by becoming so “mushy”.)  In any case, for those of you who stuck with it and made it through this difficult material, a hearty Yasher Koach. 
May you have the strength and time to keep on learning more Mishnah!  Tomorrow we begin Pesahim.  


  
