Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses an eruv (a meal) which was set up before Shabbat but then something happened to it such that it became unattainable, inedible or in some other way invalid.  The question is, is the eruv still effective?

Mishnah Four
1) [An eruv] which rolled away beyond the [Shabbat] limit, or a heap of stones fell on it, or was burnt, [or was] terumah and became impure:
a) [If one of these occurred] while it was yet day, it is invalid,
b) [But if it occurred] after it became the eruv is valid.  
2) If it is doubtful [when it occurred]:
a) Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah say: this is a donkey-driver/camel driver.  
b) Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Shimon say: a doubtful eruv is valid. 
i) Rabbi Yose says: Avtulmos testified on the authority of five elders that a doubtful eruv is valid.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah begins by describing situations where a Shabbat border eruv became invalid in some way.  If it rolled away beyond the Shabbat limit, then he cannot get to it on Shabbat.  If a heap of stones fell on it, he cannot uncover it because it is forbidden to clear a heap of stones on Shabbat.  Obviously, if it is burnt there is nothing left to eat.  Finally, if it was terumah and it became impure, it is forbidden to eat it.  The mishnah now teaches that the validity of the eruv depends upon when one of these things happened.  If the eruv was ruined before Shabbat began, when it was still Friday, the eruv is invalid, because it did not exist at twilight.  If it was ruined after dark, the eruv is certainly valid, because it did exist at twilight.
Section two:  The bigger problem is a situation in which we don’t know whether the eruv was valid at twilight.  Probably, this is the most typical situation—a person sets up an eruv before Shabbat and then checks it on Shabbat and sees that it has been ruined but does not know when it happened.  Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah use a proverb to describe this situation—he is like a camel driver and a donkey driver.  A camel driver stands in front of the camel and pulls him along.  A donkey driver stands behind the donkey and whips him to go forward faster.  Someone who needs to drive both a camel and a donkey has a problem—if he whips the donkey he’ll bump into the camel and if he pulls the camel he’ll go to fast for the donkey.  All he can do is go at a medium pace between the two animals.  This is the situation of one whose Shabbat border eruv may be invalid—he loses in both directions.  To remember, an effective Shabbat border eruv extends his Shabbat limit in one direction by 2000 cubits, but causes him to lose 2000 cubits in the other direction.  If he sets it 2000 cubits to the west of the city, he can go 4000 cubits in that direction, but he can’t go any cubits to the east of the city.  In our situation, let’s say he set up the eruv 2000 cubits to the west and then discovered that it was invalid but does not know when it occurred.  He cannot go another 2000 cubits to the west because the eruv might be invalid.  However, he also cannot go 2000 cubits to the east of the city (or any other direction) lest his eruv is valid.  In other words, he loses in both directions. 
Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Shimon say that a doubtful eruv is effective. This is because it was known to be existent before Shabbat and was only known to be nonexistent after Shabbat started.  We can presume that it existed until we know that it did not, and therefore, we can presume that it existed at twilight, the critical time.
Rabbi Yose supplements his opinion with testimony provided by Avtulmos, who taught in the name of five elders, that the a doubtful eruv is valid.   
