Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses the minimum measure of food which is need for a Shabbat border eruv.  

Mishnah Two
What is the minimum measure [for Shabbat border eruvin]? 
1) Food for two meals for each person, for weekdays and not for Shabbat, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: for Shabbat and not for weekdays. 
b) And both intended to give a leniency.   
2) Rabbi Yohanan ben Beroka says: not less than a loaf that is purchased for a pondium when the price of wheat is four se’ah for a sela.   
3) Rabbi Shimon says:  two thirds of a loaf, when three [loaves] are made from a kav [of wheat].   
a) Half of this loaf is the size prescribed for a leprous house, and half of its half is the size that disqualifies one’s body [from eating terumah].  

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, the eruv must consist of enough food for two weekday meals.  Rabbi Judah says the food should be enough for Shabbat meals and not weekday meals.  Seemingly we would think that a person eats more on Shabbat than during the week, so Rabbi Judah would be stricter than Rabbi Meir.  However, the mishnah says that both intended to be lenient.  In order to understand this, we need to explain that the eruv’s minimum measurement was set according to the amount of bread eaten at a typical meal.  According to Rabbi Meir, on Shabbat one eats a lot of different types of food and a lot of bread to accompany the food.  Therefore, on Shabbat one eats more, and the minimum amount of food for the eruv is set according to the bread eaten during the week, a lesser amount. According to Rabbi Judah, since on Shabbat there are many side dishes a person eats less bread than he would during the week when there are less side dishes.  Therefore, Rabbi Judah sets the minimum amount of bread for the eruv according to what one eats on Shabbat.
Section two:  Rabbi Yohanan ben Baroka gives a minimum amount of bread that must be used for the eruv.  This amount of bread is what is sufficient for two meals.  It is the size of a loaf that can be bought for one pundion (a coin) when 4 se’ah (24 kav, a measure of volume) of wheat are sold for a sela (a coin worth 48 pundion).   If we do the math, we can see that a kav of wheat is bought for two pundionim, meaning that one pundion will buy half a kav of wheat, which according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Baroka is sufficient for two meals.  
Section three: According to Rabbi Shimon, two meals are equivalent to two-thirds of a loaf when three loaves are made from a kav of wheat.  A loaf is therefore 1/3 of a kav and 2/3 of a loaf is two meals.  This is a smaller amount than that set by Rabbi Yohanan ben Baroka.  
Rabbi Shimon now mentions two other halakhot which are connected to the size of a loaf of bread he mentioned above.  Half of this loaf, meaning 1/6 of a kav is related to the laws of an infected (leprous house).  One who stays in the house long enough to eat a loaf of bread of this size is impure.
Half of this, meaning 1/12 of a kav is relevant to disqualifying someone from eating terumah.  This means that a person who eats 1/12 of a kav of impure food cannot eat terumah until he immerses in a mikveh.     
