Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with two towns which are located in close proximity to one another (within 4000 cubits), and the people from one town customarily set up an eruv so that they can get to the other town on Shabbat.

Mishnah Ten  
1) One who left to go to a town with which [his home town is wished to be] connected by an eruv, but a friend of his returned him home, he himself is allowed to go to the other town but all the other townspeople are forbidden, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
2) Rabbi Meir says: whoeve is able to prepare an eruv and neglected to do so is like one who is both a donkey-driver and a camel-driver. 

Explanation 
Section one:  This person left his town to go set up a communal eruv that would allow him and the other people of his town to travel from their town to a neighboring town.  While on the way, his friend tells him that he will set up the eruv instead, but then his friend does not set up the eruv. According to Rabbi Judah, the person who went out to set up the eruv may go to the other town on Shabbat, even though his friend never set up the eruv for him and the rest of the town.  Since this person began to go on the way to where he wanted to set up his Shabbat place, his situation is like the person in mishnah seven who was traveling and saw a familiar point.  In other words, since he sees where he wants to go, he may establish his Shabbat place there at a distance.  This is an eruv set up by physical presence just at a distance.  However, the other people of the town who were relying on an eruv of a meal cannot go to the other town because their eruv was not set up.  They get the normal 2000 cubits in all directions
Section two:  Rabbi Meir disagrees with Rabbi Judah concerning the person who began to go on the road in order to set up his eruv. According to Rabbi Meir this person loses in both ways.  He doesn’t get to go all the way to the city, because he didn’t set up his eruv, neither with bread, nor with a full declaration of “my Shabbat place shall be here.”  However, he is also not allowed to walk 2000 cubits around his own city lest he did set for himself a “Shabbat place” on the way to the other city.  All he may do is walk 2000 cubits from his city to the other city.  Rabbi Meir compares this to a person driving a camel and a donkey, standing in between the two (see above 3:4, where we explained this image).  
