Eruvin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we saw that there is no limit to how large the enclosure around the well may be, so long as the gaps are kept to a certain minimum.  In today’s mishnah, which is a direct continuation of yesterday’s, we will learn that this was the opinion of the sages whereas Rabbi Judah disagrees.  

Mishnah Three
Rabbi Judah says: [the enclosure may be only] as large as two bet se'ah.
They said to him: they only prescribed [the limit of] two beth se’ah for a garden or a karpaf only, but if [the enclosure] was a pen, or sahar, a backyard or courtyard even if it is five or ten bet kor, it is permitted. 
And it is permitted to remove [the posts] to any [distance] provided one increases the posts.

Explanation
Rabbi Judah limits the size of the enclosure to two bet se’ah, which means a piece of land upon which one can grow enough wheat to produce a se’ah of grain.  This is about 5000 square cubits (about 50 meters by 25 meters), the size of the mishkan (the tabernacle).
The other sages respond to Rabbi Judah that the measure of 5000 square cubits does not apply to the halakhah about the enclosure surrounding a well, but rather applies to a garden or a karpaf, neither of which are enclosed as living spaces but rather to keep out animals or thieves.  A karpaf is a large field behind a house or a courtyard or outside of a city which has been enclosed so that it can store wood.  Since these are fenced in only to keep things out and not to keep things in, they have a relatively small minimum measurement.  In contrast, things which are enclosed for those things which inhabit them, such as a pen, a sahar (a pen in the field to keep in the flocks), a backyard or a courtyard can be even the size of five or even ten bet kor.  A kor is 30 se’ah, so this measure is significantly larger.  
The final clause of the mishnah is a repeat of the last clause in yesterday’s mishnah.  Since the enclosure of a well is also enclosed for the use of those who wish to drink the water in the well, it to may be as large as one wants it to be.  
In summary, according to the sages there is a simple rule:  if it is enclosed as a living space for either people or animals, the enclosure may be as large as one wants it to be.  If it is enclosed to protect something stored inside, then the limit is two bet se’ah. 
