Eruvin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with carrying from one roof to another.  In order to understand this mishnah we need to remember that without an eruv it is only prohibited to carry things from the house to the courtyard.  Even without an eruv it is permitted to carry things from one courtyard to another, provided those things were in the courtyard when Shabbat began. 

Mishnah One
1) All the roofs of a town are a single domain, provided no roof is ten handbreadths higher or lower [than the neighboring roof], the words of Rabbi Meir. 
2) The Sages say: each one is its own domain.  
3) Rabbi Shimon says: roofs, courtyards and karpafs are all one domain with regard to objects that were within them when Shabbat began, but not with regard to objects that were in the house when Shabbat began. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, one is allowed to carry vessels from roof to roof even without an eruv, as long as the vessels were on the roof when Shabbat began.  However, if one roof is higher or lower ten handbreadths than the next, it is prohibited, since they are then considered to be two different domains.  
Section two:  The Sages hold that just as it is prohibited to carry from one house to another without an eruv, so too it is prohibited to carry from one roof to another without an eruv.  In other words, the roof is treated as an extension of the house below.  In contrast, it is permitted to carry from courtyard to courtyard because there is no area below which is prohibited.  
Section three:  Rabbi Shimon holds that it is permitted to carry from roof to roof, from courtyard to courtyard and from karpaf to karpaf (a karpaf is a small area behind the home used to store wood or other things) as long as the vessels were in those areas (and not in the house) when Shabbat began.  However, if they were in the house when Shabbat began, without an eruv it is forbidden to take them out.  Rabbi Shimon basically agrees with Rabbi Meir but does not make any exception for roofs which are ten handbreadths higher or lower than the others.        
