Eruvin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
In this mishnah Rabbi Ilai transmits three halakhot in the name of Rabbi Eliezer, the first two dealing with the topic of eruvin and the third dealing with the identification of bitter herbs for Pesach.  The structure of this mishnah is similar to that which we encountered in tractate Eduyot—mishnayot were ordered by names of the sages and not by topic. 

Mishnah Six	 
1) Rabbi Ilai said:  I heard from Rabbi Eliezer, even if it is as large as a bet kor. 
2) I also heard from him that if one of the residents of a courtyard forgot to join in the eruv, his house is forbidden to him for taking in or taking out any object but it is permitted to them.  
3) I also heard from him that people may fulfill their duty [for bitter herbs] at Pesach by eating hart’s tongue (akrevanim).  
4) I went round among all his disciples seeking a fellowstudent but I found none. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to this tradition, Rabbi Eliezer allows carrying within a garden or karpaf even if it is large enough to sow a kor of produce.  A kor is 30 se’ah, and a bet kor is 75,000 square cubits.  Rabbi Eliezer allows carrying here even if the area is not designated to serve as a living space, as long as it has a proper partition.
Section two:  In subsequent chapters we will learn that in order for residents who share a courtyard to carry from their homes to the courtyard (and vice versa), they must set up an eruv, which consists of a common meal.  If one of the people did not participate in setting up the eruv (meaning he did not help pay for the meal) then it is generally forbidden for everyone to carry from their homes into the courtyard since all of those who own the courtyard did not participate in the eruv.  In other words since he partly owns the courtyard but did not participate in the eruv, others cannot carry in and out of the courtyard since all of the courtyard’s owners did not participate in the eruv.  The Talmud explains that in the case described by the mishnah, the person who did not share in the eruv annuls his partial ownership of the courtyard, thereby granting those who did participate in the eruv full ownership over the courtyard. In such a case, all of the other people who share the courtyard may carry from their homes to the courtyard and even from his home to the courtyard, since he annulled his ownership.  However, he may not carry from his home to the courtyard because that would look like he is retracting his annulment, an act which would make carrying forbidden.  He may nevertheless carry from their homes to the courtyard since he is like a guest at their homes, and guests rely on the eruv of their hosts.  
Section three:  “Akrevanim” is a type of herb, which according to this tradition, may be used as bitter herbs on Pesach.  The mishnah in tractate Pesachim does not list this herb as a possibility.  Albeck identifies it as scolopendrium (hart’s tongue), which is a type of fern.
Section four:  Rabbi Ilai did not find any other students who corroborated these traditions.  This mishnah provides an interesting glimpse of how the oral tradition worked.  Students would seek other students who had the same traditions and thereby strengthen their own certainty with regard to what their masters had taught them.  
