Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with drawing water from a water-channel that goes through a courtyard.  

Mishnah Seven
1) A water channel that passes through a courtyard— they do not draw water from there on Shabbat unless they made for it a partition ten handbreadths high at its entrance and exit.   
2) Rabbi Judah says: the wall above it may be regarded as a partition. 
3) Rabbi Judah said: it happened with the water-channel of Avel that they would draw water was from it on Shabbat on the authority of the elders.   
a) They said to him: because it was not of the prescribed size. 

Explanation
Section one:  The water channel is at least four handbreadths wide and ten handbreadths deep, and therefore it is a separate domain, one that is called a “karmelit”.  Since the courtyard is a private domain, it is forbidden to draw water from the “karmelit” on Shabbat.  In order to allow drawing water from it, they need to make a special partition above or below it, as we learned concerning the cistern in yesterday’s mishnah.  In this case, they must make the partition both at the channel’s entrance and the channel’s exit.  
Section two:  As he did in yesterday’s mishnah, Rabbi Judah holds that the courtyard wall, which goes over the channel, is sufficient to allow drawing from it on Shabbat.  
Section three:  Rabbi Judah relates a story that took place in Avel (a town in the Lower Galilee) where people drew from the channel on Shabbat, and the elders who were in the courtyard allowed it to happen.  The Sages respond that the reason that the elders allowed people to draw from this channel was that it was not four handbreadths wide and ten deep.  In such a case it is not its own domain, but rather it takes on the status of the domain in which it is situation.  Therefore, everyone agrees that the residents of the courtyard can draw from it.  Thee elders of Avel did not permit the drawing of the water because of the wall, as Rabbi Judah believed.   
