Gittin, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with documents whose signators are Samaritans.  The Samaritans were a Jewish splinter group whose history is somewhat blurry.  For more information on the Samaritans, see the introduction to Nedarim 3:10.  
The second section of the mishnah deals with documents pertaining to Jews which were validated in non-Jewish courts.  This was certainly a common phenomenon in the mishnaic periods.  The Greco-Roman court system was well-developed, as were their laws.  As subjects, if not always citizens, of the Roman Empire, Jews would have had some legal recourse to Roman courts and justice.  Therefore, the rabbis had to discuss the validity of documents which were upheld in these courts.  

Mishnah Five
1) Any document which has upon it the signature of a Samaritan is invalid, except for bills of divorce or a writ of emancipation. 
a) It happened that a bill of divorce was once brought before Rabban Gamaliel at Kefar Otnai and its witnesses were Samaritan, and he declared it valid.
2) All documents which are accepted in the courts of non-Jew, even if those who signed on the documents are non-Jews, are valid except bills of divorce and of writs of emancipation.
a) Rabbi Shimon says: these also are valid; they were only pronounced [to be invalid] when done by ordinary persons.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah teaches that all documents which have upon them signatures of people known to be Samaritans are invalid, except for bills of divorce or writs of emancipation.  According to Albeck, Samaritans were suspected by the rabbis of lying with regard to issues of money, and therefore they could not serve as witnesses for matters such as loans and acquisitions.  However, they were evidently not suspected of lying in matters of divorce or emancipation and hence they could serve as witnesses in these matters.  Furthermore, they were assumed to be knowledgeable enough in matters of divorce and emancipation. Indeed, according to the mishnah, Rabban Gamaliel once allowed even two Samaritans to serve as witnesses on a get.  This occurred at Kefar Otnai, in the southern Galilee.
Section two:  This section of the mishnah deals with documents that were upheld by non-Jewish courts or even signed by non-Jews.  In this case, these documents are generally valid with the exception of divorce and emancipation documents.  Monetary documents are valid, because non-Jews are trustworthy to adjudicate monetary matters.  However, since they do not know the laws of Jewish divorce and emancipation, bills of divorce and writs of emancipation could not be upheld in non-Jewish courts, nor could those who signed them be non-Jewish.  
Rabbi Shimon partially disagrees with the opinion in the previous clause.  According to him, the earlier opinion that said that divorce and emancipation documents done in non-Jewish courts are invalid, referred only to those done by courts which lack knowledge of the laws.  However, if the court was an expert court, they may even draw up divorce and emancipation documents, even though they are not Jewish.  
