Gittin, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
After a two chapter digression, the Mishnah returns to the main topic of the tractate—divorce law.  Most of this chapter deals with men and women appointing agents to deliver or to receive the get.  As we shall see, a husband can tell the agent to bring the get and a woman may make an agent to receive or bring a get.  The difference between the two has to do with when the woman is considered to be divorced and up until what point the husband may change his mind.    

Mishnah One
1) If a man says, “Receive this get on behalf of my wife”, or, “Carry this get to my wife”, if he desires to retract [before the wife receives it] he may do so. 
2) If a woman says, “Receive the get on my behalf”, [and he does so], if [the husband] wants to retract he may not do so.  
3) Therefore if the husband said to him, “I do not want you to receive it on her behalf, but rather carry it and give it to her”, then if he wishes to retract he may do so.  
4) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: even if the wife says “Take for me”, [and he does so] the husband may not retract.

Explanation
Section one:  A man can appoint an agent to bring a get to his wife, but he cannot appoint an agent to accept the get on behalf of his wife.  A agent who is empowered to legally accept the get can only be appointed by the wife, since she is the one who has to receive the get in order for it to be valid.  Therefore, it does not matter what language the husband uses, when he sends an agent with a get she is not divorced until she receives the get.  Even if he says to the agent, “Receive this get…”, the get is not valid until the agent hands it over to the woman.  Therefore, the husband may change his mind and annul the get until she actually receives it.
Section two:  In contrast, a woman has the right to appoint an agent to receive a get on her behalf.  Once this agent has received the get, the woman is fully divorced.  If after giving it to an agent empowered to receive the get the husband wishes to retract, he may not do so.
Section three:  This section teaches that the husband may change the appointment of the agent from one of “receiving” to one of “carrying.”  The husband authorizes the agent to bring the get to the woman but not to receive it on her behalf.  The woman is divorced only when she receives the get and therefore the husband may retract until that moment.  
Section four:  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel deals with a woman who says, “Take for me…” instead of “Carry to me…” or “Receive for me…”  He rules that “Take for me” is equivalent to “Receive for me” and therefore the woman is divorced as soon as the agent receives the get; after that point the husband may no longer retract.    
