Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah discusses a husband who divorces his wife because she turns out to be an “aylonit.”  An aylonit is a female who does not develop physical signs of sexual maturity, but is clearly a female.  By definition, she cannot have children.  If later on she has children then it turns out that she is not an aylonit.  

Mishnah Eight
1) A man divorces his wife because she is an aylonit:
a) Rabbi Judah says he may not remarry her,
b) But the sages say that he may remarry her.  
2) She marries someone else and has children from him and then demands her ketubah settlement [from her first husband]: 
a) Rabbi Judah said, they say to her, “Your silence is better than your speaking.”

Explanation
Section one:  The reason that Rabbi Judah says that he may not remarry a wife that he divorced because she was an “aylonit” is similar to the reasons we learned in yesterday’s mishnah why men who divorce for certain reasons may not remarry their wives.  If he divorces her because she is an “aylonit” and then she remarries and has children from her next husband the first husband might say, “Had I known that she was not an aylonit, I would not have divorced her.”  This statement would annul the divorce and her children would become mamzerim.  To prevent this, Rabbi Judah rules that we tell him when he divorces her that he will never be able to remarry her, and in that way he will divorce her with complete conviction.
However, in this case the Sages do not agree, for they are not concerned lest such a scenario arise.  Perhaps they thought it unlikely for a woman who was assumed to be an aylonit to later have children. 
Section two:  When a woman is divorced because she is an aylonit, her husband does not have to pay her ketubah (see Ketuboth 11:6). When this woman who was divorced because she was thought to be an aylonit has children in her subsequent marriage, it turns out that she wasn’t really an aylonit.  Hence she could make a valid claim that her first husband owes her a ketubah.  However, Rabbi Judah says that she would do better not to make such a claim, for if she does her husband might attempt to annul the divorce and thereby make her children mamzerim and forbid her to her new husband because she is an adulteress (albeit an unintentional one.)   
