Gittin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with a husband who tries to sneak a get to his wife by telling her it is a different type of document or by giving it to her while she is asleep.  Perhaps he wishes to avoid a face to face confrontation.  The mishnah will teach us that he must state to her “Here is your get” in order for her to be divorced.
The second section returns to the subject of a husband who throws a get to his wife.

Mishnah Two 
1) If he said to her, “Take in this debt document”, or if she found it behind him and read it and it turned out to be her get, it is not a get, until he says to her, “Here is your get.” 
2) If he put it into her hand while she was asleep and when she woke up she read it and found it was her get, it is not a get until he says to her, “Here is your get.”
3) If she was standing in the public domain and he threw it to her, if it lands near her she is divorced, but if it lands near him she is not divorced. 
a) If it lands midway, she is divorced and not divorced. 

Explanation
Section one:  In this case the husband tries to sneak the get to his wife either by telling her it was a debt document, or by hiding what it was until she picked it up.  In either case the get is invalid unless he affirmatively states to her “Here is your get.”
Section two:  Similarly, he may not place the get in her hand while she is sleeping and then just let her wake up and read it.  Although he can divorce her against her will, he must at least tell her that she is being divorced.  
Section three:  In this case she is standing on neutral ground, in the public domain which is neither his nor her property.  According to the mishnah if the get lands close to her, it counts as if he actually gave it to her and she is divorced.  The Talmud explains that in order for the get to be considered “close to her”, it must be within four amot (cubits).   If it is in-between the two of them, let’s say two amot from her and two amot from him, then she is doubtfully divorced.  In such a case, she would need another get in order to remarry.      
