Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
These two mishnayoth discuss the emancipation of slaves.

Mishnah Four
1) A [non-Jewish] slave [of a Jew] was taken captive and then ransomed [by a third party]:  
i) If [he is ransomed] to be a slave he goes back to slavery, 
ii) If [he is ransomed] as a free man he does not go back to slavery. 
iii) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  in either case he goes back to slavery.
2) If a man makes his slave a pledge [for a debt] to another man and then he emancipates him, according to the “letter of the law” the slave is not liable to do anything.
i) But because of tikkun olam we force his [second] master to emancipate him and he [the slave] writes a document for his purchase price. 
ii) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that the slave does not write the document but rather the one who emancipates him.  

Explanation
Section one:  If a non-Jewish slave is taken captive and held for ransom and then his ransom is paid, according to the first opinion in the mishnah his return to slavery depends upon the intent of the one who paid his ransom.  Since the original master didn’t offer up the ransom himself, he loses the ability to decide whether the slave remains a slave.  According to another source, if the person who paid the ransom decides that he should remain a slave to his former master, the master must pay back the ransom money.   Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel holds that in any case the slave returns to his previous owner.  The Yerushalmi explains that this is in order to prevent the slave from running away.  Another explanation is that the first opinion in the mishnah holds that there is no commandment to redeem slaves.  Therefore, by paying his ransom the redeemer has in essence purchased the slave and may do with him as he wishes.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel holds that there is a commandment to redeem slaves owned by Jews.  Since the redeemer fulfilled a commandment he did not acquire the slave and the slave returns to his owner.
We should note that there are several other explanations of this mishnah.  
Section two:  In this case Reuven loans Shimon money, and as a pledge (like pawning) for his loan, Reuven takes Shimon’s slave.  Shimon still owns the slave and therefore can free the slave despite the loan.  In such a case, according to the letter of the law the slave is totally free and need not do anything.  However, to protect the slave from an angry Reuven, the court forces Reuven to write out an emancipation document, as if he too has freed the slave.  The slave then writes out a document stating how much he is worth, and with this document Reuven can try to recover his loan from Shimon.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that the original owner (Shimon) writes out the document for he is the one who damaged the lender’s lien on his assets by freeing the pledged slave.  If the debtor writes the document, the creditor is more likely to recoup his loss.   
