Gittin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with “sicaricon”, which refers to the illegal, governmental expropriation of land from its rightful owners.  Specifically we are talking about land taken from Jews by Romans during the Second Temple and mishnaic periods.  The word “sicaricon” can refer to either the Roman who expropriated the property (in this case I shall capitalize the word); the rule governing land taken in such a faction; a person who came into land by buying it from a sicaricon.

Mishnah Six
1) There was no sicaricon in Judea for those killed in war.   
2) After the war’s slaughter ended there is sicaricon there. 
a) How so? 
b) If a man buys a field from the Sicaricon and then buys it again from the original owner, his purchase is void, but if he buys it first from the original owner and then from the sicaricon it is valid. 
3) If a man buys [a piece of a married woman’s property] from the husband and then buys it from the wife, the purchase is void, but if he buys it first from the wife and then from the husband it is valid. 
4) This was [the ruling] of the first mishnah.   
a) The court that came after them said if a man buys property from the Sicaricon he had to give the original owner a quarter [of the value].   
b) When is this so? When the original owners cannot buy it themselves, but if they can they have preemption over everyone else. 
5) Rabbi assembled a court and they decided by vote that if the property had been in the hands of the Sicaricon twelve months, whoever purchased it first acquired the title, but he had to give a quarter [of the price] to the original owner.

Explanation
Section one:  During the Great Revolt from 67-70 C.E. which culminated in the destruction of the Temple, the rule of sicaricon was not applied.  Practically what this meant was that land expropriated by the Romans was considered to legally belong to the Romans.  Therefore, a Jew who subsequently bought the land did not need to return anything to the original owner.  This was to encourage people to buy back the land in order that it should not remain Roman in perpetuity.  
Section two:  After the war the rule of sicaricon was enforced.  What this meant was that a Jew who bought the land from the Roman and then went and asked to buy the land from the Sicaricon had not legally acquired the land.  This is because we can assume that the original owner only agreed to sell the land out of fear—were he not to sell the land the Romans who had already sold it might lose their sale.  However, if the purchaser acquired it first from the original owner and then from the Sicaricon the sale is valid.  
Section three:  This section does not have to do with the rules of sicaricon and is brought here because of its similarity to the previous section.  When a man marries a woman the woman retains ownership over her property but her husband has the right to use the property.   Neither of them may sell the property without the other’s permission.  If someone buys the property first from the husband and then from the woman (who agrees), the sale is not valid.  The problem is that the woman may have sold under duress, being pressured by her husband.  However, if he buys from the woman first, we can assume that the woman sold of her own free will.  If the husband also agrees to the sale, the sale is valid.
Section four:  The problem with this system may have been that people would have been afraid to buy land from the Sicaricon.  This might have left large pieces of Jewish land in Roman control.  Therefore, a later court made a new rule.  If a person buys from a Sicaricon, he must give one quarter of the sale price to the original owners.  This way people would buy the land and the original owners would get at least some of their money back. However, if the original owners have the money to buy back their land, they still have the first shot at doing so.
Section five:  Rabbi Judah Hanasi and his court enacted a further change in this law.  If the land remained with the Sicaricon 12 months, and it didn’t look like anyone was going to buy it, the first person to purchase it has legally acquired it.  In other words, a purchaser need not worry that the original owners would preempt him.  However, the purchaser must still pay compensation to the original owners.
