Gittin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This same exact mishnah appears in Eduyoth 7:9.  It is brought here because it contains two “takkanot” (in sections three and four).  

Mishnah Five
1) Rabbi Nehunia ben Gudgada testified concerning a deaf-mute whose father had given her in marriage, that she could be sent away with a bill of divorcement;   
2) And concerning a minor, daughter of an Israelite who married a priest, that she could eat terumah, and if she died her husband inherited from her; 
3) And concerning a stolen beam that had been built into a palace, that it might be restored by the payment of its value, because of the enactment to encourage repentance. 
4) And concerning a sin-offering that had been stolen, and this was not known to many,   that it caused atonement because of the welfare of the altar.

Explanation
Section one:  As we have learned in other places, the Rabbis considered a deaf-mute to lack intelligence, because in their time the deaf-mute had little way of communicating with the outside world.  Usually a person who lacks intelligence, such a deaf-mute, minor or insane person, cannot enter into legally binding contracts, because they don’t understand their ramifications.  However, as Rabbi Nehunia testifies, a deaf-mute can be divorced.  (She was married off by her father).  The reason is that divorce is not dependent upon the woman’s acquiescence; she can be divorced against her will.  Since her will is irrelevant, even one who lacks awareness can be divorced.  Although this might sound harsh, as if the Rabbis are going out of their way to allow a deaf-mute to be divorced, it may have also worked in her benefit.  If men couldn’t divorce deaf-mutes, perhaps they might refrain from marrying them.  By allowing a “way out” the Rabbis might actually be encouraging their marriage.  
Section two:  This section deals with an orphaned minor girl of a non-priestly, Israelite family, who marries a priest. Generally this type of marriage is considered to be valid only rabbinically (derabanan) and not valid through Torah law (deoraita).  Deoraita a minor can only be married off by her father.  Only when she reaches majority she can marry herself off without her father’s aid.  Despite the fact that this is really only a “derabanan” marriage, Rabbi Nehunya testifies that it is sufficient for her to be allowed to eat terumah and for her husband to inherit her, should she die.  Even though these are usually rights only given to a valid “deoraita” marriage, Rabbi Nehunya testifies that the husband does receive these rights.  
Section three:  Usually one who steals an item must return the actual stolen item, as long as the item still exists.  If one stole a beam and then used it in the foundation of a castle, legally he is bound to take down the castle and return the beam.  Obviously this will discourage people from admitting that they stole.  This admission is an essential part of making atonement for their crime.  To allow people to more easily make atonement, the robber is allowed to pay back the value of the beam.
Section four:  If it were forbidden to use animals that might have been stolen as sacrifices, the priests would never sacrifice an animal, lest it be stolen.  Therefore, the mishnah rules that stolen animals can be used as sin-offerings, and that they do procure atonement for the one bringing them, as long as the theft is not publicly known.  This mishnah is not permission to steal an animal and bring it as a sacrifice.  Rather it is permission to use an animal without being concerned that it is stolen property.  The mishnah teaches that if it was stolen property and the person who brought it did not know that it was stolen, that it is effective in bringing atonement.  
