Gittin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
In this mishnah, instead of conditioning the get upon her paying him money, the husband stipulates that to be divorced she must continue to look after his father.  We can easily see the social situation reflected in this stipulation.  The husband no longer wishes to remain married, but the wife has performed an important function in the family.  The mishnah discusses when we consider the stipulation fulfilled.
I should make an important note when discussing these situations.  The Mishnah does not generally provide an opinion whether a husband, or really any person, has done something “virtuous”.  The Mishnah is often interested in the technical, legal details and implications of things that can potentially occur.  These mishnayoth are not providing approval of a husband’s essentially blackmailing his wife.  Rather, they admit that such action is legally possible and hence its implications must be discussed.  

Mishnah Six
1) [If a husband says], “This is your get on condition that you look after my father”, [or] “On condition that you nurse my child”—
a) How long must she nurse? Two years.  
b) Rabbi Judah says, eighteen months. 
2) If the child dies or the father dies, the get is valid. 
3) [If he says], “This is your get on condition that you look after my father for two years”, [or] “On condition that you nurse my child for two years”, if the child dies or if the father says, “I don't want you to look after me”, even though she has not caused him to complain, the get is invalid. 
a) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  something like this is a get.  
b) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said a general rule: wherever the obstacle does not arise from her side, the get is valid.

Explanation
Section one:  In this scenario, the husband made the get conditional upon his wife’s continuing to look after his father or to nurse his child.  The time limit for looking after the father is the remainder of the father’s life.  However, the wife need only nurse the child for two years, the standard length of time in which an average child nursed in mishnaic times.  Rabbi Judah says she need nurse only for eighteen months, which was probably the minimum amount of time that children nursed in this time period. 
Section two:  When the husband said that she must continue to take care of his father or child, his intention was that she should do so as long as the father or child was alive.  Should they die, she has fulfilled the stipulation on the get and it is valid.
Section three:  In this the husband stipulates a limit of two years to her having to take care of his father or child.  The mishnah takes this to mean that she must take care of the father or nurse the child for a full two years no matter what happens.  Therefore, in this case if the father or child dies, she has not fulfilled the stipulation.  Furthermore, if the father decides he no longer wants her to wait on him, she still hasn’t fulfilled the stipulation.  This is certainly true if she gave him reason to “fire” her, but according to the first mishnah, even if she was not at all at fault, she still has not fulfilled the condition.  However, Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel disagrees with this.  He holds that if she was not the obstacle which prevented the fulfillment of the stipulation, then the get is valid.  Therefore, if the father gets angry at her and she was not at fault, she is divorced.


