Gittin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The final mishnah of chapter five completes the examples of enactments made because “of the ways of peace.”  
This mishnah demonstrates that in the Second Temple period Jews of different levels religiosity lived in the same communities and shared their things with one another.  While people who were more observant of certain ritual requirements had to be careful in certain areas, they did not cease living together.   

Mishnah Nine
1) A woman may lend to another woman who is suspected of not observing the sabbatical year a fan or a sieve or a handmill or a stove, but she should not sift or grind with her. 
2) The wife of a “haver” may lend to the wife of an “am ha-aretz” a fan or a sieve and may winnow and grind and sift with her, but once she has poured water over the flour she should not touch anything with her, because we do not assist those who commit a transgression.   
3) All these rules were only said because of the ways of peace. 
4) Gentiles may be wished luck in the Sabbatical year but not Israelites and greeting may be given to them, because of the ways of peace.

Explanation
Section one:   It is forbidden to keep sabbatical year produce in one’s house after it no longer exists in the field.  The woman suspected of not observing the sabbatical year may have such produce in her house.  Nevertheless, another woman may still lend various vessels, even though those vessels will used to commit transgressions.  However, the woman should not physically help her neighbor commit a transgression.
Section two:  A “haver”, literally friend, or perhaps better translated as “member”, is one who is careful about purity laws and about tithing.  An “am ha-aretz”—an ignoramus—is not careful about such laws.  The wife of the “haver” may work with grain with the “am ha-aretz” even though the latter is impure.  However, once the flour has become wet, it is now susceptible to impurity.  At this point since we are discussing flour that belongs to an am haaretz, terumah and tithes have assumedly not been taken out of the flour.  Therefore the am-ha-aretz will be rendering the terumah impure and this is forbidden.  Since this is forbidden, the wife of the haver may not help her.
Section three:  The permissions granted in the first two sections were because of “the ways of peace.”  Communities of people with varying degrees of religiosity need to learn to be able to live together.  
Section four:  It is forbidden to work fields during the Sabbatical year.  If Gentiles own a field in the land of Israel one may wish them luck in their endeavors, even though the field should not be worked.  However, one shouldn’t wish luck to Jews who are engaging in a prohibited activity.  One may also greet a Gentile in order to increase peace between Jews and Gentiles.  It seems that there is an underlying fear in this section. If Jews do not wish Gentiles luck, or greet them properly, they may cause danger to the Jewish community.  Alternatively, one could see a more positive message here.  It is important for Jews and Gentiles to get along and therefore, to increase peace, Jews should wish them well.     
