Gittin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The first half of the mishnah deals with a situation where a scribe wrote a get for a husband to give to his wife and a receipt for payment of the ketubah for the wife to give to her husband.  He accidentally switched the documents, giving the get to the wife and the receipt to the husband, whereupon the husband divorced his wife using a ketubah receipt.  The problem is that this wife never received her get.  
The second half of the mishnah contains a debate between Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel over a husband who writes out a get to give to his wife but does not give it to her.  

Mishnah Eight
1) If a scribe wrote a get for the husband and a receipt for the wife and by mistake gave the get to the wife and the receipt to the husband and the two exchanged them and after some time the get came out of the hands of the man and the receipt out of the hands of the woman, she must leave both husbands and all these things apply to her. 
a) Rabbi Elazar says:  if [it comes out of her hands] immediately, it is not a get, but if [it comes out of her hands] after some time, it is a get; it is not in the power of the first to render void the right of the second.  
2) If a man wrote a get with which to divorce his wife and then changed his mind, 
a) Bet Shammai says that he has disqualified her from marrying a priest.  
b) Bet Hillel says that even if he gave it to her with a certain stipulation, if the condition was not fulfilled, he has not disqualified her for marrying a priest.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion in this section, since the wife never received her get she was never divorced.  Hence her second marriage is invalid, and all of the consequences that applied in the previous mishnayot apply to her as well.
Rabbi Elazar says that the get is invalid only in a case where she immediately noticed that she had received a ketubah receipt and not a get.  If she only discovered that she had never received the get at a later time, she is considered divorced.  The reason that she is considered divorced is that we fear that the husband and the wife may have made a deal in order to disrupt the second marriage.  By her giving him back the get and his giving her back the receipt, they can make it look like she was never divorced.  The first husband does not have the authority to ruin the second husband’s marriage.  
Section two:  A priest cannot marry a divorced woman.  According to Bet Shammai, even if a woman’s husband writes a get but does not give it to her, he has already disqualified her from subsequently marrying a priest.  In contrast, Bet Hillel holds that even if he gives her the get with a condition (for instance, “here is your get if I don’t return within 12 months) and the condition is not fulfilled and the get is invalid, she is still not disqualified from marry a priest.  
The Yerushalmi (Palestinian Talmud) connects this Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel debate with their debate that appears in the last mishnah of the tractate.  Since Bet Shammai says that a husband can divorce only on grounds of adultery, the very fact that the husband suspected her of adultery and therefore wrote out a get, disqualifies her from marrying a priest.  In contrast, Bet Hillel allows divorce on nearly all grounds, and therefore does not see a disqualified get as disqualifying a woman from the priesthood.  
