Gittin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first section of the mishnah is a direct continuation of yesterday’s mishnah.  It teaches that the laws concerning a husband throwing a get to his wife are the same as the laws of a man throwing betrothal money or a betrothal document to a woman or a borrower repaying his debt by throwing money at the creditor.
The second half of the mishnah deals with a husband who is on a roof and throws a get down to his wife or is below and she is on the roof and he throws the get up to her.  

Mishnah Three
1) Similarly with betrothals and similarly with a debt. 
a) If a man’s creditor said to him, “Throw me my debt”, and he threw it to him, if it lands nearer to the creditor, the borrower is credited [with paying back his debt]; if it lands nearer to the borrower, the borrower is still obligated [to repay the money]; if it lands midway, they divide.
2) If she was standing on a roof and he threw it up to her, as soon as it reaches the airspace of the roof, she is divorced. 
a) If he was above and she below and he threw it to her, once it has left the space of the roof, [even were it to be immediately] erased or burnt, she is divorced.

Explanation
Section one:  The laws concerning throwing a get are the same when it comes to throwing betrothal money or documents or repaying monetary debts.  The remainder of the mishnah illustrates the principle with regard to repaying debts.  Note that the one difference between debts and divorce/betrothal is that in the latter case, if the document lands halfway, the woman is doubtfully divorced or doubtfully betrothed.  There is no possibility of a woman being half divorced or betrothed.  In contrast, when it comes to debts, people can split money.  Therefore, if the money lands halfway between the two parties they split it and the borrower owes half the debt.
Section two:  When the husband is standing below and she is standing on the roof, the get must reach the level of the roof for she to be divorced.  In other words, her domain only begins at roof-level.
Similarly, if he is standing on the roof, her domain begins at the level of the roof.  If he drops the get, she is divorced as soon as the get enters her domain, which is below the level of the roof.  Even if it briefly enters her domain and then is somehow erased (severe case of bird droppings?) or burnt (by a lightning bolt) she was divorced as soon as the get entered her domain.   
