Gittin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The first section of the mishnah deals with a man who is suspected of having sexual relations with his divorcee.  The second section deals with a “bald get”, one that does not have the proper number of signatures.

Mishnah Nine
1) A man divorces his wife and then stays with her over night in an inn: 
a) Bet Shammai says:  she does not require from him a second get, 
b) But Beth Hillel say she does require a second get from him. 
c) When is this so?  When she was divorced after marriage. And [Beth Hillel] agrees that if she is divorced after betrothal, she does not require a second get from him, because he would not [yet] take liberties with her.
2) If a man marries a [divorced] woman through a “bald” get, she must leave both husbands and all the above-mentioned consequences apply to her.

Explanation
Section one:  If a divorced woman is secluded with her ex-husband, Bet Hillel suspects that they may have had sexual relations and through the sexual act he betrothed her again (we shall learn about how betrothal is performed in the beginning of Kiddushin).  Since they may have remarried, she requires another get from him.  Bet Shammai is not suspicious that they had sexual relations and therefore does not require another get.  Again, this debate may be connected with their debate over the grounds for divorce.  Since Bet Shammai holds that divorce can only be a result of adultery (or at least suspected adultery), it is less likely that the couple will again engage in sexual relations.  Bet Hillel holds that a man may divorce his wife for almost no reason and therefore there is a greater chance at reconciliation.
However, Bet Hillel suspects that the divorced couple may have sex only if they were already married and assumedly had already had sexual relations while married.  In this case, their prior intimacy increases the likelihood that when secluded they will again become intimate.  If the divorce occurred after their betrothal but before they were ever married, since they had never been intimate before, it is less likely that they will now engage in sex.  Therefore, in such a situation she does not require a second get.
Section two:  A “bald get” is a “sewn document”, as described in Bava Batra 10:1-2.  There we learned that to protect forgeries people would sew several folds into their documents, having people sign on each fold.  A “bald get” is one where there are more folds than signatures.  It is “bald” because it is missing signatures and is therefore invalid. Since it is invalid, she was not properly divorced from her first husband when she married her second husband and all of the consequences which were discussed in mishnah five (and mentioned in 6-8) apply to her as well.   
