Gittin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah continues the topic of collecting debts from mortgaged properties.  The second section deals with returning lost objects.  

Mishnah Three
1) [Creditors] do not collect from mortgaged property for produce consumed, for the improvement of property, [and payment] for the maintenance of a widow and daughters, because of tikkun olam.  
2) The finder of a lost article is not required to take an oath, because of tikkun olam.

Explanation
Section one:  There are three types of repayments mentioned in this section.  In each of these cases when a creditor collects his debt he can only collect from unmortgaged property, meaning property that is actually in the hands of the debtor.  
The first category is “produce consumed.”  This refers to a situation where someone illegally obtained land, for instance he stole it.  He then eats the produce on the land and sells the land to another person. When the original owner comes to claim the land he extracts the land from the person who purchased it from the thief and he can extract the value of the produce from the thief himself.  However, he can only exact this payment from the thief from unmortgaged property and not from property which the thief sold or gave away to others.
In this same situation, the one who purchased the property from the thief and then had to restore it to its original owner collects from the thief the original purchase price.  He also may collect from the thief any money he spent to improve the property, but this amount he may collect only from unmortgaged property.  This is what the mishnah means by “improvement of property.”  
When a man dies one of the ketubah stipulations is that his widow and daughters are to be provided for from his estate until they are married.  However, they are only provided for from the dead husband’s unmortgaged property.
The “tikkun olam” here is that these amounts are not fixed.  Therefore, one who buys from a person who might be in this situation will never know how much debt that person is really in and he won’t be able to be cautious lest he buy property that has a lien on it.  To protect these purchasers, these amounts cannot be collected from them. 
Section two:  If a person returns a lost object to another person, and the person receiving the lost object suspects that the one returning it has kept part of the object for himself he cannot make the one returning the object take an oath that he has returned it all.  If such an oath could be enforced, people might be hesitant to return lost objects, because people did not want to take oaths even if they were true.  In order to encourage people to fulfill the mitzvah of returning lost objects, in other words for tikkun olam, such oaths were not enforced.
