Gittin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a man who tried to divorce his wife but at the same time restrict her from subsequently marrying a certain man.  Generally speaking divorce frees a woman to marry almost anyone who she wishes to marry (except priests and anyone related to her previous husband).  The background to this case is probably that the husband is divorcing his wife because he suspects that she has committed adultery with a certain man.  By divorcing her, he does not want to allow her to go marry the very man whom he suspects.

Mishnah One
1) If a man divorces his wife and said to her, “You are free to marry any man but so-and-so”, Rabbi Eliezer permits her [to marry on the strength of this get], but the rabbis forbid her. 
2) What should he do? 
a) He should take it back from her and give it to her again saying, “You are free to marry any man.” 
b) If he wrote [the restriction] in the get, even though he went back and erased it, it is invalid.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Eliezer allows the woman to remarry on the strength of this get.  She can marry anyone save the person whom her husband stated she was not allowed to marry.  The remainder of the sages declared this get to be invalid.  In the Talmud, there is recorded a story of four sages who gathered together to refute Rabbi Eliezer after his death.  Indeed the opposition to this opinion of Rabbi Eliezer is among the most vehement in the Talmud.   Evidently, the rabbis believed that for divorce to work it must totally sever the legal relationship between the man and woman.  Any retention of his control over her undermines the entire validity of divorce.
Section two:  In this section we learn how the husband can fix the situation so that his wife is legally divorced.  If he has not written the words “but so-and-so” in the get, he need merely take the get back from her and restate the divorce formula correctly. However, if he has written the invalidating words in the get, the document itself is irreparably invalid.  

