Gittin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with who may write a get, and the second section with who may deliver a get.

Mishnah Five
1) All are qualified to write a get, even a deaf-mute, an imbecile and a minor. 
a) A woman may write her own get and a man his own receipt [for the ketubah], since the document is upheld only by its signatures. 
2) All are qualified to bring a get except a deaf-mute, an imbecile, a minor, a blind person and a non-Jew.

Explanation
Section one:  Anyone can write a get including people who were categorically considered not to have “awareness”.  These people can write a get even though they would not even understand what they are doing (remember that in the ancient world deaf people were wrongly considered to lack intelligence), because as we see below, the critical issue with the get is that it is signed by valid witnesses.   Similarly, a woman may write her own get (this would make for an interesting scenario), and a man may write his own receipt for having paid the ketubah to his wife.  Since the get is upheld not by checking who wrote it but who signed it, it matters not who does the writing.  Although the woman has written her own get, the witnesses will not sign it unless they are sure that it was written upon the husband’s directive.  Similarly, witnesses will not sign a receipt for payment unless they know that the husband paid the money to the wife.
Section two:  Almost anybody can deliver a get from a husband to his wife.  The exceptions are again those people who categorically do not have awareness.  In all areas of halakhah, someone who does not have “awareness” cannot act as someone else’s agent.  A blind person can also not deliver a get, even though blind people were not considered to lack “awareness”. The Talmud explains this to mean that he cannot deliver a get from abroad to Israel because he cannot say “In my presence it was written and in my presence it was signed.”  Note that blind people were considered to have “awareness”, unlike deaf-mutes who could not really communicate. Non-Jews cannot marry or divorce Jews and therefore cannot serve as agents for delivering a get.  
