Gittin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah.  Again, while divorcing his wife, the husband attempts to restrict her from subsequently marrying a certain man.  Yesterday we learned that the sages consider such a get to be invalid.  Today, the mishnah discusses what would happen if the man to whom the husband tried to restrict his wife was in any case prohibited to her.
 
Mishnah Two
1) [If he said,] “You are permitted to any man but my father, your father, my brother, your brother, a slave, a Gentile, or anyone to whom she is incapable of being betrothed,” the get is valid.  
2) [If he said,] “You are permitted to anyone but (supposing she was a widow) a high priest, or, (supposing she was a divorcee or a halutzah) an ordinary priest, or, (supposing she was a mamzeret or a netinah) a regular Israelite, or (supposing she was an Israelite) a mamzer or a natin, or anyone who is capable of betrothing her even in transgression, the get is invalid.

Explanation
Section one:  In this section the husband tells his wife that she may not subsequently marry someone whom she couldn’t subsequently marry in any case.  All of the men in this list cannot possibly contract marriage with her.  In other words his restrictions on the divorce were in essence meaningless, because she couldn’t marry any of them in any case.  Hence, the get is valid.
Section two:  In this section, the husband restricts his wife from marrying someone who would be prohibited to her, but to whom she could possibly be betrothed. The marriages listed in this section are possible even though they carry with them a transgression.   For instance, his wife was a mamzeret and he says “You are permitted to any but to so-and-so the Israelite”.   In such cases, the get is invalid because his restriction was not meaningless.
We should note that the list in this section is a stock list, since not all of these categories are relevant in this situation.   The woman whom he is divorcing will in any case be prohibited to a priest, as are all divorcees.  However, this is a stock list and hence it appears in all places as an entirety.  
