Gittin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a man who divorces his wife either because a rumor went out that she had committed adultery or because of a vow that she took.  

Mishnah Seven
1) If a man divorces his wife because of ill-repute, he cannot remarry her.   
2) If because of a vow, he cannot remarry her. 
3) Rabbi Judah says: [if he divorces her] for vows which she made in front of many people, he may not remarry her, but if for vows which she did not make in front of many people, he may remarry her.   
4) Rabbi Meir says: [if he divorces her] for a vow which requires the investigation of a sage, he may not remarry her, but if for one which does not require the investigation of a sage, he may remarry her.   
a) Rabbi Eliezer says:  they only forbid that one because of that one . 
5) Rabbi Yose son of Rabbi Judah said: a case happened in Sidon of a man who said to his wife, “Konam, if I do not divorce you”, and he did divorce her, and the Sages permitted him to remarry her —because of tikkun olam.  

Explanation
Section one:  If a man divorces his wife because he believes that she committed adultery he may not remarry her.  The fear is that after he divorces her he may find out that the rumor was false.   When he discovers that the rumor was false he may regret divorcing her and say, “Had I known that the rumor was false, I would never have divorced her.”  Since the divorce was based on a false assumption, the get is invalidated and any children which she had from a subsequent marriage are considered mamzerim.  To prevent this problematic situation (in other words for tikkun olam), when the husband divorces they say to him that he must know that his divorce is final and irrevocable, even if the rumor for which he divorces her proves to be false.  In this way, he will in his mind divorce her completely and he cannot later claim that the divorce was mistaken.
Section two:  The same holds true for a husband who divorces his wife because she took a vow that disrupted their marriage in some way.  In such a case he may later discover that he could have had the vow released and then regret divorcing her, thereby annulling the get.  To prevent this he is told that if he divorces her because of a vow, he can never remarry her.
Section three:  The following sages argue over which types of vows the previous section was referring to.  According to Rabbi Judah, if the vow was public he cannot remarry her, but if the vow was not public he may remarry her.  The Talmud explains that Rabbi Judah believes that the rule husbands may not remarry their wives if they divorced them because of a rumor of adultery or because of a vow is a punishment for the wife.  Therefore, if she vows privately such that others don’t know that she took a vow, then she is not punished and her husband may remarry her.  
Section four: Rabbi Meir makes a different distinction. According to Rabbi Meir he cannot remarry her if the vow required the investigation of a sage in order to release the vow.  If it did not require even the investigation of the sage for the vow to be released then it must have been a mistaken vow.  Such a vow can obviously be released and everyone should know this.  Therefore, he cannot later claim, “Had I known that the vow could be released I would not have divorced her.”  Since he cannot make this claim, we do not need to prevent him from remarrying her.  Rabbi Elazar reasons completely opposite.  The reason that they made it forbidden for him to remarry her for a vow that does require the investigation of a sage is because he may regret divorcing her for making a vow that does not require the investigation of a sage.  
Section five:  The final section deals with a case where a husband vowed to divorce his wife.  In this case, we might have thought that in order to encourage men not to hastily vow to divorce their wives the law would have been that if he does so he cannot remarry her.  However, the Sages ruled that he can nevertheless remarry her.  The only reason that in other cases they prohibited him from remarrying her was lest he state “Had I known that the vow could be broken I would not have divorced her.”  This prohibition was made because of tikkun olam—protecting the wife from a husband who makes such a statement.  However, if the husband vows there is no reason to prevent him from remarrying her.  
