Gittin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The first section of the mishnah discusses gittin written in languages different from the language in which the witnesses signed.  
The second section deals with how witnesses sign a get. 
The third section deals with the way in which the husband and wife’s names may be written. 
The fourth and final section deals with husbands whom the court forces to divorce their wives.  This last issue is obviously a crucial one, and I will discuss it at somewhat greater length below.

Mishnah Eight
1) A get which was written in Hebrew and whose signatures are in Greek, or was written in Greek and whose signatures are in Hebrew, or which has one Hebrew signature and one Greek signature, or which was written by a scribe and signed by one witness, is valid. 
2) [If a man signs], “So-and-so, witness,” it is valid. 
a) [If he signs,] “Son of so-and-so, witness, it is valid. 
b) [If he signs,] “So-and-so son of so-and-so” and he didn’t write “witness”, it is valid. 
3) If he wrote his own family name and hers, the get is valid. 
a) And this is how the scrupulous in Jerusalem would do.   
4) A get given imposed by court:  in the case of a Jewish court is valid, and in the case of a Gentile court is invalid. 
a) And with regard to Gentiles, if they beat him and say to him, “Do what the Israelites say to you,” (and it is valid). 

Explanation
Section one:  In all of these cases we might have feared that since the person signed a language different from that in which the get was written, the signer did not actually understand the document.  The mishnah nevertheless rules that these gittin are valid, relying on people’s good faith not to sign documents unless they know what is written in them.  This section also teaches that the scribe himself may sign the get.  His role as scribe and his role as witness are independent, and therefore he can act as both.
Section two:  Normally, people would sign, “So-and-so, son of so-and-so, witness.”  The mishnah teaches that while this is the normal custom, it is not necessary for the signature to be effective.  A signature can be valid without one’s personal name, or without one’s family name or without the word “witness.”   I should note that printed editions contain the line “And this is how the scrupulous in Jerusalem would do” at this point, and not as it appears in manuscripts, as part of the next section.  According to this, the scrupulous in Jerusalem did not write the word “witness.”   The manuscript version is clearly correct, as the line makes little sense here.
Section three:  Usually the scribe would write the husband and wife’s personal names.  However, if he wrote their family names, which were not surnames as we now use but rather some sort of personal nicknames, the get is valid.  Indeed, since these names are sometimes more precise, the practice of writing nicknames was common among the “scrupulous people of Jerusalem.”
Section four:  Perhaps the most controversial issue in Jewish law today is the problem of the “agunah”, a woman who cannot obtain a divorce.  Often (although not always) this is the result of the husband’s refusal to divorce his wife.   The mishnah states quite clearly that if an Israelite court forces him to divorce his wife and he divorces her under duress, the divorce is nevertheless valid.  Only if the coercion is done by a Gentile court, not acting according to Jewish law, is the get invalid.  Even if Gentiles beat the recalcitrant husband, telling him to do what the Israelite court has told him to do (divorce his wife) the get is valid so long as the Gentiles are enforcing Jewish law.  Gentile coercion invalidates the get only if it comes without the request of an Israelite court.
After reading this mishnah, one might wonder why, if the Mishnah states that husbands may be compelled to divorce their wives, do women today find it often difficult to get a court to actually do so. I cannot answer this question fully in this forum but we should make three notes. First of all, it is not clear that this mishnah would apply in all cases.  The question still needs to be asked; upon what grounds a court might force a husband to divorce his wife.  The most important issue of all:  what if the wife merely no longer wants to remain married to her husband, without any formal, specific grounds?  Secondly, from the 12th century and onwards, rabbis became increasingly hesitant about compelling men to divorce.  Hence, our modern problem is not so new. Thirdly, it seems to me that the modern problem is not one of halakhah, but rather of rabbis being overly hesitant in using halakhic authority.  It is more of a sociological issue than a halakhic one.  Rabbis could solve the problem, and many have made various suggestions of how to do so.  They are often unwilling to solve the problem for sociological reasons.  However, the subject is too important and complex to be dealt with fully here.   
