Gittin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first half of this mishnah deals with a get that was temporarily lost on its way from the husband to the wife.  
The second half deals with a sick or old husband who sent a get to his wife.  The question is whether or not the one bringing it can assume that the husband is still alive when he (the one bringing the get) arrives at the wife?   

Mishnah Three
1) One who brings a get and loses it on the way:
a) If he finds it immediately it is valid, and if not it is not valid.  
b) If he finds it in a small bag or in a folder—if he recognizes it, it is valid.
2) If one brings a get and left [the husband] when [the husband] was an old man or sick, he should deliver it to her on the presumption that he is still alive. 
3) If the daughter of an ordinary Israelite is married to a priest and her husband goes abroad, she continues eating terumah on the presumption that he is still alive.  
4) If a man sends a sin-offering from abroad they sacrifice it on the presumption that he is still alive.

Explanation
Section one: If a messenger loses a get, we fear that the get that he finds is not the same get that he lost, and therefore the get will not have been written for that specific woman.  Note that the names written on the found get have to be the same as those on the lost get, otherwise it will be clear that it is not the same get.  However, as we learned in previous mishnayoth, similar names may not have been so uncommon.  If the get is immediately found, it is still valid.  But if time elapses we are concerned that the one bringing the get found a different get, even though the names are the same.  Furthermore, if he recognizes the bag or folder which he was using to carry the get, and the get is still inside, the get is valid even if it was found after time had elapsed.  The likelihood that a get with the same names as the lost get would get into a bag that looks exactly the same as the lost bag is too remote for concern.
Section two:  A woman may not be divorced from her husband after he died. The importance of this halakhah is in the realm of levirate marriage.  A woman whose husband died before he had offspring is liable for yibbum (levirate marriage), whereas a woman who was divorced is not.  Since a get goes into effect the moment that the woman receives it, and not when given to the messenger to deliver, it is important to know if the husband was alive when the get was delivered to the woman.  Nevertheless, the mishnah states that the person delivering the get should not be concerned lest the husband died after he (the one delivering the get) received it.  He may deliver it to the wife even if the husband was an old or sick man and presume that the husband is still alive.   
Section three:  The mishnah now brings two halakhot which employ a similar principle, that is we assume that a person is still alive until it is known that he has died.  A woman who eats terumah because she is married to a priest can continue to do so even if her husband went on a long trip and she no longer knows if he is alive.   
Section four:  Similarly, the priests at the Temple may offer up a sin-offering which was sent from abroad under the assumption that its owner who sent it is still alive.  Had they known that the owner had died, the animal would not be able to be sacrificed. 
