Hagigah, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
When people would make their pilgrimage festivals to Jerusalem, they would usually bring with them money which they had used to redeem their second tithe.  Second tithe can be eaten by its owners but only in Jerusalem. To make things easier for people the Torah allows them to redeem the produce for money, take the money to Jerusalem and use it there to buy food items. Our mishnah deals with which sacrifices one can buy from second tithe money and which have to be purchased with “hullin,” unconsecrated money.  It is in the best interests of the pilgrim to be able to use his second tithe money, money which he will have to spend in Jerusalem in any case.  
 
Mishnah Three
1) Burnt-offerings during the festival [week] are to be brought from [animals bought with] unconsecrated money, and thanksgiving offerings, from [animals bought with] tithe money.
2) On the first festival day of Pesah: 
a) Bet Shammai say: [they must be brought] from [animals bought with] unconsecrated money.
b) And Bet Hillel say: [they can be brought also] from [animals bought with] tithe money.

Explanation
Section one: This section deals with hol hamoed, the middle of the week of Sukkot and Pesah.  Burnt-offerings, the pilgrimage offerings, which are obligatory, must be brought with animals purchased with unconsecrated money. This is the same rule as for all mandatory offerings—they may not be purchased with tithe money.
Celebratory thanksgiving offering, brought during the middle of the festival are not obligatory as are the other festival offerings.  A person has to eat meat during the week and while it was customary to use thanksgiving offerings, it was not mandated.  Since this sacrifice wasn’t mandated, one can use tithe money to purchase it. 
Section two:  On the first day of both Pesah and Sukkot, and on Shavuot, the thanksgiving offering, the hagigah, is obligatory.  Since it is a mandated offering, Bet Shammai holds that it must come from animals purchased with unconsecrated money.  Bet Hillel holds that one can still use tithe money because the hagigah is partially eaten by its owners. The Torah states that second tithe must be used to purchase food and the hagigah is food. According to the Talmud, second tithe cannot be used to purchase the whole animal, because some of the animal is offered on the altar.  It may only be used as part of the purchasing price.   
