Hagigah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The vessel that a zav or zavah (a man or woman who had an unusual genital discharge) steps, sits, leans or lies upon is impure.  This vessel will now transmit impurity to those who touch it. This type of impurity is called “midras” which means “stepped upon.”  In our mishnah the rabbis state that the garments of people who have immersed for a lesser purpose possess midras-impurity for those who wish to preserve a higher degree of impurity. What this would mean is that if the person who wished to possess the higher degree of impurity touched these clothes, he would become impure.
On a less literal level, this mishnah seems to rank those who preserve their purity, granting a higher status to those who are more cautious about the purity laws.  Also, this mishnah is parallel to yesterday’s mishnah, both ranking degrees of purity.

Mishnah Seven
1) The garments of an am haaretz possess midras-impurity for Pharisees.
2) The garments of Pharisees possess midras-impurity for those who eat terumah. 
3) The garments of those who eat terumah possess midras-impurity for [those who eat] sacred things.
4) The garments of [those who eat] sacred things possess midras-impurity for [those who occupy themselves with the waters of] purification. 
5) Yose ben Yoezer was the most pious in the priesthood, yet his apron was [considered to possess] midras-impurity for [those who ate] sacred things. 
6) Yohanan ben Gudgada all his life used to eat [unconsecrated food] in accordance with the purity required for sacred things, yet his apron was [considered to possess] midras-impurity for [those who occupied themselves with the water of] purification.

Explanation
Section one:  An am-haaretz literally means, “one of the land” but it is used to refer to a person who does not observe the laws of purity and tithing as do the Pharisees.  As an aside, the word does not have quite as negative a connotation in the Mishnah as it does in later rabbinic literature.  In later literature one could translate the term as “ignoramus.”  In any case, since they were not cautious about purity laws, their clothes have midras-impurity for Pharisees.
Section two: While Pharisees were cautious about purity, they were not as pure as priests who ate terumah.  The Pharisees immersed to eat unconsecrated food and we learned in yesterday’s mishnah that one who immerses to eat unconsecrated food cannot eat terumah.  Hence the clothes of Pharisees have midras-impurity for a priest who eats terumah.
Section three:  Yesterday we learned that one who immerses to eat terumah is not pure enough to eat sacrifices (sacred things).  Today we learn that the clothes of the one who eats terumah have midras-impurity for the one who wishes to eat sacrifices.
Section four: One who wishes to deal with the waters of purification cannot touch even the clothes of one who immersed to eat sacrifices.
Section five:  Yose ben Yoezer was mentioned above at the beginning of mishnah two.  He was, according to our mishnah, the most pious of priests and he would immerse before eating unconsecrated food as it is was terumah. Nevertheless, his apron which he used to wipe his hands after eating, possessed midras-impurity for one who wished to eat sacrifices. As strict as he was in matters of purity, they still treated his clothes according to the above rules. 
Section six: Yohanan ben Gudgada was even stricter with regard to purity and ate even unconsecrated food as if he was eating sacrifices.  This is one level stricter than the Pharisees who ate unconsecrated food as if it was terumah.  Nevertheless, since there is one level higher than the purity for sacrifices, his garments were still considered to possess midras-impurity for one who wished to deal with the waters of purification.
These last two sections demonstrate that favor was not shown in matters of purity. 
