Hagigah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
The final mishnah of the chapter, tractate and seder (game, set and match) explains how they purified the Temple’s vessels.

Mishnah Eight
1) How did they undertake the purification of the Temple court?  They immersed the vessels which were in the Temple, and they say to them: “Be cautious lest you touch the table or menorah and defile them.”  
2) All the vessels that were in the Temple had second and third sets, so that if the first was defiled, they might bring a second set in its place. 
3) All the vessels that were in the Temple required immersion, except the altar of gold and the altar of bronze, for they are like the ground, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. 
a) But the sages say: because they were overlaid [with metal]. 

Explanation
Section one:  All the vessels in the Temple were immersed in order to purify them lest they had become impure during the festival. However, the table upon which the showbread was placed could not be immersed because the showbread had to be on it always (Exodus 25:30).  Similarly, the menorah had to always be lit (Leviticus 24:2) and therefore it couldn’t be immersed either.  Since these could not be immersed because they were in constant use, they would tell the priests to be very careful to make sure that the impure vessels which they were immersing would not touch the table or the menorah.
Section two:  All the vessels in the Temple had backups in case the first set became impure.  You could think of these as sort of “understudy vessels”, just waiting for their day in the sun!
Section three: There were two vessels in the Temple that did not require immersion, the two altars. The bronze altar was used for the sacrifices and the gold altar was used for the burning of the incense.  There is a debate between Rabbi Eliezer and the sages why these altars do not require immersion. According to Rabbi Eliezer because they are attached to the ground, they are treated like the ground which cannot become impure. According to the sages their metal covering prevents impurity from getting to the vessel itself. The metal covering itself cannot become impure because it is not a vessel. 

Congratulations!  We have finished Moed Katan and Seder Moed!  
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives. 
For those of you who have been following along with Mishnah Yomit from its beginning, you have now learned half of the entire Mishnah!  We began with Seder Nezikin, continued with Seder Nashim and now we have finished Seder Moed. This is quite an impressive amount of learning.  These are the three orders of Mishnah most learned and for which there exists both Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds.  You should feel really good about this accomplishment and hopefully, you are looking at the proverbial glass as half full.    
However, we still have half the Mishnah to go. Mishnah Yomit never lets up. Tomorrow we begin Seder Zeraim, Tractate Berakhot.    
