Hallah, Chapter One, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah deals with dough made for the consumption of dogs. The mishnah deals with whether this dough is treated like human food, which carries with it a number of implications.

Mishnah Eight
Dough for dogs: 
1) If shepherds eat it: 
a) it is subject to hallah, 
b) and one may use it to make an eruv or a shittuf;   
c) and one should say the blessings over it, and one should make an invitation for birkat hamazon over it;   
d) and it may be made on a festival;
e) and one fulfills his obligation with it on Pesah.
2) But if shepherds do not eat it:   
a) it is not subject to hallah;   
b) and one may not use it to make an eruv, or a shittuf;   
c) and one does not say the blessings over it, and one does not make an invitation for birkat hamazon over it;   
d) and it may not be made on a festival;
e) and one does not fulfill his obligation with it on Pesah.
3) In either case it is susceptible to ritual defilement affecting food.

Explanation
Section one: If this dough was prepared well so that the shepherds could also eat it, then it is treated as human food, even though it was made mostly for animals. This has implications in five areas of halakhah:
a) it is subject to hallah: Only human food is subject to hallah.
b) and one may use it to make an eruv, or a shittuf: An eruv or a shittuf is a common meal which allows one to carry from a house into a courtyard or from a courtyard into the adjoining alleyway on Shabbat. An eruv can also allow one to travel further than the Shabbat limit, which is 2000 cubits from the border of the city (see the introduction to Eruvin for more information). If this dough is eaten by shepherds then it counts as potential human food and can be used to make an eruv or shittuf. 
c) and one should say the blessings over it, and one should make an invitation for birkat hamazon over it: Before eating this dough one would say “hamotzi” and afterwards “birkat hamazon.” In addition, if eating in a group of at least three, the invitation to recite birkat hamazon would be recited.   
d) and it may be made on a festival: only human food can be made on Yom Tov, a festival.
e) and one fulfills his obligation with it on Pesah: if it was not leavened, then one could use it for matzah on Pesah.
Section two: If it was made in a poor fashion, so that the shepherds would not want to eat it, then it doesn’t count as food and none of the above halakhot apply.
Section three: Even if it was made in a poor fashion, shepherds might still come to eat it occasionally. Therefore, in any case, the dough is subject to the rules of food impurity. Only food that is eaten solely by animals, for instance straw, would not be subject to these rules. 
 
