Hallah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Nine

Introduction 
When one harvests olive trees, and some olives are left in the tree, the poor have the right to come and strike the tree to bring down the last remaining olives. Similarly, if there are grapes that are not fully formed at the regular time of harvest, they belong to the poor. 
Regularly harvested grapes and olives are liable to terumah and tithes, but those left for the poor are not. 
Our mishnah discusses what one can do if his regularly harvested grapes or olives become mixed with those belonging to the poor. Can he get away without having to separate terumah and tithes based on the entire larger amount?

Mishnah Nine
Similarly, if olives of [regular] picking became mixed with olives [left over] for striking-off   [by the poor], or grapes of [regular] picking, with grapes [left over] for gleaning [by the poor]:
1) If he has a supply from another place, he can take out [terumah and tithes] in accordance with the precise amount.   
2) But if does not, he takes out one terumah and terumat maaser for all of the grapes. 
3) And as for the rest, [he takes out] tithe and the second tithe in accordance with the precise amount.  

Explanation
Section one: This is the same rule as that found in section one in yesterday’s mishnah.
Section two: If he does not have other produce from which to take out the terumah, then he must separate terumah and the terumah that is taken from tithes (terumat maaser) for the entire amount, even though the produce that was for the poor was exempt. Note that he does not need to take out tithes for the entire amount. The law is stricter when it comes to terumah because a non-priest who eats terumah is liable for death by the hands of heaven. Therefore, he has to be certain that he has separated terumah for the entire amount.
Section three:  The laws regarding tithes are not as strict because a non-priest can eat tithe. Therefore, he can take out tithe and second tithe for the amount of produce that is actually liable to tithes and second tithe. This is the amount of his produce that is in the mixture; it does not include the produce that belongs to the poor. 


