Hallah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
In today’s mishnah Rabban Gamaliel defines the borders of Israel with regard to the issue of hallah. This same division is found in Sheviit 6:1, so I am not going to explain the geographical or historical issues here. Please look there for more information.
According to the Torah, one need not separate hallah outside of the land of Israel (see Numbers 15:19). However, the rabbis decreed that Jews should continue to separate hallah from dough even outside of the land of Israel so that the laws of hallah would not be forgotten while the Jews were in the Diaspora. The problem is that outside of the land of Israel was considered to be impure, so that any hallah separated there would also be impure. So the hallah that they took out had to be burned. In order to remember that hallah was originally given to priests, the rabbis decreed that a Jew should separate a second portion of hallah and give that portion to the priests. It turns out, as we learned yesterday’s mishnah, that outside of the land of Israel a person would have to set aside a double portion of hallah.  
 
Mishnah Eight
Rabban Gamaliel says: there are three territories with regard to [liability to] hallah: 
1) From the land of Israel to Chezib: one hallah-portion.
2) From Chezib to the river and to Amanah: two hallah-portions.
a) One for the fire and one for the priest.  
b) The one for the fire has a minimum measure, and the one for the priest does not have a minimum measure.
3) From the river and from Amanah and inward: two hallah-portions.
a) One for the fire and one for the priest.  
b) The one for the fire has no minimum measure, and the one for the priest has a minimum measure.
4) And [a priest] who has immersed himself during the day [and has not waited till sunset for his purification to be complete] may eat it.   
a) Rabbi Yose says: he does not require immersion.   
i) But it is forbidden to zavim and zavot, to menstruants, and to women after childbirth;
5) It may be eaten with a non-priest at the [same] table;
6) And it may be given to any priest. 

Explanation
Section one: The northern border of the land of Israel is set at Chezib (see Sheviit 6:1). Until that point one separates from dough one portion of hallah. 
Section two: This is an “in-between” geographical region. In Sheviit 6:1 we learned that some of the laws of sheviit apply here and some do not. With regard to hallah, what is important to understand is that the region is considered impure, as are all lands outside of Israel, and therefore any hallah separated there will be impure. So the first thing he does is separate a measure of hallah and then he destroys it by burning it. 
The problem with this is that the rabbis were concerned lest Jews forget the rules of hallah. Seeing the hallah burnt, they may not realize that the reason it was burned and not eaten is that it was impure by virtue of it being outside of Israel. Therefore they decreed that along with the “real” hallah that needs to be burned, people should also separate one portion of hallah and give it to a priest. This hallah is not the true biblically mandated hallah, but rather originates in a decree of the rabbis. Therefore we can be more lenient with it and it need not be of the minimum size (1/48). However, the hallah that is burned is biblically mandated and therefore it must consist of the minimum measure. 
Section three: In this region, the agricultural laws do not apply and therefore both portions of hallah, the one that is burned and the one that is given to the priest, are decrees of the rabbis and not biblically mandated.  
In this case the law concerning which portion requires a minimum measure applies in an opposite fashion. The portion that is burned does not need to be of minimum measure because this portion is separated only because of a rabbinic decree. However, there is a minimum measure to the portion given to the priest, even though it too was a decree of the rabbis. One of the two portions needs to be of minimum measure so that these laws will not be forgotten, so it might as well be the portion that will not go to waste. 
Section four: This portion given to the priest is only of rabbinic origin. Therefore, some of the purity laws that normally apply to biblically-mandated hallah, do not apply to this portion. Normally, an impure priest would go to the mikveh and immerse, and then be able to eat hallah/terumah only at nightfall. In this case it is sufficient for him to go the mikveh and eat the hallah before nightfall, because this is not actually hallah. It seems that the rabbis wanted him to go to the mikveh before eating this hallah so that he would remember that hallah should not be eaten in a state of impurity. However, in order to signify that this hallah was not biblically-mandated, they were somewhat lax in the application of these laws and they allowed him to eat before he was actually pure. 
Rabbi Yose rules that even an impure priest may eat this terumah, without going to the mikveh at all. But, he agrees that it can’t be eaten by anyone whose impurity stems from their own body. This would include zavim and zavot, men or women who have an abnormal genital discharge, menstruants and women after childbirth. Note that the women referred to here must be either wives or daughters of priests—they too can eat hallah.
Section five: Normally, a priest should not eat terumah or hallah at a table with a non-priest, lest the non-priest come to eat food strictly prohibited to him. Since this hallah is only of rabbinic origin, it may be eaten at a table with a non-priest.
Section six: Normally, one should not give hallah to an “am haaretz” priest, lest he defile it. We are again lenient in this case since the hallah is not biblically-mandated. 

