Hallah, Chapter One, Mishnah Nine
 
Introduction
Today’s mishnah lists similarities between the rules concerning terumah with those concerning hallah.

Mishnah Nine
In the case of hallah and terumah:
1) One is liable for death on account of [having eaten] them death [intentionally], or to [repay] an added fifth [if unwittingly];   
2) They are forbidden to non-priests;   
3) They are the property of the priest;   
4) They are nullified [in a mixture of] one-hundred-and-one [parts, the rest being non-sacred dough or produce];   
5) They require washing of one’s hands;   
6) And [waiting until] the setting of the sun [prior to eating them];   
7) They may not be separated from pure [stuff] for impure;   
8) But rather from that which is close,   
9) And from that [in a] finished [state].   
10) If one said: “All my threshing-floor is terumah, or all my dough is hallah,” he has not said anything, unless he has left some over.  

Explanation
Section one: The penalty for a non-priest who intentionally eats terumah or hallah is “death by the hands of heaven.” This is derived from Leviticus 22:9-10. If one unintentionally eats terumah or hallah he must repay the value of that which he ate, plus an added fifth (see Leviticus 22:14).
Section two: Only priests may eat terumah and hallah.
Section three: The priest can sell the terumah or the hallah to someone else (assumedly another priest) and then he can use the proceeds to buy anything he wants. In other words, these are not like sacrifices, which the priest cannot sell and keep the proceeds for himself. 
Section four: If one hundred parts hullin (non-sacred produce) are mixed in with one part terumah or hallah, then one can take out one part, give it to the priest as terumah/hallah and the rest reverts to being hullin. If there is less than a 100-1 ratio of hullin to terumah/hallah, then the whole mixture must be treated like terumah and only priests can eat it. 
Section five: Before one touches terumah or hallah, one must wash one’s hands to ritually cleanse them. This is true even if one was not known to be ritually impure.
Section six: An impure person who has been to the mikveh during the day to cleanse him/herself, must wait until the sun sets in order to eat terumah (Leviticus 22:7). 
Section seven: If one has some pure produce/dough and some impure produce/dough, he cannot separate terumah or hallah from the pure in order to exempt the impure, even though this might seem beneficial to a priest, who would surely prefer the pure terumah/hallah (which he can eat—the impure terumah/hallah cannot be eaten). See Terumot 2:1 for more information
Section eight: When one comes to separate terumah or hallah, he must take the terumah and hallah out of produce or dough that is close by. Thus if I have some dough here in Modiin, I can’t take hallah out of dough that I also have in Jerusalem, but I could take hallah out of dough that I have in my second kitchen. I don’t have a second kitchen, but if I did, I could make bread in both kitchens and take hallah out of one batch of dough and exempt the other batch. Probably not a good enough reason to get a second kitchen.
Section nine: Terumah is separated from produce whose processing has been completed, and hallah is separated from dough, and not from flour.
Section ten: It is impossible to make all of one’s grain at the threshing floor or all of one’s dough into terumah or hallah. Numbers 15:21 says, “From the first of one’s dough you shall give terumah, for all your generations.” The rabbis make a midrash on the word “from the first”—and not all of the first, meaning not all of one’s produce or dough can become terumah/hallah.     
