Hullin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that the skin is not treated as part of the flesh, as far as transmitting nevelah-uncleanness. That is to say, in order for there to be an olive’s worth of flesh to convey nevelah-uncleanness, there must be meat and not skin.
Our mishnah teaches that there are cases where the skin is considered to be impure like the flesh.
 
Mishnah Two 
1) In the following cases the skin is considered flesh:   
a) The skin of a person, 
b) The skin of the domesticated pig.
i) Rabbi Yose says: even the skin of the wild pig. 
c) The skin of the hump of a young camel.
d) The skin of the head of a young calf.
e) The skin around the hooves.
f) The skin of the pudenda. 
g) The skin of a fetus.
h) The skin beneath the fat tail.
i) The skin of the gecko, the monitor, the lizard and the skink. 
i) Rabbi Judah says: the lizard is like the weasel.   
2) If any of these skins was tanned or trampled upon as much as [was usual] for tanning, it becomes clean, excepting the skin of a man. 
a) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: the eight reptiles have [real] skins. 

Explanation
Section one: In all of these cases, the skin is treated just like the flesh. The skin of a dead human being transmits impurity in the same way that the flesh does. 
In the remainder of the examples listed here the skin is treated like flesh because it is eaten like the flesh. These are all cases where the skin is soft and therefore edible. Thus people eat the skin of the domesticated pig, but not the skin of wild pigs. Rabbi Yose says that people eat even the skin of wild pigs. 
In sub-section i, the mishnah lists four of the eight “reptiles” (sheratzim) mentioned in Leviticus 11:29-30. Rabbi Judah holds that the skin of a lizard is not eaten and therefore it is like the skin of the weasel, which does not count as flesh. 
Section two: Generally the types of skins mentioned in section one are eaten and not tanned. That is why they convey impurity as does flesh. However, if they were tanned, or even begun to be tanned, then it is obvious that the owner does not intend to eat them. Therefore, they are pure from nevelah uncleanness. The one exception is human skin, which continues to be impure even if it is tanned (I realize that this is a disturbing image).
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri holds that the 8 reptiles listed in Leviticus 11:29-30 have real skins, ones that don’t convey nevelah-uncleanness. He disagrees with the sages above who distinguished between the different reptiles. 
 
