Hullin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses how long a hide that is being flayed from an animal is considered to be part of the animal. The importance of this issue is for matters of purity: if it is considered to be connected to the animal, then it conveys impurity to the remainder of the flesh and receives impurity as well. When it is disconnected it is considered a separate entity with regard to matters of purity. 

Mishnah Three
1) One who was flaying cattle or wild animals, clean or unclean, small or large: 
2) In order to use the hide for a covering, if he stripped as can be taken hold of [the hide is no longer considered as connected to the flesh.]  
3) In order to make a water-skin, until the breast has been flayed.
4) If he was flaying from the feet upwards, until the whole hide [has been flayed].
5) [All of these measures apply] for both conveying uncleanness and becoming unclean. 
6) As for the skin that is on the neck:
a) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: it is not connected.
b) But the sages say it is connected until the whole hide has been flayed.

Explanation
Section one: The rules in this mishnah apply to all animals, whether domesticated or wild, clean (kosher) or unclean, small or large.
Section two: The amount of hide necessary for it to be considered as disconnected to the flesh is going to depend on what he wants to use the hide for. If he is using it for a covering, either for a chair or table, or other such object, then once he has removed enough to grab hold of, the part that he has removed is considered to be disconnected from the flesh. If the animal is a nevelah, then the hide that has been already flayed does not make the person who touches it unclean. And if the animal was properly slaughtered but the hide became unclean, the remainder of the flesh remains clean. 
Section three: If he was intending to use the hide as a water-skin, then the hide is considered connected until he flays the breast. When skinning an animal for this purpose, he would cut a small hole at the place of the neck and then flay the rest of the skin whole. The skin counts as being connected until he gets down to the breast, because this is the most difficult place to properly flay. Until he reaches this point, the purity status of the skin and flesh is shared.
Section four:  If he was flaying in the opposite direction, from the feet upwards, then the skin is considered connected until it is all removed.
Section five: As I have explained above, these rules apply in both directions: both to convey uncleanness from the animal to the hide, and from the hide to the animal.
Section six: The skin that surrounds the neck is easily separated from the flesh and therefore Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri considers it as disconnected from the flesh. If it becomes unclean, the flesh is not unclean and if the flesh is unclean, it remains clean.
The other sages say that this hide is treated just as is the rest of the hide. One who touches it, it is as if he touched the flesh, even if part of it was removed. It is not separate until it has all been removed. 
