Hullin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with the milk that is found inside the stomach of an animal. This sour milk contains enzymes that were used to curdle milk and make cheese. Similarly, the lining of the stomach was also used in this process.  

Mishnah Five
1) The [milk in the] stomach [of an animal] of a Gentile or [in the stomach of] a nevelah is forbidden. 
2) If a man curdled milk with the skin of the stomach of an animal that was validly slaughtered and it imparted its flavor [to the milk] it is forbidden. 
3) The [milk in the] stomach of a validly slaughtered animal which had suckled from a terefah animal is forbidden.
a) The [milk in the] stomach of a terefah animal which had suckled from a kosher animal is permitted, because the milk is collected inside. 

Explanation
Section one: This milk is prohibited because the animal is prohibited. 
Section two: The skin of the stomach of an animal is considered to be meat. Therefore, if a meaty taste is imparted to the cheese then the cheese is considered to be meat mixed with milk and it is forbidden. If there is no taste of the meat, then the cheese is permitted.
Section three: The milk in the stomach of an animal is considered to have come from the mother from whom the animal suckled. Thus if milk is found in the stomach of an animal that was validly slaughtered, but it is known that the milk came from a terefah (an animal that cannot be eaten because it will die from a defect/wound) then the milk is prohibited. In contrast, if the slaughtered animal was a terefah, but the animal from which it suckled was valid, then the milk is permitted. 
We should note that this mishnah has many ramifications for later halakhah, specifically with regard to the issue of making cheese. There are various opinions among medieval commentators with regard to whether the milk found in the stomach of an animal, which is called rennet, can be used to make cheese if it comes from a non-kosher animal. However, this is not the place to expand upon such an issue. For more information, you might want to look on the Rabbinical Assembly’s website for a teshuvah concerning the use of rennet in making cheese. 
