Introduction to Tractate Gittin

The laws of divorce are taught in only four verses in Deuteronomy 24:1-4, verses which directly deal with the prohibition of remarriage.  Interestingly, the Torah addresses the issue of divorce almost as an aside, something which everyone would know without a description.  
The first two verses read, “When a man takes a wife and has relations with her, and if she does not find favor in his eyes because he finds something obnoxious about her, and he writes her a bill of divorcement, hands it to her, and sends her away from his house; and she leaves his household and becomes the wife of another man…”  From here the rabbis learn that divorce must be performed with a document, called a “get” which is Aramaic for document (and not connected to the English word, as in “get out of my house!).  Divorce without a properly written document is invalid.  Most of the laws of this tractate deal with how this document must be written and given.  The rules can be quite strict, and to this day, gittin (the plural of get) are written by professional scribes.  
In Jewish law, the man must give the divorce document to his wife; she may not write a “get” and give it to him.  However, under certain circumstances, many of which were discussed in Ketuboth, the court may force the husband to give his wife a get.  
The grounds for divorce, while a very important issue in divorce law, are not discussed until the last mishnah of the tractate.  
We should note that the issue of divorce was an issue of controversy among different groups of Jews in this period.  As is well-known, Jesus, according to one of the gospels, took a strong stance against divorce.  Less well-known is the fact that the Dead Sea sect also, in all likelihood, opposed divorce.  The rabbis were in general quite lenient on divorce.  How easy divorce should be, is something about which we can argue.  Some may say too-easy divorce will lead to instability in marriage, while others may claim that easily attainable divorce is desirable, since a bad marriage is worse than a broken marriage.  I should point out something that is not usually mentioned in these arguments.  In the time of the Mishnah (and indeed until recently) marriages were typically arranged by the parents of the couple, while divorce was a decision taken by those married (or at least by the man).  Those who allow for divorce provide more autonomy for the feelings of the couple than do those who forbid or put severe restrictions on divorce.  Allowing divorce is in a sense saying that staying married is a decision based on the feelings of the couple themselves, be they feelings of love or security.  Forbidding divorce causes the parents’ decision to become permanent, allowing no or little expression for the couple themselves. 
Finally, we should note two an important change in divorce law that was legislated around the year 1000 C.E.  Rabbenu Gershom, a leading German rabbi, made a decree that men could not divorce their wives against their consent.  This was an important balance to his other famous decree that prohibited bigamy.  However, during the mishnaic and talmudic periods bigamy was permitted and men could divorce their wives against their will.  
     
