
Introduction to Sheviit

There are three passages in the Torah which deal with the topic of sheviit, the sabbatical year.  Throughout our learning of Sheviit we will make frequent reference to these passages, so for ease of reference, I have quoted them all here in full, from the JPS translation.

Exodus 23:10-11
10 Six years you shall sow your land and gather in its yield; 11 but in the seventh you shall let it rest and lie fallow. Let the needy among your people eat of it, and what they leave let the wild beasts eat. You shall do the same with your vineyards and your olive groves.

Leviticus 25:1-7
The LORD spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai: 2 Speak to the Israelite people and say to them: When you enter the land that I assign to you, the land shall observe a sabbath of the LORD. 3 Six years you may sow your field and six years you may prune your vineyard and gather in the yield. 4 But in the seventh year the land shall have a sabbath of complete rest, a sabbath of the LORD: you shall not sow your field or prune your vineyard. 5 You shall not reap the aftergrowth of your harvest or gather the grapes of your untrimmed vines; it shall be a year of complete rest for the land. 6 But you may eat whatever the land during its sabbath will produce -- you, your male and female slaves, the hired and bound laborers who live with you, 7 and your cattle and the beasts in your land may eat all its yield.

Deuteronomy 15:1-3
Every seventh year you shall practice remission of debts. 2 This shall be the nature of the remission: every creditor shall remit the due that he claims from his fellow; he shall not dun his fellow or kinsman, for the remission proclaimed is of the LORD. 3 You may dun the foreigner; but you must remit whatever is due you from your kinsmen.


There are several major issues that we will deal with when learning this tractate, and I will just introduce them now.  First of all, it is clear that it is forbidden to work the land during the sabbatical year.  The question is what counts as work? This is a similar question to that which we asked about Shabbat (the seventh day of the week). There too we know that work is prohibited but the question is what work is prohibited.

The second question is when does this work become prohibited?  According to the Torah, work is prohibited only during the seventh year itself. However, the rabbis added that in some cases work is prohibited before the seventh year even begins.  

Along with the prohibition of working the land on the sabbatical year, there is the additional issue of the status of the produce that grows on its own.  It is permitted to eat this produce but it is considered to be ownerless, meaning anyone can enter any field and eat what she wants.  However, while the produce may be eaten, it may not be sold.  There is also a limit as to how long one may store the produce, the general rule being that the produce may be stored as long as it is still found in the field. Once it is no longer in the field, it must be cleared out of the storehouses.  

The sabbatical year does not only affect the land and its produce.  It also remits loans, as we see in Deuteronomy.  The final chapter of Sheviit will discuss these laws, as well as Hillel’s famous enactment of the prozbul, a technique which avoided the problematic remission of loans.  

I hope you enjoy learning Sheviit. As an added bonus, you should know that this year in Israel is a sabbatical year (no, that does not mean that I get a sabbatical from my work!).  This is probably one of the most difficult halakhic challenges that Zionist rabbis have had to face, helping to run a modern state with a fully modern economy while not completely abrogating rules that were written thousands of years ago.  We will not deal with this issue extensively while learning the tractate, but it should at the least be in the back of our minds.  
