Introduction to Moed

The third “seder”—order—of Mishnah which we will learn is Seder Moed, the Order of Appointed Times.  Nearly all of Seder Moed deals with laws governing the holidays, with one exception—Tractate Shekalim, which deals with donations to the Temple.  
The order of the tractates within Moed is the typical order of tractates within the Mishnah—from longest (Shabbat, 24 chapters) to shortest (Hagigah, 3 chapters).  The only holiday not discussed is Hannukkah, probably because there is not enough halakhic material to justify a separate tractate.   
We should make a few brief notes concerning Moed.  More focused introductions will precede each tractate.  
First of all, Jewish holidays, especially Shabbat, are still observed today.  However, practical halakhah has developed and changed much over the past 2000 years.  The Talmud interprets the Mishnah, brings opposing opinions, and vastly expands upon the content of the Mishnah.  Commentators and halakhic authorities continue this process.  The material reality, the way we live, the way we eat, the way we earn a living, have vastly changed and halakhah has had to deal with situations unfamiliar to mishnaic and talmudic rabbis.  Therefore, the Mishnah simply cannot be used as a compendium for modern observance of halakhah.  It gives us the beginning of the process, but not its current manifestation.  
Secondly, large portions of Moed, specifically Yoma (Yom Kippur), Shekalim, Pesahim, Hagigah and to a certain extent, Rosh Hashanah and Sukkah deal with Temple law.  This material may be difficult but it should be interesting nonetheless.  Most of these halakhot had no practical ramifications after the destruction of the Temple, but they continued to be learned.  However, for unknown reasons, there is no Babylonian Talmud for tractate Shekalim. The rest of the Seder is commented upon by both the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds.  
Finally, many of the halakhot in this tractate tend towards the dryer side of halakhah.  For instance, Shabbat and Eruvin are concerned mostly with Shabbat prohibitions; Shabbat joy and rest is barely mentioned.  Pesahim is concerned mostly with the prohibition of leavened bread and with the Pesach sacrifice—the idea of freedom is only mentioned at the end.  This is not, in my opinion, a reflection of the essential nature of Jewish holidays, but the nature of law in general and the Mishnah in particular.  Law tends to deal with complicated situations, whereas simple essentials, agreed to by all, are often left unstated.  The Mishnah in particular focuses on “borderline” cases, the complications and the precise definitions of various entities—it need not state that Shabbat is supposed to be a day of rest or that on Pesach we celebrate the Exodus from Egypt.  Hence, while learning the particulars we should keep in mind the essential generalities as well.  
I wish you luck in learning Seder Moed
