Kelim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with tools that have two ends with which two different types of work can be performed. 

Mishnah Two
1) A koligrophon whose spoon has been removed is still susceptible to impurity on account of its teeth.
a) If its teeth have been removed it is still susceptible on account of its spoon. 
2) A makhol whose spoon is missing is still susceptible to impurity on account of its point; 
a) If its point was missing it is still susceptible on account of its spoon. 
3) A stylus whose writing point is missing is still susceptible to impurity on account of its eraser;  
a) If its eraser is missing it is susceptible on account of its writing point. 
4) A zomalister whose spoon is lost is still susceptible to impurity on account of its fork;
a) If its fork is missing, it is still susceptible on account of its spoon. 
5) So too with regard to the prong of a mattock.   
6) The minimum size for all these instruments: so that they can perform their usual work.

Explanation
Section one: The koligrophon has a shovel on one end which was used to remove bread baking on the sides of an oven. On its other end are teeth, used to rake the coals in the oven. As long as one side is still functional, the entire instrument is susceptible to impurity. 
Section two: A makhol has a spoon on one end for cleaning out one's ears, and a sharp other end to apply make-up to one's eyes. Again, as long as one side is still functional, the entire instrument is susceptible to impurity.
Section three: The stylus has one end used for writing and one end used for erasing.
Section four: A zomalister seems to be the ancient version of the spork, except it had it spoon (actually a ladle for pouring soup) on one end and its fork (for taking meat out of a dish). 
Section five: A mattock is a tool shaped like an axe and used to break up the ground before planting. Sometimes they would affix teeth to its other end to aid in breaking up ground. It is susceptible to impurity as long as one side remains.
Section six: As is normally the case, as long as the tool is still usable for its original purpose, it is still susceptible to impurity.    
