Kelim, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) If a stick was used as a handle for a hatchet, it is regarded as connected for uncleanness at the time of use. 
2) A yarn winder is regarded as connected for uncleanness at the time of its use. 
3) If it was fixed to a pole it is susceptible to uncleanness, but it is not considered connected to it. 
4) If the pole itself was converted into a yarn winder, only that part which is needed for use is susceptible to uncleanness. 
5) A seat that was fixed to the pole is susceptible to uncleanness, but the latter is not regarded as connected to it. 
6) If the pole itself was turned into a seat, only the place of the seat is susceptible to uncleanness. 
7) A seat that was fixed to the beam of an olive-press is susceptible to uncleanness, but it is not connected to it. 
8) If the end of a beam was turned into a seat it remains clean, because people would tell him, "Get up and let us do our work."

Explanation
Section one: When the hatchet is in use, its handle is considered connected to it with regard to impurity. This means that if either piece, the handle or the hatchet, is defiled, both are defiled. 
Section two: A "yarn winder" is a small stick with a nail attached to it which was used for weaving. While it is in use, the nail is considered connected to the stick for issues of impurity.
Section three: If he fixed the yarn winder to a pole, the yarn winder remains susceptible to impurity, but it is not considered connected to the pole, which remains clean. 
Section four: In this case he makes the end of the pole into a yarn winder. The part that is used as a yarn winder is susceptible, but the remainder of the pole stays clean, because it is a simple wood vessel.
Section five: If one fixed a seat to the end of a pole, the seat (like the yarn winder) is susceptible to impurity, but it is treated separately from the pole.
Section six: This is the same as section four, just with regard to the seat.
Section seven: The same rule as found in section three and section six. 
Section eight: If the end of an olive press beam is turned into a seat, even the seat part remains pure. People won't let another person sit there because that would prevent them from doing their work. Therefore, it's a dysfunctional seat and not susceptible to impurity.   

     
