Kilayim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah teaches various cases in which the kilayim prohibition applies despite the fact that the wool and linen may not seem to actually be woven together. According to some commentators, some of these prohibitions are only “derabanan,” of rabbinic status and not of toraitic status.

Mishnah Nine
1) Felted materials [can be] prohibited because of kilayim, since they are combed. 
2) It is prohibited to attach a string of wool (pif) to linen material, since this resembles weaving.   
3) Rabbi Yose says: it is forbidden to use cords of purple [wool to tie round a loose linen garment], since before he ties it, he stitches it on. 
4) One may not tie a strip of woolen material with one of linen material for the purpose of girdling one’s loins, even if there is a leather strap between the two. 

Explanation
Section one:  Felt is made from wool that is beat and not spun.  It is prohibited to attach it to linen even without weaving them together because the wool and linen are combed together.  According to one opinion in the Talmud, this prohibition is only derabanan—from the Torah the garment is prohibited only if it is combed, spun and ten woven.  However, the rabbis added that even if only one of these processes has taken place, the garment is prohibited because of kilayim.
Section two: A pif (or piv) is a string that falls from a garment when it is being woven and that the weavers stick into the sides of the garment when giving it to the purchaser.  If the woven material is of linen, one cannot put a pif of wool on it and vice versa. This looks too much as if they had been woven together.
Section three:  Since this wool belt is stitched to the linen garment and not just tied around the garment, it does violate the laws of kilayim.
Section four:  Tying a belt made of woolen material together with one of linen material is prohibited even if a leather strap is sewn between the wool and the linen in order to separate them. The reason that this is still prohibited is that when he will eventually tie the ends of the belt together when he ties it around his waste.  
