Kilayim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with mules and whether they can be yoked together.  It then goes on to categorize a few other animals as a “hayyah,” wild animals.  We shall see below why such categorization has halakhic ramifications.

Mishnah Five
1) Mules of uncertain parentage are forbidden [one with another,] 
2) And a ramakh is permitted.   
3) Wild man-like creatures are [in the category of] hayyah.   
4) Rabbi Yose says: they cause impurity in a tent like a human being.   
5) The hedgehog and the bush-mole are [in the category of] hayyah.   
6) The bush-mole: Rabbi Yose says in the name of Bet Shammai: an olive's size [of its carcass] renders a person carrying it unclean, and a lentil’s size [of its carcass] renders a person touching it unclean. 

Explanation
Section one:  If it is unclear whether a given mule was born of a female horse or a female donkey then it can’t be yoked together with a different mule, lest the two be of different species.  Since the prohibition of kilayim is “deoraita,” or toraitic origin, in cases of doubt we rule strictly.  
Section two: A rammakh is a mule whose mother is known to be a horse. Hence it is permitted to yoke this type of mule with another ramakh.
Albeck provides an alternative explanation to the “ramakh” halakhah. The ramakh does not actually aid in pulling the plow, and therefore there is no prohibition of yoking it with another animal.   
Section two: Wild man-like creatures are probably a type of monkey.  The mishnah categorizes this animal as a “hayyah” a wild beast.  Hence the laws of kilayim are applicable to it. Were we to have categorized it as a “man” the laws of kilayim would not have applied.
Section three:  Rabbi Yose says that despite the fact that this animal is a “hayyah” and not considered like a human, when it comes to transmitting impurity in a tent, the animal is treated like a person.  This means that if something overhangs this dead animal and another person, impurity goes from the carcass and impurifies the human being.
Section four:  The hedgehog and the bush-mole are categorized as “hayyah.” Again, this means that the laws of kilayim do apply to them.  Without this mishnah we might have thought that they belong to the category of “sheretz,” creepy crawly thing, to which the laws of kilayim do not apply. 
Section five: Rabbi Yose says that according to Bet Shammai, the bush-mole is a doubtful hayyah/doubtful sheretz, meaning that it might be either and we just don’t know how to categorize it.  Since its categorization is doubtful, the stricter impurity laws of both categories apply.  What this means is that an olive’s worth of its flesh transmits impurity in a tent, as does the flesh of the carcass of a hayyah (or behemah).  However, a lentil’s worth of its flesh transmits impurity to one who touches it, as does the flesh of the carcass of a sheretz.   
