Kilayim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah goes over the various basic laws and prohibitions with all four different types of kilayim.  

Mishnah One
1) Kilayim of the vineyard: it is forbidden both to sow and to allow to grow, and it is forbidden to derive benefit from them.  
2) Kilayim of seeds: it is forbidden both to sow and to allow to grow, but it is permitted to eat them, and all the more so to derive benefit from them. 
3) Kilayim of clothing: is permitted in all respects, except that it is forbidden to wear them.
4) Kilayim of beasts: it is permitted to raise and to keep, and it is only prohibited to cross-breed them. 
5) Kilayim of beasts: these one are prohibited with these. 

Explanation
Section one:  Kilayim of the vineyard are grain or vegetables that grow in a vineyard.  This is the strictest form of kilayim.  It is forbidden to sow the grain or vegetables in the vineyard and it is even forbidden to allow grain or vegetables to grow in the vineyard.  Finally, if this does occur, it is prohibited to derive any benefit from the produce or the grapes.  This would mean that one couldn’t even use such products to feed animals, nor could one sell them to non-Jews.
Section two:  Kilayim of seeds are when produce of two different kinds of seed are grown in the same field.  It is prohibited to sow or allow these seeds to grow, just as it is with kilayim of the vineyard.  However, if they do grow it is permitted to eat them, and if it is permitted to eat them, it is all the more so permitted to derive other types of benefit from them.
Section three:  Kilayim of clothing is a mixture of wool and linen, called shatnez (Leviticus 19:19 and Deuteronomy 22:11). It is permitted to derive benefit from such mixtures.  It is also permitted to weave and sell or own these types of clothing.  The only prohibition is to wear them.
Section four: Kilayim of beasts refers to either cross-breeding or cross-yoking.  This section notes that it is permitted to raise animals born of cross-bred parents. For instance one can raise and keep a mule.  It is only forbidden to cross-breed animals in order to make the mule in the firstplace.
Section five: This introduces the topic which the rest of the chapter will discuss—cross-yoking animals, that is yoking together different types of animals.      
