Kilayim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) Silk and floss-silk do not come under the prohibition of kilayim, but are prohibited on account of appearance.  
2) Mattresses and pillows do not come under the prohibition of kilayim, as long as his flesh does not come into [immediate] contact with them. 
3) There is no [permissibility for the] temporary [wearing] of kilayim. 
4) Neither may one wear kilayim even on top of ten [garments], even for the purpose of evading taxes.

Explanation
Section one:  Silk is not prohibited under the category of kilayim, meaning that one who wears a garment in which silk and wool or silk and linen are mixed together has not transgressed the biblical prohibition.  Nevertheless, because such mixtures look like kilayim, they are prohibited “derabanan”, a prohibition of rabbinic origin.
Section two:  The Torah only prohibits wearing kilayim and not using kilayim for other purposes. Hence, mattresses and pillows which one lies on and doesn’t wear can have in them mixtures of wool and linen. However, if the mattress or pillow comes in direct contact with his skin, then it is prohibited because this is too close to “wearing.”  
Section three:  It is prohibited to even temporarily put on kilayim as clothing.  We might have thought, perhaps, that unless someone really goes out with such clothing on, that it would be permitted, or at least not forbidden, and therefore the mishnah teaches that one who puts on a kilayim garment has immediately transgressed the prohibition. 
Section four: If the garment is being used as clothing, it is prohibited even if it doesn’t come into contact with his skin, for instance, it is an outer piece of clothing and he has other clothing underneath it.  This prohibition holds true even if his sole intent in wearing the clothing was to hide it from tax collectors who are coming to assess his property.  In such a case he isn’t wearing the garment in order to derive benefit from it as clothing.  He is only wearing it in order to smuggle it away from the tax collectors.  Nevertheless, because he is wearing it, it is forbidden.      
