Kinim, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah is an explanation of the last line of yesterday's mishnah, which referred to different "names."

Mishnah Four
1) What is meant by one "name"? For a birth and a birth, or for zivah and zivah, that is one name.  
a) And "two names"? For a birth, [and the other] for a zivah. 
2) What is meant by "two women"? [When] one [woman] brings [her offering] for a birth and the other for a birth, or [when one brings] for a zivah and the other for a zivah—this is "of one name". 
a) And a case "of two names"? When one brings for a birth and the other for a zivah. 
3) Rabbi Yose says: when two women purchased their kinnim in partnership, or gave the price of their kinnim to the priest [for him to purchase them], then the priest can offer whichever one he wants as a hatat or as an olah, whether they are of one name or of two names.  

Explanation
Section one: There are two main reasons why a woman would bring a ken—either for a childbirth or after having an abnormal genital discharge, called "zivah." If she brings two kinnim, one for this birth and one for this birth, or one for this zivah and one for this zivah, then the priest can only offer one bird as an olah and one as a hatat, as we explained yesterday. 
The same is true even if the two kinnim she set aside were for different "names"—one for a birth and one for zivah. 
Section two: If multiple women set aside kinnim for either one "name" of for many "names," they can only sacrifice as many hataot and olot as the fewest number of kinim brought by one of the women, as we explained in yesterday's mishnah.
Section three: The above section, as well as mishnayot 2-3 dealt with cases where women gave their kinnim to the priest and the birds got mixed up. Rabbi Yose notes that they can avoid this problem by either buying their birds together or by giving the money to buy the birds to the priest. In both of these cases, the priest buys or receives all of the necessary birds. He can then determine which will be a hatat and an olah for this woman and which will be a hatat and an olah for the other woman. He can even do this if they are brought for different reasons. If done this way, even if the birds get mixed up, there will not be a problem. 
