Maasrot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that bring one’s produce into another person’s home doesn’t make the produce liable for tithes.  Only bringing it into one’s own home makes it liable for tithes. 
In today’s mishnah we learn about people traveling on the road and staying at other people’s homes and when their food becomes liable for tithes.

Mishnah Three 
1) One who brings produce from the Galilee to Judea, or if he goes up to Jerusalem, he may eat of them until he arrives at the place to which he intends to go, and the same is true when he returns.   
2) Rabbi Meir says: [he may eat] until he reaches the place where he intends to rest [on Shabbat].   
3) But peddlers who travel from town to town may eat until they reach the place where they intend to stay over night.   
4) Rabbi Judah says: the first house [he reaches] is his house.

Explanation
Section one: When one is traveling on the road for business, or making a pilgrimage to Jerusalem and he enters an inn to spend the night while on the way, he can continue to eat the harvested produce without tithing it until he gets to the place, meaning the home that he intended to go to. This is true even if that house is not actually his home. However, bringing the produce into someone else’s home while still on the way does not make it liable for tithes. 
Section two: Rabbi Meir says that once he gets to the place where he wants to spend Shabbat he can no longer eat his produce without tithing it, even if he gets to that place at some earlier time during the week. The beginning of Shabbat always means that produce must be tithed before it is eaten, but Rabbi Meir adds that just merely being at the place where one will spend Shabbat already makes the produce liable for tithes even if it is not yet Shabbat.
Section three: Peddlers are constantly on the move, going from one place to another, and they don’t really have one place to which they are going. Therefore, the arrival at any place where they intend to spend the night makes their produce liable for tithes. 
Section four: Rabbi Judah is even stricter and rules that even if he doesn’t intend to spend the night in a certain place, just entering any house makes his produce liable for tithes. A peddler’s home is whatever place he ends up in, and not just one that he plans on going to beforehand.     
