Maaser Sheni, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah contains cases that are opposite of those found in yesterday’s mishnah. In these cases the non-food item bought does not become hullin.

Mishnah Four 
1) One who bought a wild animal for a shelamim offering or a domesticated beast for non-sacrificial eating, the hide does not become hullin.   
2) Open or sealed jars of wine [which were bought] in a place where they are usually sold open, the jars do not become hullin.   
3) Baskets of olives or baskets of grapes [bought] together with the vessel, the value of the vessel does not become hullin.  

Explanation
Section one: Wild animals cannot be used as shelamim offerings, or any other offerings for that matter. While domesticated animals can be bought for non-sacrificial purposes, the rabbis dictated that with maaser sheni money one should buy only shelamim sacrifices and not just normal non-sacred beasts. Since in both of these cases the person did not act properly, the hide does not become hullin. This means that he will have to buy food the equivalent value of the hide and treat that food with the sanctity of maaser sheni.
Section two: In this case, the sale of wine occurred in a place where wine was normally sold open, meaning that the jars were usually not part of the sale. Even if he does buy the jar along with the wine, the jar is not considered secondary to the wine (it doesn’t automatically come with the wine) and therefore the jar does not become hullin. He will have to buy food the value of the jar and treat that food with the sanctity of maaser sheni.
Section three: Normally, olives and grapes are not sold with the baskets they come in. Therefore, the basket is not considered ancillary to the olives or grapes and the basket does not become hullin. While wine is sometimes sold in sealed jars, meaning the jars are sold along with the wine, this is not true of produce such as olives and grapes. Therefore, if one does buy the jar with them, the jar is not part of the sale, and this is considered buying a non-food item with maaser sheni money.  
 
