Makkot, Chapter One, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Both mishnah seven and mishnah eight which we will learn tomorrow contain midrashim, exegeses, of the verse in Deuteronomy 17:6 which states that a person may be executed by the testimony of “two or three witnesses”.  This statement is not a precise legal statement.  If two witnesses are sufficient than the Torah should have stated two.  If three witnesses are necessary the Torah should not have stated two.  Since all of the Sages held that two witnesses were sufficient, they must answer why the Torah also stated three. 

Mishnah Seven
“A person shall be put to death only on the testimony of two witnesses or three witnesses” (Deuteronomy 17:6).    
1) If the testimony is sufficiently established by two witnesses, why does Scripture [further] specify three? 
a) This is to compare two to three: just as three are competent to incriminate two as perjurers, so are two competent to incriminate three as perjurers. 
b) How do we know [that two or three can even incriminate] a hundred?  The Torah states “witnesses”.   
2) Rabbi Shimon says: “Just as two witnesses are not put to death until both have been incriminated as perjurers, so three are not put to death until all three have been incriminated as perjurers. 
a) How do we know [that two or three can even incriminate] a hundred?  The Torah states “witnesses”.
3) Rabbi Akiba says:  “The third witness was only mentioned in order to be stringent upon him and make his judgement the same as the other two.   
a) And if Scripture thus penalizes one who consorts with those who commit a transgression, as [if he is actually] one of those who commits the transgression, how much more so shall he who consorts with those who perform commandments receive a reward as [if he is actually] one of those who performs the commandments!”

Explanation
This mishnah contains three opinions with regards to a perceived problem in the Biblical verse mentioned in the beginning of the mishnah.
Section one:  The first solution is that the Torah teaches that a set of three witnesses can be made into perjurers even by a set of two witnesses.  If the Torah had only taught “two witnesses” we might have thought that two was sufficient to incriminate two other witnesses but not three, since they are more numerous.  Therefore, the Torah teaches that no matter how large the group of witnesses, even one hundred, they do not have more power than a contradictory set of two.  If, therefore, three witnesses were to testify to a capital crime and the person was found guilty and condemned to die and then two witnesses claimed that the three prior witnesses were not present at the time of the alleged crime and rather were with them, the first three are executed as perjurers.
Section two:  Rabbi Shimon’s opinion is that just as when a pair of witnesses testify neither can be executed until both are proven to be perjurers, so too when three witnesses testify, none may be executed until all are proven to be perjurers.  Without the word “three” in the Torah we might have thought that if three or more testify and two are found to be perjurers they may be executed, even if the third was not a perjurer.  After all, the two would have been sufficient to have the accused executed.  Therefore the Torah teaches “three” and “witnesses” to teach that none are executed as perjurers until all are proven to be so.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Akiva, if three witnesses testify and two are incriminated as perjurers, the third witness is executed even if he was not a perjurer.  He is punished not for his false testimony but for joining in with other perjurers/evildoers.  Although this is a harsh sentence, Rabbi Akiva finds in it a ray of hope.  If those who merely join with evildoers are punished so harshly all the more so will those who join with those who perform commandments be greatly rewarded.


Questions for Further Thought:
 What would be the practical result of the various interpretations on the procedures of the court?  What type of psychological effect would they have on the witnesses? 
