Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Fourteen

Introduction
The first half of mishnah fourteen lists the Biblical verses that are called out while the lashes are being administered.  The second half of the mishnah discusses the offender either dying or befouling himself while being lashed.

Mishnah Fourteen
1) And the one who recites, says: “If you fail to observe faithfully all the terms of this Teaching…the Lord will inflict upon you extraordinary plagues (lashes)” (Deut. 25:58-59) 
a) And then (if time remains) he returns to the beginning of the section.  
2) [“Therefore observe faithfully all the terms of this covenant” (Deut. 28:9) and he completes by saying, “And He is merciful, forgiving iniquity” (Psalms 78:38).]
3) If the offender dies under his hand, he is exempt [from penalty].   
a) If he gave him one more lash and the offender died, he goes into banishment. 
4) If the offender befouled himself either with feces or urine, he is exempt.   
a) Rabbi Judah says: “Feces in the case of a man and [even] urine in the case of a woman.

Explanation—Mishnah Fourteen
Section one:  While the lashes are being administered Biblical verses are read out loud.  These verses function as a warning to the person being lashed and to those witnessing.  The verse in Deuteronomy warns that if Israel fails to observe the Torah (“Teaching”) God will punish Israel with plagues.  In Hebrew the word plagues (makkoth) is the same word as lashes.  This verse can be read to say that one who does not observe the Torah will be punished with lashes.
If the reader has finished reciting the verses and there remains more lashes to be administered, the reader begins again to recite the verse from the beginning.
Section two:  This line is missing in many versions of the mishnah, hence it is in brackets.  Those manuscripts which do contain this line do not contain the previous line, section 2a.
According to this version, a different verse is also recited and when close to finishing the lashes, the reader calls out a verse which mentions God’s mercy.  
Section three:  If the offender dies while being lashed the one administering the lashes is not responsible, not even as an accidental killer.  This law was already learned in chapter two, mishnah two.  Our mishnah adds that if the one lashing mistakenly added one lash more than was prescribed, and then the offender died, he is considered a manslayer and hence must go into banishment.  The assumption is that the one lashing did not kill the offender on purpose and therefore he is not judged as an intentional killer but as an accidental one.
Section four:  If the offender befouls himself, either by defecating or urinating, while being lashed, the lashing ends.  This is a remarkable law, teaching that even at the time when the court is by definition punishing and humiliating the criminal, we are still to be concerned for his honor.  By befouling himself in public the criminal is overwhelmingly shamed, and therefore the court cannot continue to punish him.  Rabbi Judah states that there is a difference between men and women.  Since women are more easily shamed, if they either defecate or urinate while being flogged they are immediately exempt from further lashes.  Men, on the other hand, are exempt only if they defecate, which is for obvious reasons considered to be a greater embarrassment.

Questions for Further Thought:
 What is the context of the verse in Deuteronomy, quoted in section one?  How might this context effect how the verse is understood when recited during the lashing?
 Why do some versions have the reader call out the verse from Psalms?  What message does this verse convey?

