Makkot, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
The second chapter of Makkoth discusses the laws regarding accidental killing.  These laws are discussed extensively in Numbers 35:9-28, 32 and Deuteronomy 19:1-13.  According to these passages, if a person killed another person by accident the victim’s relative could exact blood vengeance upon the accidental killer.  If the accidental killer wanted to avoid being killed by the blood avenger he would run to one of the cities of refuge that were to be established when the Land of Israel was conquered.  The accidental killer would have to stay in this city until the death of the High Priest at which point he could return to his former city and the blood avenger would be forbidden from killing him.
The mishnah which we will learn today defines what killing is considered accidental such that it allows a killer to escape to a city of refuge.

Mishnah One
1) The following go into banishment: one who kills in error.  
a) If [for instance] while he was pushing a roller [on the roof] and it fell down and killed somebody;
b) If while he was lowering a cask it fell down and killed somebody; 
c) If while coming down a ladder he fell on somebody and killed him, he goes into banishment. 
i) But, if while he was pulling up the roller it fell back and killed somebody; 
ii) If while he was raising a cask and the rope snapped and the cask fell and killed somebody; 
iii) If while going up a ladder he fell down and killed somebody, he does not go into banishment. 
(1) This is the general principle: [whenever the death was caused] in the course of a downward movement, he goes into banishment, but [if it was caused] not in the course of a downward movement, he does not go into banishment. 
2) If the iron slipped from its heft and killed [somebody]: 
i) Rabbi says, “He does not go into banishment.” 
ii) And the Sages say:  “He goes into banishment.”
a) If it flew from the log being split:
i) Rabbi says, “He goes into banishment.” 
ii) And the Sages say:  “He does not go into banishment.”

Explanation
Section one:  This entire section illustrates the principle that an accidental death which will force the killer to go into exile is a case where a person is lowering a heavy object or he himself is going down a ladder and the object or the person slips and accidentally kills someone.  If however, he was bringing something up or going up a ladder and the object or he fell downward he is not obligated to go into exile.  The difference between the two is that in the first case the likelihood of injuring someone below is relatively high and he therefore should have been more cautious.  In the second case, when he is bringing something up, the likelihood that it will fall below and cause injury is unlikely.  Therefore he does not need to go into exile.  
This section illustrates an important difference in the Rabbinic understanding of exile from the Biblical understanding of exile.  In the Bible the accidental killer’s fleeing to the refuge city is to his own advantage. If he does not the blood avenger will kill him.  Exile is not a punishment for a crime or for negligence but legal protection offered to an accidental killer.  In the Rabbinic legal system exile is a punishment for negligence.  This is probably partly due to the fact that blood vengeance was not accepted in their society.  The Rabbis understand exile as a punishment for negligence.  Therefore if the killing was totally unanticipated, he need not go to the city of exile.  
Section two:  Deuteronomy 19:5 brings up an example of accidental killing whereby a man goes into the forest with an ax and the “ax flies off the handle and strikes another so that he dies”.  This phrase “ax flies off the handle” is read in two different ways. The Sages read the verse as we have translated it, that the instrument which kills is the metal part of the ax which flies off its handle.  According to Rabbi (Judah the Prince) in this situation the person is not liable for exile.  He reads the verse as if it states that the ax causes a chip to fly off from the tree and the chip kills someone else.  [Rabbi would translate the word handle as “tree”, and they are both indeed the same word.]  According to the Sages, in this situation he is not liable for exile.   

