Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The first fourteen sections of our mishnah mostly lists different types of forbidden foods and a few other Temple related prohibitions for which one is to be flogged.  Section fifteen discusses the amount of untithed produce that if one eats he is liable for a transgression.

Mishnah Two  
1) An unclean person who ate holy meat (Leviticus 7:20, 12:4);
2) One who entered the sanctuary while unclean (Leviticus 12:4, Numbers 5:3, 19:13); 
3) One who ate forbidden fat or blood (Leviticus 3:16, 7:23-27); 
4) Or leftover sacrificial meats (Leviticus 19:6-8); 
5) Or sacrifices that had been offered up with improper intention (Leviticus 7:18);
6) Or [an offering] that has became unclean (Leviticus 7:19);
7) One who slaughters, or offers up a sacrifice, outside the Temple precincts (Leviticus 17:4);   
8) One who ate leavened [bread] during Passover (Exodus 12:15, 19);   
9) One who partakes of food [or drink] or does work on the Day of Atonement (Leviticus 23:27-31);   
10) One who puts together the ingredients for the [anointing] oil, or the ingredients for the incense, or anoints with the oil for anointing (Exodus 30:22-28):
11) One who eats an animal that died a natural death (Deuteronomy 14:21); 
12) Or was improperly slaughtered (Exodus 22:30); 
13) Or any of the [creatures deemed] ‘abominable’ and ‘teeming’ (Leviticus 11:11, 40).   
14) One who eats non-tithed produce, or first-tithe from which heave offering has not been removed, or unredeemed second-tithe, or unredeemed sanctified property.
15) How much untithed produce is one to eat to become liable?   
a) Rabbi Shimon says:  “Any amount.”
b) The Sages say:  “An olive's size.”   
i) Rabbi Shimon said to them:  “Do you not admit that if one ate the minutest ant that he would be liable?  
ii) They said to him: “[Only] because it is a whole creature.”  
iii) He said to them:  “Even a grain of wheat is a whole entity.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section fifteen:  According to Rabbi Shimon one is liable for flogging if he eats any amount of untithed produce, even a single grain. The Sages disagree and state that only if one eats an olive’s size of untithed produce is he liable for flogging.  Less than that and he is exempt.  Rabbi Shimon attempts to prove his point by making an analogy to eating an entire ant.  All agree that if one eats an entire ant (on purpose) he is liable to be flogged, even though the ant is smaller than an olive.  The Sages respond that one is liable for eating an ant since it is an entire creature.  Since it is a distinct, full entity it is enough to make one who consumes it liable for punishment.  Rabbi Shimon responds that a single grain is also a whole entity, and therefore one who eats a single grain of untithed produce is liable to be flogged as well.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Section fifteen: How might the Sages further respond to Rabbi Shimon, who gets the last word in the mishnah?  


