Meilah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) All kinds of piggul can combine with one another and all kinds of notar can combine with one another. 
2) All kinds of carrion can combine with one another.
3) All kinds of sheratzim can combine with one another.  
4) The blood of a sheretz and its flesh can combine with one another.  
5) A general rule was stated by Rabbi Joshua: all things that are alike both in respect of [duration of] uncleanness and in respect of their minimum measure can combine with one another. Things that are alike in respect [of duration] of uncleanness but not in respect of minimum measure, in respect of minimum measure but not in respect [of duration] of uncleanness, or [if they are alike] neither in respect [of duration] of uncleanness nor in respect of measure, cannot combine with one another.

Explanation
Section one: To remind ourselves, piggul is a sacrifice that was offered with the intent of eating it outside of the time in which it must be eaten. If one eats different types of piggul, for instance part that came from a most holy sacrifice such as a hatat, and part that comes from a less holy sacrifice such as shelamim, he is liable for having eaten piggul, if together they add up to the minimum measure of an olive. Notar is sacrifice that is left over after the time in which it must be eaten. The same thing here—if the notar comes from different types of sacrifices, it still joins together to create the minimum measure.
Section two: An olive’s worth of carrion causes impurity. All types of carrion join together to convey this impurity, even if half of the measure is from a pure animal and half is from an impure animal. 
Section three: There are eight forbidden sheratzim (creepy crawly things) listed in Leviticus 11:29-30 that convey impurity at the minimum measure of a lentil’s worth. They all join together to create the minimal measure. 
Section four: Just as different sheretzim join together, so too does the blood of the sheretz join with its flesh to add up to the minimum measure. 
Section five: Rabbi Joshua now provides a general rule as to when different things join together. There are two criteria. First of all, the minimum measure needs to be the same. Second, the rules regarding their impurity need to be the same. So a part of a sheretz and a piece of carrion do not join together because carrion has a minimum measure of an olive, whereas the minimum measure for a sheretz is a lentil.
A piece of dead body and a piece of carrion share the same measure (an olive’s worth) but the piece of a dead body cause seven-day impurity, whereas the carrioin causes one day impurity, so they don’t join. 
All the more so a piece of a dead body won’t join with a piece of sheretz because both their impurity and their measures are different.   
