Menahot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with situations in which the loaves that accompany the todah sacrifice are for various reasons not sanctified, meaning that they don’t attain the status of a sacrifice. If one were to make non-holy use of one of the loaves that had not been sanctified, he would not be guilty of making illicit use of Temple property. 
 
Mishnah Three 
1) One who slaughtered the todah within [the Temple court] while its bread was outside the wall, the bread has not been sanctified. 
2) If he slaughtered it before [the loaves] had become crusted in the oven, even if all except one had become crusted, the bread is not sanctified.
3) If he slaughtered the todah [intending to eat it] outside its proper time or outside its proper place, the bread is sanctified.   
4) If he slaughtered it and it was found to be terefah, the bread is not sanctified.   
5) If he slaughtered it and it was found to have a blemish: 
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: the bread is sanctified. 
b) But the sages say: it is not sanctified. 
6) If he slaughtered it under another name, and so, too, if the ram of the consecration-offering or the two lambs offered at Shavuot were slaughtered under another name, the bread is not sanctified.

Explanation
Section one: If they slaughtered the todah while the bread was still outside of the Temple walls, the bread is not sanctified. Some commentators interpret the walls here to be the walls of Jerusalem.
Section two: The todah should be slaughtered only once the bread has been baked. “Dough” turns into “bread” when it is crusted over in the oven. Thus if the loaves were not yet crusted over when the todah is sacrificed, then the loaves are not sanctified.
Section three: If he sacrifices the todah with an improper intent, then the bread is sanctified. However, it becomes “piggul” or “disqualified” just like the todah. In other words, in this case, the bread became sanctified and then disqualified. In the cases in the first two sections, the bread was simply never sanctified.  
Section four: If the animal is found to be a terefah (an animal that has a defect that would have caused it to die), then the animal was never really a valid sacrifice. Therefore, the bread is not sanctified.
Section five: In Zevahim 9:3 we learned that Rabbi Akiva said that an animal with a blemish that was put up on the altar is not taken down. In other words, since the animal was slaughtered to be a sacrifice, it remains sanctified. Rabbi Eliezer agrees with this and therefore holds that the bread is also sanctified. The other rabbis disagree and seem to hold like the other opinion in Zevahim, that if an animal with a blemish is slaughtered and put on the altar, it must be taken down. It was never sacred, and neither is the bread.
Section six: If he slaughtered the todah, or the other sacrifices that are accompanied by bread (the ram of consecration was explained above in mishnah two, and the two lambs offered at Shavuot were mentioned in 2:2), under the wrong name, meaning intending for them to be another sacrifice, then the bread that accompanies them is not sanctified because the sacrifice does not count.    
