Menahot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
1) If a [minhah that is accompanied by] the libations had already been sanctified in a vessel when the animal-offering was found to be invalid: 
a) If there is another animal-offering, they may be offered with it; 
b) But if not, they are left to become invalid by remaining overnight.  
2) The offspring of a todah, its substitute, and the animal which was set apart in the place of the todah which was set apart and was lost, do not require the [accompanying] bread, as it says, “And he shall offer [them] with the sacrifice of thanksgiving (todah)” (Leviticus 7:12); the todah requires the accompanying bread, but its young, what is brought in its place, and its substitute, do not require the accompanying bread.

Explanation
Section one:  The first section deals with the libations and the minhah that accompany an animal sacrifice (see Numbers 15:2ff and see also above 2:4). If the minhah was already sanctified by having been put in a vessel, and then the animal sacrifice was found to be invalid, there are two possible outcomes. If there is another animal-offering that the minhah and the libations can accompany, then they can be offered with it. If not, then the minhah and the libation should be left over night in the Temple. Anything left out over night is invalid and must be burned. This is the way of disposing of the minhah and the libations. Note that they can’t just get rid of them, because they have already attained a holy status by being put in a vessel. 
Section two: There are three different types of animals related to here. The first is the offspring of a todah, meaning an animal born from an animal that had already been set aside as a todah. The second is a substitute, which refers to an animal that someone tried to substitute for a todah (there is an entire tractate devoted to this subject, so we will learn more there). The third is a replacement todah, one that was meant to take the place of a lost todah, but then the original todah was found. In all of these cases, the animal is holy and must be sacrificed. However, since it is not actually itself a todah, it need not be accompanied by the bread. This is derived from the verse which is read as emphasizing that only the todah requires bread, not other sacrifices that are in various ways derived from the todah. 

