Menahot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah teaches how the oil was put into the minhah.

Mishnah Three
1) All menahot that are prepared in a vessel require three applications of oil: pouring, mixing and putting oil in the vessel, before they are completed.   
2) The [baked] cakes were mixed [with oil], the words of Rabbi [Judah Ha-Nasi]. 
a) But the sages say: the fine flour [was mixed with oil]. 
3) The loaves were mixed and the wafers anointed. 
a) How did he anoint them? In the form of a “chi.”   
4) And the rest of the oil was eaten by the priests.

Explanation
Section one: The menahot that are prepared in a vessel are those prepared in a pan or a griddle. These menahot had oil put in them on three occasions. First some oil was poured into the vessel, and then he would pour the flour into the vessel. Then he would pour more oil onto the flour and mix it all together. Then he would add in lukewarm water, knead the flour into dough and bake ten loaves. After they were baked he would break them into pieces and pour more oil onto the pieces. Note that the mishnah is in backwards order—first they would put oil in the vessel, then they would mix it in with the flour, and the pouring only came at the very end. 
Section two: Rabbi Judah Hanasi disagrees with the rabbis as to when the mixing occurs. According to the Rabbi, the mixing occurs after the cakes have been baked. He then breaks them into pieces and mixes them up with oil. The other sages say that the mixing occurs when the minhah is still flour, before it has been kneaded and baked, as we explained above.
Section three: As explained above, the oil was mixed into the loaves, according to the sages when they were still flour, and according to Rabbi when they were already baked. If the minhah came in the form of wafers, the procedure was slightly different. Here they would anoint the wafers after they were baked by making an X over them. The letter “chi” in Greek is written as an X. [The Greeks would probably prefer that we say that the letter “ex” in English is written as a chi.]
Section four: Whatever was left over from the oil could be eaten by the priests. 
