Menahot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Today’s mishnah continues to teach laws regarding the laying of the hands on the sacrifice. 

Mishnah Eight 
1) All lay hands on the offering except a deaf-mute, an imbecile, a minor, a blind man, a gentile, a slave, an agent, or a woman. 
2) The laying on of hands is outside the commandment.   
3) [One must lay] the hands: 
a) On the head of the animal, 
b) Both hands 
c) In the place where one lays on the hands there the animal must be slaughtered; 
d) And the slaughtering must immediately follow the laying on of hands.

Explanation
Section one: Everyone who brings a sacrifice is required to lay his hands on the animal with the following exceptions. 1) The deaf-mute, imbecile and minor. These three categories of people are all assumed not to have “da’at”, awareness of the consequences or meaning of their actions. 2) A blind man. Perhaps he was excluded because he couldn’t see what he was doing. 3) A gentile. This is derived from Leviticus 1:2 which begins, “Speak to the children of Israel.” From here the rabbis derive that the laws in this chapter (and elsewhere) refer to Israelites and not Gentiles. 4) A slave is in the same category, for this matter, as a Gentile. 5) An agent—the owner himself, or his heir, must lay his hands on the animal. One cannot appoint another to do so in his stead. 5) A woman—this is also derived from the verse “the children of Israel” which can be translated “the sons of Israel.” A woman can bring a sacrifice and will often be obligated to do so, but she does not have to lay her hands on it.
Section two: The laying on of the hands is not part of the commandment, such that if one doesn’t lay on his hands, the sacrifice is invalid.
Section three: This section provides various instructions as to how the laying on of the hands must be performed. Both hands are placed on the animal’s head (see Leviticus 16:21). The laying on of the hands is done in the Temple court, the same place where the animal is slaughtered. And it is performed right before the animal is slaughtered.  
