Menahot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Having already discussed grain and oil, our mishnah turns its attention to the next element of the minhah, the wine. 
 
Mishnah Six
1) From where did they bring the wine?  
a) Keruhim and Attulim rank are alpha their wine. 
b) Second to them are Bet Rimmah and Bet Lavan on the mountain and Kefar Signa in the valley. 
c) [Wine of the] whole land was valid but they used to bring it only from these places. 
2) One may not bring it from a manured field or from an irrigated field or from vines planted in a field sown with seeds; but if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. 
3) One may not bring wine from sun-dried grapes, but if one did bring it, it was valid. 
4) One may not bring old wine, the words of Rabbi. 
a) But the sages permit it. 
5) One may not bring sweet wine or smoked wine or cooked wine, and if one did bring it, it was invalid. 
6) One may not bring wine from grapes suspended [on reeds], but only from the vines growing close to the ground and from well-cultivated vineyards.

Explanation
Section one: The best wine was from two places in the region of Judah, one called Keruhim and the other Attulim. The second best wine came from three other places, Bet Rimmah and Bet Lavan in the mountains of Judah and Kefar Signa which was in the valley of the Judah region. As was the case with the grain and the oil, wine brought from other regions is valid, even though they used to bring from those places.
Section two: These are the exact same rules we saw in mishnah two with regard to the grain and in mishnah three with regard to the oil.
Section three: This wine was inferior, but still valid for libations.
Section four: Although old wine is better, it does lose some of its redness, according to Rabbi [Judah Ha-Nasi] and therefore it should not be used for libations. 
Section five: These types of wine are all invalid for libations, for they are not pure, regular wine. 
Section six: The grapes used to produce libation wine must be grown on vines close to the ground, and not on reeds used to suspend them in the air, as many vines are grown today. The vines must be well-cultivated and tended to, so as to produce the best grapes possible.   
