Menahot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) There were seven liquid measuring vessels in the Temple: the hin, the half-hin, the third-hin, the quarter-hin, the log, the half-log, and the quarter-log.  
2) Rabbi Eliezer bar Zadok says: there were markings in the hin measure [indicating] thus far for a bull, thus far for a ram, and thus far for a lamb.    
3) Rabbi Shimon says: there was no hin measure at all, for what purpose could the hin serve?   
4) But there was an additional measure of one and a half logs by which one used to measure [the oil] for the minhah of the high priest, a log and a half in the morning and a log and a half towards evening.

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah now begins to list the liquid measurements. The hin contains 12 logs. Each log is about ½ a liter, so a hin is about 6 liters.
Section two: Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says that they didn’t need to have separate vessels for the parts of the hin. Rather there were markings on the hin measuring vessel that would indicate a half of a hin for a bull, a third of a hin for a ram and a quarter of a hin for a lamb (see Numbers 15). So according to Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok, there would have been only four measuring vessels in the Temple, the hin and the three log measuring vessels.
Section three: According to Rabbi Shimon, there was no hin measuring vessel, because none of the sacrifices require a wine or oil libation of a hin, so why have one in the first place?
Section four: Rabbi Shimon, after having stated that there was no hin measuring vessel, adds in another vessel so that there will be seven, as stated in the beginning of the mishnah.  This seems to have been some tradition, which he is unwilling to dispute. 
The extra vessel was one and a half logs, and it was used for the oil for the high priest’s griddle cakes minhah which was three logs, half used in the morning and half in the evening. This is similar to the half of a tenth measuring vessel used for the grain of his minhah offering, as we saw in yesterday’s mishnah. 

