Menahot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
For some sacrifices the person offering the sacrifice must lay his hands on the sacrifice before it is slaughtered. Our mishnah teaches which sacrifices require the laying on of the hands and which do not. 

Mishnah Seven 
1) None of the communal offerings require the laying on of hands except the bull that is offered for [the transgression by the congregation] of any of the commandments, and the scapegoat.   
2) Rabbi Shimon says: also the he-goat offered for [the sin] of idol worship.  
3) All the offerings of an individual require the laying on of hands except the first-born, the cattle tithe, and the pesah. 
4) And an heir may lay his hands [on his father’s offering], and he may bring the libations for it, and can substitute [another animal for it]. 

Explanation
Section one: Almost all public sacrifices do not require the laying on of the hands. There are two exceptions to this rule. The first is the bull that is offered if the entire congregation of Israel sins. This is stated explicitly in Leviticus 4:15, “And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bull.” The other exception is the scapegoat sent to Azazel on Yom Kippur. Leviticus 16:21 states, “And Aaron shall lay his hands upon the head of the goat.” 
Section two: Rabbi Shimon adds that also the he-goat offered for idol worship requires the laying on of the hands. This he-goat is mentioned along with the bull in Numbers 15:24. Since the bull requires the laying on of hands, so too does the goat.
Section three: Offerings brought by an individual, be they mandatory sacrifices such as the hatat and asham or voluntary ones such as the shelamim or todah, do require the laying on of the hands. The three exceptions are the first-born, the tithe and the pesah, three sacrifices that are often considered exceptional.
Section four: If someone’s father dies before his sacrifice can be offered, the heir can lay his hands on the sacrifice in place of the father. He may also bring the libations (wine, grain and oil) if his father had not yet brought them. He also has the ability to substitute another animal for his father’s sacrifice, although as we will learn, the effect of this is to make both animals sacred. There is an entire tractate on this later in Seder Kodashim.   
