Menahot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Today’s mishnah explains why one who says “I take upon myself to bring a todah” must buy the todah with hullin (non-sacred) money and cannot use maaser sheni money. This was the halakhah that we learned in yesterday’s mishnah. 

Mishnah Six
1) From where [is it derived] that if one says, “I take upon myself to bring a todah,” he can bring it only from hullin? 
2) As it is said, “And you shall sacrifice the pesah to the Lord your God, from the flock or the herd” (Deuteronomy 16:2). But is not the pesah sacrifice brought only from the lambs and from the goats? Why then is it written, “from the flock or the herd”? 
3) It is to compare whatever is brought from the flock and the herd with the pesah: just as the pesah is obligatory and offered only from what is hullin, so everything that is obligatory may be offered only from what is hullin. 
4) Therefore if a man says, “I take upon myself to bring a todah,” or “I take upon myself [to offer] a shelamim,” since [in these cases] these are obligatory they may be offered only from what is hullin. 
5) The libations in every case may be offered only from what is hullin.

Explanation
Section one: This section asks why the mishnah rules that one who vows to bring a todah must purchase it with hullin money.
Section two: The answer is derived from a problematic verse that deals with the pesah sacrifice. The pesah sacrifice, according to Exodus, must be brought only from flock animals, meaning sheep or goats. However, Deuteronomy 16:2 states that it can come from herd animals, such as cows. This is a clear example of biblical verses which contradict each other. 
Section three: The mishnah answers that Deuteronomy states “from the flock and the herd” not because the pesah can come from the herd (it cannot) but to compare other sacrifices that come from the flock and the herd with the pesah. The comparison is that whatever sacrifice is obligatory, as is the pesah, must be brought only from hullin sources and not from maaser sheni money. We should note that this makes sense from a practical perspective. If the Torah mandates that I bring a certain sacrifice and it mandates that I bring maaser sheni money and use it to buy food in Jerusalem, combining these two obligations would be cheating the system. Rather, maaser sheni money should be used to buy voluntary sacrifices, sacrifices that I would not otherwise had to have brought.
Section four: A todah is usually a voluntary sacrifice. However, in this case once he makes a vow to bring a todah, it is no longer voluntary but rather obligatory. Since he has made it into an obligatory sacrifice, he can no longer purchase the animal with maaser sheni money. In sum, a normal todah can be purchased with maaser sheni money because it is a voluntary sacrifice but a todah brought because of a vow is a mandatory sacrifice and must be purchased with hullin money.
Section five: The libations that accompany a todah or a shelamim sacrifice must always be purchased with hullin money, even if he explicitly vows to bring the todah from maaser sheni. The reason is that these libations are not eaten, but rather fully sacrificed on the altar. Maaser sheni money must be used to purchase food that will be eaten by people and not sacrifices that go completely to the altar.   
