Mikvaot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with mikvaot that are found and with whether one can assume that they have been filled with rainwater and are valid or that they have been filled with drawn water and are invalid. 

Mishnah One
1) The land of Israel is clean and its mikvaot are clean.  
2) The mikvaot of the nations outside the land are valid for those who had a seminal emission even though they have been filled by a pump-beam;  
3) Those in the land of Israel: when outside the entrance [to the city] are valid even for menstruants, and those within the entrance [to the city] are valid for those who had a seminal emission but invalid for all [others] who are unclean.  
4) Rabbi Eliezer says: those which are near to a city or to a road are unclean because of laundering; but those at a distance are clean. 

Explanation
Section one: The rabbis declared that merely being in the land of the other nations defiles. The land of Israel, on the other hand, is clean. Similarly, if one sees a mikveh in Israel and is not sure if it is valid or not, the presumption is that it too is valid. 
Section two: According to rabbinic legend/law, Ezra decreed that men who have had a seminal emission must immerse in a mikveh before they study Torah or pray (this is no longer observed). A mikveh found outside of the land of Israel can be assumed to be valid for such a purpose for this immersion is mandated only by rabbinic law. This is true even if it had been filled with a pump-beam, which would mean that it is certainly drawn water. However, the mikveh is not valid for other types of immersions that are toraitic in origin.
Section three: Mikvaot found outside of the city can be assumed to have been filled with rain water or some other natural water. Mikvaot in the city are assumed to have been filled with drawn water and are invalid. 
With that in mind, if one finds a mikveh outside of the city gates, anyone can immerse there, even a menstruant, whose obligation to immerse is from the Torah. But if one finds a mikveh inside the city, it is only valid for men who have had a seminal emission, whose obligation is derabanan, from the rabbis. 
Section four: Rabbi Eliezer adds that mikvaot found near the city or near a road may have been used for laundering. During the laundering water would have been put into the mikveh and this creates the presumption that the mikveh is invalid. 
  
