Mikvaot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) The matted hair on the heart and on the beard and on a woman's hidden parts; pus outside the eye, hardened pus outside a wound and the plaster over it, dried-up juice, clots of excrement on the body, dough under the finger nails, sweat-crumbs, miry clay, potter's clay, and road-clay. 
2) What is meant by 'miry clay’? This means the clay in pits, for it is written: "He lifted me out of the miry pit, the slimy clay" (Psalms 40:3).  
3) "Potter's clay" according to its literal sense. 
a) Rabbi Yose declares potter's clay clean, but clay for putty unclean. 
4) And "road-clay." 
5) These become like road-side pegs in these [kinds of clay] one may not immerse oneself nor immerse [other things] with them;  
6) But in all other clay one may immerse when it is wet. 
7) One may not immerse oneself with dust [still] on one's feet.   
8) One may not immerse a kettle with soot [on it] unless he scraped it. 

Explanation
Section one: This section is a list of things that block successful immersion. 
Most of these are self-explanatory. Sweat-crumbs are formed on your hands when they are dirty and you rub them together and little balls are formed (this is actually quite a clever description of those little things). 
The various types of clay are explained in the continuation of the mishnah.
Section two: Miry clay is clay found in pits—the word comes from the verse in Psalms. 
Sections three and four: These seem to be self-explanatory.
Section five: All of these types of clay become like "road-side pegs." This refers to a person who walks in mud and has around his legs cakes of mud. One is not allowed to immerse with these types of clay on him, nor can one immerse vessels with this type of mud on them.
Section six: Other types of mud do not block immersion, as long as they are wet.  
Section seven: The dust on one's feet does not block immersion.
Section eight: Before one immerses a kettle, one must scrape off the soot. The words "unless he scraped it" can also refer to the dust on one's legs.  
