Nazir, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the subjectivity to nazirite vows of three, typically somewhat marginal groups of people in rabbinic thought and society:  Gentiles, women and slaves.  

Mishnah One
1) Gentiles are not subject [to the laws] of naziriteship. 
2) Women and slaves are subject [to the laws] of naziriteship. 
3) The nazirite vow is more stringent in the case of women than in the case of slaves, for a man can compel his slave [to break his vow] but he cannot compel his wife [to do so].
4) [The nazirite vow] is more stringent in the case of slaves than in the case of women, for he can void the vows of his wife, but he cannot void the vows of his slaves. 
a) If he voids his wife’s [vow], it is void for ever, but if he voids his slave’s vow, [if] the slave becomes free he must complete his naziriteship.
5) When [the slave] passes from [his master's] presence:
a) Rabbi Meir says: he may not drink [wine].
b) Rabbi Yose says: he may drink [wine].

Explanation
Section one:  The opening verse of the passage in Numbers which deals with the nazirite laws states, “Speak to the children of Israel” (Numbers 6:2).  From here the rabbis conclude that Gentiles are not subject to the Jewish nazirite laws.
Section two:  In contrast, the children of Israel includes women and slaves (those working in Israelite households).
Section three:  The mishnah now compares the situation of the woman/wife with that of the slave.  Both are subject to the authority of their husbands, but in different ways.  In one way the rules for the women are more stringent.  A master can at any point come up to his slave and say that the slave can no longer keep his nazirite vow and that he must perform one of the prohibitions.  This is not voiding the vow, but preventing the slave from observing a vow that he remains obligated to observe.  In other words, the master has total control over the slave’s work life.  A husband does not have this power over his wife, for she is certainly not his slave.  Although, as we shall see below, a husband may annul his wife’s vow, once the vow has been confirmed, he cannot impede her nazirite observance. 
Section four:  On the other hand, a husband can annul his wife’s nazirite vow (as he can all her vows) completely, such that she is no longer subject to the vow.  In contrast, while he can prevent his slave from observing his vow, technically the vow is still valid and the slave is still obligated to observe a naziriteship.  If he is freed, all of the sages agree that he must complete his naziriteship.  The master did not void the naziriteship, he merely delayed its observance.
Section five:  Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yose disagree over whether the slave must observe his naziriteship when not in the presence of the master.  Rabbi Meir says that he must observe the naziriteship and not drink wine, even though in the master’s presence the master wants him to drink wine.  Rabbi Yose disagrees and holds that as long as he is enslaved to his master, he must continue to fulfill his master’s wishes, in or out of his presence.  
As an aside note, it seems to me that this mishnah is demonstrating a key difference in the rabbinic perception of wives and slaves.  Rabbinic ideology in this period was certainly patriarchal, as was that of all of their surrounding society.  However, the rabbis don’t view the wife, despite her obligations to her husband, as a slave to him.  The Torah gave the husband a right to void her vows, but the rabbis limit that to a formal process.  They do not extrapolate and conclude that therefore a husband’s control over his wife is like that over his slave.  Rather, the Torah-bequeathed power remains local, and perhaps of a different nature than that of a master’s control over his slave.
