Nazir, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that a father may impose a nazirite vow on his son, but that the vow is valid only if the son or the relatives do not protest.  Most of the mishnah discusses a case where the son or relatives protest, thereby voiding the vow, but the father has already set aside the animals for the sacrifices or has set aside money, with which to buy the sacrifices.  The end of the mishnah is exactly the same as that found in mishnah four.  To understand the rules regarding the sacrifices look back there.  

Mishnah Six
1) A man may impose a nazirite vow on his son, but a woman cannot impose a nazirite vow on her son. 
How so?
2) [If the boy] shaves himself or is shaved by his relatives, or if he protests or his relatives protest on his behalf, 
a) Then if [the father] had set aside an animal [for the sacrifice]:
i) the sin-offering is left to die, 
ii) the burnt-offering is offered as an [ordinary] burnt-offering, 
iii) and the peace-offering is offered as an [ordinary] peace-offering, and it may be eaten for one day [only], and it does not require loaves of bread.  
b) If he had a lump sum of money [set aside for the purchase of these sacrifices] it is to be used for voluntary offerings;  
c) If he had specified money: 
i) The money for the sin-offering is to be taken to the Dead Sea, the use of it is forbidden, but the laws of sacrilege do not apply;  
ii) The money for the burnt-offering—they bring a burnt-offering, and the laws of sacrilege do apply;   
iii) The money for the peace-offering—they bring a peace-offering, and it may be eaten for one day [only], and it does not require loaves of bread.  

Explanation
Section one:  In theory a father can impose a nazirite vow on his son and then not cut his hair for the term of his naziriteship, prevent him from becoming impure or eating/drinking things which derive from grapes.  A father can impose this vow only so long as his son is a minor.  In contrast, a woman cannot impose a nazirite vow on her son.  
Section two:  However, the father’s imposed vow is only valid so long as the neither the son nor other relatives protest.  If the relatives or the son protest, or if they perform an action which proves that they do not want the child to be a nazirite, the son is not a nazirite.  In such a case a problem will be created if the father has already separated the requisite sacrifices.  Since this is the same problem that exists should a husband annul his wife’s nazirite vow, the solutions are the same.  For more detail, see the commentary to mishnah four.  
