Nazir, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah continues to illustrate the principle which we learned in yesterday’s mishnah, that observing part of the day as a nazirite counts as a full day’s observance.  Yesterday we saw that this means that one who shaves on the thirtieth day has fulfilled his obligation.  
Today’s mishnah deals with one who has made two nazirite vows.

Mishnah Two
1) If a man vows two naziriteships, he shaves for the first one on the thirty-first day, and for the second on the sixty-first day. 
a) If he shaved for the first on the thirtieth day, he can shave for the second on the sixtieth day.  
b) If he shaved on the day before the sixtieth, he has fulfilled his obligation.
2) For this was the testimony that Rabbi Papias testified concerning one who vows two naziriteships, that if he shaved for the first on the thirtieth day, he is to shave for the second on the sixtieth day.  And if he shaved on the day before the sixtieth day, he has fulfilled his obligation, the thirtieth day counting towards the required number.

Explanation
Section one:  If one vows two naziriteships, the best thing would be to shave on the thirty-first day, and then begin counting the second naziriteship that same day.  If he does so, he will shave for the second naziriteship on the sixty-first day.  
However, if he shaved for the first naziriteship on the thirtieth day, he can shave for the second on the sixtieth day, and he could even shave on the fifty-ninth day.  This would mean that he shaved for the first on the thirtieth day, and then began counting the second that very day, and twenty-nine days later shaved, counting part of the fifty-ninth day as the completion of the second naziriteship.  Note that the thirtieth day is in all cases counted for both naziriteships.
Section two: This section is a mishnah in tractate Eduyoth 7:5.  It states the same thing as we just learned.  This is probably the older version of the way the halakhah was preserved. The halakhah was later developed into the above section.  
