Nazir, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
There are two categories of defilement with the dead that are relevant to nazirite laws.  If he is defiled through actual contact with the dead, he loses his whole period of naziriteship and he must shave and begin to count his naziriteship over.  This contact can occur either through touching, carrying or being overshadowed by contact with a dead body or part of a dead body.  [Overshadowing refers to a case where an object overshadowed him and the part of the dead body. For instance, they were under the same roof.]
In tomorrow’s mishnah we will learn of cases where the nazirite is considered to be impure, but he has not contracted that impurity from direct contact with the dead.  In such a case the nazirite does not shave, bring a sacrifice or lose the previously served part of his naziriteship.  However, in such a case the days that he is impure do not count toward his naziriteship.  

Mishnah Two
For which types of defilement must the nazirite shave? 
1) For [defilement contracted from] a corpse, or an olive’s bulk of [the flesh of] a corpse, or an olive’s bulk of corpse ooze, or a ladleful of corpse-mould;
2) Or the spinal column, or the skull, or any limb [severed] from a corpse, or any limb [severed] from a living body that is still properly covered with flesh, or a half-kav of bones, or a half-log of blood.
3) Whether [the defilement was contracted] from contact with them, from carrying them, or from overshadowing them. 
4) For [defilement contracted from] a barley-grain’s bulk of bone, whether by contact or carrying. 
5) On account of these, a nazirite must shave and be sprinkled on the third and seventh days, and such [defilement] annuls the previously served period, and he does not begin to count a new [naziriteship] until he has become clean and brought his sacrifices.

Explanation
This mishnah lists the types of impurity through contact with the dead that obligate a nazirite to shave, bring sacrifices and start counting his entire term of naziriteship from the beginning.
Section one:  He is impure through contact with any piece of flesh, as long as it is of minimum size.  There are different minimum measurements depending upon the state of this flesh.  (Yes, I know this is a little on the ‘yucky’ side, especially the “corpse mould”.  It just goes to show that in the ancient world death was probably less removed from their reality than it is in our world.)
Section two:  This section lists mostly limbs, bones and at the end a minimum measurement of blood.  Note that except for a “limb from a living body”, the rest of these come from a corpse.
Section three:  The things listed in the first two sections transmit their impurity to the nazirite by contact, by being carried or through overshadowing.  “Carrying” can cause impurity even if the impurity was not directly touched.
Section four:  In contrast, a minimum piece of bone, the size of a barley-grain, does not transmit impurity through overshadowing, but only through contact and carrying. 
Section five:  This section lists the rules for a nazirite who contracts such defilement.  As stated above, he must shave, purify himself, bring a sacrifice and only after becoming pure can he begin to count his naziriteship again.  
