Nedarim, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
As we explained above, the minimum period of naziriteship is thirty days.  However, a person can accept upon himself more than one “naziriteship”, and thereby become a nazirite for 60 days, 90 days etc.  In such a case, after each thirty day naziriteship he would bring the sacrifices, shave his head and then start a new, thirty day period of naziriteship.  In addition, a person can certainly become a nazirite for longer than thirty days if he so specifies.

Mishnah Three
1) A nazirite vow of unspecified duration is for thirty days.
a) If one says, “Behold, I am a nazirite for one long [period”], or “Behold, I am a nazirite for one short [period]”, or even [if he says, “[Behold, I am a nazirite for as long as it takes to go] from here to the end of the earth,” he is a nazirite for thirty days.
2) [If one says,] “Behold, I am a nazirite, plus one day,” or “Behold, I am a nazirite, plus one hour,” or “Behold, I am a nazirite, once and a half,” he becomes a nazirite for two [periods of naziriteship].
3) [If one says,] “Behold, I am a nazirite for thirty days plus an hour,” he becomes a nazirite for thirty-one days, since there is no naziriteship for hours.

Explanation
Section one:  If someone vows a nazirite vow but does not specify how long the naziriteship will last, the naziriteship will be thirty days.  This is true even if he says that he wants to be a nazirite for a long time, or a nazirite for a short time, or even if he says he wants to be a nazirite for as long as it takes to walk from here to the end of the world, since he did not mention a specific period of time, he is a nazirite for only thirty days, no more and no less.  
Section two:  In the cases mentioned in this section, he vows one period of naziriteship, and then a partial second period.  The mishnah treats this as if he has vowed two periods of naziriteship. The first one he expressed fully, and the second one, even though he only partially expressed, is obligates him for a full second naziriteship.
Section three:  In this case he did not say “I am a nazirite” without specifying for how long, but rather, “I am a nazirite for thirty days plus one hour.”  Since he mentioned thirty days he has only vowed one naziriteship that shall last thirty days plus one hour.  However, one cannot be a nazirite for hours, and therefore he must observe a naziriteship of thirty-one days. 
