Nazir, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This first section of this mishnah teaches that if one accepts some of the prohibitions for which a nazirite is liable, he is obligated for all of the regulations.  
The second section deals with becoming a nazirite like Samson. 
The third section deals with the distinction between a nazirite like Samson and one who is a regular life-long nazirite.  

Mishnah Two
1) [If one says,] “Behold I am a nazir [to abstain] from grape seeds, or from grape skins, or from shaving, or from [contracting] ritual defilement,” he is a nazirite and all the regulations of naziriteship apply to him.
2) [If one says,] “Behold, I shall be like Samson”, “like the son of Manoah”, “like the husband of Delilah, or “like the one who uprooted the doors of Gaza,” or “like the one whose eyes the Philistines put out,” he is a nazirite like Samson.
3) What difference is there between a nazirite like Samson and a life-nazirite?   
a) A life-nazirite if his hair becomes burdensome, he may thin it with a razor and then offer three animal sacrifices.  
b) If he should he be ritually defiled, he must offer the sacrifice [prescribed] for defilement.   
c) The nazirite like Samson if his hair becomes burdensome, he may not thin it.
d) And if he becomes ritually defiled, he does not offer the sacrifice [prescribed] for defilement.

Explanation
Section one:  There are three nazirite prohibitions:  eating things that come from grapes, shaving/cutting hair, and contracting impurity.  If one takes a vow of naziriteship but tries to limit his prohibitions to one of these things, the nazirite vow if valid and all of the prohibitions apply, not just those that he mentioned.  The mishnah uses the example of grape seeds and skins since they are mentioned in Numbers 6:4.  
Section two:  Samson, son of Manoah, husband of Delilah, who uprooted the doors of Gaza,  and whose eyes were put out by the Philistines, was perhaps the most famous nazirite ever (see Judges 13).  One who uses one of these aspects of Samson’s life to vow a nazirite vow is a nazirite like Samson.  
Section three:  This section explains the differences between a nazirite like Samson and a regular life-nazirite.  A person can become a life long nazirite if he says, “Behold I am a life-nazirite” or “ “Behold, I am a nazirite all my life.”  According to the Talmud, Absalom, son of David, was a life-long Nazirite.  This assumption is made because of Absalom’s long hair (II Samuel 14:26) which was also his eventual undoing (II Samuel 18:9).  As we shall see in tomorrow’s mishnah, if a person vows a nazirite vow but does not stipulate for how long his naziriteship is to last, he is a nazirite for only thirty days.  
There are two differences between Samson-nazirites and life-nazirites.  If a life-long Nazirite wishes to lighten his heavy hair he may do so.  This is derived from Absalom who, once a year when his hair became too heavy, cut it (II Samuel 14:26).  However, if he chooses to cut his hair, he must bring three sacrificial animals:  one for a sin offering, one for a burnt offering and one for an offering of well-being (Numbers 6:14).  
If a life-long nazirite becomes impure, he must bring an offering made as a result of impurity, as is mandated in Numbers 6:10-12.  
In contrast, a Samson-nazirite may never cut his hair, because Samson never cut his hair.  However, if he becomes impure he does not bring a sacrifice, just as Samson did not bring a sacrifice when he became impure (Judges 14:19).   
