Nazir, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned which types of defilement annul a nazirite’s previously served days of naziriteship, and make him liable to bring a sacrifice.  Today we learn the opposite cases:  defilement that does not force him to shave, does not annul his previously served days and does not  make him liable for a sacrifice.  

Mishnah Three
1) But for [defilement contracted by] overhanging branches, or protruding stones, or a field that may have once been a cemetery, or land of the Gentiles, or the stone which covers the tomb or the supporting stone of a tomb, or a quarter-log of blood, or a tent, or a quarter-kav of bones, or utensils that have been in contact with a corpse, or on account of the days of counting [after contracting scale disease] or the days during which he is certified unclean [because of scale disease];   
2) For all these the nazirite is not required to shave, but they do sprinkle him on the third and seventh [days], and [the defilement] does not annul the formerly served period, and he begins to resume counting [his naziriteship] immediately [after purification] and there is no sacrifice.  
3) In fact they said: the days of [defilement of] a male or female sufferer from gonorrhea and the days that a leper is shut up as a leper count toward his [naziriteship].

Explanation 
Section one:  All of the things listed here defile a person, but since they are not considered defilement coming directly from a corpse, they do not force the nazirite to annul his naziriteship.  I shall explain each one at a time:
Overhanging branches:  this refers to a branches of a tree which hang over him and a doubtful piece of a dead body.
Protruding stones:  similarly, these are overhanging stones which may overshadow him and a doubtful piece of a dead body.
A grave that has been plowed:  this actually refers to the area around such a grave, which might have on it bones or pieces of bones.
Land of the Gentiles:  the sages declared that all land outside of Israel defiles (see above 3:6). 
The stone which covers the tomb or the supporting stone of a tomb:  The former refers to a round stone, rolled in front of the tomb to seal it off. The latter refers to the stones surrounding this stone which supported it in its place.
A quarter-log of blood:  In yesterday’s mishnah we saw that a half-log was necessary for to force the nazirite to restart his counting and to bring a sacrifice.  A quarter-log, therefore, transmits full impurity but does not count enough to annul his naziriteship.    
Or a tent:  this refers to touching a tent in which a dead body is found.
A quarter-kav of bones: In yesterday’s mishnah we saw that a half-kav was necessary to restart his counting and to bring a sacrifice.  Similar to the case of blood, a smaller amount still causes impurity but doesn’t count as defilement from a corpse.
Utensils that have been in contact with a corpse:  These will cause impurity, but even though the impurity is indirectly from a corpse, since the nazirite was not defiled directly by the corpse, his naziriteship is not annulled.
On account of the days of counting [after becoming a leper] or the days during which he is certified unclean;  this refers to a nazirite who has become a leper (one with scale disease).  Becoming a leper does not cause him to lose his term already served as a nazirite, neither the days in which he becomes clean, nor the days in which he is certified unclean.
Section two:  For all of these things he is considered to be defiled, and he must be sprinkled with hatat water on the third and seventh days.  However, he does not shave, nor does he bring a sacrifice, nor does he lose his earlier served days.  As soon as he becomes clean, he may begin to count again.
Section three:  This halakhah is even more radical than that in the previous section.  If, while serving a naziriteship, he contracts gonorrhea (zav), or becomes a leper, not only does he not lose his previously served days, but these days also count toward his naziriteship. The only reason that a nazirite must shave and lose his previously served days is through contact with the dead.  Other forms of impurity, as serious as they may be, do not have the same effect.  Here we learn that they can even count as days served toward his naziriteship.   
