Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah teaches that although in general when bringing sacrifices, a person must specify which animal is for which sacrifice, the nazirite need not do so.  
The second section of the mishnah teaches what a nazirite does with his hair once he has shaved it off.

Mishnah Eight
1) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: if he brought three animals without specifying [what they were for], the one suitable for a sin offering is sacrificed as a sin offering, for a burnt offering as a burnt offering, and for a well-being offering as a well-being offering.
2) He would then take the hair of his nazirite head and threw it under the cauldron.  
a) If he shaved in the province he [also] would throw it under the cauldron.
3) With regard to what was this said?
a) With regard to shaving in ritual purity, whereas in shaving [after] ritual defilement he does not throw it under the cauldron.
b) Rabbi Meir says: all [nazirites] throw it under the cauldron, except for the defiled nazirite [who shaved] in the provinces.

Explanation
Section one:  Generally speaking, when a nazirite brings his offerings he should state which is for a sin offering, which is for a burnt offering and which is for a well-being offering.  However, since each offering is from a different type of animal, even if he did not do so, it is obvious which is for which.  The female sheep is the sin offering, the male sheep is the burnt offering and the well being offering is a ram.  These are all prescribed by Numbers 6:14.
Section two:   Numbers 6:18 states, “The Nazirite shall then shave his consecrated hair, at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, and take the locks of his consecrated hair and put them on the fire that is under the sacrifice of well-being.”  Our mishnah adds that even if he shaved his hair in the province, which means in Jerusalem but outside the Temple, he still throws it under the cauldron.  
Section three:  According to the first opinion, he only throws his hair under the cauldron if he is shaving at the end of his naziriteship.  He does not do so if he is shaving due to his having been ritually defiled.  In contrast, Rabbi Meir holds that even when shaving due to defilement, he throws it under the cauldron.  The only one who does not do so is the nazirite who shaved due to defilement outside of the Temple.  According to another mishnah (Temurah 7:4), the hair of a nazirite is buried.  
