Nazir, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah where a man vowed to be a nazirite if he had a child.  Our mishnah deals with a case where his wife miscarries.  The question is, do we consider the miscarriage to be a case where the child was viable while in the womb, and hence he had a child or not.  

Mishnah Eight
1) If his wife miscarries, he does not become a nazirite. 
a) Rabbi Shimon says: [in this case] he should say, “If it was a viable child, behold, I am a nazirite from obligation; otherwise behold, I am a voluntary nazirite.”  
2) If [his wife] later bears a child, he then becomes a nazirite. 
a) Rabbi Shimon says: he should say, “If the first was a viable child, the first [naziriteship] was obligatory, and this one is voluntary; otherwise, the first one was voluntary, and the present one is obligatory.”

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion, if his wife miscarries he is not a nazirite.  Although there is some doubt that the child might have reached viability before the miscarriage, in cases of doubtful naziriteships the ruling is lenient.
Rabbi Shimon is more concerned with the possibility that the child reached viability.  Therefore, the one who vowed is considered a doubtful nazirite.  The way that one observes this doubtful naziriteship is by saying that if the child was viable, then he is now serving a mandatory naziriteship.  If, however the child was not viable, then his naziriteship is just from doubt. In any case, he must observe a naziriteship.
Section two:  If after the first miscarriage his wife becomes again pregnant and this time has a child, according to the first opinion, he must now observe a naziriteship because he did not previously observe one.
For Rabbi Shimon he cannot just simply observe another naziriteship because he may have fulfilled his vow when he previously served a naziriteship.  However, if the first one was only voluntary, then he is still liable to serve an obligatory naziriteship for his original vow.  Therefore, he again stipulates, that if the first naziriteship was obligatory (the fetus was viable), then the current one is only voluntary, but if the first one was voluntary (the fetus was not viable), then the current one is the obligatory naziriteship.   
