Nazir, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
In this mishnah nine (!) people “wager” their nazirite vows over whether a koy is a wild beast or a domesticated beast.  Already by the Talmudic period they did not know exactly what animal a koy really was.  Some said it was a wild ox, while others interpret it as a mix of different deer species.  In any case, it was consider in some ways similar to a wild beast and some ways similar to a domesticated beast.  Mishnah Bikkurim 2:8-10 discusses the halakhic nature of the matter, for there are halakhic differences between rules regarding domesticated and wild animals. 

Mishnah Six
If he saw a koy and said, “Behold, I am a nazirite if this is a wild beast”, [and another] “Behold, I am a nazirite if that is not a wild beast,” [a third said] “Behold, I am a nazirite if that is a domesticated beast,” [and a fourth said,] “Behold, I am a nazirite if that is not a domesticated beast,” [a fifth said,] Behold, I am a nazirite if that is both a wild beast and a domesticated beast,” [and a sixth said,] “Behold, I am a nazirite if that is neither a wild beast nor a domesticated beast” [and a seventh said,] “Behold, I am a nazirite if one of you is a nazirite,” [and an eighth said,] Behold, I am a nazirite if one of you is not a nazirite,” [and a ninth said,] “Behold, I am a nazirite if you are all nazirites”, then all of them are nazirites.

Explanation
Some mishnaic commentators claim that in this case, Beth Hillel agrees with Beth Shammai that they are all nazirites.  A koy is not an animal about which we have a doubt whether it is a domesticated or wild beast.  Rather a koy is both a domesticated and a wild beast.  This mishnah is different from the previous mishnayoth in that in this case there is no true identity to the koy, whereas regarding the person, he certainly has an identity, even if that identity is unknown.  
Others explain that Beth Hillel holds that they are all nazirites in doubt, the category mentioned at the end of yesterday’s mishnah.  If so, the mishnah teaches that even if the status of the matter in question is by definition one of doubt, they are nazirites in doubt.   
