Nazir, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This whole mishnah contains an argument between Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel over consecration in error.  

Mishnah Three
1) If a man vowed to be a nazirite and then asked a sage [to be released from his vow] but [the sage] bound him [to his vow] he counts [the naziriteship] from the time that the vow was made.   
2) If he asked a sage [to be released from his vow] and he released him, if he had an animal set aside [for a sacrifice], it goes forth to pasture with [the rest of] the herd.   
3) Beth Hillel said to Beth Shammai: do you not admit that here where the consecration is in error, [the animal] goes forth to pasture with the herd?   
4) Beth Shammai said to them: do you not admit that if a man in error calls the ninth [animal], the tenth, or the tenth the ninth, or the eleventh the tenth, each is consecrated?   
5) Beth Hillel said to them: it is not the staff that makes these consecrated.  For suppose that by mistake he placed the staff upon the eighth or upon the twelfth, would this have any effect?  Rather Scripture which has consecrated the tenth, has also declared consecrated the ninth and the eleventh.

Explanation
Section one:  If a person makes a nazirite vow, he may ask a sage to be released from his vow, just as he can ask a sage to be released from any vow.  However, if the sage refuses to release him from his vow, then he must observe his naziriteship, and the naziriteship is counted from the beginning.  
Sections two and three:  If he asked the sage and the sage released him, then his animal that he set aside to be used for his sacrifice, is not considered to be consecrated. Beth Hillel considers this to be a precedent for all cases of mistaken consecration.  In this case the person made a nazirite vow and then separated an animal to be used as a sacrifice.  Later, he told a sage that the vow was mistaken and the sage agreed.  Hence the animal was consecrated also by mistake.  The fact that it is not consecrated, and may go back and join the herd, proves to Beth Hillel that something consecrated by mistake is not consecrated.
Section four:  Beth Shammai retorts with their own precedent to prove that something consecrated by mistake is consecrated.  Animals must be tithed (like produce), every tenth animal going to the priest (Leviticus 27:32).  This is done by passing all of the animals under a staff and counting them.  The tenth animal that passes under the staff is consecrated. If a person accidentally calls the ninth animal the tenth, or the eleventh animal the tenth, both the ninth and eleventh animals are consecrated (as is the actual tenth animal). This proves that things consecrated by mistake are consecrated.
Section five:  Beth Hillel refutes this proof.  The staff placed on the animals is not what consecrates them in general, rather the Torah consecrates them, or dictates that the tenth animal is consecrated.  To prove that the staff does not consecrate them, Beth Hillel points out that if one calls the eighth animal the tenth, or the twelfth animal the tenth, they are not consecrated.  Rather the Torah stated that the tenth animal is consecrated, and also stated (through a midrash:  do not look for this in the verse itself), that if one places the staff on the ninth or the eleventh, that they are consecrated.  However, one should not use this as a precedent for other cases to prove that all things consecrated by mistake are consecrated.   
