Nazir, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction
As we have already learned, a nazirite may not shave.  This mishnah discusses what is included in the prohibition of shaving.

Mishnah Three
1) A nazirite vow of unspecified duration is for thirty days.
2) If [the nazirite] shaved himself or bandits shaved him, it overturns thirty days.  
3) A nazirite who shaves himself, whether with scissors or a razor, or who singes [the ends of his hair], even a minimal amount, is liable.
4) A nazirite may shampoo [his hair] and part it [with his fingers] but may not comb it.   
a) Rabbi Ishmael says: he is not to cleanse it with dirt because it causes the hair to fall out.

Explanation
Section one:  This halakhah was already taught above 1:3.  It is repeated here because of the halakhah in the following section.
Section two:  If the nazirite is shaved, even if others shave him against his will, he must count another thirty days until he is able to shave and bring his sacrifices.  However, shaving overturns only thirty days.  Thus if he made a sixty day nazirite vow, and already served 50 days and then shaved or was shaven, he must count another thirty days, but he doesn’t lose the first twenty days which he served.
Section three:  It doesn’t matter how he cuts his hair he is liable and must count another thirty days.  The word for “singes” is unclear and is also interpreted to mean “pull out a little bit of hair”, “pull hair out from its roots.”  In any case, he is liable for all of these things.
Section four:  When one washes one’s hair, some of it sometimes falls out.  [Personal confession:  I remember this quite well when I went bald at the age of 20.  I would have made a poor nazirite!]  Nevertheless, the mishnah rules that a nazirite can wash his hair, since it is not certain that his hair will fall out.  However, he may not comb his hair for then it is certain that some of his hair will be uprooted by the comb.
Rabbi Ishmael rules that he may not wash his hair with dirt, which was a means in the ancient world to cleanse hair (things have certainly improved) for that too will certainly cause some hair to fall out.
We see, therefore, that the issue is not one of intent but certainty.  A nazirite may not do something that will certainly cause his hair to fall out, but he may do something that is likely to cause hair to fall out.   
