Nedarim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
This mishnah begins by describing another type of mistaken vow which is void.  The second part of the mishnah tells a story with a quite poignant line from Rabbi Yishmael.
Before learning this mishnah we should note that in ancient Palestine light skin was considered more aesthetically pleasing than dark skin.  This is probably explained simply by the fact that most people in this area of the world are dark-skinned.  Light skin would be the rarer commodity, and as is typical, that which is unusual is held in greater esteem (after all, why are diamonds considered precious stones? Why are dandelions weeds and not flowers?).  Furthermore, light skin is a sign of wealth, for fieldworkers do not have light skin.  In any case, my point is that this attitude is geographically determined and is certainly not a statement on the inherent value of one skin color over another.
  
Mishnah Ten
1) “Konam if I marry that ugly woman,” and she turns out to be beautiful; 
a) “That black-skinned woman,” and she turns out to be light-skinned; 
b) “That short woman,” and she turns out to be tall, he is permitted to marry her, not because she was ugly, and became beautiful, or black and became light-skinned, short and grew tall, but because the vow was made in error. 
2) And thus it happened with one who vowed not to benefit from his sister’s daughter, and she was taken into Rabbi Ishmael’s house and they made her beautiful. 
a) Rabbi Ishmael said to him, “My son!  Did you vow not to benefit from this one!” 
b) He said, “No,” and Rabbi Ishmael permitted her [to him]. 
3) In that hour Rabbi Ishmael wept and said, “The daughters of Israel are beautiful, but poverty disfigures them.”  
a) And when Rabbi Ishmael died, the daughters of Israel raised a lament, saying, “Daughters of Israel weep for Rabbi Ishmael.” 
b) And thus it is said too of Saul, “Daughters of Israel, weep for Saul” (II Samuel 1:24).

Explanation
Section one:  The one who made the vow mistakenly thought the woman whom he did not want to marry was ugly, dark-skinned or short.  When it turns out that she was beautiful, light-skinned or tall, the vow is released because it was mistaken.  He need not even turn to a sage for this vow to be released.
Section two:  The story in this section is slightly different from the halakhah learned in the previous section.  Here the ugly woman (his niece) actually was ugly and then was helped to become beautiful by those of the house of Rabbi Ishmael.  This is a “new fact” (see mishnah two above), and Rabbi Ishmael holds that a “new fact” may be used to release a vow.  When the man expresses regret from his vow, Rabbi Ishmael permits the woman to him.
Section three:  After having beautified the woman, thereby permitting her to the man who had vowed, Rabbi Ishmael laments the state of Jewish women in his day.  Rabbi Ishmael lived through and after the Bar Kochba revolt, a revolt that was quelled by the Romans in 135 and that may have been even more devastating than the destruction of the Temple.  Rabbi Ishmael laments that the oppressive state in which they live prevents the inner beauty of Jewish women from being seen.  We might add, that this oppressive state may have also made it more difficult for men to have seen through the women’s worn exteriors into the deeper layers of beauty.  For such sentiments and recognition of the difficulties under which they live, and perhaps also for his outstanding abilities as a cosmetician (!), the daughters of Israel lament him at his death, just as they King Saul was lamented at his death.   
