Nedarim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The final mishnah in chapter seven deals with cases where a person made a vow in order to spur someone or himself into doing something.  The mishnah interprets his vows according to what their intent probably was.

Mishnah Seven
1) If one says to his neighbor “Konam, what I benefit from you, if you do not come and take for your sons a kor of wheat and two barrels of wine,” the latter may annul his vow without the release of a sage, by declaring, “Did you vow for any other purpose but to honor me? This [refusal] is my honor.” 
2) Similarly, if one says to his neighbor, “Konam, what you benefit from me, if you do not give my son a kor of wheat and two barrels of wine”:
a) Rabbi Meir says: he is forbidden until he gives; 
b) But the Sages say: he too can annul his vow without the release of a sage, by saying to him, “I regard it as though I have received it.” 
3) If they were urging him to marry his sister’s daughter, and he said, “Konam, what she benefits from me forever”; Likewise, if he is divorcing his wife and he said, “Konam, what my wife benefits from me forever,” — they are permitted to benefit from him, because he meant only marriage. 
4) If he was urging his neighbor to eat at his house, and he replied, “Konam be your house which I do not enter,” or, “The drop of water that I do not drink,” he may enter his house and drink cold water because he only meant eating and drinking in general.  

Explanation
Section one:  The person vowing in this mishnah wanted to honor his friend by giving him wheat and wine for his son.  It seems that the person receiving did not want to accept his generosity, so the person giving made a vow to urge him on.  The mishnah teaches that this vow may be released even without the declaration of a sage, a process which we will learn about in chapter nine.  The person receiving may in essence annul the vow by saying that since the vow was only intended for his own honor, he is honored by not accepting the gift.  
Section two:  In this situation the one vowing wants his sons to receive a gift of wheat and wine from his friend.  To urge his friend on, he makes a vow stating that if his friend does not give his sons such a gift, everything he owns will become prohibited to his friend.  According to Rabbi Meir this vow stands and the friend cannot benefit from the one who vowed until he brings the wheat and wine.  The Sages, however, rule that this vow too may be annulled without a sage’s intervention.  The one who vowed may, if he regrets having made the vow, say that it is as if he has already received the goods and therefore the prohibition is void.  
Section three:  In these cases a man was being urged either to marry his sister’s daughter (a common phenomenon in mishnaic times, and not considered incestuous) or was divorcing his wife.  In either case, he makes a vow that the woman should not benefit from him. The intent of the vow was to make sure this woman could not either become his wife or remain his wife. The mishnah rules that since the intent of the rule was merely to prevent himself in marriage to these women, they may still derive other types of benefit from him.   
Section four:  In this case someone was urging his friend to eat over at his house.  In order to increase the leverage on his friend, he said that if he didn’t come over to his house, the other’s house would be Konam (forbidden) to him, or that the other’s water would be Konam to him.  Seemingly, as long as his friend doesn’t come to his house, he may not even enter his friend’s house, nor drink a simple cup of water.  The mishnah, however, rules that his intent was to prohibit eating a full meal at his friend’s house. Therefore he may enter the house and drink water, although he may not sit down for a proper meal.  
