Nedarim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four

Introduction
In this mishnah Rabbi Meir teaches that the Sages may tell a person that by making a vow prohibiting another person from using his things he has transgressed several commandments in the Torah, and if he expresses regret, they may use that regret as grounds for releasing the vow.  

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Meir also said: They release [the vow] by using what is written in the Torah, and they say to him, “Had you known that you were violating [the prohibitions]: 
1) “You shall not avenge” (Leviticus 19:18), 
2) “You shall not bear a grudge” (ibid.), 
3) “You shall not hate your kinsfolk in your heart (ibid., v. 17), 
4) “Love your neighbor as yourself” (ibid., v. 18), 
5) “Let him live by your side” (ibid. 25:37), for he might become poor and you would not be able to provide for him, 
[would you have vowed]?”.
And should he reply, “Had I known that this is so, I would not have vowed,” he is permitted [the vow is absolved].

Explanation
The type of vow being released in this mishnah is one in which a person prohibits his fellow Jew from benefiting from all or part of his property.  This very act is actually a transgression of five separate commandments, four of which are found in Leviticus 19:17-18.  The fifth commandment is that a Jew may not let his fellow become poor but rather they must live “side by side”, which is interpreted here to mean, that those who have means must aid those who do not.  If the one who vows admits that had he known that his vow would cause him to transgress so many commandments he would not have vowed, he may be released from his vow.
In my opinion this mishnah is emblematic of Jewish social ethics.  The mitzvot regarding concern for one’s neighbor and love for one’s fellow human being, are not merely ideals, left for individuals to pursue according to their own understanding.  Rather they have real manifestations in this world and govern our everyday actions.  Judaism is a religion in which ideals are translated into laws, which dictate precisely how a Jew is to live.  The laws of “love” dictate that a vow which prohibits one’s property to another is a sinful vow which should be released.   
