Nedarim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Section one of this mishnah deals with the definition of a bed and a couch.  Section two deals with defining the borders of a city and a house, in cases where a person has vowed not to enter either.  

Mishnah Five
1) One who vows abstinence from a bed is permitted a couch, the words of Rabbi Meir.
a) But the Sages say:  A couch is included in “bed”. 
b) If he vows abstinence from a couch, he is permitted the use of a bed.
2) One who vows not to benefit from a town, may enter the town’s [Shabbat] border but may not enter its outskirts.   
a) But one who vows not to benefit from a house, is forbidden [only] from the door-stop and inwards.

Explanation
Section one:  This section is similar to the yesterday’s mishnah and the dispute between Rabbi Meir and the Sages.  Rabbi Meir holds that a couch and a bed are two separate items, and one who vows abstinence from one is permitted the other. The Sages hold that a “bed” is a collective name and includes couches.  Therefore, one who vows abstinence from beds, is also prohibited from deriving benefit from couches.  However, a “couch” is specific, and therefore one who vows not to derive benefit from couches may still derive benefit from beds.
Section two:  This section deals with the border of areas which have been prohibited by a vow.  One who vows not to enter a city, may still enter into the city’s Shabbat border.  This is a perimeter around a city of 2000 amot, which is the distance a person can walk outside of the city on Shabbat.  In Numbers 35:5, this area is referred to as “outside the city.”  However, he may not enter its “outskirts”, a perimeter of 70 amot and four tefachim outside of the city.  The Shabbat borders are measured from the end of the outskirts, and hence the outskirts are considered part of the city.  
In contrast, one who vows not to benefit from a house, may not enter from the place of the door and inwards. However, he may go onto the porch even though this area is similar to the “outskirts” of a city.   
