Nedarim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The first two sections of our mishnah deal with a person who makes a vow which is to be completed either when the rains begin or when they end.  It is important to remember that in Israel it only rains from the fall through the spring, roughly speaking from Sukkot until Pesach.  In the late spring and summer it almost never rains, and even on the rare occasion that it does, such rain does not benefit the crops.  
The third section deals with the problem of leap (intercalated) years. The Jewish year consists of twelve lunar months.  To adjust the lunar calendar to the solar calendar, about once every three years an extra month is added. This month is called “second Adar”, for it falls after first Adar, the last month of the year (if we count from Nisan, as the Torah does).
The final section of the mishnah returns to the topic taken up above in mishnah 2, about when vows end if they were made “until Pesach.”    

Mishnah Five
1) [If one vows,] “Until the rains,” [or], “Until the rains shall be”, [he is forbidden] until the second rainfall descends.   
a) Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says: until the [normal] time for the [second] rainfall is reached.   
2) [If one vows,] “Until the rains cease,” [he is forbidden] until all of Nisan is completed, the words of Rabbi Meir.  
a) Rabbi Judah says:  Until Pesach is over.
3) [If one vows,] “Konam that I taste not wine for a year”, if the year is intercalated, he is forbidden during the year and its extension. 
a) [If one says,] “Until the beginning of Adar,” [he is forbidden] until the beginning of the first Adar; 
b) “Until the end of Adar,” until the end of the first Adar.  
4) Rabbi Judah says: [If one vows, “Konam that I taste no wine until Pesach shall be,” he is forbidden only until Pesach night, for he meant until the hour when people usually drink wine.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, if one vows “Until the rains,” or “Until the rains shall be,” the “rains” is understood to refer to the “second rainfall.”  In ancient Israel they divided the rainfall into three seasons (all within the rainy season).  In the Talmud they dispute when the second rainfall is; some say the seventh of Heshvan, some the 17th, and others the 23rd.  Therefore, according to this opinion, he would have to wait for this date (according to whichever date is the accepted opinion) and then for it to rain.  
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that the vow is over when the time is reached (whatever that date may be), even if it has not yet rained.
Section two:  If he vows “Until the rains cease,”, Rabbi Meir holds that he must wait until Nisan is completed, for he holds that all of Nisan is still considered the rainy season.  In contrast, Rabbi Judah considers the rainy season to have ended after Pesach, about a week before the end of Nisan.
Section three:  If one vows not to have wine “this year”, if the Sages decide that the year must have an extra month added, he is prohibited during that month as well.  The second month of Adar is considered part of the year.  However, if he connects his vow to “Adar”, his intention was the first Adar, and therefore he is only prohibited until the beginning or end of Adar. This is probably because when he made his vow he did not know whether or not there would have even been a second Adar.  Hence, his intention was clearly “first Adar”.
Section four:  Rabbi Judah holds that “Until Pesach shall be” refers to right before Pesach night actually begins.  Some commentators hold that Rabbi Judah disagrees with the opinion in mishnah two, according to which “Until Pesach shall be” refers to the end of Pesach, and therefore the vow lasts until Pesach is over.  Other commentators hold that Rabbi Judah does not disagree with that opinion but rather the two mishnayoth refer to vows on two different vows, wine and other things.  Rabbi Judah holds that if he says “Until Pesach shall be,” with regard to other prohibitions, his intention is until Pesach is over.  However, with wine, since people drink wine on Pesach night, his intention was only until Pesach begins.  
