Nedarim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who sets a limit for his vow of a day, a week, a month, a year or a week of years (seven years, a sabbatical cycle).  The mishnah teaches how long the vow is to last.  As we shall see, this depends on how he expresses his vow, and when the set time is determined to expire.  

Mishnah One
1) [If one vows,] “Konam, if I taste wine today,” he is forbidden only until it gets dark. 
2) “This Sabbath,” he is forbidden the whole week and the Sabbath belongs to the past [week];  
3) “This month,” he is forbidden the whole of that month, and the beginning of the [following] month belongs to the next month.  
4) “This year,” he is forbidden the whole year, and the beginning of the [following] year belongs to the next year. 
5) “This week of years,” he is forbidden the whole of that week of years, and the [following] sabbatical year belongs to the past.  
6) But if he says, “One day,” “One Sabbath,” “One month,” “One year,” [or] “One week of years,” he is forbidden from day to day.

Explanation
Section one:  “Today” includes only the day time, and therefore by night the one who vowed not to drink wine may drink.
Section two:  “Sabbath” in Mishnaic Hebrew can mean “week” and not just the  Sabbath day itself. Therefore, one who vows not to drink wine on the Sabbath is prohibited from drinking all week.  The Sabbath day which follows the week is counted with the previous week.
Section three:  The first of the new month counts as part of the subsequent month.  Therefore, one who vows not to drink wine all month, may do so on the first of the next month.
Section four:  Similarly, the first day of the following year is counted with the following year.
Section five:  In this section he prohibits himself from drinking wine for an entire cycle of sabbatical years, which is seven in number and is therefore called a week of years.  The sabbatical year, like the Sabbath itself, is considered the last of the years in the cycle and therefore it belongs to the cycle which proceeds it. 
Section six:  In all of the above cases the one who vowed said, “Today”, “This Sabbath”, “This month” etc., which implies that the prohibition will last until the current day, week, month, etc., expires.  However, if he says “One day”, “One week” etc., the vow must last the duration of the time he mentions.  Therefore, no matter when he vows it will last as long as he said it would.    
