Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) A screen that had colored and white stripes, a nega may effectively spread from one to the other.   
2) They asked Rabbi Eliezer: But the white stripe is separate?   
a) He replied: I have heard no ruling on this question. 
b) Rabbi Judah ben Batera said to him: Shall I derive the answer? 
c) He replied: If this would confirm the words of the sages, then yes!  
d) He said back: It is possible that it would remain on it in an unchanged condition for two weeks, and that which remains unchanged on garments for two weeks is unclean.   
e) He said to him: You are a great sage, for you have confirmed the words of the sages. 
3) A spreading that is close [to the original nega is effective] however small it may be.
a) One that is distant [is effective only] if it is of the size of a split bean.
b) And one that reappears [is effective only if it is] of the size of a split bean.  

Explanation
Section one: The screen has stripes that are white and colored. If the nega appears on the white stripe and then spreads to the colored stripe, the entire screen is impure. This is true even though colored garments are not susceptible to impurity.
Section two: We now have a discussion between Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Judah ben Batera. Rabbi Eliezer, as is well-known, is the arch-conservative, never wishing to say anything that he hadn't already heard from his teachers. He accepts the halakhah found in section one, but he doesn't really understand it. After all, the white stripe stands on its own, separate from the colored stripe. So how can spreading into the colored stripe cause the white stripe to be impure?
Rabbi Eliezer gives Rabbi Judah permission to answer his question, but only if his answer supports the halakhah found in section one. 
Rabbi Judah ben Batera says that the garment is impure not because of the spreading to the colored stripe but rather because the whole garment could be impure if the nega stays on the white stripe for two weeks. When the sages said "it effectively spread from one to the other" they did not mean literally that it can spread. Rather, it spreads in the sense that if the white stripe is impure because the nega remained there for two weeks, the whole garment becomes impure, even the colored stripes.
Rabbi Eliezer accepts the answer because it confirms that which the sages said, even though it effectively provides a different reason for why the garment is impure. 
Section three: This section deals with how large the "spreading" must be. If the spreading is right next to the original nega, it can be any size and it will cause the garment to be impure. If the spreading is slightly removed, then the spreading must be the size of a split bean. 
And if a nega returns to a garment that has already been declared pure must be the size of a split bean for the garment to be made impure.   
