Negaim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction
The final mishnah of chapter thirteen continues to deal with the status of vessels in a house into which a metzora has entered. 

Mishnah Twelve
1) If he enters a synagogue, a partition ten handbreadths high and four cubits wide must be made for him.   
2) He should enter first and come out last.   
3) Any vessel that affords protection by having a tightly fitting cover in the tent of a corpse affords protection by a tightly fitting cover in the house of one afflicted by a nega, 
a) And whatsoever affords protection when covered in the tent of a corpse affords protection when covered in the house of one afflicted with a nega, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
4) Rabbi Yose says:  any vessel that affords protection by having a tightly fitting cover in the tent of a corpse affords protection when covered in the house of one afflicted with a nega; and whatsoever affords protection when covered in the tent of  a corpse remains clean even when uncovered in a leprous house.  

Explanation
Section one: If a metzora enters a synagogue, they must make for him a partition (a mehitzah) ten handbreadths high to keep him from defiling the other people in the synagogue. It is interesting how lenient this law is. The Torah states that a metzora should be sent out of the camp (see Leviticus 13). In contrast, the rabbis assume that a metzora could enter a synagogue and the only thing that needs to be done is for a partition to be made for him. Perhaps we can sense here some hesitance on the part of the rabbis to isolate a metzora from their community (even if these rules are only theoretical).
Section two: He should go in to the synagogue first so that he doesn't defile anybody before he arrives at his partitioned off spot. He should also go out last so that he doesn't defile anyone when leaving that spot. 
Section three: In Tractate Kelim we learned that there are vessels that protect their contents from becoming impure when found in a tent with a corpse if they have a tightly-fitting cover (see 10:1). According to Rabbi Meir these same vessels protect their contents from becoming impure in a metzora's house, as long as they have a tightly-fitting lid. And there are some cases where something needs only to be covered for it to protect its contents. It does not need a tightly-fitting lid. According to Rabbi Meir if something is protected by being covered in a tent of corpse, it is also protected by being covered in the house of a metzora. In short, the same rules that apply in the tent of a corpse apply in the house of a metzora.
Section four:  Rabbi Yose rules more leniently. If a vessel's contents are protected by a tightly-fitting lid in the tent of a corpse, they only need to be covered to afford protection in the house of a metzora. And if a vessel's contents are protected with any type of cover in the tent of corpse, then the vessel doesn't need to be covered at all for its contents to be protected in the house of a metzora. In other words, each rule is slightly more lenient in the house of a metzora than it is the tent of a corpse.   
