Negaim, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The last line of this mishnah is the key to understanding it—for a house to be susceptible to impurity it must have stones, wood and earth. Based on partially on that principle, the mishnah lists what material must be in houses for it to be susceptible to nega impurity.

Mishnah Two
1) A house, one of whose walls was covered with marble, with rock, with bricks or with earth, is pure.   
2) A house that did not have in it stones, wood or earth, and a nega appeared in it and  afterwards stones, wood and earth were brought into it, it remains clean. 
3) So also a garment in which there was no woven part that was three fingerbreadths square and a nega appeared in it and afterwards there was woven into it a piece of cloth three fingerbreadths square, it remains clean. 
4) A house does is not susceptible to negaim uncleanness unless there are in it stones, wood and earth.  

Explanation
Section one: The only building material that is susceptible to house negaim is: wood, stones (formed from rocks) and clumps of earth used to cement the parts together. Marble, rocks and bricks are not susceptible, and therefore even if only one of the walls is made from such material, the whole house is not susceptible.
Section two:  If even one of the four walls of the house was originally made of material that was not susceptible to impurity and then a nega appeared, and then the susceptible material was added to the wall, the house remains pure. In other words, if the nega appeared in a house that was not susceptible, and then the house became susceptible, it remains pure.
Section three: This is the same rule but in connection with a garment. A garment must be at least three fingerbreadths by three fingerbreadths to be susceptible to impurity. So if the nega appeared in the garment before it was large enough to be susceptible, it remains pure even if its size is increased. 
We should note that negaim are the one type of impurity that remain in/on something. All other impurity is contracted by some sort of contact with something from the outside world.
Section four: This section is included here as an introduction to tomorrow's mishnah. So stay tuned! 
 
