Negaim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The blood of the guilt offering is now applied to the metzora's ear, thumb and big toe. However there is a problem—the metzora can't enter the Israelite's court for someone who has not yet offered his obligatory sacrifices can't enter there (see Kelim 1:8). And the blood can't be brought out of the court. So how can the blood be applied to the metzora? Our mishnah answer this puzzle!

Mishnah Nine 
1) [The metzora] put in his head inside and [the priest] applied [the blood] to the tip of his ear; 
a) [He put in] his hand and [the priest] applied [the blood] to the thumb of his hand.
b) [He put in] his foot and [the priest] applied [the blood] to the big toe of his foot. 
c) Rabbi Judah says: he put in all three at the same time. 
2) If he had no thumb on his hand or no big toe on his foot or no right ear he could never become clean.   
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: [the blood] is applied to the place where they were. 
b) Rabbi Shimon says: if he applied it to the left side, the obligation has been fulfilled. 

Explanation
Section one: You put your ear in, you get the blood on [and you shake it all about]. Sorry, I couldn't help that one. Basically, the mishnah resolves the problem by saying that he can put parts of his body into the Temple courtyard without transgressing the prohibition of entering. Rabbi Judah is even more lenient. He can put his ear, hand and foot in at the same time. Sounds a bit tough to me, but I guess it would save some time.
Section two: There are three opinions as to what to do if he is missing any of these appendages. According to the first opinion, he simply cannot perform the mitzvah and therefore he can never become fully clean. As unfair as this sounds, the author of this opinion would simply answer that the Torah demands that the conditions be fulfilled. If they cannot, then there is no way to cleanse the metzora. Rabbi Eliezer finds a solution in applying the blood to the place on the body where the ear, thumb or toe was (or at least should be). I don't know how this would work for a person whose entire arm or leg had been amputated. Rabbi Shimon says that he can apply the blood to the left side. This would only be a solution if the person had a left ear, thumb or big toe. It's unclear how Rabbi Shimon would rule if these were missing as well.     
