Negaim, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
The first three mishnayot of this chapter compare the laws that apply to different signs of negaim and it demonstrates how each nega has different rules and regulations.
Our mishnah begins by covering the sign of the white hair with the sign of the spreading of the nega. 

Mishnah One
1) There are [laws] that apply to the white hair that do not apply to the spreading, while others apply to the spreading and do not apply to the white hair. 
2) That white hair causes uncleanness at the beginning, it causes uncleanness whatever the state of its whiteness, and it is never a sign of cleanness.  
3) There are laws that apply to the spreading, for the spreading causes uncleanness however small its extent, it causes uncleanness for all negaim and even when it is outside the nega, and these laws do not apply to the white hair. 

Explanation
Section one: This sets up the comparison that shall be fleshed out (pun intended) below.
Section two: As we learned in 3:3, a white hair is a sign of a nega when it is first examined by the priest, even before any period of isolation. In contrast, spreading can be a sign only after the afflicted person has been isolated for a week.
A white hair is a sign of uncleanness even if its white is duller than any of the shades listed in mishnah 1:1. However, for the spreading to be a sign of uncleanness it must be one of these shades.
Even if the whole body became full of white hairs, it is not a sign that the person is clean. In contrast, if the nega spreads to the whole body, the person is deemed clean (see Leviticus 13:13).
Section three: Even the smallest spread of the nega will cause him to be unclean. In contrast, there must be two at least white hairs for them to be unclean.
The spreading applies to all negaim, whereas the white hair only applies to skin, boils and burns. 
The spreading is a sign of impurity when it extends beyond the nega, whereas white hairs are a sign of impurity only within the nega.     
