Negaim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) Any part [of the body] that can be subject to the uncleanness of a bright spot nega can prevent the effectiveness of the breaking out [over the entire body], and any part that cannot be subject to the uncleanness of a bright spot nega does not prevent the effectiveness of the breaking out abroad. 
2) How so? If it broke out covering all of his skin, but not on the head or the beard, or on a festering boil, burn or blister, and then the head or the beard became bald, or the boil, burn or blister turned into a scar, he is clean.   
3) If it broke out covering all of his skin, except a spot of the size of half a lentil near the head or beard, or near a boil, burn or blister, and then the head or the beard became bald, or the boil, burn or blister turned into a scar, even though the place of the quick flesh became a bright spot, he is unclean unless it breaks out covering all his body.  

Explanation
Section one: In 6:8 we learned that there are some parts of a person's body that are not susceptible to negaim under certain circumstances (a head or beard with hair, a festering boil, burn or blister). This means that if a nega appears there he is not impure. Since these spots are not susceptible to negaim, they also do not prevent a nega from being considered as having spread to one's entire body. He is pure even if the nega doesn't spread there. Simply put—these parts (under certain circumstances) are not relevant to the laws of negaim. However, any part that is subject to negaim, does prevent the nega from being considered to have spread to his entire body, if the nega does not spread there.
Section two: The mishnah now illustrates this principle. At first the nega spreads to his entire body, except to parts that are not susceptible to negaim (for an explanation of these parts see 6:8). Subsequently, these parts changed so that they have become susceptible to negaim. Despite the fact that the nega is now not found on parts that are susceptible to negaim, he is still pure since when the nega spread to his entire body these parts were not susceptible. In other words, if the person is pure because the nega covered all susceptible parts of his body, he remains pure even if other parts later become susceptible.
Section three: In this case the nega spread to his entire body, except to one tiny part. He is now impure because the nega did not actually spread to his entire body. This part was adjacent to a part of the body that was not susceptible to negaim. Subsequently, two things happen. The nega spreads to the small spot that it had not previously spread to. And the parts that were not susceptible become susceptible. In this case he is impure because at the time when the nega spread to his entire body, the head, beard and previously festering spots had already become susceptible to negaim. He will be impure until the nega spreads to these spots as well.    
