Negaim, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Mishnah One
1) Everyone can become impure from negaim, except for a non-Jew and a resident alien.
2) All are qualified to inspect negaim, but only a priest may declare them unclean or clean. 
a) He is told, "Say: 'unclean,'" and he repeats "unclean," or "Say: 'clean,'" and he repeats "clean." 
3) Two negaim may not be inspected simultaneously whether in one man or in two men; rather he inspects one first and isolates him, certifies him as unclean or pronounces him clean, and then he inspects the second. 
4) One who is isolated may not be isolated again nor may one who is certified unclean be certified unclean again.  
a) One who is certified unclean may not be isolated nor may one who is isolated be certified unclean.   
5) But in the beginning, or at the end of a week, he may isolate on account of the one nega and isolate him on account of another one; he may certify him unclean on account of one sign and also certify him unclean on account of another sign; he may isolated the one sign and declare the other clean, or certify the one unclean and declare the other clean.  

Explanation
Section one: The laws of negaim apply to all Jews, even to minors and even to slaves. They do not apply to non-Jews or to the "resident alien (ger toshav)." According to one, common, definition of this category is that it refers to a non-Jew who has accepted upon himself to observe the seven Noahide laws.
Section two: In light of the Torah, we would think that only a priest is qualified to examine a nega. However, the rabbis say that while the priest must declare whether the person has a nega or not, anyone can determine whether it is a nega or not. 
The mishnah goes on to describe a priest being told by a sage whether to pronounce the nega clean or unclean. This seems to be part of the general rabbinic tendency to make the priests subservient to the sage. We need the priest, but the priest does not have the learning (according to the rabbis) to know when a discoloration of some sort is the type of nega referred to in the Torah. 
Section three: One is not supposed to examine two negaim at the same time, whether both negaim are on the same person or on two different people.
Section four: If someone has been isolated already, and then he gets another nega, he is not isolated again based on the second nega. Neither can one who is already declared impure be declared impure for a second nega. Similarly, one who is already isolated cannot be declared impure, nor can one who is impure be isolated. Basically, if one already has one status, isolated/impure, he cannot be changed to the other status based on a second nega.
Section five: However, if the second nega appears before he is isolated for the first nega, or it appears at the end of the first week of isolation for the first nega before he is isolated for a second week or determined unclean or declared pure, then the priest can isolate or determine him unclean/clean for both negaim at the same time. Or he can isolate or determine him unclean for one nega, and declare him clean from the other. Basically, since the first week is up or has not yet even begun, he can determine the status of two negaim at the same time.  

