Negaim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
1) If there were two bright spots, one unclean and the other clean, and they broke out from one to the other, and then [a nega] broke out covering all of his skin, he is clean.   
2) [If the bright spots] were on his upper lip and lower lip, or on two of his fingers, or on his two eyelids, even though they cleave together and appear as one, he is clean. 
3) If it broke out covering all his skin except white scurf, he is unclean. 
4) If the ends of his limbs reappeared in the color of white scurf, he is clean.   
5) If the ends of his limbs reappeared to the extent of less than a lentil: 
a) Rabbi Meir rules that he is unclean, 
b) But the sages rule that a piece of white scurf less in size than a lentil, is a sign of uncleanness in the beginning, but it is not a sign of uncleanness at the end.  

Explanation
Section one:  In this case a person has two white spots (negaim) one of which has been pronounced clean and one of which has been pronounced unclean. The nega then spreads from one to the other and then breaks out over his entire body. He is deemed to be pure because the nega has spread to his entire body. We don't consider this to be a case where the nega covered his entire body "from a point of purity" because we consider the spreading over his body to have come from the impure nega and not from the pure bright spot. 
Section two: In this case, the two bright spots, one pure and one impure, are from two adjoining parts of his body that can be put together to look like one. We might have thought that the nega spread over his whole body from a pure bright spot, in which case he is impure. However, the mishnah says that since these are actually separate bright spots and one is impure, the situation is the same as in section one and he is ruled pure.
Section three: White scurf is a white spot that is darker than the color of any of the four shades of white required of a nega (see 1:1). If the nega covers his whole body but the white scurf remains, he is still impure because the nega is not considered to have covered his entire body.
Section four: Although white scurf can prevent the nega from being considered to have spread over his whole body, if white scurf appears on a person who already had a nega cover his whole body, it is not considered to be the normal color of flesh and he remains pure. The Torah says that if undiscolored flesh appears on the person covered with the nega, he is impure. But white scurf is not undiscolored flesh, so this person stays pure.
Section five: According to Rabbi Meir if any part of his limbs returns to its natural color, even if it is less than the size of a lentil, he becomes impure again.
The rabbis disagree. They address two cases here: white scurf and quick flesh less than the size of a lentil. In both of these cases, if the nega does not spread there at the outset he is still impure. So if any flesh is not covered by the nega, he is still impure. However, when it comes to retracting from a nega that covered the entire body, these are not signs of a return to impurity. If a piece of white scurf emerges or quick flesh returns to a spot smaller than the size of a lentil, he remains pure 
   
