Negaim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The first part of our mishnah deals with the obligation to shave the head or beard due to a scall. After a week of isolation, if no signs of impurity appear the person with the scall shaves his head and beard except for the place of the scall. This is stated in Leviticus 13:32-33:
32 On the seventh day the priest shall examine the affection. If the scall has not spread and no yellow hair has appeared in it, and the scall does not appear to go deeper than the skin, 33 the person with the scall shall shave himself, but without shaving the scall; the priest shall isolate him for another seven days.
As a reminder, the scall was located on a place from where the hairs had fallen out. 

Mishnah Five
1) How does one shave who has a scall?   
a) He shaves outside it and leaves next to it two hairs in order to determine whether it spreads. 
2) If he was certified unclean on account of yellow hair, and then the yellow hair disappeared and other yellow hair appeared, and so also if there was a spreading,   irrespective of whether the certification took place at the beginning, at the end of the first week, at the end of the second week or after his release from uncleanness, behold he remains as he was before.   
3) If he was certified unclean on account of a spreading, and the spreading disappeared and then reappeared, and so also if there was yellow hair, irrespective of whether the certification took place at the end of the first week, at the end of the second week or after his release from uncleanness, he remains as he was before.

Explanation
Section one: When shaving at the end of the first week of isolation, he shaves around the scall and leaves the space of two hairs unshaven. If these two hairs fall out, it is a sign of spreading and he is impure. 
Section two: In this case the person is certified unclean because of yellow hair. Then the yellow hair falls out and other yellow hair appears or the scall spreads. No matter when he was certified unclean at the outset or at any other time, once the new sign appears he becomes impure again without the priest declaring him impure again. This halakhah was taught with regard to a bright spot in 5:2.
Section three: Here he is declared unclean because the scall spread. This section is basically the same as section two, except since spreading is not a sign of impurity at the outset, he cannot be declared impure at the outset. See also 5:2.  
