Negaim, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the problem that the color of negaim appear differently depending upon the skin color of the person being examined. This could undermine the objectivity of the examination

Mishnah One
1) The bright spot in a German appears as dull white, and the dull white spot in an Ethiopian appears as bright white.  
2) Rabbi Ishmael says: the children of Israel (may I be atonement for them!) are like boxwood, neither black nor white but of an intermediate shade.   
3) Rabbi Akiva says: painters have materials with which they portray figures in black, in white, and in an intermediate shade; let, therefore a paint of an intermediate shade be brought and applied around the outside of the nega, and it will then appear as on skin of intermediate shade. 
4) Rabbi Judah says: in determining the colors of negaim the law is to be lenient and not stringent; let,therefore, the negaim of the German be inspected on the color  of his own body  so that the law is lenient, and let that of the Ethiopian be inspected as if it were on the intermediate shade so that the law is also lenient. 
5) The sages say: both are to be treated as if the nega was on the intermediate shade.  

Explanation
Section one: A "bright spot" is impure, but on a pale German (I assume this means anyone from northern Europe) it will look dull. This would mean that he will be declared pure, even though he should not be.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, a dull spot, which should not be impure, will look bright on an Ethiopian's skin. This will cause him to be isolated and then, if it remains, to be declared impure. 
The question is—how do we deal with this situation?
Section two: Rabbi Ishmael says that we use the skin of Israelites, which is dark but not black, as the barometer. This is because the laws of negaim were stated with regard to Israelites.
As an aside, Rabbi Ishmael offers to take upon himself vicarious atonement for Israel's sins. 
Section three: Rabbi Akiva says that we actually paint the person's skin, at least around the nega. This way we can get an unbiased portrait of what shade the nega really is.
Section four: Rabbi Judah says that we always rule leniently. Therefore, if the spot looks dull on the German, he is pure. And if it looks bright on the Ethiopian, we estimate how it would look on a person of average skin color. 
Section five: The sages disagree and say that all negaim are judged based on an average background. This opinion seems to agree with Rabbi Akiva. 
     
