Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses at what point threads become susceptible to negaim.

Mishnah Eight
1) The warp and the woof can contract the uncleanness of negaim immediately. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: the warp, only after it has been boiled, but the woof immediately.
2) And bundles of flax after they have been bleached. 
3) How much must there be in a coil for it to be capable of contracting the uncleanness of negaim? 
a) Enough to weave from it a piece of three fingerbreadths square, either warp  or woof, even if it is all warp or all woof. 
4) If it consisted of broken threads it does not contract the uncleanness of negaim. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: even if the thread was broken only in one place, and he knotted together, it does not contract the uncleanness of negaim. 

Explanation
Section one: Because Leviticus 13:48 states, "in the warp or in the woof of the linen or the wool," the rabbis rule that the threads of the warp and woof are susceptible to impurity as soon as they have been woven. Rabbi Judah says that the warp which consists of thinner strands, must be boiled before it is susceptible to negaim. The boiling was done to whiten the threads. The warp is susceptible immediately. 
Section two: After they would remove the flax from where it had been soaking to soften it, they would put it in the oven so that it would become white. Only then is the flax susceptible to negaim.
Section three: For the coil of strings to be susceptible to negaim there must be enough thread to make a garment that is three fingerbreadths square. Even if all of the threads are either warp or woof, as long as there is enough to make three fingerbreadths of cloth, it is susceptible.
Section four: If the bundle was made of broken threads, then it is not susceptible, assumedly because these are not so usable. Rabbi Judah is even more lenient. Even if the thread was broken in only one place, and then it was tied back together, it is not susceptible.     
