Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The beginning of this mishnah continues to deal with garments that are colored, or at least partly colored.
The second half deals with the spread of the nega within the garment.

Mishnah Four
1) A garment whose warp was colored and whose woof was white, or whose woof was colored and whose warp was white, all depends on what is most visible. 
2) Garments contract uncleanness if they are an intense green or an intense red. 
3) If [the nega] was green and it spread out red, or if it was red and it spread out green, it is unclean. 
4) If its color changed and then it spread, or if it changed and it did not spread, it is regarded as if it had not changed.   
a) Rabbi Judah says: let it be inspected as if it then appeared for the first time.

Explanation
Section one: The warp threads are those that are attached to the loom and run lengthwise. The yarn that is inserted is the woof. Whether or not the garment is considered to be "colored" does not depend specifically on which one is colored, but rather on whether or not the color is most visible. Albeck explains that when it comes to clothing, the woof is most noticeable, but when it comes to pillows, sheets and blankets, the warp is most visible. 
Section two: Leviticus 13:49 reads: "If the affection in the cloth or the skin, in the warp or the woof, or in any article of skin, is streaky green or red, it is an eruptive affection. It shall be shown to the priest." The rabbis interpret "streaky green or red" to be intense colors. For the nega found in the garment to be considered impure, it must be intensely red or green.
Section three: Garment negaim are like skin negaim. At the outset they are isolated and if the nega spreads they are pronounced unclean. If the original color was red or green and the color of the spreading was different, it counts as spreading and it is unclean.
Section four: If the color of the nega changed before it spread, we regard it is as if it didn't change. Therefore, if it spread it is impure and the garment must be burned. If it didn't spread, the garment should be laundered and then isolated for another week to see if it spreads. 
Rabbi Judah says that if the color changes it is treated as if it was a new nega. Therefore, it would have to be laundered and isolated to see if it subsequently spreads.        
