Negaim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) A bright spot which had quick flesh and a spreading: if the quick flesh disappeared it is unclean on account of the spreading; if the spreading disappeared it is unclean on account of the quick flesh. 
2) So also in the case of white hair and a spreading.   
3) If it [the bright spot] disappeared and appeared again at the end of the week, it is regarded as though it had remained as it was.   
4) If it reappeared after it had been pronounced clean, it must be inspected as a new one.   
5) If it had been bright white but was now dull white, or if it had been dull white but was now bright white, it is regarded as though it had remained as it was, provided that it does not become less white than the four principal colors.   
6) If it contracted and then spread, or if it spread and then contracted: 
a) Rabbi Akiva rules that it is unclean;
b) But the sages rule that it is clean.

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah refers to a person who has a bright spot (a nega) and then was isolated.  When examined again it had quick flesh and a spreading and the priest pronounced him impure. If one of these signs disappears, he is still impure because of the presence of the second sign. 
Section two: The same thing is true if one of the signs is a white hair and one is spreading.
Section three: The person was isolated at the beginning of the week because of the appearance of a nega. During the week of isolation, the nega disappeared and then reappeared. We treat this as if the nega had never disappeared. If he is at the end of the first week, the priest will isolate him for another week. If he is at the end of the second week, then he will be pronounced pure.
Section four: If the nega disappeared and he was pronounced pure, and then it reappeared, it is treated as if it was a new nega. He will need two periods of isolation before he can be pronounced pure again.
Section five: If the nega changes color it is still treated as the same nega as long as it is still one of the four requisite shades mentioned in 1:1.
Section six: There are two situations described here. In the first the nega is large enough to be impure and then it becomes smaller than a barleycorn and then it spreads back to its original size. Rabbi Akiva counts this as "spreading" and therefore declares it impure. The sages say that this does not count as spreading, so he is not impure. If he is at the end of the second week of isolation, he is pure. 
The second situation is opposite. It spread and then contracted back to its original size. Rabbi Akiva says that this is a new nega and he must go back to a new period of isolation. The rabbis say again that this doesn't count as spreading and he is pure (if he has already been isolated for two weeks).  
      
