Negaim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah discusses what happens if while pronouncing whether a given nega is clean or unclean, there are changes in the nega. 

Mishnah Three
1) A bright spot in which there were no signs of uncleanness:
a) At the beginning, or at the end of the first week, he is isolated; 
b) At the end of the second week or after it had been pronounced clean, he is pronounced clean. 
c) If while the priest was about to isolate him or to pronounce him clean, signs of uncleanness appeared in it, he certifies him as unclean. 
2) A bright spot in which there are signs of uncleanness, he certifies him as unclean. 
a) If while the priest was about to certify it as unclean the signs of uncleanness disappeared:
i) If at the beginning, or at the end of the first week, he isolates him; 
ii) But if at the end of the second week or after the spot had been pronounced clean, he is pronounced clean.

Explanation
Section one: If the bright spot has no signs of uncleanness (white hairs or quick flesh) he is isolated for one week and then for another, if the nega doesn't change. If at the end of two weeks no signs have developed, he is pronounced pure. This is all information we know and it is only here because of the next line.
The mishnah adds that if while the priest is pronouncing him pure, signs of impurity appear, he must be certified as unclean. 
Section two: In this case the bright spot was already examined and certified unclean. This is obvious (like in section one).
While pronouncing him unclean the signs of impurity disappear but the nega remains. If this occurs in the beginning or at the end of the first week, he is isolated as he would be with any nega that doesn't have one of the signs of impurity. However, if this occurs after the second week ,or after he has been pronounced clean the signs return to the nega and then while pronouncing him unclean they disappear again, he is pronounced clean.
To summarize this mishnah: if the status of the nega changes while the priest is making his proclamation, the change must be taken into account, whether this causes a stringency (section one) or a leniency (section two).  
