Negaim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah describes the end of the purification process for the metzora. It explicates the following verses:
9 On the seventh day he shall shave off all his hair — of head, beard, and eyebrows. When he has shaved off all his hair, he shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water; then he shall be clean. 10 On the eighth day he shall take two male lambs without blemish, one ewe lamb in its first year without blemish, three-tenths of a measure of choice flour with oil mixed in for a meal offering, and one log of oil. 11 These shall be presented before the Lord, with the man to be cleansed, at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, by the priest who performs the cleansing. 12 The priest shall take one of the male lambs and offer it with the log of oil as a guilt offering, and he shall elevate them as an elevation offering before the Lord. 13 The lamb shall be slaughtered at the spot in the sacred area where the sin offering and the burnt offering are slaughtered. For the guilt offering, like the sin offering, goes to the priest; it is most holy. 14 The priest shall take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and the priest shall put it on the ridge of the right ear of him who is being cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. 15 The priest shall then take some of the log of oil and pour it into the palm of his own left hand. 16 And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in the palm of his left hand and sprinkle some of the oil with his finger seven times before the Lord. 17 Some of the oil left in his palm shall be put by the priest on the ridge of the right ear of the one being cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot — over the blood of the guilt offering. 18 The rest of the oil in his palm the priest shall put on the head of the one being cleansed. Thus the priest shall make expiation for him before the Lord. 19 The priest shall then offer the sin offering and make expiation for the one being cleansed of his uncleanness. Last, the burnt offering shall be slaughtered, 20 and the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meal offering on the altar, and the priest shall make expiation for him. Then he shall be clean. 
Mishnah Three
1) On the seventh day he shaves off his hair a second time in the manner of the first shaving, he washes his garments and immerses  himself. 
2) He is clean in so far as not to convey uncleanness as a sheretz, but he was still like a tevul yom.   
3) He may eat second tithe. 
4) After sunset he may eat terumah. 
5) After he had brought his offering of atonement, he may also eat sacred things. 
6) Thus there are three grades in the  purification of a metzora and three grades in the purification of a woman after child birth. 

Explanation
Section one: As stated in verse 9.
Section two: He has now rid himself of impurity. His status is that of a "tevul yom." This is a person who has immersed in a mikveh but the sun has not yet set. While he doesn't defile anything, if he touches terumah or holy things (sacrifices) he disqualifies them (see Kelim 1:5).
Section three: He may now eat second tithe. Note that anyone can eat first tithe, even one who is completely impure. 
Section four: After the sun sets, he can eat terumah.
Section five: After he brings his sacrifices (described at length in the Torah) he is now fully clean. This is stated in v. 20. He can now eat even sacrifices.
Section six: We have now seen three stages of purity: 1) At the beginning of his purification process (mishnah 2), 2) after the second immersion (section two) and 3) after bringing his sacrifices. 
A woman after childbirth also has three stages of purification. The first is 7 days after the birth of a boy and 14 after the birth of a girl, the second is 40 days after the birth of a boy and 80 after a girl, and once she brings her sacrifices she is completely pure. See Leviticus 12:2-8.     
