Negaim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today's mishnah is a continuation of yesterday's. It discusses a case where the nega was not impure because the person or part of body was not subject to negaim when it first appeared. Then when the person or area of body became subject to the laws of negaim the nega changed color. For instance, a non-Jew had a nega of a certain color and then once he converted, the nega turned into a different color. The question at hand is whether or not this must be treated as a new nega.

Mishnah Two
1) If their color changed, whether to be lenient or stringent:
a) How is it "to be lenient"? 
i) If it was white like snow and it became white like the lime of the Temple, or like wool or like the skin of an egg, or [as white] as the second shade of a rising or the second shade of bright white.
b) How is it "to be stringent"? 
i) If it was the color of the skin of an egg and it became like white wool, the lime of the Temple or like snow.
2) Rabbi Eliezer ben Azariah rules that they are clean. 
3) Rabbi Eliezer Hisma says:  if the change was to be lenient it is clean, but if it was one to be stringent it must be inspected as if it were a new one. 
4) Rabbi Akiva says: whether the change was to be lenient or to be strict it must be inspected as if it were a new one.

Explanation
Section one: There are two ways for the color to change. A whiter color can get darker (this is "to be lenient") and a darker color can become whiter (this is "to be strict"). These various colors are mentioned in 1:1. 
Section two: Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah says that even if the color changes, it is still the same nega and since it started in a case of purity, it remains pure.
Section three: Rabbi Eliezer Hisma distinguishes between white spots that get darker and darker white spots that get lighter. If the spot gets darker, the rule is lenient and it remains clean. But if it gets darker, we have to treat it as a new nega, and it must be examined afresh by the priest.
Section four: Rabbi Akiva says in either case it must be examined, for any change causes it to be considered a new nega. 
