Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) Colored hides and garments are not susceptible to negaim. 
a) Houses whether they are colored or not colored, are susceptible to negaim, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
2) Rabbi Judah says: hides are like houses.
3) Rabbi Shimon says: those that are naturally [colored] are susceptible to uncleanness but those that are artificially [dyed] are not susceptible to uncleanness. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, hides and garments must be uncolored for them to be susceptible to negaim. Even if their color is natural, such as the hide of a tiger or some other colorful animal, clothing made of them is not susceptible to impurity. Houses (we shall learn about house impurity in the next chapter) on the other hand are different. They are susceptible whether they have been colored or not. 
Section two: Rabbi Judah says hides and houses are treated the same—both are susceptible whether they are colored are not.
Section three: Rabbi Shimon says that hides are susceptible if they are naturally colored, but they are not susceptible if their color is artificial, meaning they have been dyed. 
While the theoretical basis of this dispute is not explained, perhaps we could surmise that there is an issue of "nature" here. Wool and linen are naturally white (or dirty white). Therefore, if they are colored, they are removed from the realm of the natural and no longer susceptible to impurity. Human skin too is "natural" and therefore it is susceptible to impurity. In other words, human skin is the paradigm for the other types of negaim. 
In contrast to wool and linen, there is less of a "natural" color to houses, and therefore, they are susceptible to impurity even if they have been dyed or the material is naturally colored. In other words, nature plays no role here because they are far removed from nature anyway.
The debate is over hides—Rabbi Judah says that hides have no natural color, therefore they are like houses and are always susceptible.  Rabbi Shimon says that if the hide has a natural color, then it is of course "natural" and is susceptible. But if it has been artificially dyed, it is not susceptible, just like wool and cloth. 
 
