Negaim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today's mishnah continues with the purification process. It explains the verses from Leviticus where yesterday's mishnah left off (Leviticus 14:7-8).

7 He shall then sprinkle it seven times on him who is to be cleansed of the eruption and cleanse him; and he shall set the live bird free in the open field. 8 The one to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, shave off all his hair, and bathe in water; then he shall be clean. After that he may enter the camp, but he must remain outside his tent seven days.  

Mishnah Two
1) He now comes to set free the living bird. He does not turn his face towards the sea or towards the city or towards the wilderness, for it is said, "But he shall let the living bird go out of the city into the open field" (Leviticus 14:53).  
2) He now comes to shave off the hair of the metzora. He passes a razor over the whole of his skin, and he [the metzora] washes his clothes and immerses himself. 
3) He is then clean so far as to not convey uncleanness by entrance, but he still conveys uncleanness as does a sheretz.   
4) He may enter within the walls [of Jerusalem], but must keep away from his house for seven days, and he is forbidden to have intercourse. 

Explanation
Section one: Leviticus 14:7 (quoted above) says only that the live bird should be set free in the open field. But 14:53, in connection with the purification of a house, states that the bird should be let out of the city into the open field. The rabbis take this to mean that the priest releasing the bird should look out into an open field, and not into a city, sea or wilderness (desert).
Section two:  See v. 8.
Section three: The mishnah clarifies the level of his purity achieved at this point by the metzora. He no longer defiles in the same way that a metzora does—by entering a building (see 13:7). However, he still defiles in a lesser way, by contact, as does one who has been defiled by contact with a sheretz (a creepy-crawly thing. See Kelim 1:1). He will achieve complete purity later on, as we shall see.
Section four: The "camp" referred to in Leviticus 14:8 is interpreted to be the walls of Jerusalem. He can now enter the "camp" but he cannot yet enter his own tent. The rabbis read the word "tent" in two ways: 1) he can't enter his home; 2) he can't have relations with his wife. This is not the only case in which the rabbis interpret "tent" to refer to a husband's sexual relations with his wife.    

   
