Negaim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) One who came [in front of the priest] with all his body white is isolated. 
2) If white hair grew, he is certified unclean. 
a) If both hairs or one of them turned black, 
b) If both or one of them became short, 
c) If a boil adjoined both or one of them, 
d) If a boil surrounded both or one of them, 
e) Or if a boil, the quick flesh of a boil, a burn, the quick flesh of a burn, or white scurf divided them [he is pure]. 
3) If quick flesh or white hair arose, he is unclean; 
a) But if neither quick flesh nor white hair arose he is clean. 
4) In all these cases if the ends of his limbs reappeared he remains as he was before.   
5) If the nega broke out, covering a part of him, he is unclean.   
a) If it broke out covering all of them, he is clean.

Explanation
Section one: Someone who comes in front of a priest and is already completely covered by a nega is to be isolated, just as if he had come in front of the priest with a bright spot the size of a split bean. He isn't pure, because a nega covering the whole body is a sign of purity only if he was already impure.
Section two: If white hair grew at the end of the first or second week, then he will be certified unclean.
The remainder of this section are all circumstances that makes the person pure. The mishnah listed these things and I explained them in 1:5.
Section three: This goes back to referring to the person who came to the priest totally covered by a nega. Quick flesh and white hair are both signs of impurity and therefore if they develop after the first or second week he is impure. And if either of these signs does not appear, then he is pure.
Section four: Whether or not quick flesh or white hair appeared or whether it appeared and then disappeared, if the ends of his limbs return to their natural color, he stays pure. This is not like a normal case where the natural color returns to a person who had been fully covered by a nega, since in this case he was not made pure by having become fully covered. In other words, this person is treated as if he simply came in front of the priest with a nega. If signs appear, he is impure. If signs don't appear or appear and then disappear, he is pure, even if the nega begins to leave parts of his body. 
Section five: If after the natural color returns to the ends of his limbs the nega begins to spread again, he is impure because spreading is a sign of impurity. If it then spreads and covers his entire body he is pure, for this is a case of spreading over the entire body of one who is impure. 

 
