Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) [A nega] that remained unchanged during the first week must be washed and isolated.
2) One that remains unchanged during the second week must be burned. 
3) One that spread during the first or the second week must be burned. 
4) If it becomes dimmer in the beginning:
a) Rabbi Ishmael says: it should be washed and isolated. 
b) But the sages say: he is not required [to do so].   
5) If the nega became dimmer during the first week it must be washed and isolated. 
6) If it became dimmer during the second week it must be torn out, and that which is torn out must be burnt, and it is necessary for a patch to be put on.   
a) Rabbi Nehemiah says: a patch is not necessary.   

Explanation
Section one:  This halakhah is stated explicitly in Leviticus 13:53-54: "But if the priest sees that the affection in the cloth — whether in warp or in woof, or in any article of skin — has not spread, the priest shall order the affected article washed, and he shall isolate it for another seven days."
Section two: If it is still there after the second week, the garment must be burned, as is stated in verse 55: "And if, after the affected article has been washed, the priest sees that the affection has not changed color and that it has not spread, it is unclean. It shall be consumed in fire; it is a fret, whether on its inner side or on its outer side."
Section three: If it spreads during either week, it is impure and must be burned, as it says: "If the affection has spread in the cloth — whether in the warp or the woof, or in the skin, for whatever purpose the skin may be used — the affection is a malignant eruption; it is unclean. The cloth — whether warp or woof in wool or linen, or any article of skin — in which the affection is found, shall be burned, for it is a malignant eruption; it shall be consumed in fire."
Section four: According to Rabbi Ishmael, if it becomes dimmer before it is even brought to the priest, it is treated as if it became dimmer at the end of the first week. In such a case he must wash the garment and isolate it for another week. But the sages say that since the color is already weaker than the required strong green or red, it need not even be isolated. It is pure.
Section five: If it becomes dimmer during the first week of isolation, it should be washed and set aside for another week.
Section six: Leviticus 13:56 states, " But if the priest sees that the affected part, after it has been washed, is faded, he shall tear it out from the cloth or skin, whether in the warp or in the woof." According to the sages, if the spot fades during the second week, the faded spot must be torn out and then replaced by a patch. This way we can see if it appears again in the same place.
Rabbi Nehemiah says that he need not put on a patch.  
