Negaim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In all of the cases in this mishnah, there were signs of impurity in the nega and the person was declared impure. And then those signs disappeared and new signs arose. The question is: does this count as a new nega or does he continue in his earlier state of impurity?

Mishnah Two
1) If one had been certified unclean on account of white hair, and the white hair disappeared and other white hair appeared, 
a) And so also in the case of quick flesh or a spreading, 
b) Whether this occurred in the beginning, at the end of the first week, at the end of the second week, or after he had been released from uncleanness, he is regarded as being in the same position as before.  
2) If he had been certified unclean on account of quick flesh, and the quick  flesh disappeared and other quick flesh appeared, 
a) And so also in the case of white hair and spreading, 
b) Whether this occurred in the beginning, at the end of the first week, at the end of the second week, or after the man had been released from uncleanness, he is regarded as being in the same position as before.  
3) If he had been certified unclean on account of a spreading, and the spreading disappeared and another spreading appeared, 
a) And so also in the case of white hair,  
b) Whether this occurred at the end of the first week, at the end of the second week, or after the man had been released from uncleanness, he is in the same position as before.

Explanation
Section one: In the first example, the sign of impurity was the white hairs. After having been declared impure, the original white hairs disappeared and either new white hairs came in their place, or quick flesh or the spreading of the original nega, both of which are also signs of impurity. No matter when this "replacement" occurred, he continues in his earlier state of impurity. In other words, if he was deemed impure immediately, without any weeks of isolation, or if he was deemed impure after a week or two weeks of isolation, or even if he was declared pure after the isolation, if the original signs disappear and new signs, he retains (or regains) his original impurity.
Section two: This section is the same as section one, except the original sign is quick flesh and not white hairs.
Section three: Here the original sign is the spreading. "Spreading" cannot be a sign of impurity at the outset, therefore this section does not read "in the beginning." 
