Negaim, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Today's mishnah continues to deal with the procedure of inspecting and declaring impure a house in which a nega has been found. 

Mishnah Six
1) [The priest] must not go into his own house to isolate it, nor may he stand within the house in which there is a nega. 
a) Rather, he must stand at the door of the house in which is there is a nega, and isolate it from there, as it is said, "The priest shall come out of the house to the entrance of the house, and close up the house for seven days" (Leviticus 14:38).   
2) He comes again at the end of the week and inspects the sign to see if it spread.
3) "The priest shall order the stones with the plague in them to be pulled out and cast outside the city into an unclean place" (v. 40). 
4) "They shall take other stones and replace those stones with them, and take other dirt and plaster the house" (v. 42).
a) He must not take stones from the one side and bring them to the other; nor earth from the one side and bring it to the other; nor lime from anywhere.   
b) He must not bring one stone to replace two, nor two to replace one. 
c) But he can bring two to replace two or to replace three or to replace four. 
5) From here they have said: Woe to the wicked, woe to his neighbor. Both must take out the stones, both must scrape the walls, and both must bring the new stones.   
6) He alone, however, brings the earth, as it is said, "And he shall take other coating and plaster the house."  His neighbor need not join with him in the plastering. 

Explanation
Section one: The priest's pronunciation that the house should be isolated to see if the nega spreads is done from outside the house. This is stated quite clearly in Leviticus 14:38. 
Section two: After the first week of isolation, the priest comes back to see if the nega spread or disappeared.
Section three: If the nega has spread, the priest orders the stones that have the plague on them to be removed and cast out of the city.
Section four: Then they replace the stones and plaster the house. The mishnah explains that these other stones must be from outside the house. Furthermore, since the Torah says that he should take "dirt" he may not use plaster in coating the house.
He also can't bring one large stone to replace two, nor two smaller stones to replace one. However, he can bring two stones to replace three.
Section five: The Torah's verbs and nouns in this section are mostly in the plural. From here the rabbis learn that if a shared wall is contaminated with a nega, the neighbor on the opposite side of the wall must also remove the stones from his side of the wall, even though that side was not affected. There is also a moral lesson to be derived here. Since the rabbis believe that negaim come as a punishment for the evil tongue, they can add "woe to the neighbor" of such a person. Slander and gossip negatively affect one's community, and this is ritually symbolized by the requirement that the neighbor of a person affected by a nega must also remove his stones. 
Section six: The verb for plastering the house is in the singular. Therefore, when it comes to that action, only the person whose house has been directly affected performs it.
