Niddah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
1) A woman who is having difficult labor is regarded as a menstruant. 
2) If she had difficult labor for three days of the eleven days and she ceased having pains for twenty-four hours and then gave birth, she is regarded as having given birth in zivah, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. 
a) Rabbi Joshua says: a night and a day, as the night and the day of Shabbat.
3) That she ceased from having pain, but not from bleeding.

Explanation
Section one: A woman who is having difficult, protracted labor and is bleeding, is considered to be a niddah.  This seems a bit strange to us—after all, a pregnant woman can't menstruate.  But it is in reality a leniency that this blood is not considered to be blood of zivah (non-menstrual blood). If it were non-menstrual blood she would have to wait seven days in which she doesn't bleed to become clean. Since it is considered menstrual blood, she will be clean seven days after giving birth (for a boy, 14 for a girl).
Section two:  The eleven days referred to here are the eleven days between menstrual periods in which any blood flow is considered to be zivah. This woman had difficult labor for three days, meaning she bled during a period of three days. Normally, this blood would be considered zivah, because it came not during the time when blood is considered menstrual. However, because she was in labor, we considered the blood to be menstrual blood, as we saw in section one. But then she ceased having pains. When she gives birth, we now can consider the blood to be zivah blood. In other words, since the pains stopped, the blood is considered to be zivah after all and not from the birth itself.
Rabbi Eliezer says that the cessation of pain must be for 24 hours. Rabbi Joshua says that the cessation must be for a whole day like Shabbat, from night through the entire next day. A simple 24 hour cessation is not enough.
Section three: This section explains that the cessation is only from the pains of labor. The bleeding continues. If she were to stop bleeding as well and then give birth, she would not even be considered as having given birth from zivah.  The blood that comes at childbirth would be from childbirth and she would be impure 7/14 as is always the case after childbirth. 
