Niddah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) If a woman miscarried on the fortieth day, she need not be concerned that it was a valid childbirth.
2) On the forty-first day, she sits as for both a male and a female and as for a menstruant. 
3) Rabbi Ishmael says: [if she miscarried on] the forty-first day she sits as for a male and as for a menstruant, 
a) But if on the eighty-first day she sits as for a male and a female and a menstruant, because a male is fully fashioned on the forty-first day and a female on the eighty-first day. 
4) But the sages say: the fashioning of the male and the fashioning   of the female both take forty-one days.

Explanation
Section one: The rabbis believed that it took forty days for a fetus to form. We should note that this was a common belief in the ancient world, one that I believe was shared by Aristotle as well. [It also had implications for the laws concerning abortion. For instance Philo, an early Jewish philosopher, stated that abortion was permitted up till the fortieth day, because that is when the fetus is formed.] If she miscarries before the fortieth day, the rabbis believe that it could not be a fetus.
Section two: If she miscarries on the 41st day, and it is not clear if it was a miscarriage or blood, she must be concerned lest it was a male, lest it was a female and lest it was menstruation. This situation was explained in yesterday's mishnah. 
Section three: Rabbi Ishmael seems to believe that males are formed on the 41st day after conception and females on the 81st day. Therefore, if she miscarries between the 41st and 80th days, she need not be concerned lest it was female. [What he is saying is that females begin as males and only turn into females on day 81. Interesting, although obviously incorrect]. This means that she will be impure for seven days. If blood appears after this time, she is again a niddah. The blood is not pure because we are not sure if she gave birth. 
Section four: The sages espouse a more egalitarian view—both males and females are formed on the 41st day. If she miscarries after this, she must be concerned lest it was a male, female or menstruation, as we explained above. 
