Niddah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The remainder of this chapter goes through developmental stages of children and notes when they are obligated or subject to various laws. 

Mishnah Three
1) A girl one day old defiles due to menstruation. 
2) A girl ten days old defiles due to zivah. 
3) A boy one day old defiles due to zivah, and defiles due to scale disease and due to corpse uncleanness; 
4) He subjects [his deceased brother's widow] to yibbum [levirate marriage];   
5) He exempts [his mother] from yibbum,   
6) He enables her to eat terumah
7) And he disqualifies her from eating terumah;   
8) He inherits and transmits inheritance;  
9) He who kills him is guilty of murder, 
10) And he counts to his father, to his mother and to all his relatives as  a fully grown man.  

Explanation
Section one: If for some reason a baby girl begins to menstruate, the blood can count as menstrual blood which defiles. I realize that this is highly unlikely, but what the rabbis are in essence saying is that there is no age at which we could consider menstrual blood to be something else. 
Section two: However, she must be ten days old for any bloody discharge to possibly count as zivah, non-menstrual blood. This is because if she bled for the first seven days of her life, it would count as niddah. Then to become a zavah, she must bleed three straight days not during the time of her period. So in order for her to become a zavah she would have to be 10 days old. 
Section three: A boy on the other hand can't be a niddah (obviously). Therefore, if he has bloody discharge from his penis, he can be a zav immediately. Similarly, other types of defilement need not wait until he is older. If he has scale disease (negaim) he is impure and he conveys impurity; the same is true if he dies—his corpse defiles.
Section four: If he has a brother who dies childless, his brother's wife is subject to yibbum with him. She will have to wait until he is old enough to perform yibbum or halitzah.
Section five: If a man dies and he has a child who is even one day old, his wife is not subject to yibbum.
Section six: If the father was a kohen and he dies, his wife can continue eating terumah by virtue of her son.
Section seven: If the father was not a kohen and the wife was, and the father dies, because she has a son she does not go back to her father's home to continue to eat terumah. Her one day old son disqualifies her from eating terumah. 
Section eight: If a woman dies on the day her son is born, the son inherits his mother's estate. If the son dies on the same day he can transmit his mother's inheritance to his paternal brother. In this way, the mother's estate can shift to her husband's child from another wife, all within one day.
Section nine: A one-day old is fully alive—therefore one who kills him is liable for murder.
Section ten: This is basically just a summary of the entire mishnah—a one day old child is a full living human being. We might add that there may be a polemic here against the common Greco-Roman tolerance of infanticide. As is well-known, Greek thought allowed for the killing of unwanted babies. The rabbis did not tolerate such a position. At the moment of birth a child is a full human being.  
