Niddah, Chapter Six, Mishnah Fourteen

Mishnah Fourteen
1) If a woman observed [a discharge of blood] on the eleventh day at twilight, at the beginning of a menstruation period and at the end of a menstruation period, at the beginning of a zivah period and at the end of a zivah period; 
2) On the fortieth day after the birth of a male or on the eightieth day after the birth of a female,   
3) At twilight in all these cases, behold these women have made a mistake [in their reckoning].   
4) Rabbi Joshua said: before you fix the situation for the women who lack intelligence, come and fix the situation for the wise ones.

Explanation
Section one: Albeck explains this section according to the Talmud which reads it as if it says, "at the beginning of a menstruation period and at the end of a zivah period or at the end of a menstruation period and at the end of a zivah period." In other words, a woman sees a discharge of blood at twilight at the end of the eleventh day of her zivah period which could also be considered the beginning of her menstrual period. If it is zivah, she is impure for one day for every day she saw blood; if it is menstrual blood then she is impure for seven days. The same doubt occurs if she sees blood on the seventh day at twilight of her menstrual days—she cannot be sure if it is menstrual blood or zivah blood.
Section two: If she saw blood at twilight on the fortieth day after the birth of a male or the 80th day after the birth of a female, we are not sure if the blood is pure because for 40/80 days after the birth a male or female child a woman's blood is pure, or it is impure blood.
Section three: In all of these cases we must consider the woman as having lost her count. The women must act as if they were zavot and if they had blood for two more days after the first discharge, they must bring the appropriate hatat (sin-offering) sacrifice at the end of their period of impurity. However, since we are not sure whether or not they are actually liable for the hatat, it may not be eaten. 
Section four: According to Albeck, Rabbi Joshua's comment refers to Mishnah 2:1, where we learned that intelligent women could help supervise women who are not considered to have halakhic intelligence. He says to the sages who composed that mishnah—instead of worrying about those woman who lack the intelligence to keep track of their own cycles, you should worry about the intelligent women, who theoretically are able to keep track of these things, but because of the complications of this system, cannot do so.  
 
