Niddah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
As background to this mishnah, we should remember that the rabbis count two periods in a woman's cycle: a seven day period in which blood she sees counts as menstrual which is followed by an 11 day period in which blood she sees counts as zivah, unnatural bloody discharge. 

Mishnah Eight 
1) If a woman observed a discharge on the eleventh day and immersed in the evening and then had marital intercourse: 
a) Bet Shammai say: they defile  a couch and a seat and they are liable to a sacrifice
b) But Bet Hillel says: they are exempt from the sacrifice.
2) If she immersed on the next day and then had marital intercourse and after that observed a discharge:
a) Bet Shammai say: they convey uncleanness5 to couch and seat6 and are exempt from the sacrifice,
b) But Bet Hillel says: such a person is a glutton.
3) They agree that if a woman observed a discharge during the eleven days and immersed in the evening and then had intercourse that both (she and he) defile couch and seat and are liable to a sacrifice.
4) If she immersed on the next day and then had intercourse, such an act is improper conduct, but the uncleanness of their contact and their liability to a sacrifice on account of their intercourse are in suspense.

Explanation
Section one: A woman observes a blood discharge on the eleventh day after her menstruation. This is still the period of "zivah"—when she should observe a day of purity for each discharge. If she instead goes to the mikveh that night and then has intercourse, Bet Shammai says that both she and her husband defile as do men and women who had relations while she was a zavah. This means they defile things they sit or lay on, even if they don't directly have contact. 
Bet Hillel says that they are exempt from a sacrifice, although they do defile, at least derabanan (rabbinically). The reason is that the eleventh day cannot be counted as part of  a three day period of zivah, the amount necessary for her to become a "zavah gedolah." For if she had discharge on the 11th, 12th and 13th day, she would not become a zavah gedolah (who is impure for seven days and has to bring a sacrifice) because the latter two days are part of the days of niddah, in the next cycle. Bet Hillel says that she shouldn't bring a sacrifice, because it is forbidden to bring non-sacrificial animals into the Temple. However, they still defile, because this is something she should not have been doing.
Section two: This woman didn't observe a full day of purity because she immersed during the day and not at night as she should have. Bet Shammai says that since she observed part of the day, she and her husband do not need to bring a sacrifice. However, they still defile, at least according to rabbinic law. 
Bet Hillel clearly condemns this behavior—she is gluttonous, for she put her desire for sex over the laws of purity. However, they don't defile because she did go to the mivkveh before having relations.
Section three: Bet Hillel agrees that if she sees a blood discharge during the eleven days and then goes straight to the mikveh instead of observing one day, that the mikveh does not cleanse her. She and her husband defile and must bring a sin-offering to atone for their transgression.
Section four: This woman saw a discharge during the eleven days and then went to the mivkeh the next day. If she doesn't see blood again, then it will turn out that although what she did was wrong, she and her husband don't defile and are not liable for a sacrifice. However, if she sees blood again the next night, they will defile and be liable for a sacrifice, for she would be considered a zavah. 

Congratulations! We have completed Tractate Niddah!
As I always write, it is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Tractate Niddah was not an easy journey, I'll admit. A lot of discussion about private matters in a very graphic way. If there's one larger point I would like to make it is that in biblical and temple times the impurity of a niddah was just one of many forms of impurity, one part of a much larger system. Today, this is virtually the only part of the system that remains (because of the sex prohibition), and it might seem at time that women are being targeted for being women. I don't believe that this is the case and when one learns all of Seder Toharot, and if you've been following along, you're not very far from being one of those people, one can see that impurity occurs in many different ways. That's my two cents.  
In any case, as always, a hearty yasher koach upon completing the tractate and keep up the good work. Tomorrow we begin Makhshirin.   

  
   
