Niddah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a woman who discovers that she has had her menstrual period but is not sure when it began. The question is at what point does she have to assume that she was already impure such that the things that she touched must be considered impure?

Mishnah One
1) Shammai says: for all women it suffices [to reckon] their [period of uncleanness from their time [of discovering the flow].  
a) Hillel ruled: [their period of uncleanness is to be reckoned retroactively] from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination, even if this was many days. 
b) The sages say: [the law is] not like the words of these or the words of those, but [the women are deemed to have been unclean] during [the preceding] twenty-four hours  when this  lessens the period from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination, and during the period from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination when this  lessens the period of twenty-four hours. 
2) For any woman who has a regular period it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time she discovers the flow.
3) And if a woman uses rags when she has marital intercourse, this is like an examination which lessens either the period of the [past] twenty-four hours or the period from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination.

Explanation
Section one: There are three different opinions as to how far back a woman (who does not have a regular menstrual cycle) must assume she was impure after she has discovered her period. 
Shammai is most lenient. She is considered impure only from the moment in which she discovers that she has had her period. If, for instance, she discovered her period in the afternoon, the pure things that she touched in the morning remain pure.
Hillel rules most strictly. She is reckoned impure from the last time that she checked herself, even if it has been many days. Hillel is concerned that immediately after her last clean check (when she didn't find that she was bleeding) she began to bleed and just didn't notice it. Therefore, anything she has touched since the last clean check must be considered defiled. 
The sages' opinion falls somewhere in between the two. There are two time periods that play into account—twenty-four hours and the last clean examination. A woman cannot be retroactively considered unclean for more than 24 hours. She also is clean from the last time she had a clean examination. She is therefore considered unclean from whatever is the lesser of the two. If she examined herself in the morning and found herself clean and then discovered her period in the evening, anything she touched after the clean examination is unclean. But if she examined herself on Sunday morning and then found herself unclean on Monday evening, only the things that she touched over the last 24 hours are considered impure.
Section two: All of the above refers only to a woman who has not established a regular menstrual cycle. If she has a regular cycle, she defiles things only from the time in which she discovered that she was menstruating.
Section three: A woman who cleans herself with rags after sexual intercourse is considered to have examined herself. If she doesn't find blood on the rags, and then sees blood later, she defiles only the things that she has touched since she cleaned herself with these rags. In other words, although the purpose of these rags is not for self-examination, since blood would be noticed, it counts as an examination. 
