Niddah, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah is really a continuation of the topic from last chapter. It discusses what counts as a sign of having reached puberty—the development of pubic hair (the lower sign) or the development of breasts (the upper sign). 

Mishnah One
1) If the lower sign appears before the upper sign, she can perform halitzah or yibbum.
2) If the upper sign appears before the lower sign, even though this is impossible:
a) Rabbi Meir says: she doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum.
b) And the sages say: she can perform halitzah or yibbum.
c) For they have said: it is possible for the lower sign to appear before the upper sign, but it is impossible for the upper sign to appear before the lower sign. 

Explanation
Section one:  The appearance of the lower sign (pubic hair) counts as having reached puberty, even if the upper sign (breast development) had not yet appeared. Therefore, she is fully subject to the laws of halitzah and yibbum, for she is certainly of majority age. 
Section two: Both Rabbi Meir and the other sages agree that the upper sign cannot appear before the lower sign. However, Rabbi Meir still thinks that if such a thing does appear to happen, we must be concerned lest it did happen. In such a case, she couldn't do halitzah or yibbum because she is still a minor. So if she was married and her husband died without children, she would have to wait till she hits majority age to perform either halitzah or yibbum. Note, however, that this is according to Rabbi Meir, who holds that a minor girl cannot do yibbum, lest it eventually turns out the she is an "aylonit," one who never becomes sexually mature. The other sages (see 5:4) hold that we are not concerned with such an eventuality. Even a minor girl could perform yibbum, but not halitzah. 
In any case, the other sages say that if the upper sign appears then the lower sign must have appeared. She is considered to have reached majority age, and she can even do halitzah. 
  
