Niddah, Chapter One, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Today's mishnah teaches that although women who have regular menstrual cycle do not retroactively defile things (see mishnah one), they should examine themselves at certain prescribed time regularly to make sure that they has not begun to menstruate. 

Mishnah Seven
1) Although though they said [that for a woman who has a regular period] it suffices to reckon her period of uncleanness from the time she observes a flow, she should nevertheless examine herself [regularly],  except for a menstruant or one who is sitting over pure blood.   
2) She should also use testing-rags when she has marital intercourse except when she is sitting over pure blood or when she is a virgin whose blood is clean.
3) And twice [daily] she should examine herself: in the morning  and at the [evening] twilight, and also when she is about to have sexual relations.
4) Priestly women are subject to an additional restriction [for they should examine themselves] when they are going to eat terumah. 
a) Rabbi Judah said: [these must examine themselves] also after they have concluded eating terumah. 

Explanation
Section one: Even a woman who has a regular menstrual cycle should still examine herself regularly to make sure she has not begun to menstruate. 
I should note here that most women might find this strange—don't women know when they are menstruating, even without checking? Truthfully, I think this is a legitimate complaint against the rabbis, but if I were to offer a defense I might say two things. First of all, the rabbis were men who obviously knew nothing about what it might feel like to be menstruating.
Second, women had frequent contact with the food and the instruments whose purity should be preserved. Therefore, a woman who was impure and didn't know that she was could defile a lot of terumah or vessels used with terumah. To avoid this serious problem, the rabbis mandated that all women examine themselves regularly. 
There are two types of women who don't need to examine themselves regularly. The first is obviously a woman who is already menstruating. The second is a woman who has recently given birth. Leviticus 12:4-5 prescribes 33 days following a seven day period of impurity for a boy or 66 days following a 14 day impurity period for a girl in which a woman's blood flow is pure. Since any such blood is considered pure, there would be no practical reason for her to examine herself.  
Section two: Generally, a woman should examine herself using examination rags both before and after sexual intercourse. Before intercourse she should examine herself because it is prohibited to have intercourse when she is menstruating. Afterwards she should examine herself to make sure that she has not defiled her husband.
Obviously, a "virgin" referred to in this mishnah is not a woman who has never had sex. Rather, it is a woman who has not yet begun to menstruate, as we learned in mishnah four. A woman who is married before she begins to menstruate need not check herself. 
Section three: This section refers to a woman who must examine herself because she doesn't have a regular period (or for some other reason). Without an examination, , she will defile everything which she had contact with during the previous twenty-four hours. 
Such a woman should examine herself in the morning to make sure that any pure things that she worked with at night were not defiled. She should also examine herself in the evening to make sure that the stuff that she worked with during the day was not defiled. 
Section four: Priestly women (either daughters of priests or wives of priests) who are regularly occupying themselves with terumah should examine themselves even more regularly. According to the first opinion, they should examine themselves before they eat terumah so that they do not defile the terumah that they are about to eat. Rabbi Judah says that they should examine themselves after eating as well. If she is found to be pure, then even the leftover crumbs are pure. In contrast, had she not checked herself afterward and then later that day (or night) found that she had begun to menstruate, the leftover terumah that she had touched would have to be considered impure. 

