Niddah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) If a menstruant examined herself on the seventh day in the morning and found herself to be clean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her separation [from impurity], and after some days she examined herself and found that she was unclean, she is in a presumptive state of cleanness.   
2) If she examined herself on the seventh day in the morning and found that she was unclean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her separation [impurity], and after a time she examined herself and found that she was clean, she is in a presumptive state of uncleanness.   
3) [But] she conveys uncleanness for twenty-four hours retrospectively or during the time between the last and the previous examination.
a) But if she had a regular period, it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time she discovers the flow. 
4) Rabbi Judah says: Any woman who did not ascertain her separation [from impurity] is regarded as being in a presumptive state of uncleanness.   
a) But the sages say: even if she examined herself on the second day of her menstruation and found that she was clean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her separation, and after a time she examined herself and found that she was unclean, she is regarded as being in a presumptive state of cleanness.

Explanation
Section one: This woman examines herself on the seventh day of her menstruation and sees that she has stopped bleeding. That night she can go to the mikveh and become pure. However, she doesn't check again that night to make sure that she is really not bleeding. Instead she just goes to the mikveh. Some days later she sees that she is menstruating again. The question is—was she menstruating between the last examination and the day that she notices that she is menstruating? 
The ruling in this case is that we assume that she was pure during those intermediary days. Since she examined herself and found herself to be pure, there is no reason to assume that she wasn't. Any pure thing she might have touched in the meanwhile remains pure.
Section two: In this case, she examines herself in the morning of the seventh and finds that she is still bleeding. She goes to the mikveh that night, simply assuming that she had stopped bleeding. Then a few days later she notices she is menstruating. Since she never saw that she wasn't bleeding, we have to assume that she was impure all along. Any pure thing she might have touched in the meanwhile is assumed to be impure.
Section three: This section refers to section one. Although she is presumed to have been pure in the intermediary days, she still has the same rule that governs any other woman who finds herself to be impure (see 1:1). She retroactively defiles anything she touched within the last twenty-four hours, or since the last time she examined herself. If, however, she had a regular period and she saw that she was menstruating on the same day that she normally does, then she doesn’t defile anything retroactively. 
Section four: Rabbi Judah disagrees with section one. According to Rabbi Judah any woman who doesn't check herself right before she goes to the mikveh is considered to be impure. The other rabbis, however, are even more lenient. Even if she only examines herself as early as the second day and finds that she is not menstruating, and then goes to the mikveh after the seventh day, she is still considered pure. The assumption seems to be that if she saw the blood flow stop at some point during her period, it didn't start flowing again. 
  
