Niddah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Today's mishnah teaches that a girl has three stages of physical development, each with their own legal ramifications. These ages are: 1) ketanah, a minor; 2) naarah, a girl beginning to mature; 3) a bogeret, a mature girl. The father's rights over his daughter are limited to the first two stages. 
We should note that this was a significant step in giving a far greater degree of independence to young girls. In the Bible, a father's rights over his daughter probably extended until she was married. The rabbis significantly curtailed this, ending his rights over his daughter at the extremely young age of 12. It is unlikely that in reality a father stopped exerting his decision making authority over his daughters at such a young age—even today father's authority over their children extends well past this age. However, even if in reality fathers had significant power over their daughters for a far longer time, the fact is that the rabbis did limit their legal power, thereby creating more room for the girl's independence. . 

Mishnah Seven
1) The sages spoke of [the physical development of] a woman in a parable: an unripe fig, a fig in its early ripening stage and a ripe fig. 
2) "An unripe fig": while she is yet a child; 
3) "A fig in its early ripening stage": when she is in her youth (naarut). 
4) In both ages her father is entitled to anything she finds and to her handiwork and to the right of invalidating her vows. 
5) "A ripe fig"— as soon as she becomes of majority age (bogeret), her father has no longer any right over her.

Explanation
Section one: The rabbis used the analogy of a fig to delineate the three stages of the physical development of a girl. This is clearly an allusion to her sexual development. A fig is somewhat of a sensuous fruit, and reminds us of the Garden of Eden. Sex and eating are often compared, so it seems that this mishnah is saying that a young girl is not ready for sex but that by 12 she is. [Again, I realize that this strikes as an extremely early age. However, we should probably realize that this is an issue that is determined by culture and that in many cultures girls are considered to be sexually ready at far younger ages than they are in our society.]
Section two: A child here is one who has not developed any signs of sexual development.
Section three: Naarut is when a girl begins to show signs of physical development. Her breasts are beginning to grow. Tomorrow's mishnah will go into greater detail.
Section four: A father has full rights over his ketanah and naarah daughter. Anything she finds and anything she makes belongs to him, and if she makes a vow he has the right to invalidate it (see Ketubot 4:4).
Section five: Once she is of majority age, he no longer has any legal rights over her. 
