Niddah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today's mishnah teaches that for a boy to be legally capable of intercourse, he must be 9 years old. Again, I should stress that this is a legal definition. The mishnah is not sanctioning boys having sex at that age. Indeed, I'm sure this was quite uncommon, if not completely unheard of. All they are saying is that a boy under that age is not legally capable of doing having sex. 
While a boy nine years of age can have legally consequential sex, he is not old enough to enter into verbal contracts. We shall see that this creates some interesting ramifications. 

Mishnah Five
1) If a boy the age of nine years and one day had relations with his yevamah, he   acquires her thereby;
2) But he cannot divorce her until he is of majority age. 
3) He contracts uncleanness through intercourse with a menstruant so that he in turn conveys uncleanness to a couch underneath as to a cover above.   
4) He disqualifies a woman from the priesthood.
5) But he doesn't give her the right to eat terumah.   
6) He renders a beast invalid for the altar, and it is stoned on his account.   
7) If he had intercourse with any of the forbidden relations mentioned in the Torah, she is to be executed on his account, but he is exempt from punishment. 

Explanation
Section one: A yevamah, a woman whose husband has died without children, is acquired by the yavam, the brother of the dead husband, through sexual intercourse. What this means is that marriage with a yevam is done not through the money of kiddushin and then huppah, but through intercourse. Since a boy's intercourse at nine years counts, he can acquire his yevamah at that age. Note, he cannot marry a regular woman until he is of majority age. 
Section two: However, divorce is done through a written document and boys of this age do not have the legal ability to execute such documents. Therefore, he couldn't divorce her until he is of majority age.
Section three: Since his intercourse counts, if he has relations with a niddah, he takes on the according level of impurity. This impurity was explained in 4:1.
Section four: If he is disqualified from being a priest, for instance he is a halal (a disqualified priest) or a mamzer, and he has relations with a woman, he disqualifies her from eating terumah.
Section five: Since he can't legally marry a woman, he can't confer upon her the right to eat terumah if he is a priest. This is true even if the woman is his yevamah.
Section six: If he has sex with an animal (I know, this is a bit sick), the sex disqualifies use of the animal as a sacrifice. The animal with which he had sex is stoned on his account. Both of these rules are the usual rules for an animal that had sex with a human. 
Section seven: If he has intercourse with a woman prohibited to him by the Torah (adultery or incest) she is punished with the death penalty. He cannot, however, be punished until he is of majority age.
To sum up this mishnah, it teaches that boys' physical ability precedes their legal liabilities, which are based on their mental capacities. While some of the details of this mishnah might be revolting and troubling, the essence seems to me quite prescient.  
