Ohalot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches a basic law concerning the ohel. If there is an object that is at least a handbreadth wide and long and a handbreadth high, it can act as an ohel. It conveys impurity that is found beneath it, and it prevents impurity from traveling above or below it. Our mishnah illustrates this with the case of a covered drain found beneath a house. In addition, the mishnah discusses the concept of impurity escaping through openings.

Mishnah Seven
1) [An object] one handbreadth square and one handbreadth high conveys uncleanness and blocks uncleanness. 
2) How does it [block uncleanness]?   
a) In the case of a covered drain beneath a house, if it has a space a handbreadth wide and its outlet was a handbreadth wide, and there is uncleanness inside it, the house remains clean;   
b) And when there is uncleanness in the house, that which is within [the drain] remains clean, for the manner of the uncleanness is to go out and not to go in. 
3) If it had a space one handbreadth wide but its outlet was not one handbreadth wide, when there is uncleanness in it, the house becomes unclean;   
a) But when there is uncleanness in the house, that which is within it remains clean, for the manner of the uncleanness is to go out and not to go in.   
4) If it did not have a space one handbreadth wide and its outlet was not one handbreadth wide, when there is uncleanness within it, the house becomes unclean; 
a) And when there is uncleanness in the house, it [also] becomes unclean. 
5) It makes no difference if the cavity was carved out by water or by a sheretz or if it had been eaten out by salt.
6) And similarly [if it is in] a row of stones or a pile of beams. 
7) Rabbi Judah says: any "tent" not made by a person is not considered a tent’. 
a) But he agrees that crevices and crags [can be considered as ‘tents’].  

Explanation
Section one: This was explained in the introduction.
Section two: In this case the drain has the required dimensions—1 x 1 x 1 handbreadths and there is a one handbreadth opening at its end, which spills into the courtyard. The impurity that is in the drain will escape out into the courtyard, and therefore that which is in the house will remain pure. The mishnah's line "for the manner of the uncleanness is to go out and not to go in" is not exactly appropriate here, for obviously the uncleanness will not simply enter the house. As we shall see, its proper place is below and in other mishnayot (4:1-3; 9:9-10). 
In addition, if there is impurity in the house it will not enter the drain because the drain is large enough to block the impurity. 
Section three: In this case, the drain does not have an outlet large enough to allow the impurity out through it. Therefore, the impurity found in the drain will go up into the house and defile whatever is found there. However, impurity in the house will not enter the drain for there is a barrier (the drain itself) between the two.
Section four: But if the drain is not even of the proper dimensions, then the impurity found in either space will go to the other. The drain is treated simply like the ground under the house and the impurity in the house spreads there as well. 
Section five: Any hole, no matter how it is made, if it has the features outlined above, is treated just like the drain. It will stop the impurity found in it from entering the structure above, and it will prevent the impurity found above from entering into it.
Section six: Similarly, any structure, no matter how it is made, can serve as an ohel. If there are spaces that are one handbreadths wide, long and tall between the different parts, then the part on top is treated separately from the part below.
Section seven: Rabbi Judah says that only human-made structures can serve as an ohel. However, he agrees that crags and crevices, structures that might form a cave, are treated like an ohel because people often use them in such a manner.
We should note that this opinion of Rabbi Judah matches his general tendency to remain close to the simple meaning of the biblical text. An ohel means a tent—that is a humanly made structure. While Rabbi Judah is not a true literalist—the law does not apply just to tents, he still holds that it only applies to things that are somewhat like tents. In contrast, the other sages seem to be thinking about how impurity is conveyed. If impurity is conveyed in an ohel, why shouldn't, they seem to say, it be conveyed by other types of structures.  
