Ohalot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction
We have learned on several occasions that if a source of corpse impurity is found in a space that has one cubic handbreadth of open air, it is as if the impurity is trapped in a grave and it spreads upward and downward, defiling anything above it or below it. It also spreads to the sides. However, if it is trapped in a smaller space, the impurity does not spread to the sides and can only travel directly above and below. 

Mishnah One
1) If there is uncleanness in a wall, in a space of one cubic handbreadth, all upper stories above it, even if there are ten of them, are unclean.  
2) If there was a single upper story [built] over two houses, that one becomes unclean but all upper stories above it remain clean.  
3) [In a] beach- wall, uncleanness cleaves upwards and downward.  
4) [With regard to] a solid tomb monument,  a person who touches it from the side remains clean, since [its] uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards.  
a) But if there was a [free] space of a cubic handbreadth in the place where the uncleanness was, a person touching it anywhere becomes unclean, because it is like a closed grave. 
5) If he supported sukkot on [the monument] they become unclean.  
a) Rabbi Judah declares them clean.    

Explanation
Section one: If there is a space of one cubic handbreadth in a wall that serves multiple stories of a house, then the impurity found in it will rise and spread and it will defile everything found in all of the stories. However, if the space was less than a cubic handbreadth, the impurity rises and descends but only directly above or below it. It will not defile the entire contents of all of the upper stories, because the impurity will not spread to the sides.
Section two: In this case, the wall was built to support one large upper story that was built over two houses, which are also separated by the wall. Above that upper story are more stories. In this case, the impurity defiles the contents of the large story that is directly above the wall. However the ceiling of the first upper story blocks the impurity from continuing to defile the stories above.
Section three: The word that I have translated as "beach-wall" is obscure and Albeck even goes so far as to state that we don't really know what it means. Some commentators interpret it to mean "beach-wall" which is a wall of sand brought up by the sea. The impurity found in this wall cleaves upward and downward, but it doesn't spread to the sides since it is sealed into a space less than one cubic handbreadth.
Section four: The solid tomb monument is placed over a sealed grave. Since there is no free space in the monument, it seals up the impurity and it doesn't spread to the sides. It only spreads upwards and downwards.
However, if there is a free space of a cubic handbreadth, then it is like the situation where the impurity is found in a closed grave. In such a situation the person need not be directly above the impurity to be defiled.
Section five: This section refers back to the situation in the beginning of section four, where the monument was solid. According to the sages, if one uses this monument to support sukkot (booths, not necessarily for the Festival of Sukkot) then the booths are impure because they are like an ohel over the monument. 
Rabbi Judah says that since one who touches the monument from the side is pure, these sukkot are also pure.  
