Ohalot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) [With regard to] a drawer of the cupboard, which is one cubic handbreadth, but whose outlet is not a square handbreadth, if there is uncleanness inside it, the house becomes unclean; 
2) But if there is uncleanness in the house, that which is within [the drawer] remains clean, for the manner of uncleanness is to go out and not to go in. 
3) Rabbi Yose declares [the house] clean, since he can remove [the uncleanness] by halves or burn it where it stands.

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah now discusses a drawer inside the cupboard. The drawer is one handbreadth cubed, meaning that it is large enough to be considered an ohel. However, its opening is less than a handbreadth's in size. Nevertheless, if there is a piece of corpse (or other corpse type uncleanness) in the drawer it escapes the drawer and defiles everything in the house. This is the same principle we learned in 3:7—impurity can escape an inner ohel and go into a larger ohel (the house).
Section two: However, impurity does not go into a smaller ohel (the drawer) from the larger ohel. Therefore, if there is impurity in the house it does not defile things that are in the drawer.
Section three: Rabbi Yose says that even things in the house are pure, in a case where there is a source of impurity in the drawer. He holds that impurity escapes holes smaller than a handbreadth only if it is inevitable that the source of impurity will at some point have to leave its current place (the drawer). In other words, he would state that the contents of the larger ohel are impure only if we can anticipate that the impurity will leave its current ohel and actually enter the larger. However, in this case, it is not inevitable that the impurity will actually enter the house, or at least that an olive's worth of it will. One could either burn the impurity while it's still in the drawer, or he could remove it in pieces smaller than an olive. Since the impurity may not enter the house, the contents of the house are not defiled.  
  
