Ohalot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
Chapter nine deals with an empty beehive (or something shaped like it) that has impurity either in it, above it or below it and is found either in a house, in the doorway to a house or outside of a house. The beehive itself is one that is not susceptible to impurity. Within each scenario, the mishnah discusses various possibilities as to the exact position of the hive vis a vis the impurity. We should conceive of this chapter as not dealing with a practical/actual problem but as a kind of theoretical exercise of what happens when a smaller structure (the hive) is found within a larger structure (the house).  We could even think of these mishnayot as an extended geometrical/scientific word problem; we know how impurity travels and we know how an ohel works. Now we just have to work out the results in various scenarios. 

Mishnah One
A beehive [lying] in the doorway with its mouth [pointing] outside: 
1) If an olive-sized [portion] of a corpse were placed below the [part of the hive] which is outside [the house], 
a) Everything directly below or above that olive-sized [portion] becomes unclean;  
b) But everything that is not directly [below or above] that olive-sized [portion], or that which is within [the hive] or within the house, remains clean. 
2) [If the uncleanness is] within the house, nothing becomes unclean except that which is within the house.  
3) [If the uncleanness is] within [the hive] everything becomes unclean.

Explanation
The mishnah describes a beehive that is lying in the doorway to a house, open to the outside of the house. The beehive itself is one that is not susceptible to impurity. There will now be three different scenarios as to where the source of impurity is located with three different halakhot as to what is impure. 
Section two: The piece of corpse is either above or below the hive, and is outside of the house. Everything that is above and below that piece of corpse is impure for vessels do not act as barriers to impurity (see 6:1). 
However, the impurity does not spread to the sides. Thus anything that is not directly above or below the piece of corpse remains clean. Anything in the hive is clean because the impurity cannot enter the hive since it does not receive impurity. Anything in the house is also pure.
Section three: If the impurity is in the house, the house is of course impure. The contents of the hive are pure because its opening is to the outside. 
Section four: If the uncleanness is within the hive everything is impure, meaning anything found in the hive, on top or below the hive or in the house. The hive does not act as an ohel to block the impurity but it does bring the impurity. This was stated explicitly in 8:3, where the mishnah listed things that bring impurity but do not block against it. 
   
