Ohalot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Six

Introduction
When we get to 7:3 we will learn that if there is a dead body in a house, all of the openings are impure, even though the dead body will only go out through one of them. [Note that the opening is considered separate from the house]. Our mishnah teaches that if a person decides to take the dead body, or a piece thereof, out through one of the openings, the other openings, as long as they are locked, are pure. However, the opening must be large enough so that the corpse or piece thereof could go out of it. If it is not, then all of the openings remain impure.  

Mishnah Six 
1) For an olive-sized portion of a corpse, an opening [in the room in which it is found] of one handbreadth [square], and for a [whole] corpse, an opening of four handbreadths [square, is enough] to prevent the uncleanness from [spreading to the other] openings;   
2) But for allowing the uncleanness to go out, an opening of one handbreadth [square is enough].   
3) [A portion] greater than the size of an olive is as a [whole] corpse. 
4) Rabbi Yose says: [only] the spine and the skull are as a [whole] corpse.

Explanation
Section one: If one intends to take an olive size portion of a corpse out of the house through an opening that is one handbreadths square, that opening is unclean, even if it is locked. Anything found in the opening, under the lintel, is unclean. But all of the other locked openings remain pure. However, if the opening is not even the size of a handbreadth, then all of the openings, even though they are locked, are impure, because in the end, the piece of corpse may be taken out through one of them. 
When it comes to a full corpse, the opening must be four handbreadths square to protect the other openings. If it is less, then the other openings are impure because the body might go out through one of them.
Section two: If the opening is not locked, then the impurity escapes as long as the opening is a one handbreadth square.  This is true even if a complete corpse is in the house. 
Section three: Section one dealt with an olive-sized portion of corpse and a full corpse. But what about something in between? The answer is that anything greater than an olive-sized piece is treated as a full corpse. This means that the opening must be four square handbreadths in order to protect the other openings from being unclean. 
Section four: Rabbi Yose says that the spine and the skull, even if only the size of an olive remains, are treated like a full corpse. This means that the opening must be four handbreadths to protect the other openings from being impure.    
