Ohalot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with elements of a corpse that have a lower degree of impurity, and can only defile through contact and carriage but not through overshadowing. 

Mishnah Three
1) The following defile by contact and carriage but not by overshadowing: 
a) A bone of barleycorn size,   
b) Earth from a foreign country,   
c) A bet peras,   
d) A limb of a corpse, or a limb [severed] from a living person which has no longer its appropriate flesh, 
e) A spine or a skull which is deficient. 
2) How much is [considered] a deficiency in the spine? 
a) Bet Shammai say: two vertebrae, 
b) But Bet Hillel say: even one vertebra. 
3) And in the skull? 
a) Bet Shammai say: [the size of a] hole [made] by a drill, 
b) But Bet Hillel say: as much as would be taken from a living person and he would die.   
4) Of what drill did they speak? 
a) Of the small one [used] by physicians, the words of Rabbi Meir.
b) But the sages say: of the large one in the Temple-chamber.    

Explanation
a) A single bone does not defile by overshadowing, but as long as there is the size of a barleycorn, it does defile by contact and carriage.
b) According to tradition, Yose ben Yoezer and Yose ben Yohanan, two Second Temple sages decreed that foreign lands defile. Our mishnah teaches that even dust from a foreign land defiles, although not through overshadowing.
c) A bet peras is a cemetery that has been plowed over. We will learn more about the bet peras in chapter seventeen.
d) A spine or a skull that are complete defile through overshadowing. If they are deficient, they still defile through contact and carriage.
Section two: Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel argue about how much of a spine or skull has to be deficient for it to no longer defile in an ohel. In both cases Bet Hillel is more lenient (meaning the amount they require for the defiency is less).
Section three: According to Bet Shammai if there is a hole in a skull the size of a drill, the skull no longer defiles in an ohel. The type of drill of which they are speaking will be explained in section four.
Bet Hillel holds that if the hole is large enough such that the person would die, then the skull is deficient.
Section four: It is interesting to note that in this section, the sages and Rabbi Meir disagree concerning the proper interpretation of Bet Shammai's opinion. It is possible that in this case, both hold that the halakhah is according to Bet Shammai.
Rabbi Meir says that the drill is the one used by a physician. [I don't think I would want to be on the receiving end of that drill]. 
The other rabbis say that the drill is the drill used in the Temple. The size of this drill is explained in Kelim 17:12. 
