Ohalot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) Just as they protect inside so they protect outside. 
2) How so?  In the case of a large basket supported on pegs on the outside [of an ohel], 
a) If there was uncleanness beneath it, vessels in the basket remain clean.   
b) But if it was [next to] the wall of a courtyard or of a garden, it does not protect.   
3) [In the case of] a beam placed across from one wall to an other, with a pot hanging from it, if there was uncleanness beneath it,   
a) Rabbi Akiva declares the vessels inside it to be clean,   
b) But the sages declare them unclean.

Explanation
Section one: In the previous mishnayot we learned that vessels can prevent the spread of uncleanness when they join together with the walls of the ohel. In today's mishnah we learn that sometimes they can protect outside of an ohel as well.
Section two:  Here the basket is outside of the ohel and it is supported in the air on pegs alongside a tent (or other tent-like structure). The basket protects its contents from the impurity that is beneath it as long as the wall of the ohel is at least one handbreadth high. 
However, this is true only if the wall was made as part of an ohel, meaning a roofed structure, such as a house. If the wall was part of a courtyard or garden, a non-roofed structure, the wall does not count as part of an ohel. And the basket itself is not sufficient to prevent the impurity from entering from below because vessels do not count as an "ohel" to prevent impurity from entering from below. Therefore, the contents of the basket are unclean.
Section three: According to the interpretation of this dispute found in the Tosefta, the pot is one handbreadth from the beam. In such a case, Rabbi Akiva holds that the beam serves to seal the pot because the pot is open less than a handbreadth. The other sages say that since the pot is open, it does not protect its contents. However, all agree that if the pot is further than a handbreadth away, its contents are impure and all agree that if the pot is right up against the beam, that its contents are pure.  
