Ohalot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) A bone the size of a barley-corn that is divided into two: 
a) Rabbi Akiva declares it unclean 
b) But Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri declares it clean. 
c) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: they did not say 'bones’ the size of a barley-corn, but ‘bone’ the size of a barley-corn. 
2) A quarter [of a kav] of bones crushed fine, and there is not a single [bone] the size of a barley-corn:
a) Rabbi Shimon declares it clean 
b) But the sages unclean. 
3) A limb [severed] from a living person which has been divided into two is clean. 
a) Rabbi Yose declares [it] unclean; 
b) But he agrees that if it is taken from a living person by halves it is clean.

Explanation
Section one: For a bone to convey impurity in an ohel it must be the size of a barley-corn. Rabbi Akiva says that even two bones can combine together to add up to this size. This is consistent with his opinion in yesterday's mishnah. Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri disagrees. From the statement in mishnah three that "a bone the size of a barley-corn" conveys impurity he derives that there must be a single bone that size. The rabbis said "a bone" and not "bones." Therefore, one bone must be the size of a barley-corn.
Section two: In this case bones have been crushed up and there is no single bone the size of a barley-corn. Rabbi Shimon says that they are clean. Even though there is a quarter of a kav, \the minimum measure in which multiple bones convey impurity, since they are crushed up they no longer defile. The other sages disagree and hold that they do convey impurity since there is a quarter kav.
Section three: A whole limb severed from a living person is unclean. Rabbi Yose says that if it is divided in two, it still defiles. The other sages disagree and are consistent with their opinion concerning the bone in section one. 
Rabbi Yose agrees that if the limb is removed from the person in halves, then it is clean because it was never a "full limb from a living person." 
     
