Ohalot, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with how a person can harvest grapes that grow in a bet peras without allowing the grapes to become impure. 

Mishnah One
1) How does one harvest the grapes of a bet peras?  
a) They sprinkle [hatat water] on the harvesters and the vessels [once] and then a second time.  
b) Then they harvest the grapes and take them out of the bet peras. 
c) Others then receive [the grapes] and take them to the winepress.  
d) If the latter set [of persons] came into contact with the former, they become unclean, 
e) This is according to the words of Bet Hillel. 
2) Bet Shammai say: [the gatherer] holds the sickle with sinew-rope, or harvests the grapes with a sharp flint, lets [the grapes fall] into a basket, and then he takes [them] to the winepress.  
a) Rabbi Yose said: When do these rules apply? [Only] in the case of a vineyard which subsequently became a bet peras; but a person who plants [vines] in a bet peras must sell [the grapes] in the market.

Explanation
Section one: The first section contains the opinion of Bet Hillel as to how one can harvest the grapes and bring them to the winepress without them becoming impure.
The first step is to purify the person harvesting and his vessels. Seven days before the harvesting he goes through the purification process of having hatat water (those containing the ashes of the red heifer) sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh day. Generally this is done only for someone who has corpse impurity, but here it is done even if the person does not actually have corpse impurity. The point of the procedure is to demonstrate that the impurity of the bet peras is being taken with grave consideration (pun intended). 
After this, the person harvests the grapes and brings them out of the bet peras. It would seem that the grapes should be defiled by the person and the vessels for these are defiled once they are in the bet peras. However, since there is no other way to get the grapes out of the field, the rabbis didn't declare that they would impure. In other words, since the impurity of the bet peras is of rabbinic origin (and not from the Torah), the rabbis have room to dispense with this impurity when they feel the situation requires.
The harvesters then give the grapes to pure people who had not gone into the field. Those who have received the grapes can take them to the winepress and press the grapes while they are pure. The harvesters should not because it is possible to pass the grapes on to people that were not in a winepress.  Those people receiving the grapes should not have any contact with those people who were in the field, and if they do, they become impure, as would the grapes.
Section two: Bet Shammai provides an entirely different solution to the problem. The harvester should harvest the grapes using vessels that cannot become impure. He doesn't touch the sickle, because he wraps it with a type of rope that cannot become impure. Alternatively, he harvests using stone, which is never susceptible to impurity. He then lets the grapes fall into a type of basket that cannot become impure. Since he never touches the grapes and the vessels are not impure, the grapes do not become impure. Then he can take the grapes himself directly to the winepress. 
Section three: Rabbi Yose says that all of the above refers only to a case where the vineyard existed prior to its becoming a bet peras. In these situations, the sages gave a solution whereby the person could find a way to harvest without defiling the grapes. However, if the person simply planted a vineyard in a bet peras, the rabbis did not allow him to bring the grapes to the winepress while preserving their purity. His only option in this case would be to sell the grapes in the marketplace. These grapes have not become susceptible to impurity since they weren't harvested to be crushed. 
