Ohalot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
1) How so? If the corpse was outside and its hair inside, the house is unclean. 
2) [With regard to] a bone which had upon it an olive-sized portion of flesh, if one brought part of it within so that the house was overshadowing it, [the house] is unclean.   
3) [With regard to] two bones which had upon them two pieces of flesh, [each] the size of half an olive, if one brought part of them within so that the house was overshadowing them, [the house] is unclean. 
4) But if [the pieces of flesh] were set into [the bone] by a person, the house is clean since connections created by human agency are not [regarded as] connections.

Explanation
Section one: As we learned in yesterday's mishnah, if the hair is connected to the corpse, it is impure like the corpse. The ramification of this is that if a corpse is found outside of a house, and the hair is in the house, the house (meaning its contents) is impure because the house overshadows the corpse. 
Section two: This section deals with a bone that in and of itself does not convey impurity in an ohel (see 2:3) but has enough flesh on it to do so. If he brings part of the bone into the house, the house is impure, even if the flesh is outside of the house because the bone serves as a connective for the flesh. It is as if the flesh is in the house. 
Section three: Similarly, two bones, each with half of an olive's worth of flesh, serve to connect the flesh that is found on them to the part of the bone that is in the house. Again, the contents of the house are impure.
Section four: In the previous two sections we learned that the bone serves as a connective for the flesh found on it, such that as long as part of the bone is in the house, the house is considered to overshadow the flesh that is out of the house. However, this is true only of flesh that grew on the bone and was naturally found there. If a person puts some flesh onto a bone, the bone does not connect the flesh, for "connections" in the case of the corpse must be natural. If the "human" world gets involved in this process, the connections created do not have ramifications on the purity status.  
