Ohalot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
A dead body that is found in a house will eventually be removed, and when it is it will defile the exit through which it is removed. The rabbis move this defilement up and consider any potential exit for the dead body to already be impure, even before the body is removed. However, there are cases in which the exit is not impure because the dead body will not be taken out through there.  

Mishnah Three 
1) If a corpse is in a house in which there are many doors, they all become unclean.   
2) If one of them was opened, that one becomes unclean but all the rest remain clean. 
3) If he intended to carry out the corpse through one of them or through a window of four hand breadths square, he protects all the other doors.   
a) Bet Shammai says: the intention must have been formed before the person died.
b) Bet Hillel say: even after he died.   
4) If [a door] was blocked up and it was decided to open it:
a) Bet Shammai says: [it is effective]   as soon he opens a [a space] four handbreadths square. 
b) Bet Hillel says: as soon as [the process] has begun. 
5) They agree, however, that when making an opening for the first time, four handbreadths must be opened up.  

Explanation
Section one: Since the corpse may be removed through any of the doors of the house, even if they are all locked, the area of the entrance of all of them is defiled immediately. Practically this means that if any vessels are in that space, they are defiled.
Section two: If there are several doors, and one of them is open and the others are locked, then only that entrance is impure because the corpse will almost certainly be taken out that way. 
Section three:  If he intends to take the corpse out through one of the doorways, the other doors are not defiled. 
There is an interesting debate between Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel concerning this intention that protects the other doors from being defiled. Bet Shammai says that one must have the intention before the person dies. Once the person dies and he has not yet decided which doorway to use to remove the body, all of the entrances are automatically defiled. 
Bet Hillel seems to say that even if he decides to take the dead body out through one of the doorways after the person dies, the other doorways are saved from being defiled. 
Section four: In this case one of the doorways is blocked up with stones and the others are locked. It is not sufficient just to think about taking the body out of one of the doorways, as it was if the doors were merely locked. Since this doorway is blocked up with stones, he must actually do something to the entrance for it to protect the other entrances from being defiled. 
Bet Shammai says that he must open up a hole that is at least four square handbreadths. Such a hole seems to be large enough to remove a (rather small) corpse. Bet Hillel is more lenient. Once he begins to cut out a hole, he has revealed his intention to remove the body through that door, and all of the other doors are pure. 
Section five: If there was no door there in the first place, and one is making a new hole in a house through which to take out a corpse, Bet Hillel agrees with Bet Shammai that he must open up four handbreadths for it to protect the other doors. Since this is a new door, he must exhibit a greater demonstration of intention for it to be clear that he will take the corpse out through the new exit and not through one of the other doors.   

