Ohalot, Chapter Seventeen, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the formation of a "bet haperas." A bet haperas is the term for a field in which the sages suspect corpse impurity to be found. In our case, the bet haperas is formed by a person plowing a field in which a corpse was buried. The fear is that by plowing the person brought bones to other sections of the field. 

Mishnah One
1) One who plows a grave [into a field], behold he makes it a bet haperas.  
2) To what extent does he make it [a bet haperas]? 
a) For the length of a furrow of a hundred cubits, a space in which four se'ahs [can grow].  
b) Rabbi Yose says: an area of five [se'ahs]. 
3) But when on an upward or downward slope: he puts a quarter [of a kav] of vetch seed on the knee of the plough, and the space where [the last] three vetches grow next to each other is a bet peras. 
4) Rabbi Yose says: [a bet haperas is only made by a plough going] downwards but not upwards. 

Explanation
Section one: If a person plows over a field in which a grave is found, he makes it into a bet peras.
Section two: The mishnah now discusses how far the bet haperas extends. 
According to the first opinion, the plow might move the bones through a space in which four seahs of seed can be sewn. This is an area of 100 cubits by 100 cubits (about 50 meters by 50 meters, which is about 2/3 of an acre). 
Rabbi Yose says that the area is the space in which five seahs can be sewn. This is 111.75 cubits by 111.75 cubits. 
Section three: The above applies only when the field is flat. There is a different measure when the field is on an upward or downward slope. To find out how far is a bet haperas he does a test with vetch (animal food) seed. He places a quarter of a kav of seed on a piece of wood of the plough and he starts plowing. Due to the movement of the plow, the seeds will begin to fall off. At first many will fall but eventually there will be little left. When he gets to a point at which only three seeds fall at a time, such that three vetch plants will grow at that spot, he knows that he has reached the edge of the bet haperas. This is because the plow will shake so much until this point, that beyond it, it will no longer drag pieces of bone.
Section four: Rabbi Yose holds that when one plows upward he doesn't make a bet haperas. Assumedly, he thinks that gravity will prevent the bones from being pulled upward. 
   
