Ohalot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah introduces the theme of the entire chapter: what things can act as tents to bring uncleanness from a corpse (or part thereof) to other vessels also found underneath and what objects can prevent impurity from spreading by acting as a barrier. 

Mishnah One
1) Some things bring forth uncleanness and [also] a protect [against it]; 
a) [Some things] bring forth uncleanness but do not protect against it; 
b) [Some things] protect but do not bring forth; 
c) [Some things] do not bring forth nor do they protect. 
The following bring forth and protect against [impurity]: 
2) A chest,  a box, a cupboard, a beehive of straw, a beehive of reeds, or the water-tank of an Alexandrian  ship, such of which [objects] have [flat] bottoms  and can contain [at least] forty seahs  liquid measure or two kors  dry measure.  
3) [Also] a curtain, a leather apron, a leather bedspread,  a sheet, a matting underlay  or a mat when made into tents.
4) A herd of cattle, unclean or clean, packs  of wild animals or birds, a resting bird, a [shady] place that [a woman] makes for her son among the ears of corn; 
5) The iris, the ivy, squitting cucumber, Greek gourds   and clean foodstuffs.   
a) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri did not agree with regard to clean foodstuffs except in the case of a cake of dried figs.

Explanation
Section one: This whole section is a typical introduction to the laws that will be taught in several mishnayot.
Section two: The objects in this section are large containers. If they are large enough such that they themselves cannot become impure (see Kelim 15:1) then they can both bring forth impurity, if a piece of corpse is found inside and other vessels as well, and act as a barrier to impurity (if vessels are found inside, they are not defiled by impurity outside). 
Section three: This section refers to hanging things that are used to form a tent. Even though these items are susceptible to impurity, they also form a barrier against impurity. Obviously, if a corpse (or piece thereof) is found underneath, they will cause the impurity to travel to clean vessels also found underneath. 
Section four:  A herd of domesticated animals or a pack of wild animals or birds can serve as an ohel both to bring impurity and protect against it. This would mean that if a source of corpse impurity is found under one animal and that animal is tightly packed into a herd with other animals, the vessels found underneath another animal will be impure. Also if there is impurity below one of these animals, the vessels above are protected.
The same is also true with regard to a tent of shade that a woman might make for her son among ears of corn.
Section five: This section lists some leafy plants that can form ohalot both to bring and protect against impurity. 
There is a debate with regard to clean food, whether it brings and forms a barrier against impurity. According to the first opinion, all clean food can perform this function. Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says that this is true only with regard to cakes of dried figs. Since it was customary to sit underneath such cakes (for shade) they bring impurity and form a barrier to it. But other foodstuffs do not act in this way because it is not customary to sit underneath them.   
