Orlah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
In the above mishnayot we learned that terumah is nullified if it falls into a mixture that is more than a ratio of 100 to 1 and orlah and kilayim are nullified in a ratio of 200 to 1. Today’s mishnah limits this principle.

Mishnah Four
1) Whatever causes something to ferment, or seasons, or makes medumma with terumah, with orlah or with ‘mixed-seeds’ of the vineyard, is prohibited.
2) Bet Shammai says: it also renders unclean.
a) But Bet Hillel says: it never renders unclean unless it has the volume of an egg.

Explanation
Section one: If someone takes starter dough (leaven) made of terumah, orlah or kilayim and uses it to ferment his hullin dough, or seasons a dish with terumah, orlah or kilayim spices, then the whole dish is rendered prohibited. Because the prohibited object caused a substantive change in the entire mixture, either causing it to rise or have flavor, the small prohibited substance cannot be nullified by the larger amount in the mixture, no matter how small a quantity the smaller amount is. 
The words “or makes medumma” are very difficult to interpret. The Rambam reads not “or makes medumma” but rather “makes medumma” which means that if the starter dough or seasoning is terumah it renders the mixture “medumma” which is terumah mixed in with hullin. Medumma may be eaten by a priest. This reading makes a lot of sense. The problem with this reading is that no other manuscripts read this way.
Section two: According to Bet Shammai, the same rule holds true when it comes to the rules of purity. If ritually clean dough has been fermented with unclean dough, or a clean dish has been spiced with an unclean dish, the dough or dish is impure, no matter how small a quantity of starter dough or seasoning was used. 
Bet Hillel, however, holds that in order to render impure there needs to be an egg’s worth of impure stuff. It doesn’t matter whether the unclean stuff is a leavening agent, spices or anything—if it’s not the volume of an egg, it can’t render impure.   
