Orlah, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction
There are two agricultural practices mentioned in this mishnah. The first is taking a branch from a vine, bending it down into the ground and then bringing it up again elsewhere. Underground the branch will grow new roots. Our mishnah will ask the question of how to reckon the years of the vine that grows from what it calls a “bent-down and rooted shoot.”
The second practice is grafting, whereby one takes a detached branch and grafts into onto an existing vine.

Mishnah Five
1) A tree which was uprooted and it has a bent-down [and rooted] shoot, and it [the tree] derives sustenance from it [the shoot], the old [tree] is [considered] like the shoot.   
2) If one bends [and roots] from it year after year, and it became detached, one counts from the time it became detached.   
3) A grafted shoot of vines, and a grafted shoot [growing] on another grafted shoot, even if he rooted them in the soil, they are permitted.   
4) Rabbi Meir said: in an instance where it is strongly [grafted], it is permitted, but in an instance where it is poorly [grafted], it is prohibited. 
5) A bent-down [and rooted] shoot that has become detached and is full of fruit, [then] if it increased one two hundredth, it is prohibited.  

Explanation
Section one: In this case the original, old tree (or vine) was uprooted, but a branch that had been bent into the ground still remains in the ground and provides sustenance to the tree. The mishnah rules that the tree is considered to be like the shoot. Shoots that are bent into the ground are not subject to the laws of orlah as long as they are still attached to the older vine/tree, because the Torah says, “When you plant” and the rabbis understand this as excluding bending shoots into the ground. Note that the innovation here is that even though the branch that had been bent and rooted into the ground now looks like a new vine, it still counts as far as attaching the old vine to the ground.
Section two: If one bends and roots branches into the ground year after year, and at some point the new vines the grow from these shoots become detached from the mother tree, their count as far as orlah goes begins from the time they become detached. Up until that point their count went according to the old vine—but once they are detached we have to look at them as if they were just planted. 
Section three: This section deals with grafting vines onto an older tree. If one grafts new vines onto an old tree their orlah count goes according to the older tree. This is true even if he puts grafts onto other grafts, and even if he bends some of those grafts into the ground such that they receive nourishment from the soil. In all of these cases, as long as the new grafts are connected to the old tree, one does not have to start a new count of years for the issue of orlah. 
Section four:  Rabbi Meir is referring to a grafted branch which is grafted onto an already existing grafted branch. If the grafted branch onto which the new one is being grafted is strongly attached to the tree, meaning this graft is successful and is producing new fruits, then the new graft is permitted in terms of orlah. The old graft is considered part of the old tree. But if the prior graft is not strongly attached, then the new one is prohibited, because we can’t look at the old graft as if it is attached to the tree.
Section five: The final section of our mishnah returns to discuss a branch of a vine that is bent down and rooted into the ground. As we learned above, as long as the branch is attached to the old vine, its fruit is permitted.  In this case, the branch grows fruit while attached and then becomes detached. The question is: does the orlah count restart for the fruit that has already grown? The mishnah rules that if the fruit grew 1/200 in size, then the fruit is prohibited. This is the standard number for cases of orlah mixed with non-orlah. If there is 1/200th orlah, then the mixture is prohibited. This would also be the case here—the part that grew when the branch was attached is not orlah, whereas the new growth is orlah. So if the new growth is 1/200th or more of the total volume, then it is prohibited.     


