Orlah, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with situations in which a tree is exempt from the laws of orlah, or situations in which it is subject, even though one might have thought that it should be exempt. 

Mishnah Two
1) If at the time when our ancestors came into the land and they found [a tree already] planted it was exempt [from the laws of orlah].
a) If they planted [a tree], even though they had not yet conquered [the land], it was subject [to orlah]. 
2) If one planted a tree for [the use of] the many, it is subject. 
a) But Rabbi Judah makes it exempt.   
3) If one has planted [a tree] in the public domain, or if a non-Jew has planted, or if a robber has planted, or one who plants on a boat, or [a tree] that has grown of itself, it is subject to orlah.

Explanation
Section one: This law is based on the beginning of Leviticus 19:23, “When you enter the land and plant any tree for food.” The laws of orlah do not apply to trees that were planted before the Israelites entered the land of Israel in the times of Joshua. If they planted a tree, the laws would apply even though the land had not yet been conquered.
Obviously this law is not of any practical significance. This is a good example of what interests the rabbis. They are interested in practical matters and there are many halakhot in the Mishnah that have practical significance. But they are no less interested in explaining the Torah, even in cases where there is no practical implication to their words. This section of this mishnah is solely meant to explain the verse.
Section two: According to the first opinion, if one plants a tree on his own property for the use of many others, the tree is still subject to the laws of orlah. Rabbi Judah disagrees and says that it is not. 
Section three: In all of the cases in this mishnah we might have thought the tree is not subject to the laws of orlah, therefore the mishnah teaches that the tree is subject. 
The first three categories all seem to say that the status of the planter and the status of the tree do not matter. Thus, although a tree in the public domain does not belong to the one who planted it, it is still subject to orlah. Halakhah does not generally apply to non-Jewish produce, but since the status of the tree is not determined by its owner, the tree planted by a non-Jew is subject to orlah. The robber does not own the field in which he planted the tree. Nevertheless, the tree is subject to the laws of orlah.  All three of these categories serve to distinguish orlah from most of the other agricultural laws. For instance, produce which grows in the public domain is exempt from tithes.
A tree that is planted on a boat is also liable, because the boat is treated as if it was land. Finally, a tree that has no owner is also liable, because as we have stated, it is the tree that is determinative, not the owner.  
