Orlah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah begins to explain two rules with regards to when mixtures of prohibited and permitted substances are prohibited. 

Mishnah Six
1) Concerning what did they say: “Anything that causes fermentation or seasons or which renders medumma we rule stringently”? 
a) [In the case of] a species [mixed] with its [like] species.
2) [When did they say] “we rule [sometimes] leniently and [sometimes] stringently”? 
a) [In the case of] a species [mixed] with a different kind of species. 
3) How so? 
a) If leaven of wheat fell into dough of wheat and there is enough to cause fermentation, [then] whether there is enough to become neutralized in one-hundred-and-one, or there is not enough to become neutralized in one-hundred-and-one, it is prohibited.
b) If there is not enough to become neutralized in one-hundred-and-one, [then] whether there is enough to cause fermentation, or there is not enough to cause fermentation, it is prohibited.  

Explanation
Section one: The first general rule is that we rule stringently when a prohibited substance (kilayim, orlah or terumah) which causes fermentation (leavens) or seasons mixes with another similar permitted substance. Such a mixture is prohibited no matter how small the prohibited substance, as we learned in yesterday’s mishnah.
Section two: The second rule is that when the two substances are of different kind, we sometimes rule leniently and sometimes strictly. This will be illustrated in subsequent mishnayot.
Section three: The mishnah now illustrates the principle in section one. If leaven of wheat falls into dough of wheat, we have a mixture of a like substance with another like substance. If the wheat leaven is terumah and there is enough leaven to ferment the entire mixture, then the mixture is prohibited no matter how small of an amount it is in relation to the mixture. 
If there is not enough wheat leaven to ferment the entire mixture, then the entire mixture can still be prohibited if there is not 100 parts hullin to one part terumah. In such a case the entire mixture is called “medumma,” doubtful terumah. It must be sold to a priest, with a reduction for the amount of terumah that actually fell in. However, if there are 100 parts hullin to one part terumah, then the mixture is not prohibited. The owner may take out one part, give it to a priest and the remainder of the mixture reverts to being hullin.  
