Orlah, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
The second chapter of orlah deals with mixtures consisting of permitted and forbidden produce. Specifically the issue is, when does the prohibited part of the mixture become nullified by the permitted part of the mixture? 

Mishnah One
1) Terumah, terumat maaser of demai, hallah and bikkurim, are neutralized in a hundred-and-one mixture.
2) And they are reckoned together [to form the statutory minimum]. 
3) And it is necessary to remove [from the mixture an amount equal to that of the consecrated produce contained in it]. 
4) Orlah and kilayim of the vineyard are neutralized in a two-hundred-and-one mixture.
5) And they are reckoned together [to form the statutory minimum]. 
6) But it is not necessary to remove [from the mixture an amount equal to that of the consecrated produce contained in it]. 
7) Rabbi Shimon says: they are not reckoned together.
8) Rabbi Eliezer says: they are reckoned together when they impart flavor, but not to prohibit.

Explanation
Section one: If terumah, or terumat maaser of demai (demai is produce acquired from an am haaretz, concerning whom we have doubt whether he tithed; terumat maaser is the terumah taken from the tithe), hallah or bikkurim (first fruits) become mixed up with hullin produce, meaning produce that has no status of holiness, then there needs to be 100 parts hullin for every part of holy stuff, in order for the holy stuff to be neutralized. If there is not 100 parts hullin, then we must treat the entire mixture as if it were holy. This will almost always cause a financial loss to the owner. 
Section two: If some of these things are mixed in together, for instance terumah is mixed in with bikkurim, then they are counted together to prohibit a larger mixture. Thus if ½ part terumah is mixed in with another ½ part bikkurim, there will need to be 100 parts hullin for the holy stuff to be neutralized. 
Section three: Once the mixture is neutralized, one would need to take out the amount of holy stuff that is in the mixture and treat it as whatever holy stuff it might be. Thus if 100 parts hullin are mixed in with one part terumah, he can take out one part, give it to a kohen, and treat the rest like hullin. The reason that he has to take the equivalent part out is that someone was supposed to receive these things, in the case of terumah, the priest. 
Section four: The necessary ratio to neutralize orlah and kilayim in a vineyard (seeds that were planted in a vineyard) is 200 to 1. The laws are simply stricter with these two types of produce because not only can they not be eaten, one can not even derive benefit from them. 
Section five: The same rule as in section two.
Section six: Unlike terumah and the other types of produce in section one, orlah and kilayim don’t go to anyone. Since they don’t go to anyone, he need not take a portion out.
Section seven: According to Rabbi Shimon, if orlah and kilayim are mixed together, they are not reckoned together (he disagrees with section five). The reason is that these are completely different prohibitions, unlike terumah, terumat maaser etc. which are all in the same family of halakhot.
Section eight: Rabbi Eliezer says that if the two combined prohibited substances, orlah and kilayim, jointly impart their taste to the entire mixture, then they are reckoned together. But if they don’t, then they don’t join together and each will be considered separately. Rabbi Eliezer seems to be a compromise between the two opposite positions found in sections five and seven.  
