Parah, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
Chapter three describes the ritual of how the red cow was burned into ash. This is covered in Numbers 19:3-6:

3 You shall give it to Eleazar the priest. It shall be taken outside the camp and slaughtered in his presence. 4 Eleazar the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and sprinkle it seven times toward the front of the Tent of Meeting. 5 The cow shall be burned in his sight—its hide, flesh, and blood shall be burned, its dung included—6 and the priest shall take cedar wood, hyssop, and crimson stuff, and throw them into the fire consuming the cow.

Mishnah One
1) Seven days before the burning of the [red] cow they would separate the priest who was to burn the cow from his house to a chamber that was facing the north-eastern corner of the birah, and which was called the Stone Chamber. 
2) They would sprinkle upon him throughout the seven days with [a mixture of] all the sin-offerings that were there. 
a) Rabbi Yose said: they sprinkled upon him only on the third and the seventh days. 
b) Rabbi Hanina the vice-chief of the priests said: on the priest that was to burn the cow they sprinkled all the seven days, but on the one that was to perform the service on Yom Kippur they sprinkled on the third and the seventh days only.

Explanation
Section one: The idea of setting aside the priest who would burn the red cow seems to be derived from the setting aside of the high priest before the Yom Kippur worship (see Yoma 1:1). And both ideas are learned from the setting aside of Aaron and his sons for seven days before the original sanctification of the altar in Leviticus 8:33-34. Part of the reason that the priest had to leave his house was to prevent him from being with his wife and thereby becoming ritually defiled. 
There are two opinions as to what "Birah" is. One holds that this is another name for the Temple, while another holds that this is a tower that was on the Temple Mount. See also Pesahim 7:5.  
Section two: During the seven days that he was separated, they would sprinkle him with the hatat purificatory waters. These waters were made using the combined ashes of all of the red cows that had been burned since the time of Moses (we shall return to this in mishnah five). Sprinkling the ashes on him for all seven days seems to be some sort of extra stringency lest the priest had become defiled before the seven day waiting period by contact with a dead body.
Rabbi Yose says that they sprinkled the purificatory waters on him only on the third and seventh days. These are the days in which a person who had contact with the dead requires purification.
Rabbi Hanina the vice-chief of the priests distinguishes between the priest who was to burn the red cow, who does require sprinkling every day, and the priest who performed the Yom Kippur service, who requires sprinkling only on the third and seventh day. It seems to me that this opinion may be a way of highlighting just how significant the burning of the red cow was in their eyes. The rules governing it are even stricter than those governing the most central act of worship in the Temple during the year—the entrance into the Holy of Holies on Yom Kippur.   



