Parah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah discusses how old a "heifer" can be before it becomes a cow. This is relevant to two laws. In Deuteronomy 21 we read that in order to expiate for an unsolved murder a ritual with a "heifer" must be performed. In order to perform the ritual correctly, we must determine how old a heifer is. And determining how old a "cow" is relevant to the issue of our tractate—the red cow. 

Mishnah One
1) Rabbi Eliezer says: the heifer is no more than one year old and the cow no more than two years old. 
a) But the sages ruled: the heifer may be even two years old and the red cow even three or four years old. 
b) Rabbi Meir says: even five years old, though she is old.
c) But they did not wait with it so long since it might in the meantime grow some black hairs and [thus] become invalid. 
2) Rabbi Joshua said: I only heard of [a cow] that was three years old [shelashit]. 
a) They said to him: What does "shelashit" mean? 
b) He replied: thus have I heard it without any explanation. 
c) Ben Azzai said: I will explain: if you say "shelishit" the meaning is ‘the third’ in number to others, but when you say "shelashit" the meaning is one that is three years old.
3) Similarly they said a vineyard that is "revai." 
a) They said to him: what does "revai" mean? 
b) He replied: thus have I heard it without any explanation. 
c) Ben Azzai said: I will explain: if you say "revii" the meaning is the fourth in number to others, but when you say "revai" the meaning is one that is four years old. 
4) Similarly it was ruled: if a man ate in an afflicted house half a loaf, three of which can be made from a kav, he becomes unclean. 
a) They said to him: say rather "eighteen of which are made of a se'ah." 
b) He replied: thus have I heard it without any explanation. 
c) Ben Azzai said: I will explain: when you say, three of which are made of a kav it would not contain hallah, but if you say, eighteen of which are made of a se'ah, it has been reduced by its hallah.

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Eliezer the heifer whose neck is broken according to Deuteronomy 21 must be less than one year old. The cow must be less than 2 years old. The other sages add a year to both of these numbers. Rabbi Meir rules that a cow can even be 5 years old and still be valid to be used in the red cow ritual.
However, if a red cow was born (a highly unusual event) they wouldn't wait five years to use it because if any of its hairs turn black, it becomes invalid. 
Section two: The mishnah now begins a series of discussion in which Rabbi Joshua and Ben Azzai participate and which hinge on the precise pronunciation of various words. The first of these discussions is pertinent to the issue of the red cow.
Rabbi Joshua asserts that he heard that the cow must be "shelashit." This seems to be an unusual spelling of the Hebrew word for the ordinal number of three—third. 
The other sages ask him—why did you say "shelashit." Rabbi Joshua, interestingly, does not know why he pronounced the word in this unusual manner. He just heard "shelashit" and repeated what he was taught. Ben Azzai, the younger student, however, has an explanation. Had Rabbi Joshua said "shelishit," the typical pronunciation of the ordinal number, we would have thought that the cow would have to be the third born to its mother. Now that he pronounced the word "shelashit" we learn that the cow must be three years old. 
Section three: The same argument now occurs with regard to a vineyard in its fourth year. This topic is covered in Maaser Sheni 5:1-5. The produce of such a vineyard must be brought to Jerusalem and consumed there. The word for fourth year as pronounced by Rabbi Joshua is "revai" instead of the more typical "revii." Again, the other sages ask Rabbi Joshua why he pronounces it this way and he doesn't know how to respond. Ben Azzai explains that had he pronounced it "revii" we might have thought that it was fourth in number. This could mean that it is the fourth vineyard owned by the owners or that it is the fourth vineyard planted in this field. Now that it is pronounced "revai" we learn that the these laws refer to a vineyard planted in its fourth year. 
Section four: The final issue has to deal with a halakhah that came up in the last tractate we learned—Negaim. If a person goes into a house afflicted with some sort of scaly plague and stays there long enough to eat half of a loaf of bread, when three loaves are made of a kav of flour, becomes impure. The rabbis ask why he expresses the amount as "three loaves in a kav" instead of "eighteen loaves in a seah." A seah is 6 kavs, so the ratio stays the same. Ben Azzai explains that had one made 18 loaves he would actually have to give some as "hallah," dough offering, to the priest. This would reduce (by a small amount) the size of each loaf. But three loaves of bread is too small of an amount to be liable for hallah. Therefore, the amount of the loaf is precise.   

 
