Parah, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Mishnah One
1) Rabbi Eliezer says: a [red] cow for the hatat that is pregnant is valid, 
a) But the sages say: it is invalid. 
2) Rabbi Eliezer says: it may not be bought from non-Jews, 
a) But the sages say: it is valid.
3) And not only this, but all sacrifices of the congregation or the individual may be brought from the land of Israel and from outside the land, from new produce and from the old; 
a) Except the omer and the two loaves, which may be brought only from new produce and from within the land.

Explanation
Section one: Rabbi Eliezer says that a pregnant red cow is still valid for the red cow ritual (the hatat is the sin offering, which is how the rabbis refer to the red cow). In mishnah four of this chapter we shall see a dispute as to whether a cow that has mated with a bull is valid. In contrast, the sages say that a pregnant cow is akin to two cows, which means it is not valid for the red cow hatat.
Section two: Rabbi Eliezer says that a cow bought from non-Jews cannot be used lest they used it for work, which would render it invalid. The other sages say that unless we know that it has been used for work, it is valid.
Section three: This expands the sages' view found in section two. All sacrifices, both public and private may be brought from animals raised outside the land of Israel, even if they are bought from non-Jews. 
The remainder of this mishnah is brought here from Menahot 8:1. My commentary here is the same as there.
All menahot (grain offerings) can come from grain grown either in or outside the land of Israel. They can also come from new produce or aged produce. There are two exceptions: the omer barley offering brought on the second day of Pesah and the two loaves brought on Shavuot. With regard to the omer it is stated in Leviticus 23:10, “When you come into the land…you shall bring the omer, the first of your harvest.” With regard to the two loaves it states there in verses 16-17, “And you shall offer a new minhah to the Lord, from your dwelling places you shall bring it.” Both of these verses teach that the omer and the two loaves must come from the new harvest and from grain grown in the land of Israel.
  
