Parah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
1) Hatat waters and hatat ashes—one may not carry them across a river on a ship, nor may one float them upon the water, nor may one stand on the bank on one side and throw them across to the other side. 
2) One may, however, cross over with the water up to his neck. 
3) He that is clean for the hatat may [sail] across [a river] carrying in his hands an empty vessel that is clean for the hatat or water that has not yet been prepared.

Explanation
Section one: According to traditional explanations of the prohibition in this section (which are based on the Bavli) it occurred one time that a person was transporting hatat waters and hatat ashes on a boat to cross the Jordan River. A piece of corpse was found on the bottom of the boat, and that caused the waters and ashes to be defiled and thereby disqualified. At that time the sages decreed that one should not carry hatat waters or ashes over water in a boat, nor transport them over a river in other similar ways. 
I must admit that I find these types of explanations somewhat intellectually dissatisfying. Just because an accident happens once doesn't mean it is any more likely to occur again. In my opinion, when the Talmud explains laws in this ways, it is in essence admitting that the law is irrational. It is as if they are saying, we have no real explanation for this, so it must be that the law was simply created when such a case actually occurred. 
Section two: However, it is permitted to carry the water across by hand, even if he is up to his neck in water. This was not considered similar enough to sailing on a ship for the rabbis to have prohibited it due to the incident described above. 
Section three: A person who is ritually clean enough to prepare the hatat waters can travel on a ship while holding a vessel that will be used for the mixture and with water into which the ashes have not yet been mixed. The incident that triggered the prohibition occurred with waters that had already been mixed and with hatat ashes—therefore that is the only case that they prohibited.      
