Parah, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
The final mishnah of Parah teaches that the dipping of the hyssop and the sprinkling of the waters must be done during the day. This is derived from the word "day" which is repeated in Numbers 19:19, "The clean person shall sprinkle it upon the unclean person on the third day and on the seventh day, thus cleansing him by the seventh day."

Mishnah Eleven
1) If he dipped the hyssop during the day and he sprinkled during the day, it is valid. 
2) If he dipped it during the day and sprinkled at night, or dipped at night and sprinkled on the following day, it is invalid. 
3) But he himself may immerse at night and then sprinkle on the following day, for sprinkling is not allowed until the sun is risen. 
4) And if any of these was done as early as the rise of dawn it is valid.

Explanation
Section one: This is the proper way for the mitzvah to be performed—both actions done during the day.
Section two: If even one of the actions is performed during the night, the sprinkling is invalid.
Section three: While the dipping of the hyssop into the waters and the sprinkling cannot be done at night, the person who is going to perform these rituals can immerse himself at night. This immersion is done in preparation for the hatat ritual.
Section four: The dipping and sprinkling should be done during the day, meaning once the sun has risen. But if one did it at first light, at the rise of dawn, it is still valid. This is common to many mitzvoth—they should be done after the sun has risen, but if they are done right after dawn, they are valid. See Megillah 2:4. 

Congratulations! We have completed Tractate Parah!
As I always write, it is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Tractate Parah is all about one of the strangest rituals in the Torah. Indeed the rabbis categorize this as the quintessential "hok"—a law that cannot be interpreted rationally. Nevertheless, despite the fact that we may not really be able to understand the rationale behind this cleansing ritual, I hope that by learning the Mishnah, we are at least able to understand how the rabbis imagined it being performed. Interestingly, qualitatively this tractate doesn't seem to be all that different from many other tractates. The rabbis take some passages in the Torah, interpret their details while using certain principles and explain mostly when something has been performed in a valid manner and when it has been performed in an invalid manner. Perhaps we could say in summary that Tractate Parah takes the admittedly irrational and makes it rational. 
Tomorrow our learning continues with Tractate Toharot. Good luck to everyone and congratulations on your amazing commitment to learning. 

    
