Parah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
Water that has not been drawn from a source of living water cannot be used for the red cow ritual. Our mishnah discusses what happens if invalid water falls into the flask that has the valid water. 

Mishnah One
1) If the smallest amount of water fell into a flask: 
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: the sprinkling must be done twice; 
b) But the sages say that the mixture is invalid. 
2) If dew dropped into it: 
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: let it be put out in the sun and the dew will rise.
b) But the sages say that the mixture is invalid. 
3) If a liquid or fruit juice fell into it, all the contents must be poured away and it is also necessary to dry the flask. 
4) If ink, gum or sulphate of copper, or anything that leaves a mark, fell into it, the contents must be poured away but it is not necessary to dry the flask.

Explanation
Section one: A drop of invalid water falls into the flask. According to Rabbi Eliezer this can be remedied by sprinkling twice onto the person who requires sprinkling. If only one drop was invalid, then with two sprinklings he has definitely been sprinkled once with valid water. 
The sages disagree and say that even the smallest amount of water disqualifies the mixture.
Section two:  Dew also disqualifies the mixture because it has not been drawn from a source of living waters. Rabbi Eliezer again offers a simple remedy. Leave the water out in the hot sun for a while and the dew will steam up and rise out. It seems that Rabbi Eliezer assumes that the dew doesn't mix up the rest of the water and stays on top so that it will evaporate first. 
The other sages again say that there is nothing that can be done and the entire flask is invalid. 
Section three: If any of these materials fall into the flask, the entire contents must be thrown away. In addition, he must dry out the flask to make sure nothing remains (see also 5:2).
Section four:  In contrast, these materials leave their mark. Therefore, while they do invalidate the contents of the flask, if they were left over inside, they could be seen (the flask seems to have been made of glass). Therefore, he need not dry out the flask. 
