Parah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The principle that underlies the following mishnah is that the purity required for a vessel holding the hatat waters is greater than the purity required for that holding consecrated foods or terumah. Therefore, if something that is pure enough to hold terumah or other consecrated foods touches something that holds or is meant to hold the hatat waters, the latter vessel becomes impure. 

Mishnah Six
1) A flask containing hatat waters that touched [a vessel] containing consecrated food or terumah: that containing the hatat waters becomes unclean, but the one containing the consecrated food or the terumah remains clean. 
2) If he held the two vessels one in each of his two hands, both become unclean. 
3) If they were both wrapped in separate papers, they remain clean. 
4) If the vessel of the hatat waters was wrapped in a paper while that of the terumah was held in his hand, both become unclean. 
5) If the one containing the terumah was wrapped up in paper while that containing the hatat waters was held in his hand, both remain clean. 
a) Rabbi Joshua says: that containing the hatat waters becomes unclean. 
6) If both were placed on the ground and he touched them, that of the hatat waters becomes unclean but that of the consecrated food or terumah remains clean. 
7) If he shifted it [without touching it]:
a) Rabbi Joshua says that it is unclean, 
b) And the sages rule that it is clean.

Explanation
Section one: The flask containing the hatat waters is impure because it touched the vessel that has a lower degree of impurity. But the vessel containing terumah or other consecrated foods remains pure because it touched something that has a higher degree of impurity. 
Section two: When the person who is pure enough to perform the hatat ritual touches the vessel that is only pure enough for terumah, he becomes impure. Then when he touches the flask of hatat waters, he defiles them. The impure hatat waters defile a person who is impure vis a vis the hatat waters (see 9:8) and then he defiles the vessel with terumah because he is holding it. This concept can also be found in Kelim 1:2. 
Section three: If the flask and vessel are covered with paper, then he is not defiled by contact with the terumah vessel. Therefore both the flask and vessel remain pure.
Section four: The person is defiled through contact with the terumah vessel. He then defiles the hatat vessel because he is carrying it, even though he does not have contact with it. Once he is defiled, he now defiles the uncovered terumah vessel, as was the case in section three.
Section five: According to the first opinion, since the terumah vessel was wrapped in paper, it doesn't defile him. He remains pure and doesn't defile the hatat vessel so both remain pure. According to Rabbi Joshua (in mishnah one of this chapter) a vessel that is susceptible to corpse uncleanness conveys madaf uncleanness and therefore defiles even without contact, through being carried or shifted. Therefore, the terumah vessel defiles the person who is carrying it, even though he didn't touch it. He now defiles the hatat vessel, even if it was covered in paper. However, he doesn't defile the terumah vessel since it is covered with paper. In other words—the terumah vessel defiles him with madaf uncleanness, but it itself is not defiled because he doesn’t actually touch it.
Section six: Both vessels are on the ground and he simultaneously touches both, one hand on each. He is defiled by contact with the terumah vessel and he now defiles the hatat vessel. However, because he is not carrying the terumah vessel, he doesn't go back and defile it. 
Section seven: In this case he shifts the vessels without touching them. Rabbi Joshua says that because he shifted the terumah vessel, he becomes impure, even without contact. He now defiles the hatat vessel. The terumah vessel remains pure because he didn't actually touch it. The other sages say that contact is necessary and therefore both vessels remain pure.     
