Parah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) They arrived at the Temple Mount and got down.
2) Beneath the Temple Mount and the courts was a hollow which served as a protection against a grave in the depths.
3) And at the entrance of the courtyard there was the jar of the ashes of the sin-offerings. 
4) They would bring a male from among the sheep and tie a rope between its horns, and a stick or a bushy twig was tied at the other end of the rope, and this was thrown into the jar. They then struck the male [sheep] was so that it started backwards.
5) And [a child] took the ashes and put it [enough] so that it could be seen upon the water. 
6) Rabbi Yose said: do not give the Sadducees an opportunity to rule! Rather, [a child] himself took it and mixed it.

Explanation
Section one: The children now proceed back up to the Temple Mount and then get off their oxen.
Section two: As was the case with the courtyards in which these children were raised, there was a space below the Temple Mount and the courtyards that would protect them from the impurity of a potential grave.
Section three: At the eastern entrance of the women's courtyard there was a stone jar in which the ashes of the burned red cow could be found. 
Section four: They didn't simply have one of the kids take the ashes out of the jar and put them in the water drawn from the Shiloah for fear that somehow the child had become impure and he would defile the ashes. Rather, they would tie some sort of stick or twig to a sheep and put the stick or twig into the ashes and then hit the sheep so that he would get moving. Thus they could remove the ashes without ever touching the jar or even directly causing the jar to move. Again, this is another stringency done in the red cow ceremony.
Section five: Once the ashes had been removed, a child could come and take them and put them into the stone jar of water that he had collected. He would put enough ashes in so that they would be noticeable in the water.
Section six: Rabbi Yose seems to fear that the Sadducees would ridicule a priest who would perform the ritual in this manner, that is by removing the ashes by using a sheep. Such ridicule could help the Sadducees to gain an upper hand over the Pharisees. To prevent such ridicule, he says that a child should just remove it himself. It is interesting to me that Rabbi Yose perceives Pharisaic rule in the Temple to be contingent upon their image in the eyes of others. Someone would see the strange ceremony and then somehow cause the Pharisees to lose control.  
After having put the ashes into the water, the children would sprinkle it onto the priest who was going to burn the next red cow, as we learned in mishnah one. 
