Parah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who draws water multiple times from a live source of water and either wants to use all five jars for one mixture or for five different mixtures. The potential problem that he could encounter is the prohibition of doing "work" while preparing the hatat water. 

Mishnah One
1) If five men filled five jars to prepare with them five mixtures, and then they changed their minds to prepare one mixture from all of them, or if they filled the jars to prepare with them one mixture and then they changed their minds to prepare with them five mixtures, all the water remains valid. 
2) If one man filled five jars intending to prepare five [separate] mixtures, [even though] he changed his mind to prepare one mixture from all of them, only the last is valid. 
3) If he intended to prepare one mixture from all of them and then he changed his mind to prepare five separate mixtures, only the water in the one that was mixed first is valid. 
4) If he said to another man, "Prepare mixtures from these for yourself," only the first is valid; 
5) But if he said, "Prepare a mixture from these for me," all are valid.  

Explanation
Section one: There are two scenarios here. In the first, five different people draw five different jars of water with which to make five different mixtures of hatat water and then they change their mind and decide to make one mixture. Alternatively, five different men want to make one mixture and then they change their mind and decide to make five different mixtures. In both cases, all of the water is valid. As stated in the introduction, the potential problem is that one person would be preparing hatat water and at the same time doing something else, even preparing a separate mixture of hatat water. In these cases, that did not happen, because there were five different men, and each was occupied with preparing his own jar of hatat water. 
Section two: Here, one man wanted to make five different jars but then changed his mind and decided to prepare one jar of hatat water. The problem is that after he filled each jar, he then went and filled another jar and this is considered "work" which disqualifies the validity of the hatat water. Only the last jar's water is valid because he didn't occupy himself with anything else after filling that jar. 
Section three: At the outset, he intended to make one large mixture of hatat water and then he changed his mind and decided to make the water that he had drawn into five separate mixtures. The first drawing remains valid. But the latter four drawings of water are all invalid because the first mixing was considered work done in between their drawing and their mixing. 
Section four: In this case a person fills up five jars and then says to another, "Prepare them for yourself." The preparer now takes possession of the water, thereby taking the place of the drawer. And just as only the first was valid in section three, so too here, only the first is valid because work was done in between their drawing their mixing. 
Section five: In this case, the drawer says to the one who will mix the water and ashes, "Prepare them for me." Here, the preparer does not take the place of the drawer, for he hasn't given possession of the water over to him. It turns out that the owner of the water (the one who drew it) didn't do any labor in between the drawing and the mixing. Therefore, all of the mixtures are valid. 
