Parah, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
1) All that require immersion in water, whether according to the words of the Torah or according to the words of the scribes, defile hatat waters, hatat ashes, and the one who sprinkled the hatat waters, either through contact or through carrying.
2) And [they defile] hyssop that has been rendered susceptible to uncleanness, and water that had not yet been prepared, and an empty vessel that is clean for the hatat through contact and carrying, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
a) But the sages say: only by contact but not by carrying. 

Explanation
Section one: As we have seen throughout this tractate, the purity regulations for anything that concerns the red cow ritual are more stringent. Therefore, the mishnah teaches that a person who is required to immerse defiles the hatat waters, the hatat ashes or another person who is prepared to sprinkle the waters. This is true whether the person is required by biblical law to immerse or whether he is only required by rabbinic law. Furthermore, he conveys impurity both by contact and by carrying (without contact). 
Section two: This section deals with material used in the hatat ritual but that is not the ashes. This includes three items. The first is the hyssop that is used for sprinkling. The hyssop needs to have been rendered susceptible to uncleanness by coming into contact with water (vegetation is never susceptible to impurity until it becomes wet). In this case the water must have been pure for the hatat ritual, otherwise the hyssop would have already been impure. The other two items referred to are water that was drawn to be used for the hatat ritual but has not yet been mixed and the empty vessel. If a person who has to immerse (whether because of biblical or rabbinic law) has contact or even carries one of these things, Rabbi Meir says it is defiled.
The other sages rule slightly more leniently. One defiles these things (the hyssop, the unmixed waters and the empty vessel) only if he has direct contact with them. He doesn't defile them through carrying. 
   
