Parah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a receptacle carved into a rock into which water from a spring would flow. Can this water be used for the red cow ritual?

Mishnah Seven
1) It is not permissible to collect the water in a trough set in the stone, nor is it permissible to prepare the mixture in it, nor may the sprinkling be done from it, nor does it require a tightly fitting cover, nor does it render a ritual bath invalid. 
2) If it was first a movable vessel and then was subsequently joined to the ground with lime, it is permissible to collect the water in it, to prepare the mixture in it and to sprinkle from it. And it needs a tightly fitting cover and renders a ritual bath invalid. 
3) If there was a hole in it below, and he stopped it up with a rag, the water in it is invalid since it is not wholly enclosed by the vessel. 
a) If the hole was in the side and it was stopped up with a rag, the water in it is valid since it is wholly enclosed by the vessel. 
4) If he made a rim of clay for the vessel and the water had risen to that spot, it is invalid; 
a) But if it was solid enough for the vessel to be moved with it, the water is valid.

Explanation
Section one: The reason that this receptacle cannot be used is that it is not considered a vessel, and as we have seen, only vessels can be used for to mix the water and for the sprinkling.
Similarly, if it is found in a tent (or tent-like structure) with a dead body (or part thereof) it does not need a tightly fitting lid to protect its contents from impurity. It is sufficient for it to be merely covered. 
If water from it flows into a mikveh, it doesn't render the mikveh invalid, as it would if the water came from a vessel. Water that flows into a mikveh from a vessel does render the mikveh invalid.
The bottom-line—it doesn't count as a vessel.
Section two: If one made a vessel out of stone and then attached it with lime to the ground next to the spring, it does count as a vessel. In such a case, he can use it for the hatat ritual, it needs a tightly fitting cover to protect its contents when in a tent with a corpse and if water flows from there into a mikveh it renders the mikveh's contents invalid. 
Section three: This relates to the situation in section two. If there is a hole in that vessel and then he stops it up with a rag, the water cannot be used for the red cow ritual. The reason is not entirely clear and my translation hides the difficulty in the Hebrew. It seems that when the hole is at the bottom the water is drawn toward the hole and the rabbis don't consider the water as being contained by the vessel. To put it another way, the hole below nullifies it from being a vessel. 
But if the hole was on the upper side of the vessel and there are full walls surrounding it, then the water is considered to be surrounded by the vessel and it can be used for the red cow ritual.
Section four: This again relates to the situation in which there is a vessel put into the rock. If he made a rim of clay around the top of the vessel and the water rose to that level, the water cannot be used because the clay around the top is not considered to be a vessel. However, if he attaches the clay in such a manner that it would be moved with the vessel, then it is part of the vessel and the water is valid. 
