Parah, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah refers to a window from which they would sprinkle the hatat waters on impure people. 

Mishnah Four
1) If one was sprinkling from a window in a public domain and [a man who was thus sprinkled upon] entered the sanctuary, and the water was found to be invalid, he is exempt; 
2) But if the sprinkling was done from a private window and [a man who was thus sprinkled upon] entered the sanctuary, and the water was found to be invalid, he is liable. 
3) A high priest, however, is exempt, whether the sprinkling upon him was done from a private window or from one in a public domain, for a high priest is never liable for entering the sanctuary. 
4) [The people] used to slip before a certain window in a public domain, and [nevertheless] they trod [on that spot] and did not refrain [from entering the sanctuary], because they said that hatat waters whose mitzvah had been performed do not defile.

Explanation
Section one: A person was sprinkled upon (with hatat waters, of course) from a window in the public domain. He then entered the Temple, assuming that he was pure. It later turns out that the water used to sprinkle upon him was impure. Nevertheless, the person is exempt from bringing a sacrifice to atone for entering the sanctuary while impure. The reason is that since this water was used to purify the public, there would be no reason he should have suspected that it was invalid. This is not an accidental sin (in Hebrew, shogeg). Rather it is something even less, called in Hebrew "anoos" which means he wasn't even negligent. Something totally anticipated happened. We can see from here that if something is being done by many people, one can assume that it is being done correctly. 
Section two: However, if the sprinkling was done from a private window, he should have checked to make sure that the water was valid. Since he did not, he is liable for having gone into the sanctuary while impure. He will have to bring a sacrifice to atone for his sin.
Section three: A high priest is never liable for entering the Temple while impure (see Horayot 3:7). 
Section four: The mishnah describes a puddle that formed underneath the window from which they would sprinkle upon people who wanted to enter the Temple. The floor got so wet that people would slip on it (Jerusalem can be slippery!). Nevertheless, people didn't refrain from stepping in this water, because they knew that once hatat waters have been used to perform their mitzvah, the purification, they no longer convey impurity.
As an aside, this is one of the few places, perhaps the only place, in Parah that describes some realistic scene concerning the sprinkling of the hatat waters.  

