Parah, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah describes various conditions that must be fulfilled for the red cow ceremony to be validly performed.

Mishnah One
1) If a hatat cow was slaughtered not for its own name, or if its blood was received or sprinkled not for its own name, or if this was done for its own name and for some other name, or for some other name and for its name, it is invalid. 
a) Rabbi Eliezer rules it valid. 
2) If [the service] was performed by one whose hands or feet were unwashed, it is invalid.
a) Rabbi Eliezer rules that it is valid. 
3) If it was performed by one who was not the high priest, it is invalid.
a) Rabbi Judah rules that it is valid. 
4) If it was performed by one who was not wearing all the prescribed garments, it is invalid.
a) And in white garments it was to be prepared.

Explanation
Section one: The hatat cow must be slaughtered and its blood must be received and sprinkled with the intent of this being for a hatat cow (the one used for the red cow ritual). If any part of these three actions are done for the sake of another type of sacrifice then it is invalid. This is true of all sacrifices, as we learned in the first chapter of Zevahim.
Rabbi Eliezer says that the hatat cow is not treated like a regular sacrifice because its ritual is performed outside of the Temple.
Section two: All sacrifices must be performed by those who have washed their hands and feet (see Zevahim 2:1). Again, the sages say that the red cow is like other sacrifices and if the ritual is performed by someone who has not washed their hands and feet, it is invalid. And again, Rabbi Eliezer rules that it is valid.
Section three: The sages say that the red cow must be performed by the high priest himself, whereas Rabbi Judah disagrees.
Section four: There are four pieces of clothing that all priests must wear when performing a sacrificial service: a cloak, pants, a headdress, and sash. Even if the high priest performs the ceremony, he performs it with the white garments worn by a regular priest and not with the eight garments worn by the high priest (see Yoma 7:5). 



