Parah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) One who was clean for the hatat waters who touched something that has madaf uncleannes, he becomes unclean. 
2) A flask that was designated for the hatat waters that touched something that has madaf uncleanness, it becomes unclean. 
3) One who was clean for the hatat waters who touched food or liquids with his hand, he becomes unclean, but if he did it with his foot he remains clean. 
4) If he moved them with his hand: 
a) Rabbi Joshua says that he becomes unclean, 
b) And the sages say that he remains clean. 

Explanation
Section one: This section is a consequence of what we learned in mishnah one. Something that has madaf uncleanness (see there for an explanation of this type of uncleanness) conveys uncleanness to a person who wants to perform the red cow ritual. The mishnah states that this is true if the person touches the object, but it is also true if he moves or carries the object.
Section two: If the flask which was meant to be used for the red cow ritual touches something that has madaf uncleanness, it is impure vis a vis the red cow (it is still pure for other things). In this case the flask must actually touch the other object. Putting the object with madaf on top of the flask (without touching) will not defile it. 
Section three: Food and liquids defile one's hands, and once one's hands are defiled, the rest of one's body is also considered to be defiled. When it comes to the preparation of the hatat, all food and liquid defile (as we saw in yesterday's mishnah). So if one's hands touch food or liquid, he is impure vis a vis the hatat ritual. But if one's foot touches the food or liquid, the body and even the foot remain pure.
Section four: Rabbi Joshua holds that if he moves the food, even without touching it, it is as if he touched it with his hand and he is impure (vis a vis the hatat). The other sages disagree and hold that he is impure only if he touches the food or liquid with his hand. Moving it is not sufficient to convey impurity.  
