Parah, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with terumah figs that fall into hatat waters. There are two issues here: 1) is the water unclean by virtue of having contact with terumah figs? 2) What happens to one who eats the figs? Does he incur the normal penalty for eating impure figs—death by the hands of heaven (meaning that a court does not carry out this death penalty)?  

Mishnah Three
1) Pressed figs of terumah which fell into hatat waters and were taken out and eaten:
a) If the amount is the size of an egg, whether [the figs] were clean or unclean the water becomes unclean, and he who eats the figs is liable for death; 
b) If their size is less than the size of an egg, the water remains clean but he who eats them is liable for death. 
c) Rabbi Yose says: if they were clean the water remains clean. 
2) If one who was clean for the hatat waters puts his head and the greater part of his body into the hatat waters, he becomes unclean. 

Explanation
Section one: If the size of the pressed figs is greater than an egg, they defile the hatat waters, for terumah is not pure vis a vis hatat waters. The hatat waters then defile the figs. When the person takes the figs out, he becomes impure by virtue of contact with the hatat waters (because he was not pure enough before to have had contact with hatat waters). Finally, an impure person who eats terumah is liable for the death penalty. 
If there is less than the amount of an egg, then the figs do not defile the water. Nevertheless, when he has contact with the hatat waters, he becomes impure and an impure person who eats terumah is liable for the death penalty.
The first opinion in the mishnah holds that all of the above is true whether the figs were pure or impure before they fell into the hatat waters. Rabbi Yose holds that pure terumah does not defile hatat waters. Therefore, if the figs are pure, they do not defile the waters.
Section two: Hatat waters are waters that have been drawn from their source. The rabbis decreed that a person who puts drawn water on himself is impure (we shall discuss why when we learn Tractate Zavim 5:12). Our mishnah teaches that since hatat waters are also drawn waters, they too defile the person who puts his head and most of his body into them. 
 
