Peah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
An “am haaretz,” a term I usually translate as “ignoramus”, is usually not believed to have tithed his produce. Therefore, one who buys produce from an am haaretz must tithe it. This is the subject of Tractate Demai, which we shall learn shortly.  Agricultural gifts are exempt from tithes.  Our mishnah teaches that even though an am haaretz is not believed to have tithed his produce, he is believed if he is a poor am haaretz claiming that his produce came from agricultural gifts and therefore was never liable to be tithed in the first place.  

Mishnah Two
1) They [amei haaretz] are to be believed concerning gleanings, the forgotten sheaf and peah during their [harvest] season, and concerning the poor man’s tithe during its whole year. 
2) A Levite is always to be trusted.   
3) They are only believed in those things which men are accustomed to give them.

Explanation
Section one:  As stated in the introduction, poor amei haaretz (ignoramuses) are believed, to a certain extent, if they say that the produce in their hands was from the agricultural gifts to the poor and hence exempt from tithes.  However, they are only believed during the harvest season, when they are most likely to have this produce in their possession. At other times of the year they are not believed and one who buys from them would have to take out tithes.  
Poor man’s tithe, the tithe given to the poor during the third and sixth year of the sabbatical cycle, is also exempt from tithes, since it itself is tithe.  The poor am haaretz is believed to say that his produce is from this tithe during the entire third and sixth year, when he is most likely to have it in his possession. During other years he is not believed and one who buys such produce from him would have to take out tithes.  
Section three:  A Levite who is an am haaretz is always believed to say that his produce is from first tithe, the tithe given to Levites. We should also note that when a Levite receives this tithe he must separate out terumat maaser, which is the terumah taken from tithes, and give it to the priest.  We trust him that he gave this terumah because Levites are not suspected of not separating terumah.
Section four:  This section actually introduces some examples that will be provided in the next mishnah.  The am haaretz is only believed if it is something that people are accustomed to give to him.  Thus he is believed with regard to grains of wheat because that is something that he customarily collects directly from the field.  However, he is not believed with regard to flour or bread, because he doesn’t collect these directly from the field nor does he usually receive them in this state from a field owner.  We shall learn more about this tomorrow.       
