Peah, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction
One is obligated to separate tithes from one’s produce.  However, one is not obligated to separate tithes from peah, ownerless produce, animal food or seed.  Our mishnah deals with the question of when the obligation to separate tithes goes into effect.

Mishnah Six
1) He may always give peah and be exempt from giving tithes until he makes a stack.   
2) One who gives [to the poor] as ownerless [produce] and be exempt from giving tithes until he makes a stack.   
3) He may feed cattle, wild animals and birds and be exempt from giving tithes until he makes a stack.   
4) He may take from the threshing floor and use it as seed and be exempt from giving tithes until he makes a stack, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
5) A priest or Levite who purchase [grain of] a threshing floor, the tithes are theirs unless [the owner] has already made a stack.   
6) One who dedicated [his crop] and redeems it [afterwards] is obligated to give tithes until the Temple treasurer has made a stack.

Explanation
Section one:  This section refers to a field owner who didn’t leave his peah in the field but rather harvested it and began to process it. The mishnah teaches that he can still declare it to be peah and thereby exempt it from tithes up until the point where he smoothes it out to make it into a stack. As we shall see throughout this whole mishnah, making something into a stack is the point at which the status of the item is set. So if he calls it peah before he makes it into a stack then it is peah. But if he does so after he makes it into a stack it does not have the halakhic status of peah.
Section two:  This section refers to someone who left peah in the field and wants to give some of his already-harvested produce to the poor without having to take out tithes. As before, he can declare his produce ownerless in order to give it to the poor and thereby exempt it from tithes up until the point where he has made it into a stack.  If he declares it ownerless after it has already been made into a stack then he must take out tithes.  
Section three: If the crops harvested are normally eaten by people, he may give it to animals without taking out tithes until he has made a stack. Once he made a stack he must take out tithes even if he is going to use it for animal food.
Section four: He can use seeds from the produce without taking tithes until he has made a stack.
Section five:  A priest and a Levite who purchase crops from an Israelite before the crops have been made into a stack may keep the tithes for themselves.  However, once the Israelite makes a stack with the crops, the crops now become liable for tithes and the priest or Levite who buys them is allowed to keep the tithes for themselves. 
Section six:  Produce that belongs to the Temple is exempt from tithes. If he dedicates his crops to the Temple and then redeems them before the Temple treasurer (or his agents) made the crops into a stack he must separate tithes because at the point that the crops became liable to tithes they already didn’t belong to the Temple.  If the Temple treasurer makes the stack before he redeems them then they are exempt from tithes.
Redeeming dedicating property means giving money in place of the dedicated object.  Often a person would dedicate an object such as a house, a field, an animal or even another person to the Temple. Under most circumstances, the person could then redeem the object and give the value of the object instead of the object itself.  

