Peah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) An olive tree found standing between three rows [of olive trees] which have two plots separating them, and he forgot it, it is deemed, “forgotten.”   
2) An olive tree containing two seahs and he forgot it, it is not deemed forgotten. 
3) To what does this apply?   
a) Only when he [the owner] had not yet begun [to harvest the tree], but if he had begun, even if it were like the olive tree of Netofah in its time, and he forgot it, it is deemed forgotten. 
4) As long as the owner has some of the olives belonging to him at the foot of the tree, he has [possession] of those on top of the tree.   
a) Rabbi Meir says: [forgotten applies only] after [those with] the beating-rod have gone.

Explanation
Section one:  This section describes a field that has three rows of olive trees, and in between the rows there are two plots sewn with grain, one plot between the first and second row and one plot between the second and third row. If there is an olive tree standing between these rows then it is distinguished by its position—between the two plots and between the three rows—and the rules of forgotten do not apply.
Section two:  Another case in which the rules of forgotten don’t apply is when the tree has two seahs of olives—see above 7:5.
Section three:  The mishnah now limits the rules that appeared in the preceding clauses, cases where the laws of forgotten did not apply. These laws applied only when the person had not yet begun to harvest the tree.  However, if he began to harvest the tree and left some of the olives still in the tree, then the rules of forgotten do apply, even if the tree was as special as that amazing olive tree in Netofah.  
Section four:  The mishnah now brings a debate about when a person is considered to have forgotten the olives still in the tree such that they belong to the poor.  Olives are harvested by beating the tree and letting the olives fall on a sack spread out underneath the tree.  According to the first opinion, as long as there are still olives in the sack underneath the tree, then he hasn’t finished harvesting the tree and the laws of forgotten do not apply.  Rabbi Meir says that the harvesting is considered completed only when the workers with their sticks for beating the tree have gone away.  
