Peah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
The first part of our mishnah deals with one who dedicates his vineyard to the Temple. The second half deals with what constitutes a forgotten cluster of grapes.

Mishnah Eight
1) One who dedicates his entire vineyard [to the Temple] before the “defective clusters” were recognizable, the “defective clusters” do not belong to the poor.
a) After the defective clusters were recognizable, then they do belong to the poor.   
2) Rabbi Yose says: [the poor] must give the value of their improved growth to the Temple.
3) What is deemed “forgotten” in the case of a trellis [a lattice for supporting plants]?   
a) Anything that one can no longer stretch his hand and take it.   
4) And in the case of ground-trained vines?   
a) From the time [the gatherers] pass by it.  

Explanation
Section one:  When one dedicates his vineyard to the Temple, we need to know whether or not the defective clusters still go to the poor. After all, these defective clusters are not really his to dedicate because they belong to the poor. The mishnah rules that if he dedicated the vineyard before the defective clusters were recognizable, then the whole vineyard belongs to the Temple, even the defective clusters that eventually grow there.  This is because the agricultural gifts are not given from Temple property.  
However, if the defective clusters were already recognizable, then they were not his to dedicate in the first place.  Hence they belong to the poor.
Section two: Rabbi Yose adds in that in the case where the defective clusters belong to the poor, it turns out that the poor were benefiting by having their defective clusters grow from land that belonged to the Temple. Therefore the poor have to reimburse the Temple for the value of the improved growth from the time of the dedication until the time of the harvest.  In this way they restore to the Temple the value of that which they benefited from Temple property.
Section three:  The mishnah now completes its discussion of vineyards by delineating when something is deemed forgotten. When it comes to grapes growing on a trellis, they are deemed forgotten when the harvester has passed by them and cannot reach back and take them.  Note that these grapes do not become forgotten automatically when the person passes by them.
Section four:  In the case of vines that are trained on the ground, they do become forgotten once the person harvesting the vineyard has passed by them.    
