Peah, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah talks about the how big a sheaf can be and still be considered “forgotten.” 

Mishnah Six
1) A sheaf that has two seahs and he forgot it— it is not considered “forgotten.”   
2) Two sheaves that together comprise two seahs: 
a) Rabban Gamaliel says: they belong to the owner;
b) But the sages say: they belong to the poor.   
3) Rabban Gamaliel said: “Are the rights of the owner strengthened or weakened according to the greater number of the sheaves?” 
a) They replied, “His rights are strengthened.”   
b) He said to them: “If in a case of one sheaf of two seahs it is not deemed “forgotten,” then how much more should be the case of two sheaves that together contain two seahs?” 
c) They replied: “No. If you argue in the case of one sheaf it is because it is large enough to be considered a stack. Are you going to argue likewise in the case of two sheaves which are like bundles?”

Explanation
Section one: A sheaf that is so large that it is two seahs (about 24 liters) is not considered to be forgotten because, as we shall see below, at this size it is like a stack. Deuteronomy 22:19 says, “And you forget a sheaf”—to the rabbis this implies that a sheaf was forgotten, and not a stack.
Section two: If two sheaves are left in the field and they have a total volume of two seahs between them, then there is a debate over whether they are to be considered forgotten. Rabban Gamaliel says they are not forgotten and that the owner still retains possession over them, whereas the other sages say that they are forgotten and they belong to the poor.
Section three:  The two sides now debate this issue. Rabban Gamaliel explains that when there are more sheaves left together, the owner’s rights to them are stronger. This was implied in yesterday’s mishnah, where we learned that if three sheaves are left together they are not considered forgotten.  Therefore, he argues, in our case if one sheaf of two seahs is not considered forgotten, all the more so two sheaves of two seahs are not forgotten.
The other rabbis respond that the reason that one sheaf of two seahs is not considered forgotten is that it is no longer a sheaf, but rather a stack.  In contrast, two sheaves which add up together to two seahs are still considered to be sheaves, or small bundles, and hence the normal rules of forgotten sheaves applies to each of them individually and they are considered forgotten.  

