Peah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
This is the final mishnah which deals with the topic of gleanings.

Mishnah Six
1) One who sells, the seller is permitted [to take the agricultural gifts] and the purchaser is forbidden. 
2) One may not hire a worker on the condition that the son [of the worker] should gather the gleanings after him.   
3) One who does not allow the poor to gather, or one who allows one but not another, or one who helps one of them [to gather]—behold he is a robber of the poor.   Concerning him it is said: “Do not remove the landmark of those that come up (olim)” (Proverbs 22:28). 

Explanation
Section one: Someone who sells a field may subsequently take the agricultural gifts (provided he is poor) from that field because once he has sold it, he is no longer the owner.  The opposite also holds true--the one who bought the field may not take the agricultural gifts even if he is poor because he is now the owner.
Section two:  The remainder of our mishnah teaches that it is forbidden to create a system whereby one poor person will have an advantage over others in collecting the gleanings.  A field owner is not allowed to hire a worker who stipulates that his son would collect the gleanings after him.  Such a scenario could entirely corrupt the system.  First, the worker’s son gains an unfair advantage. Second, one can easily imagine the field owner telling the worker that he is going to pay him less because he is giving him preferential ability to collect the gleanings.  The owner might try to in essence sell the gleanings.  In other words, forbidding this contract protects the rights of other poor people as well as this worker himself.
Section three:  The mishnah concludes with some general exhortations against these types of arrangements.  One should not do anything to give preferential treatment to some poor people over others.
The final midrash on Proverbs 22:28 is based on a variant reading of the text of Proverbs.  The Masoretic (traditional Jewish) text reads, “Do not remove the ancient (olam) landmark stone.”  Our text reads the word “olam” as if it was written “olim.”  “Olim” usually means “those who go up” and therefore it may be being used euphemistically here for the poor who could be called “those who are going down,” meaning they have lost their money.        
