Pesahim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Exodus 12 clearly mandates that a lamb be brought for the pesah sacrifice.  Deuteronomy 16:2 states, “You shall slaughter the pesah sacrifice for the Lord your God, from the flock and the herd.” The herd refers to cattle (cows) and the flock refers to sheep.  The problem is that this verse which allows the pesah to be brought from cattle contradicts Exodus 12 which mandates a lamb.  II Chronicles 35 also mentions that cattle were brought along with the lambs.  However, in II Chronicles it becomes somewhat clearer that the cattle were not the pesah sacrifice but an accompanying sacrifice.  The rabbis call this sacrifice the “hagigah”, a word which comes from “hag” the word for festival in Hebrew, as in “hag sameah”—happy holiday.  They would eat the hagigah before they ate the pesah so that the pesah could be eaten on a full stomach.  Since lambs which could be used for the pesah were not easy to come by, they ate the additional sacrifice before the pesah and then everyone would eat a small amount of pesah to fulfill the commandment.
Our mishnah teaches that this sacrifice was not really a separate mitzvah in and of itself, but merely an accompaniment to the pesah. Hence it was not always brought.  

Mishnah Three
When does he bring a hagigah with it [the pesah sacrifice]? 
When it comes during the week, in purity, and in small [amounts].   
But when it comes on Shabbat, in large [amounts], and in impurity, one does not bring the hagigah with it.

Explanation
The hagigah is not brought in the following three situations:
1)  Shabbat.  While slaughtering the pesah does override the Shabbat, slaughtering the hagigah does not.  Hence, if the eve of Pesah falls on Shabbat the hagigah is not brought.
2)  In impurity:  Usually, those who eat the pesah sacrifice must be ritually pure.  However, if most of the congregation of Israel is in a state of impurity, these laws are waived and they may conduct the sacrifice and eat it while impure (we will learn this in 7:6).  Our mishnah teaches that in such a case while they can bring the pesah they do not bring the hagigah.
3)  In large amounts:  If there is enough pesah meat to feed everyone then the hagigah is not brought.  It is only brought if there is a necessity for some extra meat.   
