Pesahim, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to prescribe when the house must be searched for chametz.

Mishnah Three
1) Rabbi Judah says: they search on the evening of the fourteenth and in the morning of the fourteenth, and at the time of destroying. 
2) But the sages say: if he did not search in the evening of the fourteenth he must search on the fourteenth; if he did not search in [the morning of] the fourteenth, he must search during the festival; if he did not search during the festival, he must search after the festival.  
3) And what he leaves over he must put away in a hidden place, so that he should not need searching after it. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to the simple interpretation of Rabbi Judah’s opinion, he seems to require that the house be searched three times, once in the evening (as we learned in mishnah one), once in the morning and once at “the time of destroying”.  The “time of destroying” is the fifth hour of the 14th of Nissan (in the evening Pesah will begin), at which time all chametz must be destroyed.  However, in the Talmud there is an explanation that according to Rabbi Judah one need check only once—either in the evening, in the morning or at the time of destroying.  If one has not searched by this time, Rabbi Judah says another search should not be done later, lest he comes to find the chametz and eat it.  In other words, it is safer not to know about the chametz at all then to find it.
Section two:  The sages hold that it is preferable to search in the evening as we learned in the first mishnah above.  However, if he did not search in the evening then he may search later, even during the festival itself.  Ultimately, if he has not searched the house during Pesah itself, he must search afterwards since it is forbidden for a Jew to derive any benefit from any chametz that a Jew owned during Pesah.  He must search lest there is some chametz that was in his possession during Pesah in order to prevent him from using this chametz after Pesah.
Section three:  If he finds chametz during his search, he should put it away discreetly until he burns it the following morning.  Were he to leave it out and then later notice that some of it was missing, he would have to perform another search.  

