Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah discusses the prohibition of a Jew from selling animals to non-Jews, lest the non-Jews use them for work on the Sabbath.  [This same mishnah appeared in Avodah Zarah 1:6. ]

Mishnah Three
1) In a place where it is the custom to sell small domesticated animals to non-Jews, such sale is permitted; but where the custom is not to sell, such sale is not permitted.
2) In no place however is it permitted to sell large animals, calves or foals, whether whole or maimed.
3) Rabbi Judah permits in the case of a maimed one.
4) And Ben Bateira permits in the case of a horse.

Explanation
Section one:  The Torah teaches on several occasions that an animal must rest on the Sabbath (see for instance Exodus 20:9). Our mishnah prohibits a Jew from selling an animal to a non-Jew, lest the non-Jew use the animal for work on the Sabbath.  
Small animals, such as sheep and goats, are not used for work.  Therefore in a place where it is customary to sell them to non-Jews it is permitted to do so.  In other places it was customary not to sell even small animals to non-Jews, lest the Jew become confused and sell them large animals, which is prohibited in all places. 
Section two:  It is forbidden in all places to sell large animals, such as oxen and horses, to non-Jews since they will be used to perform work on the Sabbath.  Even though once the non-Jew buys the animal it is no longer a “Jewish” animal and hence the Shabbat prohibitions apply to it, the mishnah still prohibits the sale because sometimes a Jew might give the animal for a trial period and then the non-Jew might return it.  In such a situation, the animal still belongs to the Jew and should not work on Shabbat.  The prohibition of selling animals includes calves and foals, even though they do not usually perform work.
Section three:  Rabbi Judah allows one to sell injured animals to non-Jews since they are clearly being purchased for their meat and not in order to do work.
Section four:  Ben Bateira allows the sale of a horse since horses are used for riding, which is not considered by the Rabbis to be work.  Pulling plows, a work performed by oxen is considered work.
