Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction 
Through the middle of mishnah five this chapter deals with customs which differ from place to place.  The basic attitude of the Mishnah is that local customs are acceptable, so long as they are not opposed to halakhah.  However, complications will arise when people from a place with one custom come to a place with a different custom.  This is the specific problem with which our mishnah deals. 
 
Mishnah One
1) In a place where it is the custom to do work on the eve of Pesah until midday one may do work; where it is the custom not to do work, one may not do work. 
2) He who goes from a place where they work to a place where they do not work, or from a place where they do not work to a place where they do work, they place upon him the restrictions of the place from where he departed and the restrictions of the place to where he has gone.
3) And a man must not act differently [from local custom] on account of the quarrels [which would ensue].

Explanation 
Section one:  Of all the different customs which the first five mishnayot of our chapter will discuss, this is the only one that is connected to Pesah.  It is because this collection begins with a custom related to Pesah that the mishnah is found here in Pesahim.
In some places it was customary not to work on the morning before Pesah.  This was to make sure that people didn’t forget to burn their chametz on time.  People who live in a place with such a custom should not work at all on this day.  However, people who live in a place where the custom is to do work on the morning before Pesah may indeed work.  
In any case, even in a place where they are accustomed to work on the eve of Pesah, they only work until midday.  Since the Pesah sacrifice could be offered any time after midday, the sages treated this part of the day as if it were a holiday unto itself and they forbade a person to work.  Even after the Pesah sacrifice could no longer be offered this prohibition remained in its place.
We should note that on the eve of Shabbat and other holidays the sages ruled that it was forbidden to do work from minchah time (the late afternoon) and onward.  On Pesah they were stricter and forbade work from midday.
Section two:   As is clear when you read this section carefully, whether he comes from a place that doesn’t do work or goes to a place that doesn’t do work, he won’t be allowed to do work on the eve of Pesah.  No matter where he is or where he is from, he is always subject to the stricter rule.
Section three:  If by not observing the local custom he will cause quarrels then he should not act differently. The simplest meaning of this line is that even if he is going from a place that does not do work to a place that does do work, he should do work if by refraining from work he would cause people to quarrel.  In other words, the mishnah wants to make sure that when a person is visiting another place, his customs don’t make other people feel that he is trying to act “holier than thou”.  If this will give that impression, then he should observe the local custom.   
