Pesahim, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
Most of this mishnah deals with dough which is found in the crevices of a kneading trough and whether or not one must remove this dough on Pesach.  The final clause of the mishnah deals with dough that may or not have already begun to become chametz.

Mishnah Two
1) [With regard to] the dough in the cracks of the kneading trough:  
a) if there is as much as an olive in one place, he must remove [it]; 
b) but if not, it is nullified through the smallness of its quantity.   
2) And it is likewise in the matter of uncleanness: 
a) if he objects to it, it makes a break;   
b) but if he desires its preservation, it is like the kneading-trough.  
3) [With regard to] “deaf” dough, if there is [a dough] similar to it which has become chametz, it is forbidden.

Explanation
Section one:  With regard to removing the dough from the cracks of the kneading trough, it all depends on whether or not there is an olive’s worth of dough in one place. If there is, then he must remove it; but if not the dough is considered as if it doesn’t exist and he need not bother removing it.
Section two: There is a similar rule with regard to uncleanness, but the rule is actually different.  With regard to uncleanness the issue is whether or not the dough is an essential and desired part of the kneading trough.  If the dough is an essential part of the trough, then if a sheretz (an impure creeping thing) touches the dough the entire trough is impure, even if though the sheretz didn’t touch the trough itself.  If the dough is not an essential part of the trough, then only the dough is impure and the rest of the trough remains pure.  The mishnah says that the dough’s being an essential part of the trough hinges on the desire of its owner.  If the owner wishes the dough to remain there because it is helping to fill a gap in the trough (functioning like plaster), then it is part of the trough and does not stop the uncleanness from spreading.  If the owner wants it to be removed, it does break the uncleanness; only the dough is impure and not the trough.
Section three:  Dough is here compared to a deaf person.  When one talks to a deaf person (they didn’t have sign language back then) the deaf person doesn’t get up to respond.  So too, this “deaf” dough does not seem to be “getting up”—meaning it doesn’t seem to be rising.  The mishnah says that if other dough that was kneaded with it is rising, then the deaf dough must also be chametz and it needs to be removed.  If not, then the deaf dough is not chametz and need not be removed before Pesah.   
