Pesahim, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Since we learned in yesterday’s mishnah what grains one can use for matzah, today we learn what vegetables one can use for bitter herbs (marror).
As an aside, I will add a rare practical halakhic issue.  Horseradish is not one of the vegetables on this list.  Horseradish is not native to the land of Israel.  It was introduced as “bitter herbs” in Europe where the herbs listed in the Mishnah did not grow, or were exceedingly difficult to cultivate.  The most commonly used and acceptable “bitter herb” today is Romaine lettuce.  Most people (I shall not name names, but some of them share my last name) complain to me that lettuce isn’t bitter so how can we use it for “bitter herbs”.  They are correct—through thousands of years of cultivation we have managed to take the bitter taste out of most lettuces.  A potential solution which many people do is to mix some horseradish with their lettuce.  In any case, I urge you to use lettuce on Pesah and not exclusively horseradish.
Finally, I am not a botanist.  I don’t pretend to know exactly what most of these vegetables look or taste like.  I have relied on Yehudah Felix’s article in  the Encyclopedia Judaica and on Albeck’s commentary for my translation and interpretation.

Mishnah Six 
1) And these are the herbs with which one discharges his obligation on Pesah:  with lettuce [hazaret]; with chicory [olshin]; with wild chicory [tamkah]; with picridium [harhavina], and with sonchus [maror].  
2) They fulfill their obligation whether they are moist or dry, but not preserved [in vinegar], nor stewed nor boiled.  
3) And they combine to the size of an olive.  
4) And they fulfill their obligation with their stalk[s]. 
5) And with demai, and with first tithe from which terumah has been separated, and second tithe and sacred property which have been redeemed. 

Explanation 
Section one:  Concerning all of these, Yehudah Felix (Encyclopedia Judaica, entry—Bitter Herbs) writes:  “The rabbis included under merorim plants whose common features are: “bitterness, possessing sap, with a grayish appearance” (Pes. 39a), meaning wild or cultivated vegetables, with leaves of a silvery-grayish-green color, that have a milk-like sap and leaves with a bitter taste.”  In his commentary on Exodus 12:8, “They shall eat it roasted over the fire, with unleavened bread and bitter herbs”, Nahum Sarna (JPS Commentary: Exodus, 55) writes, “Hebrew merorim (sing. maror) is a generic term and probably referred originally to the kind of pungent condiment with which pastoral nomads habitually season their meals of roasted flesh.”  
Section two:  The vegetables may be dry, but moist would be better.  The Talmud says that only the stalks may be dry—the leaves must be fresh.  However, they cannot be cooked or preserved, which is usually considered to be akin to cooking.
Section three:  On Pesah one must eat an olive’s worth of maror.  The mishnah teaches that one can combine them to equal an olive’s worth, eating half an olive’s worth of one kind and half an olive’s worth of another.
Section four:  The leaves and stalks count toward fulfilling one’s obligation.
Section five: This is the same list as found in section two of yesterday’s mishnah.  Notice that the mishnah does not even have to list those things with which one cannot fulfill one’s obligation, because they are the same as section four in yesterday’s mishnah.  
