Pesahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to discuss ways in which improper intent can disqualify the pesah sacrifice.  The second half of the mishnah discusses a pesah which was offered at the wrong time of day. 

Mishnah Three
1) If he slaughtered it for those who cannot eat it or for those who are not registered for it, for uncircumcised persons or for unclean persons, it is unfit. 
2) [If he slaughtered it] for those who can eat it and for those who cannot eat it, for those who are registered for it and for those who are not registered for it, for circumcised and for uncircumcised persons, for unclean and for clean persons, it is fit. 
3) If he slaughtered it before midday, it is disqualified, because it is said, “[and all of the assembled congregation of Israelites shall slaughter it] at twilight” (Exodus 12:6).  
4) If he slaughtered it before the [evening] tamid, it is fit, providing that a person stirs its blood until [that of] the tamid is sprinkled.
a) [Nevertheless] if it was sprinkled [before the tamid], it is fit.

Explanation
Section one:  This section lists people who cannot for various reasons eat the pesah sacrifice.  If he slaughters the lamb with the intent of it being eaten only by people from these categories then the sacrifice is unfit.  There are four categories of people listed here.  1)  “Those who cannot eat it” refers to sick or old people who will not be able to eat even a minimum amount of the sacrificial meat.  2)  Before the sacrifice is slaughtered a group of people must register themselves for eating the sacrifice—meaning they intend to be the group that eats the sacrifice.  Unregistered people may not eat from the pesah. If he sacrifices it for people who are not registered for that specific pesah, it is unfit.  3)  The pesah may not be eaten by uncircumcised males (Exodus 12:48).  4)  In order to eat the pesah a person must be ritually clean.
Section two:  This section teaches that if he slaughtered the pesah with a group of people in mind, some of whom could eat it and some of whom could not, the pesah is still valid.  As long as at least one of the people for whom he sacrificed it can eat it, it is valid.
Section three:  According to the rabbis “twilight” is when the sun has already reached its peak and has begun to descend to the west.  This is from six and a half hours and onwards.  If the pesah was slaughtered before this time it is invalid.
Section four:  The pesah should a priori be slaughtered after the evening tamid (daily offering).  We learned this above in mishnah one.  However, ex post facto, even if it was slaughtered before the tamid, it is still valid, provided that a person stirs the blood of the pesah so that it can be sprinkled on the altar after the blood of the tamid is sprinkled.  However, even this requirement is only “a priori”—if the blood of the pesah is sprinkled before that of the tamid it is still valid.  
 

