Pesahim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
In this mishnah they begin to bring in front of him the food.  We should note that the foods are brought in front of him before the discussion and recitations which we shall encounter in the following mishnayot.  It is not entirely clear from the Mishnah itself whether they ate before the recitation of the “haggadah”, the ritual retelling of the story of the Exodus, or whether they first told the story and then ate, as we do today.

Mishnah Three
1) They bring [it] in front of him. He dips lettuce before until he reaches the appetizer that precedes the bread.   
2) They bring before him matzah, lettuce, and haroset (and two dishes) though the haroset is not mandatory. 
a) Rabbi Elazar son of Rabbi Zadok says: it is mandatory. 
3) And in the Temple they bring the body of the pesah before him.

Explanation
Section one:  As did the previous mishnah, this mishnah continues to describe foods brought in front of him by a servant.  Although many Jews probably could not afford servants, the mishnah relates to each Jew on the seder evening as if he is a member of the upper class.  
The mishnah does not say what “it” is that they bring in front of him.  Some commentators add that it is vegetables and lettuce, while others say that it is a table.  Whatever it is, it is clear that appetizers are served before the meal.  Today we call this appetizer “karpas”, a Persian, Aramaic and Arabic word for celery.  In mishnaic times they probably used lettuce as the appetizer.  Other sources mention other appetizers as well.  The mishnah may allude to this when it says “until he reaches the appetizer that precedes the bread.”  The mishnah may be stating that he continues to eat appetizers until the final appetizer is brought.  We should note how different this is from today’s custom, according to which a very small amount of a vegetable is eaten and then people can go hungry until the main meal is brought (and if they are at my seder they can shoot me mean looks as I go on and on).  
Section two:  After the appetizers are completed, the servants bring in front of him the main festival foods, the matzah, lettuce and haroset.  The matzah is explicitly commanded by the Torah.  The lettuce is the bitter herbs (see abover 2:6) also mandated by the Torah.  Haroset does not appear in the Torah.  Haroset, a mixture of wine and fruit or wine-vinegar and fruit, was a common food in the Greco-Roman world.  It was probably added to the Pesah meal after the destruction in an attempt to provide more foods for the seder.  In the Talmud it is explained as having different symbolic meanings, most familiarly that it represents the mortar used to make the bricks in Egypt.  Others say that it should have a sharp flavor to remind us of the slavery in Egypt.  Still others say that the apples used in making it are to remind us of the “apple” in Egypt, a symbol of the fertility of the Israelite women.  
According to the first opinion, haroset is brought to the table but it is not mandatory.  Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says that it is mandatory.
Section three:  The mishnah notes that in Temple days at this point they would bring the pesah in front of the seder participant.  Note that the main part of the mishnah describes the seder as it existed after the Temple was destroyed.  Only at the end does the mishnah note when the pesah was eaten during Temple times.  
