Pesahim, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah and the following one discuss which activities in connection with the pesah sacrifice may be performed on Shabbat.   
We should note that this was a “hot” issue in the Second Temple period.  Different sects of Jews argued over the potential conflicts between strict Shabbat observance and the necessary sacrifices which occur on festivals.  Indeed, the calendar of the Dead Sea sect (and perhaps of others as well) had all of the holidays falling on Wednesdays (their calendar was 364 days, 52 weeks), the day furthest away from Shabbat.  Part of the reason for this was to avoid what they perceived to be the desecration of Shabbat.   

Mishnah One
1) These things in [connection with] the pesah override Shabbat: its slaughtering and the sprinkling of its blood and the cleansing of its innards and the burning of its fat. 
2) But its roasting and the washing of its innards do not override Shabbat. 
3) Carrying it and bringing it from outside the Shabbat border and cutting off its wart do not override Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  The pesah has to be slaughtered on the fourteenth of Nisan.  Therefore, its slaughtering will have to be done on Shabbat, if the fourteenth of Nisan falls on Shabbat.  Other mandatory sacrifices such as the tamid are also slaughtered on Shabbat.  Similarly, the sprinkling of its blood must be done immediately after it has been slaughtered and hence it too can be done on Shabbat.  If the sacrifice is left as it is until evening, without its innards being removed, it will start to rot and hence its innards may also be removed.  Finally, the burning of its fat on the altar also can be done on Shabbat.  Although this could wait until later in the day, since they allowed the animal to be slaughtered they also allowed its fat to be burned.  It also seems to me that activities that were “sacrificial” in nature were allowed, whereas, as we shall see below, preparing the animal to be eaten was not allowed.
Section two:  Roasting the sacrifice is prohibited on Shabbat, since it can be done either before or after Shabbat.  If the fourteenth fell on Nisan this would have to be after Shabbat was over. If the fourteenth fell on Friday, then the roasting would have to be completed before Shabbat began.   
Washing its innards with water can wait until Shabbat is over and there is no fear that the carcass will begin to rot.  Hence this activity can also not be performed on Shabbat.
Section three:  Putting the animal on his shoulders to carry him through the public domain is forbidden.  Similarly bringing the animal outside of the Shabbat border (2000 cubits around the city) is forbidden on Shabbat.  Finally, a lamb that has a wart cannot be offered as a pesah.  In order to make it possible to use it as an offering the wart has to be cut off.  This too cannot be done on Shabbat.  All three of these activities could have been done before Shabbat began and hence they do not override the Shabbat.  
Rabbi Eliezer disagrees and holds that just as the actual performance of the mitzvah overrides Shabbat, so too the preparing of the accessories which help to perform a mitzvah overrides Shabbat.  We have encountered this debate before in Shabbat 19:1 concerning making and carrying a knife with which to circumcise.  In tomorrow’s mishnah Rabbi Eliezer and the sages will debate this issue.  Stay tuned! 
   
