Pesahim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
This mishnah deals with remedying a situation in which the pesah offerings of different companies got mixed up with each other.

Mishnah Ten
1) Two companies whose pesah sacrifices became mixed up: these take possession of one [animal] and these take possession of one. 
a) One member of these joins those, and one member of those joins these, and thus they declare: if this pesah is ours, your hands are withdrawn from your own and you are registered for ours; while if this pesah is yours, our hands are withdrawn from ours and we are registered for yours. 
2) Similarly, if there are five companies consisting of five members each or of ten each, they draw one from each company and say thusly.

Explanation
Section one:  The pesahim of each of two companies have become mixed up.  Since a company must be registered for a pesah before they can slaughter it and eat it, they may not simple slaughter whichever one they want.  The mishnah therefore works out a remedy for such a situation.  One person from each company switches companies. Then all of the members of each company declare to the new person a declaration which I shall now explain.  If the pesah which they took into their hands was theirs, then they tell him that he is switching his registration from his original one to theirs. Similarly, if the pesah which they possess was originally his, then they declare that they are withdrawing from their original pesah and registering for his.  What they cannot do is simply register without having one person switch companies because it is forbidden to leave any pesah without anyone registered for it for even a moment.  Also, they couldn’t register for a new pesah without first withdrawing from being registered for the old one because a person cannot be registered for two pesahim at the same time.  All of this is not a problem if one person switches companies, because it then turns out that at no point is either pesah left without any owners.  
Section two: The mishnah now elaborates now that the same above method of resolving the problem also works if there are five companies each with five members of ten companies each with ten members and all of the pesahim got mixed up.  In each case, one person from each company has to go to each of the other companies.  Each newly formed company would have one member from each of the old companies, and each person in each company would have to make the declaration.
