Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Two

Introduction
It is permissible to eat produce which was reaped during the sabbatical year so long as that type of produce is still growing in the fields.  Once it no longer grows in the fields it is forbidden to eat it.  Our mishnah deals with a person who goes from a place where a certain produce grows in the field to a place where that produce does not grow in the field, or vice versa.

Mishnah Two
1) Similarly, he who transports sabbatical year produce from a place where it has ceased [to exist in the field] to a place where it has not ceased or from a place where it has not ceased to a place where it has ceased, he is bound to remove it.  
2) Rabbi Judah says:  he can say to them “You can go out too and bring [produce] for yourself.”

Explanation 
Section one:  Again, the mishnah rules that one who travels from one place to another follows the stricter rule.  If for instance he is traveling from Hebron where bananas are still in the field, to Bet El, where they are no longer in the field, he must remove the bananas he brings with him.  Similarly, if he travels from Bet El which has no bananas in the field (yes, they have no bananas) to Hebron, where the bananas are still thriving, he must still get rid of his bananas because in his home town he can’t have them.
Section two:  Rabbi Judah says that if he goes from a place that has a certain bananas in the field to a place that doesn’t he can still eat the bananas because he can say to the people of the other place, you can go back to my place where you can eat them as well as I can.  According to Rabbi Judah this is not an issue of following the local custom, as was the issue in yesterday’s mishnah.  Rather he understands that the prohibition is to eat produce from a field when that produce no longer grows in that area.  Therefore, in our example above, it is only forbidden to eat Bet El bananas because Bet El has no bananas in the field.  To eat Hebron bananas is okay, even in Bet El.  [Note, I have explained this section according to Albeck’s commentary.  The Talmud contains different interpretations.]    

 
