Pesahim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah lists some differences and similarities between the first Pesah and the second.

Mishnah Three
What is the difference between the first Pesah and the second? 
1) The first is subject to the prohibition of [chametz] shall not be seen and [chametz] shall not be found, while at the second matzah and chametz are in the house with him.
2) The first requires [the reciting of] Hallel when it is eaten, while the second does not require Hallel when it is eaten. 
3) But both require [the reciting of] Hallel when they are sacrificed, and they are eaten roasted with matzah and bitter herbs, and they override Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  The chametz prohibitions are stated only in Exodus 12-13 (Pesah Rishon—the first Pesah) and are not mentioned in Numbers 9 (Pesah Sheni).  Therefore, the rabbis teach that these prohibitions apply only to the first Pesah and not to the second.  
Section two:  The Hallel, the recitation of a group of Psalms, is one of the oldest elements of the Pesah celebration.  As we shall see in chapter ten, it continued to be observed in the post-destruction seder and is a central part of the Passover Haggadah to this day.  According to the Talmud, the Hallel is hinted at in Isaiah 30:29, “For you, there shall be singing as on a night when a festival is hallowed.” Our mishnah teaches that the Hallel was recited both while the pesah was being sacrificed and while it was being eaten.  The difference between Pesah Rishon and Pesah Sheni is that on the first the Hallel is recited both while the Pesah is eaten and when it is sacrificed whereas on Pesah Sheni it is only recited when the pesah is sacrificed.
Section three:  Besides the fact that the Hallel is recited on both of the Pesah’s at the time of the sacrifice, there are two other similarities between the two.  On both occasions the pesah is eaten with matzah and bitter herbs (see Numbers 9:11-12) and on both occasions if the fourteenth of Nisan falls on Shabbat the pesah is still sacrificed (see above 6:2).
