Pesahim, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses a halakhic quandary.  In order to understand it we need to first mention some background halakhot.  
1)  When one prepares dough there is a mitzvah to separate some dough.  This separated dough is called hallah (Numbers 15:20).  If the dough is ritually clean it is given to a Kohen; if it is ritually unclean it cannot be eaten and must be burned. 
2)  On Pesah all dough needs to be baked immediately lest it become chametz.  
3)  On festivals one is allowed to cook food, but one is not allowed to cook food which cannot be eaten.
4)  One is not allowed to burn sacred things in order to remove them on a festival.  This includes challah, which is considered sacred.     
The problem then is what to do with baking unclean hallah on one of the festival days of Pesah.  If she bakes it then she may be transgressing the laws of the festival which allows one to cook only food which can be eaten.  The unclean hallah cannot be eaten so it can’t be baked.  She can’t burn it either.  If she just leaves it, it will ferment and become chametz. 
In our mishnah the rabbis debate what to do with this dough.  
   
Mishnah Three
How do they separate hallah on the festival [from dough which is] in [a state of] uncleanness?   
1) Rabbi Eliezer says: she should not call it [hallah] until it is baked.   
2) Rabbi Judah ben Batera says: she should put [the dough] into cold water.   
3) Rabbi Joshua said:  this is not the chametz concerning which we are warned with, “It shall not be seen”, and “It shall not be found”.  Rather she separates it and leaves it until the evening, and if it ferments it ferments.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Eliezer tries to find a means to avoid the problem.  Usually, one separates and designates dough as hallah while it is still dough, before it is baked.  In this case, to avoid the problem, what the woman baking the dough should do is not designate which piece will be hallah until after it has been baked.  In this way, while the loaves are being baked, we could point to each loaf and say, “this one will not be hallah.”  After it has already been cooked we need not be concerned about it becoming chametz.  In the evening, she may burn the unclean hallah.
Section two:  Rabbi Judah ben Batera comes up with a different solution.  Separate the hallah when it is still dough, but instead of baking it put it in cold water.  The cold water will arrest the fermentation process.
Section three:  Rabbi Joshua rejects both of the previous solutions and rather says that she should separate the dough and if it becomes chametz then it becomes chametz. There is no need to be concerned that this is a transgression.  The Torah’s prohibitions “It (chametz) shall not be seen” (Exodus 13:7) and “It shall not be found” (Exodus 12:19) do not apply to this chametz because it doesn’t belong to its owners anymore.  From the minute she separates it to make it challah it already belongs to the kohen.    
