Pesahim, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah lists those types of grains with which one can make the obligatory matzah on Pesah.  There is a duel function to this list—anything which can be used to make matzah can also become chametz.  Hence, this mishnah also indirectly teaches us which types of grain must be removed before Pesah.  

Mishnah Five
1) These are the things with which they fulfill their obligation on Pesah:  with wheat, with barley, with spelt, with rye, and with oats. 
2) And they fulfill [the obligation] with demai, with first tithe whose terumah has been separated, and with second tithe or sanctified property which have been redeemed; 
3) And priests [can fulfill their obligation] with hallah and terumah. 
4) But not with untithed produce, nor with first tithe whose terumah has not been separated, nor with second tithe or sanctified property which have not been redeemed. 
5) Loaves of the thanksgiving offering and the wafers of a nazirite:
a) If he made them for himself, they cannot fulfill [their obligation] with them; 
b) If he made them to sell in the market, they can fulfill [their obligation] with them.

Explanation
Section one:  This is the list of grains from which one may make the obligatory matzah.  Note that rice is not on the list.  According to the mishnah, matzah may not be made out of rice nor does rice become chametz.
Section two:  We have encountered this list on several occasions already (Shabbat 18:1; Eruvin 3:2; Sanhedrin 8:2; Makkot 3:2).  It is basically a list of foods which can be eaten, at least according to toraitic law.  The opposite is in section four—those foods are prohibited and hence one cannot use them to fulfill the obligation to eat matzah.
Section three:  Hallah (which a person must separate when he makes dough) and terumah are given to the priest, who may use them to make his matzah.  A non-priest cannot eat them and hence cannot use them for matzah.
Section four:  The opposite list of that in section two.
Section five:  These loaves and wafers are not chametz and hence might potentially be usable for matzah.  The mishnah rules that if he made them for his own personal use then they are already sanctified and one cannot use them for matzah.  In other words, although they physically fulfill the requirements of matzah, since they were sanctified for another use they cannot count also as matzah on Pesah.  
However, if he is a merchant and made them to sell to those who need to bring sacrifices, then they have not yet become sanctified and they may be used as obligatory matzah on Pesah.  
