Pesahim, Chapter Three, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Chametz is usually removed the day before Pesah, on the fourteenth of the month of Nisan.  This potentially becomes a problem when the day before Pesah is Shabbat because chametz is usually removed by being burnt and one cannot burn chametz on Shabbat.  In our mishnah the sages debate how to handle this problem.

Mishnah Six
1) If the fourteenth [of Nisan] falls on Shabbat, they remove everything before Shabbat, the words of Rabbi Meir.
2) The sages say: at its [usual] time.
3) Rabbi Eleazar bar Zadok says: terumah before Shabbat, and non-sacred [chametz] at its [usual] time. 

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Meir says that all of the chametz is to be burned before Shabbat.  Most commentators add, based on a talmudic source, that he may leave enough chametz to eat two meals, one on Friday night and one on Shabbat morning.  This is because halakhah forbids the eating of matzah on the day before Pesah.  However, the custom not to eat matzah on the day before Pesah may not yet have developed in the time of the Mishnah.  It is likely that Rabbi Meir assumes that one will eat matzah for Friday night dinner and for the first meal on Shabbat itself.  In any case, today when this occurs, many people destroy all of their chametz on Friday, but some people leave enough bread to eat for Friday night dinner and a very early Shabbat morning lunch. This meal must be eaten before the fourth hour of the day, by which time all chametz must be removed.  
Section two:  The sages say that all of the chametz is removed at its usual time, meaning on Shabbat itself.  The sages assume that they will remove the chametz by eating it or by giving it to his animals.  If it can’t be eaten, then it may crumbled up and thrown into the wind (see above 2:1).
Section three:  The problem with waiting until Shabbat to remove the terumah is that far fewer people can eat terumah—only kohanim and their families may eat it.  Therefore, he should burn the terumah the day before Pesah.  However, regular chametz may be eaten by anyone, and therefore they can wait to remove it until Shabbat itself.  On this point he agrees with the sages.      
