Pesahim, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with burning impure sacrificial meat of a low degree of impurity with impure sacrificial meat of a higher degree of impurity, a potential problem since it causes the less impure meat to become more impure.  The mishnah is brought here because of the mishnah which follows it, which deals with burning unclean chametz with clean chametz.

Mishnah Six
1) Rabbi Hanina the vice-chief of the priests said: during all of the days of the priests they never refrained from burning [sacrificial] meat which had been defiled by an offspring of uncleanness with meat which had been defiled by a father of uncleanness, even though they add uncleanness to its uncleanness.  
2) Rabbi Akiva added and said: during [all] the days of the priests they did not refrain from lighting oil which had been rendered unclean by a tevul yom in a lamp which had been made unclean by one who had contracted corpse impurity, even though they add uncleanness to its uncleanness. 

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Hanina, a rabbi who served in the Temple, testifies that the priests did not refrain from burning meat which had become unclean with other meat that had become unclean, even if the levels of uncleanness were different.  When what is called a “father of uncleanness” (av hatuma) comes into contact with something that is receptive to impurity it renders it impure in the first degree; something impure in the first degree renders that which it comes into contact with impure in the second degree, and so on (up to four degrees).  Everything besides the “father of uncleanness” is called an “offspring of uncleanness”.  Meat which has come into contact with an “offspring” is at most impure in the second degree, since the “offspring can be no higher than a first degree.  This meat is nevertheless rendered ineffective as a sacrifice.  Rabbi Hanina teaches that they would burn this type of meat with meat that had come into contact with a “father of impurity”, even though this meat was of first degree uncleanness and hence it would add to the uncleanness of the other meat by making it of second degree uncleanness.  Since both pieces of meat were impure in any case, they did not refrain from burning them together.    
Section two:  Rabbi Akiva adds that the same halakhah is also true with regard to oil.  A “tevul yom” is someone who was impure, immersed in a mikveh but because the sun has not set, thereby ending the day, he is still impure.  Until the sun sets he is considered to be of second degree impurity.  If he comes into contact with oil that is terumah he renders it of third degree impurity.  Rabbi Akiva teaches that this oil may be put into a lamp that is of first degree impurity, because it (the lamp) had been in contact with someone who had contracted corpse impurity (the corpse is the “granddaddy of all uncleanness, and one who comes into contact with a corpse is a “father of uncleanness).  The lamp renders the oil of second degree impurity, bumping it up one level.  
