Pesahim, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah contains three more prohibited mixtures, two of which deal with chametz.

Mishnah Eight
1) One may not put flour into haroset or into mustard;
2) And if he did put [it], it must be eaten immediately; 
a) But Rabbi Meir forbids [it]. 
3) One may not boil the Pesah sacrifice, neither in liquids nor in fruit juice but one may baste and dip it in them.   
4) The water used by a baker must be poured out, because it causes leavening.

Explanation
Section one:  “Haroset” is a mixture of fruit and wine or wine vinegar and it was customary to put flour in it as well.  However, on Pesah it is forbidden to put flour in it because the wine or wine vinegar will cause it to become chametz.  Mustard is also made with vinegar and therefore it is also forbidden to put flour into it.
Section two:  If he nevertheless did put flour into either mustard or haroset, he must eat it immediately so that it doesn’t become chametz.  Rabbi Meir, however, holds that it becomes chametz immediately and therefore one cannot eat it.
Section three:  Exodus 12:9 forbids eating the Pesach sacrifice if it has been boiled.  Our mishnah adds that this prohibition holds true for all liquids, water and fruit juices—the sacrifice may not be boiled in any liquid.  However, it is not prohibited to baste the sacrifice with liquids such as wine or oil while it is roasting and one can dip the meat in liquids after the roasting is complete.  
Perhaps the reason that this section is here is that above we dealt with Exodus 12:8 and here we deal with Exodus 12:9.  Alternatively, since the previous sections and the following one deal with juices, this halakhah is brought here.
Section four:  While baking matzah, the baker will dip his fingers in water to keep them moist.  The water bowl into which he dips his fingers must be dumped out so that the flour in it doesn’t turn into chametz.  It should be dumped out somewhere where it will not gather in one place so that it doesn’t turn into chametz on the ground.     
 

