Pesahim, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah discusses a person who starts on a journey and once he has already left he remembers that he forgot to remove his chametz.  The question is whether or not he must return home to remove the chametz or whether he may continue on his way.

Mishnah Seven
1) He who is on his way to slaughter his Pesah sacrifice or to circumcise his son or to dine at a betrothal feast at the house of his father-in-law, and remembers that he has chametz at home:
a) if he is able to go back, remove [it], and [then] return to his religious duty, he must go back and remove [it]; 
b) but if not, he annuls it in his heart. 
2) [If he is on his way] to save from an invasion or from a river or from brigands or from a fire or from a collapse [of a building], he annuls it in his heart.   
3) [But if] to rest for pleasure, he must return immediately.

Explanation
Section one:  In the first section, the person is on his way to perform a commandment when he remembers that he forgot to remove his chametz. The first two commandments are extremely significant and time-bound.  The commandment to participate in the Pesah sacrifice and the commandment to circumcise are the only two positive commandments which carry with them the punishment of karet for lack of fulfillment.  Furthermore, the Pesah must be sacrificed on the fourteenth of Nisan and if the eighth day of a boy’s life falls out on the fourteenth of Nisan then it must take place then.  It is not surprising that the halakhah allows him to continue on his way to perform these weighty commandments.  What is perhaps more surprising is that participating in a betrothal feast is placed in the same category.  This perhaps can be read as a rabbinic statement concerning the importance of marriage.  
In any case, if a person sets off to engage in one of these activities and realizes that he has not burned his chametz, if he can still return home, burn the chametz and get to where he needs to be on time, then he must do so.  However, if there is not sufficient time for this, then he need not return.  Rather, in his heart he annuls the chametz, that it should be to him as is the dust of the earth.  
Section two:  In this section he is on his way to save someone’s life.  In such a case, even if he could return to remove his chametz and still make it to where he needs to go on time, he need not do so.  Since these are matters of life or death, he shouldn’t hesitate or take a risk by returning to remove his chametz.  Life takes precedent over all commandments. Therefore, all he should do is annul the chametz in his heart.
Section three:  If he sets out just for pleasure, for instance on a vacation, without there being any commandment that he is going to perform, then he must return and remove his chametz even if this will cause him to not be able to get to where he needs to go.  In such a case, the mishnah does not allow him to annul the chametz in his heart.  
