Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
According to some commentators, this mishnah teaches that even in places where they did do work on the fourteenth of Nisan, the eve of Pesah, not all types of work were permitted.  According to this understanding, the mishnah restricts that which we previously thought was permitted.  Others understand this mishnah to refer to places in which work is generally not done.  Our mishnah would then teach that in such places while most work is not done, some work may indeed be done.  This mishnah then would be allowing that which we thought was prohibited. 

Mishnah Six
1) Rabbi Meir says: any work which he began before the fourteenth, he may finish it on the fourteenth; but he may not begin [new work] on the fourteenth, even if he can finish it [on the same day]. 
2) The sages say: three craftsmen may work on the eve of Pesah until midday, and these are they: tailors, hairdressers, and laundrymen. 
a) Rabbi Yose bar Judah says: shoemakers too. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir one may complete already-begun work on the fourteenth of Nisan, the eve of Pesah, but one may not start new work.  Starting new work is prohibited even if he will be able to finish it before the day is over, or more specifically before midday, at which point all work is prohibited.
Section two:  The sages say that only three types of craftsmen can do work.  All other types of craftsmen may not work, even if they can complete their work before midday.  All three of these types of work are considered to be essential for the full appreciation of the holiday.  Furthermore, these types of work are sometimes allowed even during the intermediate days of the holidays, if they could not have been done before the holiday (we will learn more about this when we learn Moed Katan).  Therefore it is allowed on the day before Pesah as well.  
Rabbi Yose bar Judah adds that shoemakers are allowed to work on the fourteenth because the sages allowed pilgrims to Jerusalem to have their shoes fixed, if they had worn out on their travels to Jerusalem.  
In any case, even these types of craftsmen can only work until midday.         
