Pesahim, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah is a direct continuation of yesterday’s mishnah.  

Mishnah Eight
1) Similarly, he who went out of Jerusalem and remembered that he had holy meat with him: 
a) If he has passed Scopus, he burns it where he is;  
b) but if not, he returns and burns it in front of the Temple with the wood of the [altar] pile.   
2) And for what [quantity] must they return? 
a) Rabbi Meir says: for both when there is as much as an egg; 
b) Rabbi Judah says: for both, when there is as much as an olive; 
c) But the sages say: holy meat, when there is as much as an olive and chametz, when there is as much as an egg.  

Explanation
Section one:  Certain sacrifices, such as a thanksgiving offering, may be eaten anywhere in Jerusalem but may not be brought outside.  If they are brought outside of Jerusalem they must be burnt. The person in this mishnah is leaving Jerusalem when he discovers that he has with him “holy meat”—some sacrificial meat that he didn’t eat.  According to the Mishnah, if he has passed Mt. Scopus, a mountain from which the Temple Mount can be seen (this is where Hebrew University is today), then he need not go back to the Temple and burn the meat there.  However, if he still has not yet reached that point, he must return to the Temple and burn the sacrifice with the wood of the altar pile.  
Section two:  The mishnah now asks about the two cases we have discussed in today’s and yesterday’s mishnah:  sacrifices and chametz—for the sake of what quantity must one return to burn/remove them?  According to Rabbi Meir, the amount is the same for both—a measure the size of an egg.  The Talmud says that Rabbi Meir learns this from the laws of uncleanness—just as food that is less than the size of an egg cannot become unclean, so too he need return only for this measure of sacrifice or chametz.  Rabbi Judah disagrees (these guys do seem to always disagree) and holds that in both cases he need return for an amount the size of an olive, a smaller amount than an egg.  The Talmud explains that Rabbi Judah learns this from the amount that is prohibited—an amount the size of an olive is prohibited and therefore this is the minimum amount for which one must return.  Finally, the sages differentiate between the two—for sacred meat he must return for the smaller amount of an olive but for chametz he need only return for an egg’s amount.  
