Pesahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah continues to discuss ways in which they avoided all possibility that the pesah would be cooked with water.

Mishnah Two
1) One may not roast the pesah either on a [metal] spit or on a grill.  
a) Rabbi Zadok said: it once happened that Rabban Gamaliel said to his servant Tabi, “Go out and roast us the pesah on the grill.”
2) If it [the pesah] touched the clay of the oven, he should pare its place.
3) If some of its juice dripped on to the clay [of the oven] and dripped back on to it, he must remove its place.   
4) If some of its juice fell on the flour, he must take a handful away from its place.

Explanation
Section one:   According to the first opinion in the mishnah, the pesah cannot be cooked using any metal.  The problem with metal is that it will heat up and it will cook the pesah and not the fire.  The rabbis were adamant that the pesah be cooked only by the fire itself and not by things which had been themselves heated by fire.  Rabban Gamaliel disagrees and holds that heat which is derived from the fire has the same status as the fire itself.  Therefore, he could tell his slave to go out and roast the pesah on a grill.
As an aside, we should note that Rabban Gamaliel in this mishnah probably is the Rabban Gamaliel who lived after the destruction of the Temple.  Nevertheless, he continues to eat a “pesah”. This is not the only evidence for such a practice after the destruction of the Temple.  Nevertheless, as time passed, this practice became less and less accepted.  
Section two:  If the pesah touched the oven, then they should pare off the place on the pesah which the oven touched.  This piece of its meat was cooked by the heat of the oven’s clay and not directly by the fire and hence it shouldn’t be eaten.  
Section three:  If some of the juices from the pesah fell onto the oven and were there cooked by the clay of the oven and then fell back onto the pesah, then it is not enough just to pare off some of the pesah.  Rather they must cut off the part onto which the juices fell and were absorbed and not eat that part. The Talmud says that they should cut off an inch deep of meat.
Section four:  If some of the juices of the pesah fell onto some flour which was boiling, then the juices are being cooked by the flour and therefore cannot be eaten. What he must do is take a handful away from the flour and burn it in the same way that all disqualified sacrifices are burned.     
