Pesahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with what parts of the pesah sacrifice are eaten.
The second section deals with several potential violations involved in eating the pesah.

Mishnah Eleven
1) Everything which can be eaten of a full-grown ox may be eaten of a tender goat, as well as the tops of the forelegs and the cartilages. 
2) He who breaks a bone of a clean pesah receives forty [lashes] but he who leaves over [flesh] of a clean [pesah] or breaks [a bone] of an unclean [one] does not receive the forty [lashes.]

Explanation
Section one:  As we have mentioned on several occasions, people needed to register to eat the pesah sacrifice before it was sacrificed.  There had to be enough meat for each person to eat at least an olive amount’s worth of the pesah.  Therefore they had to estimate how much of the animal could be eaten.  The mishnah states that any part of a fully grown ox that can be eaten can also be eaten from a tender goat, the animal used as the pesah sacrifice.  Additionally, the tops of the forelegs and the cartilages of the tender goat may be eaten as well.  However, besides these two things any part of the tender goat that is not eaten in a fully grown ox does not count when they figure out how much meat there will be to go around from the pesah.  Furthermore, it is permitted to leave inedible parts uneaten and one does not violate the prohibition of leaving any of it until morning.
Section two:   Exodus 12:46 prohibits breaking the bone of a pesah sacrifice.  One who breaks the bone of a pure pesah sacrifice has violated a negative commandment. The mishnah expresses this violation by saying that he gets forty lashes, the amount of lashes prescribed for the violation of any negative commandment.  
The Torah also prohibits leaving any of the pesah over until the following morning.  However, one is not lashed for violating this prohibition because the verse gives a remedy for the violation.  Exodus 12:10 states, “Do not leave any of it over until morning, and what remains in the morning shall be burned in fire.”  The fact that a remedy exists for the violation means that one is not punished by lashes for the violation itself. 
An alternative reason that punishments are not meted out for leaving over the pesah is that it is a passive violation and only active violations are punished.
Breaking a bone of an unclean pesah is not punished by lashes since the pesah is in any case disqualified.  
