Pesahim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The topic of this mishnah is one who slaughters an animal that is supposed to be a sacrifice on Shabbat, the eve of Pesah, but sacrifices it for the wrong purpose.  Again we will see an extended argument between Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua, two of the same sages who disputed above in mishnah two.

Mishnah Five
1) If the pesah was slaughtered for a different purpose on Shabbat, he [the slaughterer] is liable to a sin-offering on its account.   
2) All other sacrifices which he slaughtered as a pesah:
a) if they are not fit [to be a pesah] he is liable; 
b) if they are fit [to be a pesah]:
i) Rabbi Eliezer makes him liable to a sin-offering, 
ii) But Rabbi Joshua exempts him.   
3) Rabbi Eliezer said to him: if for the pesah, which it is permitted [to slaughter] for its own purpose, yet when he changes its purpose he is liable; then [other] sacrifices, which are forbidden [to slaughter even] for their own purpose, if he changes their purpose is it not logical that he should be liable. 
4) Rabbi Joshua said to him:  not so. If you say [with regard to] the pesah, [he is liable] because he changed it to something that is forbidden; will you say [the same] of [other] sacrifices, where he changed them for something that is permitted?   
5) Rabbi Eliezer said to him: let the community sacrifices prove it, which are permitted for their own sake, yet he who slaughters [other sacrifices] in their name is liable. 
6) Rabbi Joshua said him: not so. If you say [with regard to] the public sacrifices, [that is] because they have a limit; will you say [the same] of the pesah, which has no limit?   
7) Rabbi Meir says: he too who slaughters [other sacrifices] in the name of public sacrifice is not liable.

Explanation
Section one:  If a person takes an animal set aside to be a pesah and slaughters it on Shabbat, the eve of Pesah, with the intent of the animal being another type of sacrifice, the sacrifice is invalid and he is liable for transgressing Shabbat.  Since he slaughtered an animal without performing a mitzvah, he is not exempt for having slaughtered.  
Section two:  In this case he takes an animal set aside to be another sacrifice and slaughters it for it to be a pesah.  If the animal cannot be a pesah, for instance it is a cow, he is liable for the same reason that he was above—he has slaughtered an animal without performing a mitzvah.  
The more debatable issue is if he slaughtered an animal set aside for another sacrifice and that animal can be a pesah, such as a one year old male sheep.  In such a case he has performed a valid sacrifice, which is a mitzvah, but he has not fulfilled his pesah obligation and he must bring another pesah sacrifice.  According to Rabbi Eliezer he is liable even though he has performed a mitzvah.  Rabbi Joshua exempts him because he has performed a mitzvah. The remainder of the mishnah is an extended argument between these two rabbis, an argument very similar to that which we saw in mishnah two.
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer starts out again in a very straightforward manner.  Everyone agrees that he is liable if he slaughters a pesah with the wrong intention.  If he is liable in this case in which it was permitted to slaughter the pesah, he should also be liable for slaughtering a different sacrifice, which he shouldn’t have been doing in the first place.  To put it another way, Rabbi Eliezer is pointing out a problem in Rabbi Joshua’s ruling—if he had slaughtered the other sacrifice with the intention of it being that which it should have been, he would have been liable.  Why should he be exempt just because he sacrificed it with the intent of it being a pesah?
Section four:  Rabbi Joshua says that rather than decide based on what the animal was supposed to be (permitted pesah or forbidden other sacrifice) we should focus on what intent he had when he sacrificed it.  When it came to the pesah which he sacrificed with something else in mind he is liable because he changed it to something which is forbidden on Shabbat.  His intent was to offer a forbidden sacrifice.  In contrast, when it came to the other sacrifice he is exempt since he changed it to something which is permitted.  Here, his intent was to offer a permitted sacrifice.  
Section five:  Rabbi Eliezer now brings into the debate another type of sacrifice which may be offered on Shabbat—public sacrifices such as the tamid or the mussaf.  These are permitted if sacrificed with the proper intent, but one who slaughters an animal set aside to be a different animal with the intent of it being a tamid or musaf is liable.  This is true even though it is permitted to sacrifice a tamid or musaf.  So too, one who slaughters a different animal with the intent of it being a pesah should be liable.  In both cases one is slaughtering a different sacrifice with the intent of it being a sacrifice which is permitted on Shabbat, and therefore in both cases the person should be liable.  
Section six:  Rabbi Joshua points out that this analogy is faulty.  There is a limit to the amount of public, mandated sacrifices that can be brought.  One can only bring one tamid in the morning and one in the afternoon.  The Torah prescribes exactly what must be brought for the musaf.  After these have been slaughtered it is forbidden to slaughter any more on Shabbat.  Therefore, one who slaughters on Shabbat another sacrifice with the intent of it being a tamid or musaf has performed a forbidden labor. There is no limit to the number of pesah sacrifices that Israel may offer and hence one he offers an additional pesah has not performed a forbidden labor.  This is the end of the argument between Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Eliezer.  Again, Rabbi Eliezer seems to lose.  Clearly the editor of the Mishnah’s sympathies do not lie with him.
Section seven:  Rabbi Meir actually goes a step further than Rabbi Joshua.  According to Rabbi Meir one who slaughters another sacrifice with the intent of it being a public sacrifice is also exempt, just like one who slaughters another sacrifice with the intent of it being a pesah.  This is a step further because unlike the pesah, these sacrifices cannot be used.  He is exempt because his intent was to slaughter the animal for a permitted sacrifice.  
