Pesahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
There are four parts of the offering of an animal which need to be performed before an animal sacrifice can be eaten or burned on the altar:  slaughtering, catching the blood in a vessel, bring the blood to the altar and the sprinkling of the blood on the altar.  All four of these actions must be done with the proper intent in mind.  That is to say the person performing these four actions must be at all times intend to offer the animal as the specific sacrifice which he is intending to perform.  Our mishnah teaches that a pesah for which one of these actions is done with the wrong intent is not a valid pesah offering.   

Mishnah Two
1) A pesah sacrifice which a person slaughtered another purpose, or caught [the blood] or brought it or sprinkled its [blood] for another purpose; 
2) Or for its own purpose and for another purpose; or for another purpose and for its own purpose, it is disqualified. 
3) How is it “for its own purpose” and [then] “for another purpose”?
a) For the purpose of being a pesah sacrifice [first] and [then] for the purpose of being a well-being offering. 
4) [How is it] “for another purpose” and [then] “for its own purpose”?
a) For the purpose of being a well-being offering [first] and [then] for the purpose of being a pesah sacrifice.

Explanation
Section one:  As stated above in the introduction, if any of the four activities are done with the intent of the animal serving another purpose besides a pesah, then the animal cannot be used as a pesah sacrifice.  
Section two:  The mishnah now emphasizes that even if one began one of the activities, for instance slaughtering, with one intention in mind and completed the activity with another intention, the sacrifice is disqualified.  The entire activity from beginning to end must be performed with the correct intention in mind.  The mishnah will now illustrate these possibilities.
Section three:  In the previous section we learned that even if one of the actions was first performed “for its own purpose”—meaning for it to be a pesah—and then “for another purpose”, that it is disqualified.  The mishnah now illustrates such an example.  He began to slaughter the animal (or any of the other three actions) with the intent of it being a pesah and then while still performing the act he intended it to be a well-being offering.  Even though he began the act with the correct intent, it is still disqualified.
Section four:  In this case he began to perform one of the actions with the incorrect intent, for instance for the animal to be a well-being offering, and then he completed the action with the correct intent, for the animal to be pesah.  Even though he completed the action with the correct intent, the sacrifice is still disqualified because he began even one of the actions with the incorrect intent.     
