Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This is the last mishnah to note different customs in different places.  It returns to the original topic of the chapter—doing work on semi-holidays.  The first section of the mishnah deals with the ninth of Av, a day of mourning commemorating the destruction of both Temples, while the second section returns to discuss the day before Pesah, the very topic that was discussed above in mishnah one.  The fact that the mishnah returns to the same subject with which it began is a sign of its careful editing.

Mishnah Five
1) In a place where it is the custom to do work on the ninth of Av, one may do it; where it is the custom not to do work, one may not do it. 
a) And in all places students of sages desist [from work on that day]. 
b) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said: a man should always make himself a student of sages.  
2) But the sages say:  In Judea they used to do work on the eve of Pesah until midday, while in Galilee they did not work at all. 
3) [With regard to] the night:  Beth Shammai forbid [work], but Bet Hillel permit it until sunrise.

Explanation
Section one:  The ninth of Av is not a festival such that it is strictly forbidden to do work on that day. Rather just as it is not appropriate for a mourner to work, so too in some places it was felt that it was not appropriate to work on this day.  However, others allowed work on the ninth of Av.  According to this position the mourning for the Temple is not the same as normal mourning since the tragedy has long passed.  
Even in places where work is allowed, students of sages (alternatively we might understand “talmidei hachamim” as referring to sages themselves) should not work.  Their extra devotion to the Torah demands of them an extra observance of this day as well.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that everyone should strive to act like students of the sages and not work on the ninth of Av.  Such behavior is not considered to be overly arrogant.    
Section two:  The sages here disagree with the mishnah in the beginning of the chapter. According to the sages, working on the eve of Pesach is not dependent on local custom, as was described above.  Rather, in Judea they allowed people to work until midday, whereas in the Galilee they forbid work the whole day.  Some explain that in this mishnah the sages explain the first mishnah above.  When the mishnah said that there were places with different customs it meant, according to the sages, that these customs differed between Judea and Galilee.
Section three:  In this section Beth Shammai and Bet Hillel debate what the custom was in Galilee, where they did not work on the eve of Pesah.  According to Bet Shammai, this prohibition included working on the night before Pesah (the night before the seder), whereas Bet Hillel held that the prohibition of work did not begin until sunrise on the fourteenth.  
