Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with work that is permitted on the fourteenth of Nisan.

Mishnah Seven
1) They may set up chicken-houses for fowls on the fourteenth; 
a) and if a fowl ran away, one may return her to her place; 
b) and if she died, one may set another in her place. 
2) They may sweep away [the manure] from under an animal’s feet on the fourteenth, but on the festival one may only move it to the side.   
3) They may take vessels to and bring them back from a craftsman’s house, even if they are not required for the festival.

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rashi this clause means that it is permitted to put eggs under hens so that the eggs will stay warm and eventually hatch.  Others explain that this clause refers to fixing nests for newly-born domesticated fowl.  In any case, from the context of the rest of the mishnah, it is clear that there is some immediate need being referred to.  Albeck explains that the mishnah repeats “on the fourteenth” in order to emphasize that it is permitted to do this all day, and not just until midday, because this is not actually work.
If a chicken ran away from sitting on her eggs, one may return her to her spot because the eggs need to be kept warm. This too is not actually work but is rather merely laborious.  
Similarly, if a chicken who was sitting on her eggs died, a new one may be put in her place.  
Section two:  It is allowed on the fourteenth (all day) to clean up the manure that has accumulated under an animal and to bring the manure out to the garbage pile.  However, on the intermediate days of the festival, when work is more prohibited, it is only permissible to move it to the sides.  To completely remove it is forbidden.  
Note that the mishnah compares here the laws concerning the fourteenth with those concerning the intermediate days of the festival. This comparison is emphasized because they are both “grayish” areas of halakhah—some things are permitted and some are not, and sometimes the same work may under certain circumstances be permitted and under other circumstances be forbidden.
Section three:  One can bring things to a craftsman’s house to be fixed or worked on and one can pick up things from his house that have already been completed.  This is permissible even if these things are not necessary for the holiday.  In contrast, on the intermediate days of the festival it is forbidden to bring things to a craftsman house even if they are needed for the festival and it is forbidden to pick things up unless they are necessary for the holiday.  We can see that the laws concerning the fourteenth are more lenient.    

