Pesahim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah contains an extended debate between Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Akiva concerning what overrides the Shabbat. 
In order to understand the mishnah we should briefly remind ourselves of the laws of Shabbat.  There are two categories of prohibited labor mentioned here and critical for understanding this mishnah’s arguments:  1) a forbidden labor; 2) mandated rest, which is called shevut.  The former prohibitions are considered to be directly from the Torah (de’oraita) and are more serious than the latter which are only of rabbinic origin (derabbanan).  
The three activities focused upon in this mishnah are:
1)  Slaughtering the pesah.  Slaughtering an animal on Shabbat is a forbidden labor.
2)  Carrying the pesah on one’s shoulders through the public domain or bringing it outside the Shabbat border.  These are considered to be prohibitions of shevut because “a living thing carries itself”, that is it is not considered to be a biblical violation of carrying on Shabbat to carry a living thing.  Also, the prohibition of leaving the Shabbat border is considered by most sages to be only of rabbinic origin.
3)  Sprinkling red heifer water on a person who has come into contact with the dead.  This is not done on Shabbat even though it is only a shevut prohibition. 
Finally, it is not often that we get a chance to see in the Mishnah how the sages actually argued. While we certainly do not have here a “recording” of their exchanges, even the literary record affords a fascinating glimpse into their intellectual world.   

Mishnah Two
1) Rabbi Eliezer said: is it not logical: if slaughtering, which is [usually forbidden] as a labor, overrides Shabbat, shouldn’t these, which are [only forbidden] as mandated rest (shevut), override Shabbat?   
2) Rabbi Joshua said to him: let the festival prove this, for they permitted labor [on the festival] and forbade [activities forbidden because of] shevut.   
3) Rabbi Eliezer said to him: what is this, Joshua?  What proof is a voluntary act in respect of a commandment! 
4) Rabbi Akiva answered and said: let sprinkling [purificatory waters] prove it, which is [performed] because it is a commandment and is [forbidden only] as a shevut, yet it does not override Shabbat; so you too, do not wonder at these, that though they are [required] on account of a commandment and are [forbidden only] as shevut, yet they do not override Shabbat. 
5) Rabbi Eliezer said to him: but in respect of that I am arguing: if slaughtering, which is a labor, overrides Shabbat, is it not logical that sprinkling, which is [only] a shevut, should override Shabbat!
6) Rabbi Akiva said to him: or the opposite: if sprinkling, which is [forbidden] as a shevut, does not override Shabbat, then slaughtering, which is [normally forbidden] on account of labor, is it not logical that it should not override Shabbat. 
7) Rabbi Eliezer said to him:  Akiva! You are uprooting what is written in the Torah, “at twilight, offer it at its set time” (Numbers 9:3), both on week-days and on Shabbat. 
8) He said to him: master, give me an appointed time for these as there is an appointed season for slaughtering!
9) Rabbi Akiva stated a general rule: work which could be done on the eve of Shabbat does not override Shabbat; slaughtering, which could not be done on the eve of Shabbat, does override Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Eliezer’s first argument is straightforward.  The sages admitted in mishnah one that slaughtering the pesah is permitted on Shabbat.  Slaughtering an animal on Shabbat is a violation of one of the forbidden labors of Shabbat.  If a forbidden labor is permitted, shouldn’t carrying the animal, which is only an issue of shevut, also be permitted.
Section two:  Rabbi Joshua responds that Rabbi Eliezer’s argument is not decisive because of the issue of work on the festival.  Generally on a festival it is permitted to slaughter an animal and cook it because one is allowed to prepare food on Shabbat.  These activities were permitted even though they are forbidden labors.  Nevertheless, when it came to issues of shevut, for instance carrying something from outside the Shabbat border, the sages did not permit these types of activities on a festival.  Therefore, it makes sense in the case of the pesah for the sages to be strict with regard to shevut infractions and lenient with regard to forbidden labors.
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer responds that Rabbi Joshua’s analogy is not good.  Preparing food on a festival is a voluntary act and hence the rabbis could be strict and forbid shevut violations.  However, eating the pesah is a commandment and hence the law should be lenient and allow shevut violations.
Section four:  Rabbi Akiva, ever the creative sage, steps in after Rabbi Joshua’s argument fails and employs a new analogy.  Purificatory waters are sprinkled on a person who has contracted corpse impurity on the third and seventh days of the purification process.  However, if the seventh day is Shabbat, the fourteenth of Nisan, they are not sprinkled even though this is necessary to allow the person to be pure and eat his pesah in the evening.  The prohibition of sprinkling the water is only one of shevut, and it is a mitzvah and nevertheless it remains prohibited on Shabbat.  So too, the carrying of the pesah on the shoulders and outside of the border remain prohibited even though they are for a mitzvah and only prohibited due to shevut.
Section five:  Rabbi Eliezer basically answers that he disagrees concerning that halakhah as well.  Just as carrying the animal is shevut and therefore overrides Shabbat, so too sprinkling which is shevut also should override Shabbat.
Section six:  Rabbi Akiva responds that now that Rabbi Eliezer is trying to overturn traditions (that we don’t sprinkle the purificatory water on Shabbat), he too can overturn a tradition.  If we don’t sprinkle the water, even though it is only shevut, then all the more so we shouldn’t slaughter the animal which is a forbidden labor.  Rabbi Akiva does not really wish to rule that we shouldn’t slaughter the pesah on Shabbat.  What he means to do is reject Rabbi Eliezer’s argument. 
Section seven:  Rabbi Eliezer responds that the Torah explicitly mandates that the pesah be slaughtered on the fourteenth even if this is on Shabbat.  Hence, the argument that Rabbi Akiva was trying to make in section six would directly contradict the Torah.
Section eight:  Rabbi Akiva returns to the original argument.  The Torah specifically mandates an appointed time for the slaughtering of the pesah.   Hence slaughtering overrides Shabbat. The other labors which are not specified by the Torah do not override the Shabbat.  This is basically the end of the argument.  In the end only activities that seem to be specifically mandated by the Torah are allowed on Shabbat.  
Section nine:  The mishnah ends with the same general principle that Rabbi Akiva iterated in Shabbat 19:1—any labor which can be performed before Shabbat must be performed then and does not override Shabbat, but any labor which cannot be performed until Shabbat itself does override Shabbat.  Slaughtering the pesah cannot be done before Shabbat, hence it overrides the Shabbat.  Carrying the pesah could have been done earlier, hence it does not override the Shabbat. 
The fact that the mishnah ends with Rabbi Akiva’s opinion is a clear expression of the Mishnah’s general connection to Rabbi Akiva and his school.   
