Pesahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
The following four chapters of mishnah deal with the Pesah sacrifice and discuss how it was offered in Jerusalem.  Our mishnah deals with the afternoon tamid (daily) offering.  Every day there were two tamid offerings, one in the morning and one in the afternoon (Numbers 28:3-4; Exodus 29:39).  Usually the afternoon tamid was the last offering of the day.  The one exception was the Pesah sacrifice which was offered after the tamid.  Our mishnah comes to teach that normally the tamid was sacrificed later in the afternoon, but on the eve of Pesah they would sacrifice the tamid earlier in order to leave more time to sacrifice the Pesah.

Mishnah One
1) The [afternoon] tamid is slaughtered at eight and a half hours and is offered at nine and a half hours.  
2) On the eve of Pesah it is slaughtered at seven and a half hours and offered at eight and a half hours, whether it is a weekday or Shabbat. 
3) If the eve of Pesah fell on the eve of Shabbat it is slaughtered at six and a half hours and offered at seven and a half hours, and the pesah offering after it.

Explanation 
Section one:  On normal days the afternoon tamid is slaughtered at eight and a half hours (remember the day is divided into twelve equal hours).  It is offered at nine and a half hours.  This leaves another two and a half hours to perform other tasks, such as various grain and incense offerings and lighting the menorah, the last thing done in the Temple before nightfall.
Section two: On the eve of Pesah they moved the tamid sacrifice up one hour to give more time afterwards to sacrifice the pesah.  This was true whether the eve of Pesah fell on Shabbat or on a weekday.
Section three:  The only exception to this was when the eve of Pesah fell on the eve of Shabbat.  In this case they had to finish roasting the pesah lamb before Shabbat began since cooking is prohibited on Shabbat.  Therefore, they offered the tamid sacrifice as early as possible—at six and a half hours which is when the sun begins to set.  The afternoon tamid cannot be offered earlier because at an earlier time it is not afternoon.  They would then immediately begin to slaughter and prepare the pesah lamb.  
