Rosh Hashanah, Chapter One, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah lists several different ways in which a person might come to profane Shabbat on his way to testify that he saw the new moon. The mishnah is adamant—a person on his way to Jerusalem may profane the Shabbat in any way that he needs to in order to ensure that he makes it to Jerusalem in order to testify.

Mishnah Nine
1) If one who has seen the new moon and is not able to walk [to Jerusalem] on foot, he may be brought on a donkey or even in a litter [on Shabbat]. 
2) If they [the witnesses] are likely to be attacked, they may take sticks [to defend themselves].   
3) If the distance is great [to Jerusalem], they may take provisions with them, since for as much as a night and a day’s journey they were allowed to profane Shabbat and go out to testify concerning the new moon, as it says:  “These are the appointed times of the Lord . . . which you shall proclaim at their appointed time” (Leviticus 23:4).  

Explanation
Section one:  Here we learn that a person may transgress two prohibitions in order to make it to Jerusalem to testify:  he may ride on a donkey and others may carry him on a litter, which is a violation of carrying.
Section two:  They may also carry sticks in order to defend themselves against bandits or highway robbers.  
Section three:  They can also carry food with them on their way to Jerusalem.  The witnesses were allowed to travel for up to an entire night and one day in order to get to Jerusalem, meaning if they saw the new moon in the evening when Shabbat began, and they were far enough away that they would have to walk the entire night and all day and then just get there when Shabbat was over, they were still allowed to go.  Of course, if they lived farther away than they couldn’t come because they wouldn’t make it in time anyway.
The rabbis’ adamancy that one must go to Jerusalem to testify and that one can break Shabbat in order to do so is justified by a midrash.  The Torah says that the appointed times, the festivals, must be proclaimed at their appointed time.  This is understood by the rabbis to mean that it is essential that the court declare the new moon on time so that the festivals would fall at the correct time. If doing so requires one to profane Shabbat, so be it.   
