Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah and the next one contain one of the most famous stories in rabbinic literature.  In it Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua clash over accepting what seems to surely be false testimony as to the new moon.  

Mishnah Eight
1) Rabban Gamaliel had diagrams of the moon on a tablet [hung] on the wall of his upper chamber, and he used to show them to the unlearned and say, “Did it look like this or this?”
2) It happened that two witnesses came and said, “We saw it in the morning in the east and in the evening in the west.”  
a) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri said:  they are lying witnesses.  
b) When they came to Yavneh Rabban Gamaliel accepted them. 
3) On another occasion two witnesses came and said, “We saw it at its proper time, but on the night which should have been the new moon it was not seen,” and Rabban Gamaliel accepted their evidence.  
a) Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas said: they are lying witnesses. 
b) How can they testify that a woman has given birth when on the next day her belly is between her teeth (swollen)?  
c) Rabbi Joshua to him: I see your argument.

Explanation
Section one: This section sets up the character of Rabban Gamaliel, who will play the lead role in the story.  Rabban Gamaliel was the head of the court in Yavneh and he was the rabbi who would ultimately decide whether the witnesses’ testimony would be accepted and the new month sanctified.  In order to facilitate this, he would have pictures of the moon in its different phases hung up in his upper chamber, where he would interrogate them.
Section two:  The story now begins.  Two witnesses come in front of some rabbi (it’s not clear whom they come in front of) and tell him that they saw the new moon in the morning in the east and in the evening in the west.  This is impossible and hence Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas calls them lying witnesses.  The witnesses proceed on to Yavneh and come in front of Rabban Gamaliel, who sanctifies the month based on their testimony.  We as readers of the mishnah are properly shocked—wasn’t Rabban Gamaliel the very rabbi who was especially fervent in checking the witnesses?
The same thing seems to happen a second time.  Again witnesses offer impossible testimony, which Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas promptly rejects, this time using a graphic analogy.  In Hebrew there is a pun which is lost in translation. The word for pregnant and the word for a thirty day month are the same.  
In the final line of the mishnah, a new character is added, Rabbi Joshua.  Rabbi Joshua agrees with Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas, setting the stage for his eventual clash with Rabban Gamaliel in tomorrow’s mishnah.  
