Rosh Hashanah, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah lists four points of the year in which the world is judged as to the outcome of certain essential aspects of life.  As we shall see, three of them are connected to agricultural holidays and events, whereas the fourth, the judgment on Rosh Hashanah, is more of a moral/religious judgment.  

Mishnah Two
At four set times the world is judged:  
1) On Pesah in respect to the produce. 
2) On Shavuot in respect to the fruit of the tree.
3) On Rosh Hashanah all the people of the world pass before Him like a division of soldier [a numerus], as it says, “He who fashions the hearts of them all, who discerns all their doings” (Psalms 33:15).  
4) And on Sukkot they are judged in respect of rain.

Explanation
Section one: In the land of Israel, the grain harvest begins around Pesah time. Indeed, this is why the Omer offering, which is brought from the first barley harvested, begins to be offered on the second day of Pesah.  The mishnah teaches that on Pesah the world is judged as to how successful the produce harvest will be.
Section two:  On Shavuot the harvest of the fruits of the tree begins.  Specifically, this seems to be when grapes begin to ripen. Hence, according to the rabbis this is when the world is judged as to the harvest of fruits which come from the tree.
Section three:  This is the central section in this mishnah, the reason why this mishnah is here in Rosh Hashanah. This is the source where we learn for the first time that on Rosh Hashanah the world is judged.  The image that the mishnah creates is that all the people of the world, perhaps even non-Jews, come in front of God one at a time and God inspects them.  He is like their general and they are his soldiers, standing at attention and being judged by Him.  The word “numerus” was interpreted by Saul Lieberman, the premier Talmudic scholar of the past century, as referring to an army division.  The version in the mishnah was understood by later talmudic scholars who did not know Greek, as “kivne meron”, understood to refer to the sheep on the Meron mountain.  This led to the well-known image of people passing in front of God like sheep passing in front of a shepherd.  The point of the prooftext is that God who is the creator of the human heart, also looks at what a person does and judges each one according to his deeds.
Section four:  In the land of Israel, the rainy season begins on Sukkot.  Hence, on Sukkot the people of the world are judged as to how much rain will come. To this day, on Sukkot Jews begin to pray for rain and add into the Amidah an acknowledgement that God causes the wind to blow and the rain to come down.  Rain and prayers for rain is a topic to which we will return when we learn tracate Taanit.  
