Rosh Hashanah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
This famous mishnah gives four new years and explains the halakhic significance of each of each of them.
  
Mishnah One
There are four new years: 
1) The first of Nisan is the new year for kings and for festivals.  
2) The first of Elul is the new year for the tithe of beasts.  
a) Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon say:  the first of Tishri.  
3) The first of Tishri is the new year for years, for shmitta and jubilee years, for planting and for [tithe of] vegetables.   
4) The first of Shevat is the new year for trees, according to the words of Bet Shammai.
a) Bet Hillel says:  on the fifteenth of that month.

Explanation
Section one:  The order of the new years in this mishnah reflects the order of the months in the Torah.  In the Torah, Nisan, the month in which Pesah falls, is considered to be the first month of the year, so it is listed here first. The first of Nisan is new year for the kings, which means that we count the years in which a king has ruled from the first of Nisan.  The reason why this is important is that in those times they would date their documents by the years in which the king had ruled.  In order for a document to be valid, therefore, one needed to know if which year of the king’s rule this was.  “For festivals” means that Pesah is considered to be the first festival of the year.   The reason that this is important is that it impacts someone who makes a vow to bring something to the Temple. Rabbi Shimon holds that he has three festivals to bring the vow-offering, and that the count of those three festivals begins on Pesah. So if he makes a vow after Pesah, he doesn’t begin counting the three festival time-limit until the following Pesah.  
Section two: The first of Elul is the Rosh Hashanah for tithing animals. When tithing animals, one groups them by year.  The first of Elul is the beginning of the next year, so any animals born on or after this date count toward the next year’s tithe and not towards those animals that need to be tithed from the previous year.  Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon disagree concerning tithes. They hold that just as tithes for vegetables are fixed on the first of Tishri (see below), so too are tithes for animals.  
Section three: The first of Tishri, what we today call Rosh Hashanah, is the new year for “years.”  This means that when we count what year it is, we count from the first of Tishri.  This is how we still count the years today.  Many other commentators take this to mean that counts based on the rule of non-Jewish kings are based on Tishri being the start of the new year.  The shmitta (Sabbatical) and Jubilee years begin on the first of Tishri—meaning from this date all of the prohibitions and regulations concerning the Sabbatical and Jubilee years begin to take effect.  This is also the new year for “planting” trees, meaning that we count the number of years a tree has grown starting on the first of Tishri. This is important in order to know when it stops being “orlah”—fruit which is prohibited during the trees first three years. Finally, the first of Tishri is the Rosh Hashanah for the tithes of vegetables.  Vegetables that were picked before Tishri are not tithed with vegetables picked afterwards.    
Section four:  The two houses debate the date of the new year for trees: Bet Shammai holds that it is on the first of Shevat, and Bet Hillel holds that it is on the fifteenth (Tu B’shvat).  The importance of this new year is that fruit which has begun to sprout on the tree before this date is not tithed with fruit that spouts afterwards.   
