Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
There are two more decrees mentioned in this mishnah, both which have to do with the testimony concerning the new month.  

Mishnah Four
1) Originally they used to accept testimony with regard to the new moon during the whole day. 
2) On one occasion the witnesses were late in arriving, and the Levites went wrong in the daily hymn.  
3) They therefore decreed that testimony should be accepted only until the afternoon [sacrifice].
4) If witnesses came after the afternoon sacrifice that day should be kept as holy and also the next day. 
5) After the destruction of the temple Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai decreed that testimony with regard to the new moon should be received during the whole day.
6) Rabbi Joshua ben Korha said: this further did Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai decree, that not matter where the head of the court might be, the witnesses should have to go only to the place of the assembly. 

Explanation
Section one:  Originally, it didn’t matter when during the day the witnesses came to testify that they had seen the new moon—there testimony was always accepted.  
Section two:  The problem with accepting witnesses all day is that when witnesses successfully testify they turn the current day into Rosh Hodesh, or in the case of Tishri, Rosh Hashanah. If they come late in the day, it may be difficult to correctly observe the special Rosh Hodesh rituals because time is simply running.  The mishnah relates that this happened one time.  The witnesses came late in the day and the Levites in the Temple sang the wrong Psalm.  The Levites would sing a Psalm while the Tamid (Daily) sacrifice was being offered.  There was a different song depending on whether it was a regular day or whether it was Rosh Hodesh. In the morning they sang the regular Psalm for that day, and then because the witnesses hadn’t yet come they sang the same Psalm for the afternoon Tamid. When the witnesses came, it turned out that they never sang the correct Psalm.  
Section three: They therefore decreed that the testimony of the witnesses would only be accepted until minhah time, which was the time when they would offer the tamid sacrifice (see Pesahim 5:1). 
Section four:  This section refers to Rosh Hashanah, which is not only Rosh Hodesh but also a sacred holiday.  On Rosh Hashanah they would observe the thirtieth day of the previous month as a holiday—meaning they wouldn’t work.  If witnesses came before minhah, then that day would count as Rosh Hashanah, and the next day would not be Rosh Hashanah.  If they came later than minhah, then that day would not have counted as Rosh Hashanah (even though they already refrained from work) and the following day will be observed as Rosh Hashanah.  This is the origins of the custom to observe Rosh Hashanah for two days.  
Section five:  After the destruction of the Temple there was no more need to worry about the Levites singing the wrong song.  Therefore, Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai restored the rule to its original state, and allowed the acceptance of testimony for the entire day.  
Section six:  According to Rabbi Joshua ben Korcha there was yet another decree made by Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai.  Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai decreed that when the witnesses came to testify all they had to do was come to the place of assembly, which is where the court sat.  They did not have to chase after the head of the court if he was in another place.  This decree seems to be another way of saying that the authority of the court is determinative and not the individual authority of its leader.      
