Rosh Hashanah, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
In order to know what date holidays would fall on, people would need to know on what day the previous month had begun.  This would be simple for those living in and near Jerusalem because they could immediately find out whether the court had decreed the thirtieth day of the previous month to be Rosh Hodesh.  Our mishnah teaches that they used to send out messengers from Jerusalem so that people who lived further away could also find out when Rosh Hodesh had been decreed.  However, they did not send these messengers out every month of the year, only on months which contained holidays.   
 
Mishnah Three
There are six months [at the beginning of which] messengers go out. 
1) On Nisan because of Pesah;
2) On Av because of the fast.
3) On Elul because of Rosh Hashanah.
4) On Tishri because of the setting of the festivals. 
5) On Kislev because of Hanukah.
6) And on Adar because of Purim.   
7) When the Temple stood, they used also to go out to report Iyar because of Pesah Katan (Pesah Sheni). 

Explanation
Most of this mishnah is self-explanatory. Note that messengers do not need to go out for Shavuot because once one knows when Pesah falls, the date of Shavuot is known automatically.  
Section two:  “The fast” refers to Tisha B’av, the Ninth of Av.  
Section three:  Messengers would go out on Elul so that people would be able to celebrate Rosh Hashanah on the thirtieth day of Elul, lest that day turns out to be the first of Tishri.  They would celebrate Rosh Hashanah on the next day as well, lest Elul has thirty days.  
Section four: On Tishri the messengers would go out so that people would know when Yom Kippur and Sukkot fall.
Section seven:  Pesah Sheni was the second chance for people to offer the pesah sacrifice if they did not offer it the first time (see Numbers 9:10-11 and Mishnah Pesahim 9:1).  After the destruction of the Temple this holiday lost any practical relevance.  We should note that by noting that when the Temple stood messengers went out for Pesah Sheni the mishnah also teaches that for all of the rest of the holidays the messengers still go out.  After the destruction of the Temple only Pesah Sheni has lost its relevance.    
