Introduction to Tractate Sanhedrin

Tractate Sanhedrin contains mostly laws concerning courts and court procedure, with much of the discussion revolving around courts that had to adjudicate capital cases.  The word “Sanhedrin”, which is a Greek word (and is preserved in the English word “synod”), signified a large council of Sages, and during the times of the Temple (until 70 A.D.) it met in the Temple itself, in the Chamber of Hewn Stone.  It is also known to have existed during the Second Temple period from non-Jewish sources (the Christian Bible, Greek writings, Josephus, etc.).  Tractate Sanhedrin in the Mishnah does not deal with these types of historical issues; rather it deals with legal issues:  the procedure of the court, selection of judges, the testimony of witnesses, lists of punishments and other issues.  There is also an important chapter which we will learn towards the end of the tractate dealing with theological issues of the world to come.  

One important note to make is that many of the laws in Tractate Sanhedrin were only theoretical already in the time of the Mishnah.  The Rabbis rarely if ever carried out the death penalty and therefore most of the discussions concerning for which crimes one receives the death penalty and how different types of executions were performed were theoretical for the Rabbis.  Nevertheless, Tractate Sanhedrin does contain important and interesting information with regards to central issues that still concern us today.

Sanhedrin, Chapter One, Mishnah One
 
Introduction
The first four mishnayoth of Sanhedrin discuss how many judges are needed to adjudicate certain cases of civil and criminal law.  The typical number for civil cases was three and the typical number for criminal cases was twenty-three.  The problem will arise in situations where it is not clear whether a certain case is civil or criminal.

Mishnah One
1) Cases concerning property [are decided] by three.
2) Cases concerning robbery or personal injury, by three.
3) Claims for full damages or half-damages, twofold restitution, or fourfold or fivefold restitution, by three.
4) Claims against a rapist, a seducer and one who defames [a virgin are decided] by three, according to Rabbi Meir.
a) The Sages say:  “One who defames [a virgin is decided] by twenty-three, for there may arise from it a capital case.

Explanation
Section one:  Property cases include disputes arising out of loans, sales, inheritance, gifts and other similar monetary matters.
Section two:  Personal injury is a case where one person directly injures another.  Robbery, as we learned in Bava Kamma chapter nine, does not carry with it a penalty of twofold restitution as does thievery.
Section three:  Full damages are assessed when a “warned” animal, one that has previously injured three times, causes further damage.  Half-damages are assessed when the damaging animal had not injured three times.  Twofold restitution is the penalty for a thief, and fourfold or fivefold restitution is the penalty for a thief who stole an animal and either sold it or slaughtered it.
Section four:  According to the Torah the rapist (Deut. 22:29) and the seducer (Ex. 22:16-17) pay fines of 50 shekel for having illegally taken the woman’s virginity.  In addition, according to the Rabbis the rapist also pays for injuring the woman as would any person who causes another person injury (see Bava Kamma, chapter eight).  The “one who defames a virgin” is referred to in Deut. 22:13-22.  This is a case where a husband falsely claims that the wife was not a virgin.  If the husband was found to be a liar he is beaten and must pay a fine of 100 shekels.  If his accusation turned out to be true the woman is put to death.  The Rabbinic understanding of this law greatly differs from its simple understanding in the Torah, but now is not the place for a detailed explanation.
