Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction
In the previous mishnah we learned that a person may go on Shabbat to the Shabbat border to get a head start on preparations for a funeral after Shabbat.  This mishnah deals with things that may be done on Shabbat itself, in order to prepare the body for burial or to preserve it.

Mishnah Five
One may perform all the needs of the dead:
1) One may anoint him with oil and wash him, provided that no limb of his is moved. 
2) One may remove the pillow from under him, and [thereby] place him on sand, in order that he should be better preserved. 
3) One may tie up the jaw, not in order that it should close but that it should not further [open]. 
4) And likewise, if a beam is broken, one may support it with a bench or bed posts, not in order that it [the break] should close up, but that it should go [open] no further.
5) One may not close [the eyes of] a corpse on Shabbat, nor on weekdays when he is about to die, and he who closes the eyes [of a dying person] at the point of death is a murderer.

Explanation
The mishnah lists things which may be done for a dead person on Shabbat itself.  
Section one: One may anoint the body with oil (done for the purposes of cleansing) and wash the body.  However, the body itself may not be moved because it is muktzeh. The reason it is muktzeh is that there is no use for the body on Shabbat, and all things which have no use may not be moved.
Section two:  One may remove the pillow/mattress upon which the dead body lies in order that it should be on the ground. This was considered a better means for preserving the body and preventing deterioration and the accompanying smell.
Section three:  One may tie the dead body’s jaw so that the mouth does not gape open further than it already is at the point of death.  However, it is forbidden to close the jaw because it is forbidden to move even a limb of the body.  One may preserve the state that the body is currently in, but not change that state.  
Section four:  This section is loosely connected to that in the previous section.   If a beam supporting the ceiling breaks on Shabbat, one may put something beneath it to support it so that it does not break any more.  However, one may not put something underneath it so that the break closes up.
Section five:  If a person dies with his/her eyes open, one may not close the eyes because it is forbidden to move a limb of the body.  The mishnah adds that even during the week it is prohibited to close the eyes of a dying person because this may cause death to arrive more speedily. This is indeed a primary source used by halakhic authorities who wish to prohibit euthanasia.  One may not do anything to make death come faster.  However, we should remember that it is nearly impossible to learn what halakhah has to say on any given topic from one single source, especially one as sensitive and controversial as euthanasia.  
    
