Shabbat, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The final mishnah of this chapter discusses what last minute preparations should be double-checked right before Shabbat begins.  The mishnah then proceeds to discuss what things may be done during twilight, a time which the rabbis were unsure whether to consider night or not.  

Mishnah Seven 
A person must say three things in his house on the eve of Shabbat just before night: 
a)  Have you separated tithes? 
b)  Have you prepared the ‘eruv?  
c)  Kindle the [Shabbat] lamp. 
2)   If it is doubtful, whether it is night or not, they do not tithe that which is certainly [untithed], they do not immerse utensils, and they do not kindle the lights. 
3)   But they can tithe doubtfully tithed produce, and they can set up an eruv, and they can store hot food.

Explanation
Section one:  There are three things a person should check before Shabbat begins.  The first is that his food has been tithed.  Tithes may not be separated on Shabbat and therefore food which has not been tithed will not be able to be eaten on Shabbat.  
He should also ask if the “eruv” has been set up.  There are two types of eruvin (the plural of eruv): one which allows a person to go further out of the city than he would otherwise be allowed to go and one which allows a person to carry things in places where it would normally be prohibited.  The tractate which follows Shabbat is tractate Eruvin so we will reserve in-depth discussion of these issues until later.  Setting up both types of eruvin is an important part of Shabbat preparation.
When all other preparations have been made, he tells his wife to light the Shabbat candles.
Section two:  The mishnah now begins to discuss what things may be done during twilight, the period after sunset before it is completely dark.  It is forbidden to tithe produce which we know has not been tithed.  Tithes are part of a forbidden labor called “completing” something’s preparation (metaken).  Similarly, immersing an impure vessel in a mikveh is considered completing its preparation and is forbidden.  Finally, if the candles have not yet been lit, they do not light them.  All three of these activities are prohibited by the Torah (deoraita) and hence cannot be done even during twilight.
Section three:  However, the following three activities are permitted.  It is permitted to tithe doubtfully tithed produce (demai) because according to Torah law he doesn’t even need to separate tithes from demai in the first place.  Since the entire obligation is only a rabbinic stringency, the rabbis allowed it to be done during twilight, although not on Shabbat.  One can still set up an eruv.  Finally, it is permitted to cover hot food with something that will maintain the food’s warmth.  On Shabbat it is forbidden to do so lest by doing so she cooks, an activity which is prohibited.  This last clause also functions as a transition to the next chapter which is devoted to the important prohibition of cooking on Shabbat.  
