Shabbat, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses the difference between carrying things in front of oneself, the way they are normally carried (picture the way you carry dishes) and carrying things behind oneself, a way of carrying that in most cases (but not all) is unusual and less effective.

Mishnah Four
1) If one intends to carry out [an object] in front of him, but it comes around behind him, he is not liable. 
2) Behind him, but it comes around in front of him, he is liable. 
3) In truth they said: a woman who wraps herself with an apron whether in front of her or behind her, is liable, because it is normal for it to reverse itself.  
4) Rabbi Judah said: also those who receive notes. 

Explanation
Section one:  In this case the person intended to carry the object out in front of her, but somehow the object came around to the other side of her body and she carried it behind her.  Had her intentions been fulfilled, she would have been liable.  However, since she ended up carrying it behind her, in a way that does not make a person liable, she is not liable for carrying.  The central idea is that her intention was not fulfilled, so she is not liable.  
Section two:  This is the opposite scenario:  she intended to carry it behind her in which case she would have been exempt.  When the object comes around to her front, it is now in a more protected position, one which she would normally be happy about. Therefore, she is liable.  The idea is that she would want the object to be more protected, and therefore she is liable for carrying.  In other words, her intention is actually fulfilled.
Section three:  From the above two sections we can see that normally, when a person carries something behind themselves, they are exempt.  This section brings up an exception—the woman’s apron.  It is normal for a woman’s apron, in which she carries things, to reverse itself.  Since this is normal and she can anticipate that the apron will reverse itself and that the object she is carrying may end up in front of her or behind her, she is liable in all cases.
Section four:  Rabbi Judah adds an additional category of people who are liable whether they carry the object in front or behind—those who receive notes.  These are messengers who would carry their bags on poles, either in front or behind them. Since the messenger could anticipate that the object might go in front or behind, he is liable in either case.     
