Shabbat, Chapter Six, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that a woman may not go out into the public domain wearing certain types of jewelry, but that if she does she has not transgressed a biblical commandment. Today we learn the parallel laws for a man.

Mishnah Two
1)   A man may not go out with a nail-studded sandal, 
2)   Nor with a single [sandal] if he has no wound on his foot;     
3)   Nor with tefillin, 
4)   Nor with an amulet, if it is not from an expert;
5)   Nor with a breastplate, 
6)   Nor with a helmet;
7)   Nor with iron boots. 
8)   Yet if he goes out with these, he is not liable for a sin-offering.   

Explanation
Section one:  Albeck suggests that nail-studded sandals were part of a soldier’s gear and therefore just as the mishnah forbids breastplates, helmets and iron boots, so too it forbids nail-studded sandals. Interestingly, Josephus, Wars of the Jews Book VI, I, VI, refers to soldiers wearing such sandals.  
Section two:  He shouldn’t go out with one sandal because people will think that he is holding the other sandal.  However, if he has a wound on his other foot everyone will see that he is wearing one sandal because of his wound. Therefore, if he has a wound on one foot he may go out with one sandal.  In both talmuds they debate whether he wears the sandal on his wounded or healthy foot.
Section three:  The sages debated whether or not tefillin are worn on Shabbat (today we don’t wear tefillin on Shabbat).  For those who held that tefillin are not worn on Shabbat it was obvious that he can’t wear them out into the public domain.  Since they are prohibited there is no reason to wear them around.  However, even for the sages who hold that tefillin are worn on Shabbat, he should not wear them in the public domain lest he need to remove them and thereby come to carry them.  He would need to remove them if he needed to relieve himself or if he came into a dirty place.  
Section four:  The sages believed in the efficacy of amulets, but only if they were made by expert amulet-makers.  If an amulet was made by an expert then a person could wear it around on Shabbat, but if it was not made by an expert it is useless and forbidden to wear in the public domain.  We should note that there are many descriptions of amulets in the Talmud and that many manuscripts describing amulet formulas and how to make amulets exist in ancient, medieval and even modern Jewish literature.
Sections 5-7:  Anything that is clothing specifically designed for war may not be worn out into the public domain on Shabbat.  Since he shouldn’t be going out to war (except in self-defense) on Shabbat, there is no need to wear these types of clothing and hence wearing them is considered carrying.
Section eight:  The prohibition of wearing all of these things is only from the sages (derabbanan).  From the Torah wearing them is not prohibited and hence if he wears one of the above listed things he is not liable to bring a sin-offering.       
