Shabbat, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
Exodus 23:12 reads, “Six days you shall do your work and on the seventh day you shall cease, in order that your ox and donkey will rest.”  From here we see that on Shabbat a Jew may not have his animals do work on her behalf.  Just as it is forbidden for a person to carry things in the public domain, so too it is forbidden for a Jew’s animal to carry things for the Jew.  Our chapter deals with things that an animal may carry or wear.  Anything needed to guard the animal is permitted, as is anything needed for the animal’s own protection from heat or cold.  However, anything which is not really necessary for the animal itself (such as loading up a donkey with one’s personal belongings) may not be placed on an animal on Shabbat.  

Mishnah One  
With what may an animal go out [on Shabbat], and with what may it not go out? 
1)   A camel may go out with a bit, a female camel with its nose-ring, a Libyan donkey with an iron bridle, a horse with its chain, and all chain-wearing animals may go out with their chains and be led by their chains. 
2)   And they may sprinkle upon them [with purifying waters], and they may be immersed in their place.  

Explanation
Section one:  All of the things in this section are normally worn by animals and they are used to lead the animals around.  Therefore, the animal may wear them on Shabbat.  In a sense they are to the animal like clothes are to human beings.  By carrying them the animal is not performing a labor for someone else.  Rather they are part of the animal’s normal gear.  
Section two:  This section is an aside about the chains mentioned in the previous section.  If these chains become impure they can be made pure without removing them from the animal.  If they become impure with corpse impurity, they can sprinkle purifying waters on the chains while they are in their place.  If they contract a lesser impurity, the chains may be immersed while still on the animal.  
