Shabbat, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
Most of this mishnah discusses assisting an animal and a woman in giving birth on Shabbat and festivals.  The final clause begins to discuss circumcision, a topic which will more fully be covered in chapter nineteen.

Mishnah Three
1) One may not deliver an animal [in giving birth] on a festival, but one may assist it. 
2) One may deliver a woman [in giving birth] on Shabbat, summon a midwife for her from place to place, desecrate Shabbat on her account, and tie up the umbilical cord.
a) Rabbi Yose says: one may cut it too. 
3) And all the requirements of circumcision may be done on Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  It is forbidden for a Jew to deliver an animal’s newborn on a festival, because this is considered to be too much work for a Jew to do on a festival.  Although it may not violate any specific prohibited labor (no pun intended) it is too great of a labor (now, pun intended) to be permitted on a festival or on Shabbat.  By “delivering”, the Mishnah means to put one’s hand into the womb and remove the newborn.  However, one may assist the animal in giving birth by receiving it as it comes out so that it doesn’t just fall to the floor.  Since this is a lesser amount of work, it is permitted.   This may only be done on the festival; on Shabbat even assisting the animal is forbidden. 
Section two:  When it comes to aiding a woman in delivering her baby, any work is permitted on festivals and on Shabbat, even activities which are not directly connected to the birth.  A midwife may be summoned from a far, even if this means she must travel to get there.  Shabbat may be in all ways desecrated because the woman’s health is in danger and according to halakhah saving a life supersedes the laws of Shabbat.
There is a debate about whether or not the umbilical cord may be cut.  The first opinion holds that it may not be cut, since there is no real danger in leaving it connected until the end of Shabbat.  Rabbi Yose holds that it may be cut, and the halakhah rules in accordance with his opinion.
Section three:  Anything connected with circumcision may be done on Shabbat.  Leviticus 12:3 states that the child shall be circumcised on the eighth day and the rabbis read this to mean that he must be circumcised even if the eighth day falls on Shabbat.  We will learn more about circumcision on Shabbat in the proceeding chapter.   
