Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that one may break open a container to get food out of it, but one may not break open the container in such a way that the container becomes a vessel.  Making a vessel is prohibited on Shabbat but ruining vessels is permitted, so long as there is a purpose to ruining them, like getting the food out.  

Mishnah Three
1) A man may break open a cask in order to eat dried figs from it, provided that he does not intend to make the cask into a vessel.  
2) And one may not perforate the stopper of a cask, the words of Rabbi Judah.
a) But the sages permit it. 
3) And one may not pierce it at its side;
4) And if it is already perforated one may not place wax upon it, because he smoothes it out.   
a) Rabbi Judah said: a case came before Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai in Arav and he said, “I fear [that he may be liable] to a sin-offering.”

Explanation
Section one:  Since breaking the ceramic cask ruins it, she may break it open in order to get out the figs (or whatever else may be inside).  However, she may not break it open and leave a nice opening in such a way that the cask becomes a vessel.
Section two:  Rabbi Judah holds that one may not perforate the ceramic stopper which is on the top of a cask because that is considered making a vessel.  What she should do is remove the stopper altogether.  The sages allow it because this is not a normal way of making a vessel.
Section three:   All agree that one cannot pierce it at its side.  In the Talmud there is a debate whether this refers to the side of the cask or the side of the stopper. 
Section four:  If the cask/stopper is already perforated she may not spread wax upon it in order to close it up.  The problem is that when she pours wax she will also need to smooth it out.  The rabbis thought that smoothing out wax was like “erasing” which is prohibited.  Rabbi Judah relates a case where a person who perforated a cask/stopper at its side came in front of R. Yohanan ben Zakai and R. Yohanan said that he might be obligated to bring a sin-offering for having unwittingly transgressed Shabbat.     
