Shabbat, Chapter Sixteen, Mishnah One

Introduction
This entire chapter deals with fires that have broken out on Shabbat.  The rabbis forbade saving things from being destroyed by a fire lest a person come to extinguish the fire, an activity which is prohibited on Shabbat.  Nevertheless there are some things which may be saved from fires on Shabbat.
 
Mishnah One
1) All sacred writings may be saved from a fire, whether we read from them or not [on Shabbat]. 
2) And even if they are written in any language, they must be stored.  
3) And why do we not read them? Because of the neglect of the study house. 
4) One may save the container of a scroll together with the scroll, and the container of tefillin together with the tefillin, even if it [also] contains money. 
5) And to where may one rescue them?  Into a closed alley.
a) Ben Batera says: even into an open one. 

Explanation
Section one:  Any scroll which contains part of the Bible (the “sacred writings”) may be saved from a fire on Shabbat, irregardless of whether that scroll is used on Shabbat.  Some commentators explain that the mishnah refers to scrolls which were not read publicly on Shabbat.  Others explain that the mishnah refers to scrolls that were not even read in private.  
Section two:   As an aside, the mishnah notes that scrolls containing the sacred writings must be put into a genizah (a place of storage) no matter what language they are written in.  According to the Yerushalmi, these scrolls also must be saved from the fire.  
Section three:  The mishnah now asks the obvious question:  why are there are scrolls from which we don’t read on Shabbat?   The answer is that these scrolls are not read from lest the reader come to neglect the study sessions that occur in the study hall on Shabbat.  On Shabbat the sages would teach the people halakhah in the study house.  The problem was that often the people would find it more interesting to read what was in the Bible than to listen to these lectures.  To prevent people from reading the Bible and thereb yneglecting the halakhic lectures of the sages, the sages forbade reading these scrolls on Shabbat. According to the Talmud, this prohibition only refers to the time when the lecture was actually taking place.
Section four:  Just as it is permitted to save sacred writings and tefillin (which contain scrolls of sacred writings) from fires, so too it is permitted to save their containers.  
Section five:  The mishnah now asks to where these scrolls may be saved.  They certainly may not be removed from the private domain to the public domain, for that would in and of itself be a forbidden labor.  According to the first opinion, they may be removed to a closed alley, which means one that it is not open on both ends.  Ben Batera says it even may be removed to an alley which is open from both ends.  
