Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah has to do with reckoning certain types of accounts on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Two
1) A man may count his guests and his appetizers/desserts by word, but not from writing. 
2) A man may cast lots with his sons and the members of his household on the table,   provided that he does not make a large portion against a small one, because of gambling.   
3) And [priests] may cast lots for sacrifices on festivals, but not for the portions.

Explanation
Section one:  A host may want to count his guests or his food before or while the meal is being served.  He may do so but he may not count them from a written list.  The Tosefta explains that this is forbidden because it is acting on Shabbat the way one acts during the week.  In the Talmud they explain that if he reads from a written list and sees that someone is not there or hears that they are not coming, he may erase their name from the list, a prohibited activity on Shabbat.  Alternatively, he may grow accustomed to reading bills, lists and other types of business documents that a person should not read on Shabbat.
Section two:  This section deals with casting lots for who will get to choose his portion of meat first and who will get the largest portion.  We should note that this was an important issue in eating customs at the time and we hear a lot from contemporary sources about people complaining that they didn’t get a good portion.  The head of the household or any other person may cast lots on Shabbat for who gets what portion, but he should not make the portions a disparate size to begin with, hoping that he will get the bigger portion, because this is a type of gambling.  Gambling is always problematic according to Jewish law, but it certainly shouldn’t be done on Shabbat.
Section three:  The priests could cast lots over who would get which sacrifice of the sacrifices offered on a festival.  However, they may not cast lots on the festival over the sacrifices offered the day before, since they could have cast the lots then.  As we have learned many times, anything that could be done before the holiday may not be done on the holiday itself.     

