Shabbat, Chapter Nineteen, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses desecrating Shabbat in order to circumcise a child on Shabbat. While the tannaim do not debate that the circumcision itself is done on Shabbat, the question is what preparations for the circumcision may be done.

Mishnah One
1) Rabbi Eliezer says: if one did not bring an instrument [with which to circumcise] on the eve of Shabbat, he must bring it on Shabbat uncovered; but in [times of] danger he hides it on the testimony of witnesses. 
2) Rabbi Eliezer said further: one may cut wood to make charcoal to make an iron instrument.  
3) Rabbi Akiva stated a general principle: any [manner of] work which could be performed on the eve of Shabbat does not supersede Shabbat; but that which could not be performed on the eve of Shabbat does supersede Shabbat.

Explanation 
Section one:  Obviously, a knife is needed to perform the circumcision.  According to Rabbi Eliezer, if one forgot to bring the knife he may bring it on Shabbat eve, even if this entails violating the prohibition of carrying on Shabbat.  In normal times, the knife should be carried openly so that people will learn that the Shabbat is violated in order to perform the circumcision on Shabbat.  However, in a time when the Roman authorities forbade circumcision (the Hadrianic persecutions, leading up to and following the Bar Kochba revolt) the knife should be hidden so as to avoid danger.  The witnesses are needed to testify that the reason that he is carrying is only in order to perform a circumcision.  In other words, they are for his protection.
Section two: Rabbi Eliezer goes to an even greater extreme.  Even if one does not have any knife with which to circumcise, one may cut down wood to heat up iron to make a knife.  It seems unlikely that one would actually find oneself in such a situation.  Rabbi Eliezer’s statement is meant to have polemical value—anything may be done so that the circumcision may be carried out on Shabbat.  
Section three:  Rabbi Akiva disagrees with Rabbi Eliezer and holds that only activities that cannot be performed before Shabbat can be done on Shabbat itself.  This would include the circumcision itself, as we shall learn in tomorrow’s mishnah.  However, preparatory activities such as making the knife and carrying it to where the circumcision will be performed must be performed before Shabbat begins.  The reason that Rabbi Akiva’s statement is phrased as a general rule is that it applies to several other halakhot as well (see Pesahim 6:2 and Menahot 11:3).   
