Shabbat, Chapter Twenty, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The mishnah deals with food preparations that may not be done in a normal manner on Shabbat but may be performed by doing them slightly differently.

Mishnah Three
1) One may not soak hiltith in warm water, but he may put it into vinegar.
2) And one may not soak leeks, nor rub them, but he may put them into a sieve or a basket.   
3) One may not sift straw through a sieve, nor put it on a high place, for the chaff to drop down, but one may take it up in a sieve and put it into the trough.  

Explanation
Section one:  Hiltith is an herb which was used both as a spice and as medicine.  It is forbidden to soak it in warm water on Shabbat, but one may put it in vinegar and dip her food in it.  The prohibition is explained in either of two ways:  1) it looks like something that is only done during the week; 2) it is medicinal and therefore prohibited.
Section two:  Above in 1:5 Bet Hillel allowed one to begin soaking leeks before Shabbat and leave them to soak over Shabbat.  Here we see that all agree that they may not be soaked on Shabbat itself, and according to commentators, even putting water over them is prohibited.  The prohibition is “separating”—putting water over them causes the waste parts to float and separate from the leeks.  Similarly, they may not be rubbed in order to remove the inedible parts.  This is prohibited under the category of “threshing”—separating the wheat from the chaff.  However, one may put them into a sieve or basket, even though this also will sometimes cause the separation of the inedible parts.  The difference is that in this case these parts separate on their own, and hence she has not performed a forbidden act.
Section three:  One may not sift stubble through a sieve; sifting is one of the 39 prohibited labors listed in 7:2.  Even though that mishnah is dealing with separating the wheat from the chaff, and here we are dealing with separating straw for an animal from dirt, it is still essentially the same activity.  
One also may not put the stubble in a high place so that the dirt blows away, because this is “separating”.
However, one may pick up a bunch of straw with a sieve and put it in front of an animal’s trough, even though this may also cause the dirt to separate.  The key difference is that this is not the direct intention of the activity. 
