Shabbat, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction 
In the introduction to Shabbat we explained that a person who performs a forbidden labor on Shabbat intentionally is liable for the death penalty (if they warned him) and for karet—extirpation—(if unwarned).  For accidental performance of a forbidden labor, one must bring a sin-offering.  Our mishnah asks a frequently-asked rabbinic question: how do we know how many sin-offerings a person is liable for?  Asked another way, what constitutes one performance of a forbidden labor?  

Mishnah One
1) A great principle they stated in respect to Shabbat: anyone who forgets the fundamental law of Shabbat and performs many labors on many Shabbatot, is liable for only one sin-offering. 
2) One who knows the fundamental law of Shabbat and performs many labors on many Shabbatot is liable for a sin-offering for each and every Shabbat. 
3) One who knows that it is Shabbat and performs many labors on many Shabbatot, is liable for every primary labor.
4) One who performs many labors belonging to the same category is obligated for only one sin-offering.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah begins by referring to a person who doesn’t remember that work is prohibited on Shabbat.  Such a person has in essence only transgressed once, no matter how many Shabbatot she performed the forbidden labor and no matter how many labors she performed.  For instance, a person who never learned about Shabbat and then later in life learned that it was forbidden to work on Shabbat, would only be liable for one sin-offering.  
Section two:  This section refers to a person who knows that it is forbidden to work on Shabbat but doesn’t know which day of the week is Shabbat.  All of the forbidden labors which she performs on any given Shabbat are considered one transgression.  Therefore she brings one sin-offering for every Shabbat which she forgot was Shabbat, no matter how many forbidden labors she performed.
Section three:  This person knows which day is Shabbat and knows that it is forbidden to perform work on Shabbat but doesn’t know which labors are prohibited. Such a person is liable for every primary labor.  As we shall see in tomorrow’s mishnah, there are thirty-nine categories of prohibited labor. Each category is a “primary labor.”  Within each category there are derived labors, prohibitions which are similar enough to the primary labor to also be prohibited.  Derived labors” are as prohibited as “primary labors” (they are all in the category of “deoraita”—toraitic—prohibitions.)  The only difference is that if one performs several different “primary labors” she is liable for a sin-offering for each primary labor.  However, if she performs a primary labor and several derived labors from the same category, she is only liable for one sin-offering.  Furthermore, in the case in this section since the person didn’t know that such a labor was prohibited on Shabbat, she is only liable for one sin-offering no matter how many Shabbatot she performed the labor.  
Section four:  In this case the person knows pretty much everything (that labor is prohibited on Shabbat, which labor is prohibited and which day is Shabbat).  She is liable for every primary labor she performs on each Shabbat.  However, if she also performs derived labors that are under the same category, she is liable for only one sin-offering for each category of labor she performs.      
