Shabbat, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Most of this mishnah deals with a person lacking a leg going out on Shabbat with his stump.  This stump was not really an artificial leg rather a support for his stump leg.  The mishnah also uses this opportunity to discuss a few other laws concerning artificial legs and arms.  

Mishnah Eight
1) A crippled person [lacking a leg] may go out with his wooden stump, the words of Rabbi Meir.
a) Rabbi Yose forbids it. 
2) And if it has a receptacle for pads, it is unclean.   
3) His supports are unclean through midras, and one may go out with them on Shabbat,   and enter the Temple court while wearing them.   
4) His chair and its supports are unclean through midras, and one may not go out with them on Shabbat, and one may not enter the Temple court with them.   
5) An artificial arm is clean, but one may not go out with it [on Shabbat].  

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, a wooden stump made for a crippled person is like his shoe and hence the person lacking a leg may go out with it on Shabbat.  Rabbi Yose holds that the crippled person doesn’t really use the stump like a shoe; rather he relies mostly on his crutches.  Hence the stump is considered to be “carrying” and it is prohibited.
Section two:  If the stump has a hollow place inside not only for his stump leg but pads, then it can receive impurity.  Generally speaking, wooden things which have receptacles are susceptible to impurity.
Section three:  “Supports” are like crutches.  They can receive impurity through “midras”, which means pressure by a zav (a person with unusual genital discharge).  If a zav sits, leans or lies on them they are impure.  Anything which is meant to be stepped on is susceptible to this type of impurity.
He may go out with them on Shabbat since they are like his shoes.  
It is forbidden to enter the Temple while wearing shoes.  However, the crippled person’s supports are not included in the category of “shoes” as far as entering the Temple is concerned.
Section four:  Similarly, a crippled person’s chair and its supports (this is kind of like a walker) are all susceptible to midras impurity, since they are made for sitting and leaning.  According to talmudic commentators it is prohibited for him to go out on Shabbat with the supports, since the chair itself is sufficient.  He may, however, go out with the special chair on Shabbat.  If he has a chair he shouldn’t enter the Temple court with his supports since in this case they are like shoes.
Section five:  An artificial arm is not susceptible to impurity since it is not considered to be a vessel.  It is forbidden to go out with it on Shabbat.  Others explain that the word for artificial arm here (ankatmin) refers to a piece of equipment which clowns use.      
