Shabbat, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction 
Yesterday’s mishnah ended with a halakhah concerning covering hot food before Shabbat so that it would stay hot during Shabbat.  Our mishnah continues to discuss halakhot of a similar nature.    
This mishnah refers to leaving a dish of cooked food on a stove during Shabbat in a case where it was put there before Shabbat.  The potential problem here is not the prohibited labor of cooking, since the dish is already cooked.  Rather the problem is that he might rake the coals to make them get hotter and raking coals is prohibited because it lights a fire.  

Mishnah One
1)   If a double stove was heated with stubble or straw, they may put a cooked dish on it.     
2)   If it was heated with peat or wood, one may not place [a dish on it] until he sweeps it out or covers it with ashes.   
3)   Bet Shammai says: hot water, but not a dish;   
a) And Bet Hillel says: both hot water and a dish. 
4)   Bet Shammai says: one may remove it, but not put it back; 
a) But Bet Hillel says: one may even put it back.

Explanation
Section one:  If a dish of cooked food was put on a stove before Shabbat it is permitted to leave it on the stove during Shabbat as long as the stove was heated with stubble or straw.  Since stubble and straw do not become coals, there is no fear that a person may come to rake coals.
Section two:  If the stove was heated with peat or wood, then the dish may not be left on it during Shabbat.  Peat is refuse left over from olive production and it was used in cooking.  Both peat and wood turn into coals and therefore if she doesn’t do some sort of preparation to the stove before Shabbat we are concerned lest she come to rake them on Shabbat, a prohibited act.  What she needs to do is either remove the coals or cover them with ashes so that they will cool down and she will not come to rake them on Shabbat.  
Section three:  The debates in this section and in the next refer to cases where it is permitted to leave food on the stove. Bet Shammai says it is permitted to leave only hot water but not a dish of cooked food.  Bet Shammai holds that since people really want their food to be cooked the halakhah is more stringent for food than it is for water.  Bet Hillel says that the halakhah is the same for both food and water.
Section four: Bet Shammai says that it is permitted to leave the water on the stove but if she takes it off she may not put it back.  Bet Shammai thinks that putting it back on the stove looks too much like cooking.  Bet Hillel holds that it is permitted even to put the water or food back.   
