Shabbat, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah discusses how much liquid one must carry in order to be liable.

Mishnah One 
1) One who carries out: 
a) [unmixed] wine, [is liable if it is] enough for the mixing of a cup;     
b) milk, as much as is swallowed at a time; 
c) honey, as much as is placed on a scab;     
d) oil, as much as is required to rub on a small limb; 
e) water, enough to rub with it collyrium;     
f) and all other liquids, a revi’it;     
g) and all waste water, a revi’it.
2) Rabbi Shimon says: all of them are a revi’it, they stated all of these measures only in respect of those who put them away. 

Explanation
Section one:  The amount for which one is liable for carrying these liquids is dependent upon the minimal amount that is useful.  Wine was mixed with water to dilute it.  Therefore, if one carries unmixed wine, she is liable if she carries enough to mix a cup.  For carrying milk, she is liable if she carries the amount normally swallowed at one time.  Honey was evidently used to heal wounds.  Oil was used like lotion and therefore she is liable if she carries enough to oil up a small limb, for instance a finger.  Water was mixed with collyrium, an eye ointment.  Although there are certainly other uses for water, this is the smallest amount that has any use.  All other liquids and even waste water must be a revi’it (less than 100 cl, or 3 oz.)
Section two:  Rabbi Shimon disagrees with the previous opinion.  He holds that all liquids have the same measure—a revi’it.  These measures have a different relevance with regard to liquid, one which relates back to that which we learned in 7:3.  There we learned that if someone cares enough about an object to store it, she is liable if she carries it from domain to domain on Shabbat. Rabbi Shimon adds that the object also has to have a minimum measure.  Our mishnah provides, according to Rabbi Shimon, the minimum measure for liquids.  If a person is one who “stores” these liquids then the minimum measure to be liable for carrying is as listed above in section one.  However, if a person is not careful about these liquids than she is liable only if she carries a revi’it.  
