Shabbat, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with things for which one is liable for carrying even the smallest amount.  The reason in the first three sections is that even the smallest quantity of these things is usable. In the final two sections, the reason why one is liable for carrying even the smallest amount is that the objects are holy and when worn out, may not be thrown away.   

Mishnah Six
1) [If one carries out] pepper, in whatever quantity. 
2) Olive-refuse, in whatever quantity. 
3) Various kinds of spices and various kinds of metal, in whatever quantity. 
4) [Pieces] of the stones of the altar or the earth from the altar, worn-out pieces of scrolls or their worn-out covers, in whatever quantity, because they are stored away in order to hide them.   
5) Rabbi Judah says: also he who carries out the service vessels of idols, in whatever quantity, [is liable], for it is said, “Let nothing that has been doomed stick to your hand” (Deuteronomy 13:18).  

Explanation
Section one:  Since even the tiniest amount of pepper can be used to spice up a dish or for other purposes, one is liable for carrying even the tiniest amount.
Section two:  Small amounts of olive-refuse were used to heal headaches.  
Section three:  This section refers to spices which were not used for cooking but for perfumes.   Since even the smallest amount might be used, one would be liable for even a tiny amount. Metal was quite precious and even small amounts would be preserved. 
Section four:  When pieces of the altar needed to be removed or parts of holy scrolls or their covers needed to be replaced, the old material must be put into a “genizah”, a place to hide them and protect them.  The word “genizah” indeed means “to be stored away.”  They may not be thrown into the garbage.  Since even the smallest amounts are important enough to forbid their being thrown away, one is liable for carrying even the smallest amount.
Section five:  Rabbi Judah thinks that even for carrying things used in idol worship, if one carries even the smallest amount one is liable. This is because of the verse “let nothing...”  The Torah considers even the smallest amount to be forbidden due to the prohibition of idolatry. Rabbi Judah learns from here that even the smallest amount has “importance” and therefore one who carries such an amount is liable.  
    
