Shabbat, Chapter Nineteen, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah discusses a case where there are two infants, one who should be circumcised on Shabbat and the other who should not be circumcised on Shabbat.  The question is what happens if the babies get switched and someone circumcises on Shabbat the one who should have been circumcised on a different day.
 
Mishnah Four
1) If a man has two infants, one to circumcise after Shabbat and the other to circumcise on Shabbat, and he forgets and circumcises the one who should be circumcised after Shabbat on the Shabbat, he is liable. 
2) [If he has] one to circumcise on the eve of Shabbat and another to circumcise on Shabbat, and he forgets and circumcises the one who should be circumcised on the eve of Shabbat on Shabbat:  Rabbi Eliezer holds [him] liable to a sin-offering, but Rabbi Joshua exempts [him].

Explanation
Section one:  In the first case the mohel (the circumciser) ends up circumcising a baby on Shabbat who should have been circumcised after Shabbat.  In other words, he desecrated Shabbat to circumcise a boy who had not yet reached his eighth day.  This child was not yet obligated to be circumcised.   Hence the circumciser is liable to bring a sin-offering for accidentally desecrating Shabbat.
Section two:  In this case it turns out that he circumcised a boy on Shabbat who should have been circumcised on Friday. Rabbi Eliezer maintains that he is still liable since he did, after all, circumcise on Shabbat in a case where he should not have done so.  Only circumcision on the eighth day overrides Shabbat (this we learned in yesterday’s mishnah and we will learn again in tomorrow’s mishnah).  Rabbi Joshua holds that since the child had already passed his eighth day and had therefore become obligated to be circumcised, the circumciser has fulfilled the commandment and is not liable.  Note that Rabbi Joshua agrees that it is forbidden to circumcise a child on Shabbat on any other day but the eighth day. He only holds that if someone mistakenly did so to a child who was already obligated for circumcision, he is not liable.    
