Shabbat, Chapter Sixteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
Our mishnah continues to deal with saving food from a fire on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Three
1) One may save a basket full of loaves, even if it contains [enough for] a hundred meals, and a round cake of pressed figs, and a barrel of wine.
2) And he [the owner] may say to others, “Come and save for yourselves.” 
a) And if they are clever, they make an account with him after Shabbat.   
3) To where may they be saved? 
a) Into a courtyard which has an eruv. 
b) Ben Batera says: even into a courtyard which does not have an eruv.

Explanation
Section one:  In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that a person may save only enough for three meals on Shabbat.  Today we learn that if a lot of food is bundled into one package, she may save the entire package even though there is more than enough for three meals.  Since the food is all packaged together, it is treated as if she is only saving one thing and therefore it is permissible.
Section two:  The mishnah now tries to arrange a “legal fiction” whereby a person can save more than enough for three meals.  If she sees that her food will be destroyed by the fire, she may say to her neighbors, “Come and save this food for yourselves.”  In this way, everyone may save three meals.  This is permitted since people normally invite over guests on Shabbat.  Furthermore, if the neighbors are clever they may realize that her intention is not really to give the food away but rather recover it for herself.  The mishnah permits them to come back to her after Shabbat so that the original owners may pay to get it back.  According to Albeck, the people who saved the food will actually pay for the food they used.  According to the Talmud, those whose food was saved pay them for their troubles.  .  
Section three:  The mishnah now asks where the food can be removed to.  It obviously cannot be removed to the public domain, for that would constitute carrying from one domain to another.  According to the first opinion, it can only be removed to a courtyard in which carrying is allowed, that is to say one which already has an eruv.  Ben Batera is slightly more lenient, as he was in the first mishnah of this chapter.  He allows the food to be removed even to a courtyard which does not have an eruv.  In any case the halakhah is more stringent here than it was with regard to the Holy Scriptures in mishnah one.     
