Shabbat, Chapter Fifteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah is a direct continuation of yesterday’s mishnah.

Mishnah Two
1) You have some knots for which one is not liable like [one is] for camel-drivers’ knots and sailors’ knots.   
2) A woman may tie up the opening of her chemise, the strings of her hair-net and of her belt, the laces of her shoes or sandals, leather-bottles of wine and oil, and a meat dish.   
3) Rabbi Elazar ben Ya’akov says: one may tie [a rope] in front of an animal, that it should not go out.
4) One may tie a bucket [over a well] with a belt but not with a rope;  
a) Rabbi Judah permits it. 
i) Rabbi Judah stated a general rule: any knot that is not permanent one is not liable for it.  

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah explains that there are some knots for which one is not liable and yet it is still prohibited to tie or untie them.  These knots are somewhat like camel drivers’ and sailors’ knots and yet they are different.  The mishnah itself does not explain what these knots are.  The Babylonian Talmud explains that these are semi-permanent knots, ones which remain in place for some time but are not meant to be permanent.  Since these remain in place for a long time, it is forbidden to tie or untie them.  However, since they are not truly permanent, one who does tie or untie them is not liable.  
Section two:  Now the mishnah lists knots which one is completely permitted to tie and untie on Shabbat.   These are all impermanent knots and therefore they entail no liability.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Elazar ben Ya’akov it is permitted to tie a rope across the pen of an animal so that the animal will not escape.
Section four:  According to the sages, it is forbidden to tie a bucket over a well with a rope because sometimes these ropes are left there permanently.  However, it is permitted with a belt because the belt won’t be left there for very long.  Rabbi Judah however, permits one to tie a bucket over a well even with a rope because the bucket will not be left there permanently.  In the last clause of the mishnah, Rabbi Judah explains that as long as the knot is not permanent, one cannot be liable for it.  This is the same opinion as the sages in the previous mishnah, but it differs from Rabbi Meir in that mishnah.   

