Shabbat, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah One

Introduction
After completing its explication of the various aspects of “carrying”, the Mishnah now turns its attention to various other prohibited labors mentioned above in 7:2.  Today’s mishnah deals with building.

Mishnah One
1) One who builds: how much must he build to be liable? 
a) He who builds any amount, and he who chisels, and he who strikes with a hammer or with an axe, and he who bores [a hole] of any size, is liable. 
2) This is the general principle: whoever does work and his work endures on Shabbat, he is liable. 
3) Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says: even one who strikes with a hammer on the anvil at the completion of his work is liable, because he is as one who improves his work. 

Explanation
Section one:  There is no minimum measure for building.  Any act of building, no matter how insignificant, can cause the builder to be liable.  Building, as we see includes various aspects of construction such as chiseling, striking with a hammer and boring a hole.  “Striking with a hammer” also can be understood as referring to the completion of labor. 
Section two:   There are two explanations for this section. The first is that it means that the person performs work which will be left in its current situation on Shabbat.  In other words, even if the work is not complete and will be added to after Shabbat, if it is sufficiently complete such that one would leave it that way on Shabbat, the person is liable.  The second explanation is that the clause refers to a person who does work on Shabbat that is actually complete, meaning no one will add to it later on.
Section three:  At the end of their work, metalworkers would strike their hammers on the anvil.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that this causes them to be liable, even though they don’t strike a blow to the vessel which they are making.  The reason is that this blow actually improves the anvil and is therefore considered to be a forbidden labor.     

 
