Shabbat, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The previous mishnayot dealt with leaving things on the fire.  Today’s mishnah deals with things that are prohibited because they are considered cooking, even if the dish has been taken off the fire.

Mishnah Five 
1)   A kettle which was removed [from the fire]: one may not pour cold water into it so that it should warm up, but one may pour it [water] into or into a cup in order to temper it.     
2)   The pan or pot which was removed [from the fire] while it is boiling, one must not put spices into it, but one may put [spices] into a dish or a tureen.   
3)   Rabbi Judah says: he may put [spices] into anything except what contains vinegar or brine.   

Explanation
Section one:  This section discusses a hot water kettle which has been removed from the fire.  It is forbidden to pour a small amount of water into the kettle because the hot water that it is in the kettle will cook the water which is put in.  However, she may put a large quantity of cold water into the kettle because this will not cause the cold water to be cooked but rather the hot water to be cooled down.  If the water from the hot water kettle has been poured into a cup she may also put in cold water in order to cool the hot water down.  
Section two:  This section discusses a pan or pot with boiling hot contents which was removed from the fire right before Shabbat began.  On Shabbat it is forbidden to put spices directly into the pan or pot because in this way the spices will be cooked.  However, if she moves the contents of the pan into a dish or tureen which is not on the fire, then she may put into the dish anything she wants.  Once the contents have been moved from their original pan, they will not cook any spices put into them.
Section three: Rabbi Judah holds that she may put spices into any dish, even one that is boiling and was just removed from the fire.  The only thing that is prohibited is putting something into a dish with vinegar or brine.  According to Rabbi Judah, the spiciness of the vinegar and brine aid in cooking the food in the dish.  [I must admit that I have a wish to say fish in dish, but that is probably because I have been reading Dr. Seuss to my children.]     
