Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Three, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses borrowing food items on Shabbat with the intent of paying the person back after Shabbat.

Mishnah One
1) A man may borrow pitchers of wine and pitchers of oil from his neighbor, provided he does not say to him, “lend [them] to me”;   
2) And similarly a woman [may borrow] loaves from her neighbor. 
3) If he does not trust him he may leave his cloak with him [as a pledge] and squares up with him after Shabbat. 
4) Similarly, if the eve of Passover in Jerusalem falls on Shabbat, he may leave his cloak with him [the vendor] and take his paschal lamb and squares up with him after the festival.

Explanation 
Section one:   It is permitted for a person to borrow things from another person on Shabbat as long as he doesn’t say “lend to me.”  There are actually two words in Hebrew for “lend”—one which implies money or something that will be paid back, and the other which implies returning the object itself.  Using the first verb sounds too much like doing business and it is therefore prohibited on Shabbat.  This is the verb in our mishnah.  However, the second verb is not problematic.  For instance, if the borrowed object was a book which itself will be returned, there is no problem.
Section two:  Just as a man may ask his neighbor to borrow pitchers of wine and oil, so too a woman may ask her neighbor to borrow loaves of bread.
Section three:  The mishnah now provides a means by which the lender may guarantee that he receives compensation for his loan.  The borrower cannot merely pay the lender, nor can they write down an amount or even state how much is owed.  What they can do is have the borrower leave his cloak with the lender as a pledge.  After Shabbat they can square up and the borrower can pay the lender back.
Section four:  This section deals with a situation where a person had not bought his pesach sacrifice (the paschal lamb) before Shabbat which fell the day before Pesach. He may do what the person in section one did to buy wine and oil—he leaves his cloak with the merchant selling lambs, buys his lamb and then on Monday he can settle up how much he owes.  
