Shabbat, Chapter Fifteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
Since yesterday’s mishnah dealt briefly with clothing (a woman tying her clothing on Shabbat) today’s mishnah also deals with clothing.  

Mishnah Three
1) One may fold clothing even four or five times, and spread the sheets on the beds on the Shabbat evening for [use on] Shabbat, but not on Shabbat for [use on] the day after Shabbat. 
2) Rabbi Yishmael says: one may fold clothing and spread the sheets on the beds on Yom Kippur for [use on] Shabbat, and the fat pieces of the Shabbat offering may be offered on Yom Kippur. 
3) Rabbi Akiva says: those of Shabbat may not be offered on Yom Kippur, nor may those of Yom Kippur be offered on Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  This mishnah deals with preparing things on Shabbat for use either on Shabbat or after Shabbat.  The first section teaches that one may fold clothing and spread sheets on a bed as long as the clothing or bed will be used on Shabbat itself.  It is forbidden to fold clothes or spread sheets on a bed if they will not be used until after Shabbat.  We may deduce from here that in general it is prohibited to prepare things on Shabbat that will not be used until after Shabbat.
Section two:  Rabbi Yishmael allows preparing things on Yom Kippur which will not be used until Shabbat, since the sanctity of Yom Kippur is less than that of Shabbat.  [Note, in today’s calendar which is fixed Yom Kippur cannot fall on Friday.  In the time of the Mishnah the calendar was not fixed and hence this was possible.]  Furthermore, if Yom Kippur falls on Sunday [this also can’t happen according to our fixed calendar] then Shabbat offerings that hadn’t been fully offered on Shabbat may be offered on Yom Kippur.  However, if Yom Kippur were to fall on Friday, the Yom Kippur offerings could not be offered on Shabbat because Shabbat’s holiness is higher than that of Yom Kippur.  On Shabbat only sacrifices that must be offered on Shabbat can be sacrificed.
Section three:  Rabbi Akiva thinks that the sanctity of Shabbat and Yom Kippur is equivalent.  Therefore the offerings of one day cannot be offered on the other.  All the more so would it be forbidden to fold clothes or spread bed sheets on one of these days in preparation for the other.  
