Shabbat, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah lists the thirty-nine primary labors.  As can be easily seen there are three main lists in the mishnah:  1) the work involved in baking bread; 2) the work involved in making clothing; 3) the work involved in writing.   These are the first three lists.  The fourth section contains six more labors that are also prohibited but do not easily fit into the other lists. 
The Talmud states that these labors were all learned from the juxtaposition of the laws of building the Tabernacle with the prohibition of work on Shabbat (Exodus 31:35).  Since the Torah had to state not to break Shabbat to build the Temple, it must be that any work which was done in building the Temple is prohibited on Shabbat. 
Much of the rest of the tractate will explain these labors, so we will be brief here.  
   

Mishnah Two
The primary labors are forty less one: 
1) sowing, plowing, reaping, binding sheaves, threshing, winnowing, selecting, grinding, sifting, kneading, baking, 
2) shearing wool, bleaching, hackling, dyeing, spinning, weaving, the making of two loops, weaving two threads, dividing two threads, tying and untying, sewing two stitches, tearing in order to sew two stitches,     
3) capturing a deer, slaughtering, or flaying, or salting it, curing its hide, scraping it [of its hair], cutting it up, writing two letters, erasing in order to write two letters [over the erasure], 
4) building, tearing down, extinguishing, kindling, striking with a hammer, 
5) [and] carrying out from one domain to another,
These are the forty primary labors less one.

Explanation
Section one: These are the labors involved in making bread, from the beginning to the very end.  Personally, I am happy that for me baking bread involves going to the store, plunking down a few shekels and taking a loaf home.
Section two:  These are all of the labors involved in making clothing.  One interesting thing to note is that many commentators hold that tearing is prohibited only if the tear is made in order to sew new stitches.  Only constructive, purposeful work is prohibited “deoraita” on Shabbat.  Tearing in a destructive manner with no other purpose is still prohibited but only “derabbanan”—a rabbinic prohibition.  “Hackling” refers to separating strands of wool.  
Section three:  These are the labors involved in writing a scroll.  Most of the work is making the parchment on which to write the scroll.
Section four:  These are all labors which are involved in building and in creating the material needed to build.  We should make a couple of important notes.  Tearing down is only considered a primary labor if it is performed with the intent of rebuilding.  Extinguishing is also only prohibited deoraita if it makes charcoal (like extinguishing a candle.)  “Striking with a hammer” is sort of a code-name for the completion of any piece of work.  When finished with a metal project the silversmith would strike it with a hammer to complete it.  That is why it is called “striking with a hammer.”
Section five:  Carrying from one domain to another is a labor unlike any of the others for instead of altering the nature of an object, it alters its location.    
   

