Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Two, Mishnah One

Introduction 
The first section of this mishnah deals with a cask of wine which broke on Shabbat and the owner wishes to save as much wine as possible.
The remainder of the mishnah discusses the prohibition of squeezing juice or other liquids out of something.

Mishnah One
1) A cask [of wine] which was broken, one may save from it the requirements for three meals.
a) And he [the owner] may say to others, “come and save for yourselves”, provided that it is not sponged up.  
2) One may not squeeze fruit in order to get out their juices, and if they exude of their own accord they are prohibited. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: if [the fruit is meant] to be food, that which exudes from it is permitted, but if [is meant to be] juice, that which exudes from it is prohibited. 
3) Honeycombs which crushed on the eve of Shabbat and it [the honey] exudes on its own, it is forbidden; 
a) But Rabbi Eleazar permits it.

Explanation
Section one: Above in 16:2 the mishnah taught that one can rescue from a fire food sufficient for three meals, the standard number of meals eaten on Shabbat.  In our explanation there we explained that the reason that a person was not allowed to rescue more than that was lest she come to extinguish the fire.  However, here it is less clear what the concern is. The commentators explain that if they let her rescue more than three meals she may carry them in the public domain.  Alternatively, she may come to fix the casket.  An alternative explanation which I would suggest is that more than three meals is muktzeh since it won’t be eaten on Shabbat.
As above, she is allowed to say to other people, “come save the wine for yourselves.”  However, no one is allowed to rescue the wine by sponging it up.  The fear is that if they sponge it up they may squeeze the sponge out afterwards, and as we have already learned and will continue to learn below, squeezing liquids out of something is prohibited.  
Section two:  Squeezing juice out of fruit is considered to be a prohibited labor derived from the prohibited labor of “threshing”.  Just as “threshing” separates the desirable wheat from the undesirable chaff, so too squeezing separates the juice from the fruit.  The mishnah teaches that even if the juice exudes without being squeezed by a person.  The fear is that if this juice is allowed people will become confused and think it is permitted to actually squeeze the juice out.
Rabbi Judah distinguishes between fruit that is intended to be eaten and fruit that is intended to be used for juice.  If the juice exudes from fruit which is intended to be eaten, then it is permitted because a person doesn’t want the juice to come out of this fruit.  A person won’t come to squeeze such a fruit.  However, if the fruit is intended for juice then Rabbi Judah too is strict and rules that even the juice that exudes is forbidden.   
Section three:  In this section a person has crushed honeycombs before Shabbat in order to start the process of extracting the honey from them.  If honey exudes from them on Shabbat, such honey may not be eaten. Again the fear is that if they permit such honey people will think that the honeycombs may be squeezed on Shabbat itself.  Rabbi Elazar is not concerned with such a possibility and hence he allows this honey to be eaten on Shabbat.    
