Shabbat, Chapter Twenty, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with straining things on Shabbat.

Mishnah Two 
1) One may pour water over lees in order to clarify them;
2) and one may strain wine through cloths and through a basket made of palm twigs; 
3) and one may place an egg in a mustard strainer;  
4) and one may make anumlin on Shabbat. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: on Shabbat [it may only be made] in a cup; on festivals, in a jug;   and on the intermediate days of festivals in a barrel. 
b) Rabbi Zadok says: it all depends on the [number of] guests.

Explanation
Section one:  There are two explanations for this section. The first is that the lees of the wine are on the bottom of the strainer and that one may pour water over them so that the wine will flow through the strainer.  While pouring the unfilterd wine over the strainer was forbidden, this is permitted.  The second explanation is that the lees are on the bottom of a jug. One may pour water into the jug so that the lees will mix with the water and make a weak wine mixture.  
Section two:  This section allows wine to be passed through either a special cloth or basket to help clarify it.  The question which we must ask is what makes this different from the previous mishnah where the sages were more stringent regarding pouring wine through a strainer? According to some commentators, this cloth or basket was already set up before Shabbat. Furthermore, there is no problem of “selecting” here because this wine is drinkable even if it isn’t passed through these secondary strainers.  Others explain that this is permitted because it is not the usual way of straining and things are often more permissible if they are done differently on Shabbat.
Section three:  This refers to breaking an egg into a strainer which has mustard already in it.  This is done so that the mustard will receive some of the color from the egg. It is not a prohibited act of “selecting” because even though the yoke will remain in the strainer, it is still edible.  “Selecting” refers to taking waste away from edible parts and not separating a food into two different edible parts.  
Section four:  “Anumlin” is a mixture of wine, honey and pepper.  This mixture can be made on Shabbat because there is no prohibited labor involved in preparing it.  However, the rabbis debate how much can be made. According to Rabbi Judah, on Shabbat she can prepare only a cup’s worth at a time, because more than that is considered to be too much labor to do on Shabbat.  On a festival she can make slightly more, a jug’s worth and on the intermediate days of the festival, when work is most permitted, she can make a barrel’s worth.  For Rabbi Judah the operative criterion is how much work is involved.  In contrast, for Rabbi Zadok the operative criterion is how many guests are in attendance.  No matter what the day, she can only make enough anumlin for the guests who are there. She may not prepare anything to be used at some later date.  
