Shabbat, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) If one carries out a peddler’s basket, even though it contains many types of things, he is liable for only one sin-offering. 
2) Garden seeds, less than the size of a dried fig;
a) Rabbi Judah ben Batera ruled: five. 
b) Cucumber seed, two.
c) Gourd seed, two.
d) Egyptian bean seed, two. 
3) A live clean locust, whatever its size.
a) Dead, the size of a dried fig. 
b) The bird of the vineyards, whether live or dead, whatever its size, because they store it for a medicine.  
c) Rabbi Judah says: even one who carries out a live unclean locust, whatever its size, [is liable], because they store it away for a child to play with.

Explanation
Section one:  A peddler’s basket contains a variety of goods.  We might have thought that one who carries such a basket full of different things from one domain to another would be liable for several sin-offerings, one for each thing in the basket. Therefore, the mishnah teaches that she is liable for only one, for the basket joins them together.  
Section two:  This section refers to seeds which will be used for planting.  The mishnah lists the minimum amount of seeds of certain types of vegetables which would be planted in one furrow.  With regard to garden-seeds, the first opinion holds that there must be a total amount of seeds equal to the size of a dried fig.  Rabbi Judah ben Batera connects this rule with that which we learned above in mishnah two—a person is allowed to plant five different kinds of seeds in one 6 by 6 handbreadth furrow.
Section three:  The Torah teaches that some locusts are clean and may be eaten and some are unclean and are forbidden.  According to the first opinion, one is liable for carrying a live clean locust of any size because they would put it aside for a child to play with.  They would not give unclean locusts to children because if the locust died the child might eat it.  Rabbi Judah at the end of this mishnah holds that even unclean locusts are stored away for children to play with and therefore one is liable also for carrying them.
For dead clean locusts which are edible everyone agrees that the minimum is the same as it is for other foods (7:4).  One would not be liable at all for carrying dead unclean locusts since they have no practical use.
Due to its inclusion in this section, it seems likely the “bird of the vineyards” is actually a type of locust.  Since even the smallest amount is used for medicinal purposes, one is liable for carrying even a small one, whether live or dead.   
