Shabbat, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah deals with clearing food away in order to make room for other things.  Even though it is permitted to carry foods (both those for animals and those for people), the sages did not permit this if it was a lot of trouble to do so.  Under certain circumstances, it was permitted even if moving the food required a lot of work. 

Mishnah One
1) One may clear away even four or five baskets of straw or produce to make room for guests or on account of the neglect of the study hall, but not the storehouse.   
2) One may clear away pure terumah, doubtfully tithed produce, the first tithe whose terumah has been separated, redeemed second tithe and sanctified things, and dry lupinus, because it is food for goats.   
a) But [one may] not [clear away] untithed produce, first tithe whose terumah has not been taken, unredeemed second tithe and sanctified things, luf or mustard. 
i) Rabbi Shimon b. Gamaliel permits [it] in the case of luf, because it is food for ravens.   

Explanation
Section one: Under normal circumstances, it would be forbidden to move large portions of straw and produce on Shabbat.  Moving large baskets is a lot of work, and so to preserve the character of Shabbat as a day of rest, the sages said that this was forbidden.  Therefore, moving baskets out of a storehouse is forbidden.  However, if moving baskets is done in order to make room for guests or in order to clear out the study hall so that people can sit and learn, it is permitted.  These are two important mitzvot (welcoming guests and studying Torah) and therefore the sages allowed one to do things for their sake that would normally be prohibited.
Section two:  The mishnah now deals with which foods one is allowed to move and which foods one is not allowed to move on Shabbat.  The first list is mostly of foods that may be eaten on Shabbat, even if not everyone can eat them.  Pure terumah may be eaten by priests, so it may be carried even by Israelites.  In contrast, impure terumah cannot be eaten by anyone and therefore it cannot be carried.  Doubtfully-tithed produce may be eaten by poor people.  The first tithe is eaten by Levites, but only once terumah has been separated from it.  Second tithe and sanctified things are redeemed with money and then one brings the money to Jerusalem and uses it there.  The produce and sanctified things then become non-sacred and one may eat them, hence they can be carried.  Lupinus is a type of bean and since it is eaten by goats, it may be carried on Shabbat.  [Note that printed editions of the mishnah state that lupinus is eaten by poor people.  Albeck says that this is a mistake.]
The second list is of things which may not be eaten on Shabbat and hence cannot be carried.  These include most of the opposites to the previous list.  Note, terumah and tithes may not be separated on Shabbat such that un-tithed produce cannot be “fixed” by tithing it until after Shabbat.  
Mustard seed is not eaten until it is processed.  Since it can’t be processed on Shabbat, the raw seeds cannot be carried either [you may carry your Grey Poupon—as long as it has a heksher ☺.  “Luf” is a type of onion.  According to the first opinion, it is not eaten it can’t be carried on Shabbat.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel disagrees and holds that since luf is eaten by ravens, it is food and can be carried on Shabbat.  The Talmud explains that rich people and kings would raise ravens and give them luf to eat.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that all Jews are considered to be like kings and therefore all Jews can carry luf on Shabbat.  The other sages hold that since people don’t normally raise ravens, food for ravens cannot be carried on Shabbat.   
