Shabbat, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the prohibition of writing, which is one of the labors prohibited in 7:2.

Mishnah Three
1) He who writes two letters, whether with his right hand or with his left hand, whether the same letter or two different letters or in two pigments, in any language, is liable. 
2) Rabbi Jose said: they made one liable for writing two letters only because [he makes] a mark, since this is how they would write on each board of the tabernacle, to know which its companion was.   
3) Rabbi Judah said: we find a short name [forming part] of a long name: “Shem” as part of “Shimon” or “Shmuel”, “Noah” as part of “Nahor”, “Dan” as part of “Daniel”, “Gad” as part of “Gaddiel”.

Explanation
Section one:  For one to be liable for “writing” she must write two letters.  It matters not if she writes with her right or left hand.  She is liable even if she writes the same letter twice. The letters can be written with different pigments or in different languages.  In all cases, writing two letters makes one liable.  
Section two:  Rabbi Yose holds that even one who makes a mark is liable for writing, since this is how the work was done in the construction of the Tabernacle.  They would make marks (scratch marks or impressions) on the wood to know which piece went with which other piece.  Therefore, when one writes one is really liable for the indentation they make on whatever they are writing.
Section three: According to Rabbi Judah, merely writing any two letters is not sufficient to incur liability unless the two letters are a complete word.  However, the two letters do not have to be the complete word which she intended to write.  If she intends to write a longer word, for instance “Shimon” but then writes “Shem” (Noah’s son) which in Hebrew consists of the first two letters in Shimon, she is liable.  This is because Shem is in and of itself a full word.  However, if the two letters she writes are not a complete word, she is exempt.
We should note that according to the Talmud, a person is not liable if they write with their weak hand.  They explain the mishnah as referring to an ambidextrous person.       
