Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah discusses exceptions to the rule in the previous mishnah, that one should not go out on Shabbat to the Shabbat border in order to go beyond the border after Shabbat to perform an activity prohibited on Shabbat. 

Mishnah Four
1) One may go to the Shabbat border before nightfall in order to attend to the affairs of a bride or of a corpse to bring him a coffin and shrouds. 
2) If a non-Jew brings reed-pipes on Shabbat, one must not bewail an Israelite with them, unless they came from a near place.  
3) If he made a coffin for himself or dug a grave for himself, an israelite may be buried in it. 
a) But if [he made it] for the sake of an Israelite, [the Israelite] may never be buried in it.

Explanation
Section one:  Arranging a marriage and arranging proper burial are two of the highest values in Judaism, competing perhaps only with the study of Torah.  One may therefore say to a fellow Jew on Shabbat, “take care of this need for a bride or a dead person after Shabbat”, even though the performance of these activities is prohibited on Shabbat itself.  Hence, if one needs to leave town after Shabbat to take care of the arrangements for a marriage or funeral/burial, one may do so.  [Remember Abba Shaul’s rule:  anything one can say, one can also go to the Shabbat border to do immediately after Shabbat.]  This includes bringing a coffin or shrouds in which to bury the dead.   
Section two:  In mishnaic times it was customary for pipes to be used at a funeral to bewail the dead.  If a non-Jew brought them to a Jew for the Jew to use them on Saturday evening, the Jew may not use them because this is benefiting from the work a non-Jew did for a Jew on Shabbat.  However, if the pipes came from a near place, within the Shabbat border, the Jew may use them immediately after Shabbat because even if the non-Jew had not brought them, the Jew would have been able to bring them for a funeral right after Shabbat.  A Jew is prohibited from benefiting only if the non-Jew does something that the Jew was not allowed to do.
Section three:  If a non-Jew made a coffin or dug a grave for non-Jewish use on Shabbat, and then decided to sell the coffin or grave to a Jew, a Jew may use it.  This is because the intent was not to do work for a Jew on Shabbat.  However, if the non-Jew made the coffin or grave on Shabbat for a specific Jew, that Jew may never be buried in that coffin or grave.  This is because the grave or coffin was made in violation of the Shabbat with that Jew in mind.  On the other hand, the grave and coffin may be used for another Jew as long as they wait between the end of Shabbat and the burial the time it would take to build a coffin and dig a grave.  This waiting period is to avoid deriving benefit from work that a non-Jew did on Shabbat.     
