Shabbat, Chapter Nineteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first part of this mishnah discusses bathing the child on Shabbat before and after his circumcision.  The second part of the mishnah deals with circumcision of a child on Shabbat if something about his status is doubtful.

Mishnah Three
1) They bathe the infant both before and after the circumcision, and sprinkle [warm water] over him by hand but not with a vessel. 
2) R. Elazar ben Azaryah says: they may bathe an infant on the third day [of circumcision] which falls on the Shabbat, as it is said, “And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore” (Genesis 34:25).  
3) For one who about whom it is doubtful, and a hermaphrodite, they may not desecrate Shabbat 
a) But Rabbi Judah permits [it] in the case of a hermaphrodite.

Explanation
Section one:  It is permitted to bathe the infant with hot water on Shabbat both before and after the circumcision.  The mishnah now proceeds to explain that this bathing is not a full bath as is usually done when it is not Shabbat but rather just sprinkling him with water by hand.  Some commentators explain that before he is circumcised the hot water may not be heated on Shabbat, but that after he is circumcised, when the bath is more crucial for his recovery, the water may be heated even on Shabbat. 
Section two:  Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah disagrees with the previous opinion in two ways. First of all, he holds that the child may be bathed in a normal manner and not just by sprinkling on him.  Secondly, the child may be bathed even if Shabbat falls on the third day after his circumcision, and not just on the day of the circumcision itself.  This Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah learns from the story of Shechem’s circumcision where we see that he and the people from his city were still hurting on the third day.  Talmudic commentators debate whether this means that the infant may be bathed up until the third day, and also on the first and second day after the circumcision, or just the third day, but not the first two days.  It seems to me that the first position is more reasonable.  According to the latter position we would have to say that for some reason the pain is worse on the third day.
Section three:   If a child is born at twilight it is considered doubtful whether he was born on the previous day or on the following day.  Such a child can never be circumcised on Shabbat.  For instance, let’s say he was born on twilight between Friday and Shabbat.  His circumcision will end up being on Sunday.  It can’t be on Friday, lest he was born on Shabbat and Friday is only the seventh day. It can’t be on Shabbat lest he was born on Friday and Shabbat would be the ninth day.  Circumcision overrides the rules of Shabbat only if it is on the eighth day. Therefore the circumcision is pushed off until Sunday (we shall learn more about this below in mishnah five.)  I should note that others explain the mishnah differently. This explanation goes according to Albeck. 
A hermaphrodite has signs of being both male and female.  He is circumcised but his circumcision cannot take place on Shabbat.  This is because we are not sure of his halakhic status as male and hence it could be that he doesn’t really need to be circumcised.  His circumcision is “doubtful” and therefore it doesn’t override Shabbat.
Rabbi Judah considers a hermaphrodite to be a male and therefore his circumcision overrides Shabbat.  
