Shekalim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with scenarios in which we determine the status of something based on a majority, a topic which we began discussing in the beginning of chapter seven.  
The specific topic is spit found in the streets of Jerusalem.  If such spit comes from an impure person than the spit is unclean.  

Mishnah One
1) Any spit found in Jerusalem is clean except that which is [found] in the upper market, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
2) Rabbi Yose says: at other times of the year [spit found] in the middle [of the road] is unclean but [spit found] at the sides [of the road] is clean; but at festivals time [spit found] in the middle [of the road] is clean, while [that which is found] at the sides [of the road] is unclean, since they are few in number, they remove themselves to the sides of the road. 

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Meir, we can assume that all spit found in Jerusalem is clean except spit found in the upper marketplace.  In most areas people who are unclean are extra cautious since they know that in Jerusalem people need to be extra careful about issues of purity and impurity.  This is because in Jerusalem many people eat sacred food, which needs to be eaten in purity.  In contrast, outside of Jerusalem we must be concerned lest the spit is unclean. The only exception within Jerusalem is the upper market, towards the southwest of Jerusalem, where non-Jews and unclean persons used to congregate.  There, found spit is considered to be unclean.  
Section two:  Rabbi Yose distinguishes between times of the year and places in the road in his determining whether we must consider the spit to be unclean.  During non-festival times, most of the people of Jerusalem are impure, just as they are in other cities.  At these times the pure people walk on the sides of the road to avoid the impure people who are walking in the middle of the road.  Hence, spit found in the middle of the road is impure whereas spit found on the sides is pure.  The opposite is true during the time of the festivals, when most people are pure.  They walk in the middle of the road and the impure people walk on the sides of the road (this seems quite courteous of theme).  Hence, only spit found on the sides of the road is considered impure.  
