Shekalim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Yesterday’s mishnah dealt with money found in between the money chests of the chamber in the Temple.  This mishnah continues to deal with money found in various places, and with how to determine its status.

Mishnah Two
1) Money which was found in front of animal dealers [in Jerusalem], it is always [second] tithes [money];
2) [If it was found] on the Temple Mount it is non-sacred [money].   
3) [If it was found] in Jerusalem during the time of a festival, it is [second] tithes [money].
4) But all the rest of the year it is non-sacred [money]. 

Explanation
Section one:  The money that is derived from second tithes must be used to buy food products in Jerusalem.  One common use of this money was to buy an animal and offer it as wellbeing offering.  Most of the animals purchased in Jerusalem throughout the entire year, and not just at festival time, are purchased through second tithes money.  Hence, if money is found in front of an animal dealer in Jerusalem we must be concerned lest it is second tithe money, and it therefore must be treated as if it is.
Section two:  Non-priests who come to the Temple Mount do not generally bring money with them, therefore this money can be assumed to have come from a priest or Levite while they were working there and not from one of the pilgrims during a festival.  This money is considered to be non-sacred even during a festival.  Although people do bring second tithe money to Jerusalem, they don’t generally bring it to the Temple Mount.  
Section three:  Money found anywhere in Jerusalem (except for the Temple Mount) during a festival is deemed to be second tithe money because most of the money that people bring with them on their pilgrimage is second tithe money.  Since Jerusalem is full of pilgrims at this time of year it can be assumed that the money is not from the smaller number of residents.
Section four:   During the rest of the year it can be assumed that the money fell from one of the residents of Jerusalem and not from a pilgrim.  Hence it is not deemed second tithe and it may be treated as non-sacred.  
 
