Shekalim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah lists the thirteen tables mentioned in mishnah one.

Mishnah Four
There were thirteen tables in the Temple: 
1) Eight of marble in the place of slaughtering and on them they would rinse the entrails. 
2) And two to the west of the ramp [which ascends the altar], one of marble and one of silver; on that of marble they would place the limbs [of the offerings], and on that of silver the ministering vessels. 
3) And there were two tables in the Porch on the inside of the entrance to the Temple, one of marble and the other of gold; on that of marble they would place the showbread placed when it was brought in, and on that of gold [they would place the showbread] when it was taken out, because things sacred may be raised [in honor] but not lowered.  
4) And there was one [table] of gold on the inside of the Sanctuary on which the showbread lay continually.

Explanation
Section one:  In the slaughtering section of the Temple there were eight marble tables upon which they would rinse out the entrails of the sacrificial animals.  
Section two:  To the west of the ramp used to ascend to the altar were two more tables, one of marble and one of silver.  They would put the limbs of the sacrifices on the marble table where they would wait until they were offered on the altar.  The marble was cool and hence slowed down the deterioration of the meat. On the silver table they would place the ministering vessels. These were 93 vessels which were brought out each morning and which would be used in worship during the day.  
Section three:  The Porch was the open section of the Temple right outside the Sanctuary. There were two tables there, one of marble and one of gold.  Both of these tables were used for the showbread. When the bread was baked on Friday it would be placed on the marble table so that it wouldn’t begin to mold before it was brought into the Sanctuary on Shabbat.  When it was taken out of the Sanctuary on the following Shabbat, it was placed on the golden table before it was divvied up to the priests.  The mishnah notes that this follows an important halakhic rule—sacred things such as the showbread should rise up in holiness and not be lowered down.   Since it was on a golden table inside the Sanctuary, it had to be on a golden table when it was brought out.  The most famous application of this rule is that on Hannukah we add a candle each night because we are to increase in holiness and not decrease.
Section four:  During the week, the showbread was placed on a golden table, as we mentioned above.
   
      
