Shekalim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who dedicates some of his possessions to the Temple and among them are things which can be used as public sacrifices but not as individual sacrifices.  This would include, for instance, the ingredients for making the incense.  We should note that these cannot just simply be used for public sacrifices because as we have learned on several occasions, public sacrifices must be paid for with public money and not individual donations.  

Mishnah Six 
1) If one dedicated his possessions to the Temple, and there was among them things which was fit for public offerings, they should be given to the craftsmen as their wages; the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
2) Ben Azzai said to him: this method is not correct.  
a) Rather, they separate from them the wages of the craftsmen, and then they exchange them for the money due to the craftsmen, and then they give them to the craftsmen as their wages, and then they buy them back again out of a new appropriation.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Akiva says that if among the dedicated property there are things which can be used for public offerings, those things should go as payment to the craftsmen.  Rabbi Akiva holds that things which are dedicated to the Temple can become regular non-sacred items if they are used in payment for work done for the Temple.
Section two:  Ben Azzai says that Rabbi Akiva’s halakhah is incorrect, because he treats this incense differently from the way in which the extra incense was treated above in mishnah five.  Ben Azzai holds that the cases are similar and should therefore be treated in the same way.  He also disagrees with Rabbi Akiva about things becoming non-sacred by being used to pay for work done in the Temple.  
Accordingly, Ben Azzai says that the same procedure described in yesterday’s mishnah should be performed here as well.  First they separate from the dedicated property an amount equal to the wages owed to the craftsmen.  Then they redeem this property with coins that are to go to the craftsmen.  They then give the incense to the craftsmen as their wages and then buy the incense back with money from the new appropriation.  This is the exact same procedure described above, in yesterday’s mishnah.   
