Shekalim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
According to Rabbi Shimon, the decree of the court that appeared at the end of yesterday’s mishnah was one of seven things that the court decreed.  The first two are similar to the decree mentioned yesterday.  

Mishnah Six
Rabbi Shimon said: there were seven things that the court decree and that was one of them. 
[The others were the following:] 
1) A non-Jew who sent a burnt-offering from overseas and he sent with it its libation-offerings, they are offered out of his own; 
a) But if [he did] not [send its libation-offerings], they should be offered out of public funds.   
2) So too [in the case of] a convert who had died and left sacrifices, if he had also left its libation-offerings they are offered out of his own; 
a) But if not, they should be offered out of public funds.   
3) It was also a condition laid down by the court in the case of a high priest who had died that his minhah should be offered out of public funds.   
a) Rabbi Judah says: [it was offered out] of the property of his heirs, 
b) And had to be offered of the whole [tenth].

Explanation
Section one:  If a non-Jew sent a sacrifice from overseas and he sent with it the proper libation offerings or money with which to purchase these offerings, then the libations are offered from what he sent.  However, if he didn’t send the libation offerings, and it is difficult to reach him in order to ask him to do so, the libations are made with public funds.  If this was a Jew who had sent an offering from overseas, evidently they would chase after him and not offer the sacrifice until he had sent the libations, or money to cover the costs.
We should also note that the idea of gentiles sending sacrifices to the Temple in Jerusalem is an interesting phenomenon, and one that is described in other places.  These may have been admirers of Jews, or perhaps pluralistic idol-worshippers who wished to “cover all of their bets” and therefore offered sacrifices to all sorts of Gods, including the God of the Jews.  
Section two:  When a convert dies and does not have any subsequent children, he/she dies without any heirs.  In other words, his relatives from before he converted do not inherit his estate.  If he dies and he leaves a sacrifice and libations, then the libations are offered with the sacrifice.  However, if he doesn’t leave money for the libations, the libations are provided for by public funds.  If the person who died had inheritors, as do all Jews, then the inheritors are liable to provide the funds for the libations.
Section three:  The High Priest offers a daily minhah (grain) sacrifice of a tenth of an ephah (see Leviticus 6:13), half in the morning and half in the night.  If the High Priest dies and they have not yet appointed a new High Priest to take his place, this grain offering is provided for by public funds.  Rabbi Judah disagrees and holds that the offering comes from the money that the High Priest’s inheritors get from him.  Both Rabbi Judah and the other sages agree that in this case an entire ephah is sacrificed in the morning and evening, instead of the usual half-ephah.  This is discussed in greater depth in Mishnah Menahot 4:5.
    
