Shekalim, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah begins to discuss what they did with the money from the appropriation.

Mishnah One 
1) What did they do with the appropriation? 
a) They bring with it the daily burnt-offerings (tamidim) and the additional burnt-offerings (musafim) and their libations, the omer and the two loaves and the showbread and all the other public offerings.  
2) Those who guard the aftergrowths of the seventh year take their wages out of the appropriation from the chamber. 
a) Rabbi Yose says: [if a man wished] he could volunteer to watch without payment. 
b) But they said to him: you too admit that they can only be offered out of public funds.

Explanation
Section one: This section contains a list of some of the public offerings that were purchased from the appropriation.  Tamidim—see Exodus 29:38, Numbers 28:3; musafim—see Numbers 28:9 ff.; the omer—Leviticus 23:10-11; the two loaves—Leviticus 23:16-17; the showbread—Leviticus 24:5-9.  
Section two:  While it is forbidden to work the land during the seventh year, it is permitted to eat produce that grows on its own. This produce was necessary for the omer, the grain brought between Pesah and Shavuot, and the two loaves, brought on Shavuot, because these both had to come from newly harvested produce.  To make sure that there was some grain in the fields the Temple would hire guards to watch the aftergrowths.  These guards took their salary from the shekels.  
Rabbi Yose says that if an individual wishes to guard the fields without pay, he is free to do so.  
The other sages respond that his opinion is problematic.  Rabbi Yose agrees that public sacrifices, those listed in section one, must come from public funds and not from individual donations.  If one were to volunteer to watch the aftergrowths, he would by law become their owner and it would turn out that the omer and the two loaves would be coming from private donations.  Therefore, individuals must take payment in return for guarding the fields.  
