Shekalim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Nine

Introduction 
This mishnah teaches how prices were fixed on behalf of the Temple such that the Temple would always get the better of the deal, should there be price changes.

Mishnah Nine
1) Once in thirty days prices were fixed [on behalf of] the chamber.   
2) Anyone who had accepted upon himself to supply fine flours at four [se'ahs for a sela] and they now stood at three [se'ahs for a sela] he must [still] supply four. 
3) [If he had accepted to supply fine flours] at three [se'ahs for a sela] and they now stood at four, he must [also] supply at four, for the sanctified property has the upper hand.   
4) If the fine flour became worm-eaten the loss is his; if the wine became sour the loss is his. 
a) For he is not entitled to his money until the altar has accepted [the offering].

Explanation
Section one:  Once every thirty days the prices of oil, fine flour and wine were set so that the Temple (the chamber) would be able to buy at that price for the entire month.  This means that if the market price went up, the Temple could still buy at the lower rate.  However, if the market price of these items went down, the Temple could buy the items at the new lower rate.  The mishnah shall now illustrate.
Section two:  If a merchant agreed to sell flour at four se’ahs (a measure of volume) for a sela (a coin) and then the price went up to three se’ahs for a sela, the merchant takes the loss.  The Temple can still give him a coin and get four se’ahs.
Section three:  However, if the price was three se’ahs for a sela and it went down to four se’ahs for a sela, he must provide four se’ahs.  The mishnah notes that the Temple (i.e. the sanctified property) always has the upper hand.  
Section four:  If the Temple buys some produce but before the produce is offered it goes bad, the merchant must replace the produce.  This is because the money is not considered to belong to the merchant until the flour, wine or oil has actually been offered.  Since the money is not yet his, he must replace the ruined product in order to keep the money which the Temple’s treasurers gave him.        
