Shevuoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six continues to discuss which sacrificial goat brought as a sin-offering brings atonement for which transgression. 

Mishnah Six
1) For intentional transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food, the goat offered inside [the Holy of Holies] on the Day of Atonement together with the Day of Atonement itself bring atonement.  
2) For other transgressions of the Torah, light and grave, intentional and unintentional, known and unknown, positive and negative, those punishable by kareth and those punishable by death imposed by the court — for all these the scapegoat [sent out on the Day of Atonement] brings atonement.

Explanation
Section one:  The previous several mishnayoth discussed for which sins the goats offered on new months, festivals and at the outer altar in the Temple on Yom Kippur bring atonement.  Our mishnah discusses yet a fourth goat, the goat sacrificed by the High Priest on Yom Kippur and whose blood is sprinkled inside the Holy of Holies.  This goat along with Yom Kippur itself atones for intentional transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food.  The previous mishnayoth discussed only unintentional sins.
Section two:  All of the other possible transgressions of the Torah’s laws, no matter how they are punished and no matter how serious they may be, whether done intentionally or unintentionally, are atoned for by the scapegoat, sent out to the wilderness, on Yom Kippur.  This teaching is learned from Leviticus 16:21-22:  “And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat and confess over it all the iniquities and transgressions of the Israelites, whatever their sins, putting them on the head of the goat; and it shall be sent off to the wilderness through a designated man.  Thus the goat shall carry on it all their iniquities to an inaccessible region.”
Our mishnah does not mention this, but there is one exception to this rule:  transgressions between one human being and another, for instance shaming another person in public.  The last mishnah in Tractate Yoma, which deals with Yom Kippur, states explicitly:  “For sins between a man and God Yom Kippur atones; for sins between a man and his fellow, Yom Kippur does not atone.”
 
