Sheviit, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with selling sheviit produce. Above, in 7:3 we learned that one cannot engage in trade with sheviit produce. However, if one gathers produce from a field in order to use it at home and then there is some left over, he may sell it. Our mishnah teaches that even though under such circumstances he is allowed to sell the produce, he may not sell it in its normal manner.

Mishnah Three 
1) Produce of the seventh year may not be sold by measure, weight or number.   
2) Neither may figs [be sold] by number, nor vegetables by weight.   
3) Bet Shammai says: they may not be sold, even in bundles.
4) But Bet Hillel says: that which is usually tied in bundles [to bring] to the house may even be tied into bundles for the market, such as leeks and netz hahalav. 

Explanation
Section one: When one comes to sell seventh year produce, he must not sell it in the normal manner, either by measure, weight or number, because this makes it look like he is engaging in trade.
Section two: Albeck explains that they used to sell figs in bunches, and in each bunch there were 100 figs. It would obviously be forbidden to sell them this way. However, even if he changes the normal way of selling figs and sells them by number, say 50 figs, it is still prohibited. This might be akin to selling eggs by number instead of by the usual dozen.
Similarly, vegetables were normally sold by the bunch. On sheviit, it is prohibited to sell them by weight, because this looks too much like engaging in trade.
Section three:  Bet Shammai adds that it is even forbidden to sell vegetables by bundles, even though this is not “by measure, weight or number,” which were prohibited in section one. To Bet Shammai, nothing can be sold in its normal manner. Rather one would have to sell them loose, roughly estimating how many are being sold.
Section four: To Bet Hillel, if there is a vegetable that one would normally make into bundles just to bring home, then he may make it into bundles and bring it to the store. This is permitted because it doesn’t necessarily look like he is bringing them to the market to engage in trade. The two examples are leeks and “netz hahalav” both mentioned above in 7:1.  
