Sheviit, Chapter Four, Mishnah Ten

Introduction 
During the seventh year it is forbidden to cause produce to come to ruin, because it must be for eating. Therefore, it is forbidden to cut down trees from the time that their fruit has begun to appear until the fruit is fully ripe. This is the period of time when the fruit needs to be on the tree in order to develop.  
 
Mishnah Ten
1) From when may they no longer cut down trees in the seventh year?   
a) Bet Shammai says: every tree, after it has produced [fruit].   
b) Bet Hillel says: carob trees after [the carobs] begin to droop, vines after the berries begin to be moist, olive-trees after they had blossomed, any other tree after it has produced [fruit].   
2) And any tree as soon as it reaches the season for tithes it may be cut down.   
3) How much should be on an olive tree such that it may not be cut down? 
a) A quarter [kav]. 
b) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: all depends on the olive-tree.   

Explanation
Section one: According to Bet Shammai it is forbidden to cut down any fruit tree once the fruit has begun to appear on the tree.
Bet Hillel gives different times for three of the most productive trees, the olive, the grape vine and the carob tree. In these three cases he seems to be slightly more lenient, allowing one to cut down the tree at a later period in its development than would Bet Shammai.  However, when it comes to other trees, Bet Hillel agrees that it is forbidden from the time that the fruit begins to appear.
Section two: Once the fruit has reached the season when it must be tithed before it is eaten (see above, mishnayot 7-9) the fruit is considered to be viable off the tree. Since the fruit can be used as food when picked, it is no longer considered to be ruining the fruit by cutting down the tree. Therefore, it is now permitted to cut down the entire tree.
Section three: This mishnah deals with a general prohibition of cutting down fruit-producing trees during any year.  This prohibition is derived from Deuteronomy 20:19, which contains the prohibition of cutting down fruit-bearing trees when waging war. The olive tree is the most productive and important of the trees in the ancient Israeli economy, and, I should note, is still the most important agricultural product in many areas of Israel, especially certain Arab areas. According to the first opinion, if the tree can produce a quarter-kav of oil, then it cannot be cut down. Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that it all depends on the tree, its size and the type of oil that it produces. 
