Sheviit, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with the topic of what to do with the accumulating dung during the sabbatical year.

Mishnah Three
1) A man may deposit in his field three dung-heaps for every bet seah [and even] more, the words of Rabbi Shimon.   
a) The sages forbid unless he [deposits them] three [handbreadths] below or thee handbreadths above.   
2) A man may pile up all the manure into one [large] store.   
a) Rabbi Meir forbids unless he [deposits them] three [handbreadths] below or thee handbreadths above.   
3) If he had just a little, he may constantly add to it.   
a) Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah forbids unless he [deposits them] three [handbreadths] below or thee handbreadths above. 

Explanation
Section one: The beginning of today’s mishnah seems to be nearly the same as the last clause of yesterday’s mishnah, where Rabbi Shimon stated that one may make more than three dung-heaps in the field, without this looking like he was fertilizing. Here we seem to learn the same thing over again.  According to some commentators, this repetition serves to introduce the statement of the sages found below. I should note that I have translated this mishnah according to the version found in all good manuscripts. The version preserved in the printed edition of the mishnah differs.  
The other sages forbid more than three dung-heaps unless he lowers them three handbreadths into a pit, or raises them three handbreadths and puts them on top of a mound.  If he does this, it will be clear to all that his intention is not to fertilize his field. While we had learned in yesterday’s mishnah that the sages prohibit, we had not learned that they do allow this if one raises or lowers the mounds.
Section two: Most sages allow one to pile the dung that would have filled three dung-heaps into one large pile. However, Rabbi Meir forbids this unless he either raises the heap three handbreadths or lowers it.  According to the Yerushalmi, Rabbi Meir forbids this only if there is more than the allowed measure of dung, that is more than the measure of three dung heaps, each of 150 seah of dung.  Since he couldn’t make three separate heaps of a larger size without having to raise or lower the heaps, Rabbi Meir holds that he must also raise or lower one large heap.
Section three: If he does not have enough dung to make such large heaps, he may take out the small amount that he does have and then add to it little by little. He need not wait until such a large volume accumulates. 
Rabbi Elazar forbids this because it looks as if he is planning to fertilize the field. This would only be permitted if he first lowered the pile or made it higher. Only through such a method is it clear that his intention is not to fertilize but rather just to remove the dung from his courtyard.  
