Shevuoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Mishnah two discusses which areas of the Temple are included in these laws.

Mishnah Two
1) It is the same whether one [while impure] enters the Temple court or the addition to the Temple court, for additions are not made to the city [of Jerusalem], or to the Temple courts except by the king, prophet, Urim and Thummim, the Sanhedrin of seventy one, and with two [loaves] of thanksgiving, and with song.   
a) And the court walks in a procession, the two [loaves] of thanksgiving [being carried] after them, and all Israel [following] behind them.
b) The inner one is eaten, and the outer one is burnt.  
c) And as to any addition that was made without all these — he who enters it [while impure] is not liable. 

Explanation
A person who is impure and enters the Temple is obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice even if he only entered an addition that had been made to the Temple court.  In other words, the holiness inherent to the Temple is also to be found in any additions made to the Temple.  The reason is that the additions made to the Temple are made with the consent of all of the ruling institutions in Israel, as well being performed in a religious ceremony.  Additions to the Temple or to the city of Jerusalem, which is also considered to be holy, can only be made with the consent of the following parties:  1)  the king; 2)  the Urim and Thummim, the two stones that sat in the high priest’s breastplate which were used to receive oracles (see Numbers 27:21);  3)  the Sanhedrin of 71 elders.  The additions to the Temple would be made in a great procession with two loaves of thanksgiving.  Any addition to the Temple that was not made using all of these elements was considered to be of a lower status.  Therefore, one who entered there while impure would not have to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.
This mishnah has some interesting historical implications.  In the Second Temple period, which began in the 5th century B.C.E. and continued until the destruction of the Temple in 70 C.E. there were no Urim and Thummim.  Therefore, any additions to the Temple would not have been of the same holiness.  On the other hand, the mishnah does not completely delegitimize these additions to the Temple.  The last clause in the mishnah indeed admits that additions to the Temple can be made without the approval of the all of these parties.  The only consequence is that one who entered there impure would not be obligated to bring a sacrifice.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Why do you think that in order to add on to the Temple they need the approval of the king, the priestly oracles and the Sanhedrin?  

