Sheviit, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
In today’s mishnah the rabbis debate what should be done with a hide that has been oiled with seventh year oil.  

Mishnah Nine 
1) A hide which they oiled with seventh year oil:
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: it must be burnt; 
b) But the sages say: he must [buy and] eat [food] for its equivalent. 
2) They said in front of Rabbi Akiba: Rabbi Eliezer used to say, A hide which they smeared with seventh year oil must be burnt. 
a) He replied: Silence! I won’t tell you what Rabbi Eliezer actually said in this connection.

Explanation
Section one: Albeck explains that Rabbi Eliezer was especially stringent upon the person who put sabbatical year oil on the hide because he considered this to be a disgraceful use of sheviit produce. The rabbis said that this was no different than the cases in yesterday’s mishnah, where a person used sabbatical year produce in an improper way. Just as in those cases he could remedy the situation by eating an equivalent amount of non-sabbatical year produce as if it was sabbatical year produce, so too he could act over here.
Section two: In this fascinating story, some rabbis tell Rabbi Akiva what Rabbi Eliezer had said, or at least what they had thought he had said, in regard to this issue. Their tradition matches that reported in section one. Rabbi Akiva angrily responded that he would not reveal to them what Rabbi Eliezer had actually said. It is unclear why Rabbi Akiva responded in such a manner, or what it is that Rabbi Eliezer seems to have said. In the Talmud two sages argue whether Rabbi Eliezer was actually more stringent or less stringent. What I think is more interesting is that Rabbi Akiva for some reason feared revealing Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion. Rabbi Eliezer is often a figure whom the other rabbis wanted to push away from being the accepted halakhah. Perhaps Rabbi Akiva fears that if he reveals his true opinion, people may be tempted to follow it. In order to keep people away from Rabbi Eliezer he censors him. However, we should note that the editors of the Mishnah record this censorship instead of erasing it from any historical memory.  
