Sheviit, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a potter who wants to sell jars to a customer during the seventh year. Again, he may not sell more than the amount normally needed for personal usage. 
As a reminder, during the sabbatical year one can harvest fruit that grows on its own and use it for personal needs.  But one may not sell the produce nor may one store it beyond the time when such produce can be found in the fields. Produce found in the fields is considered ownerless, no matter who owns the field.

Mishnah Seven
1) The potter may sell five oil-jars and fifteen wine-jars, for this is the usual amount one collects from ownerless produce.   
2) But if he brought more, it is still permitted.   
3) He may also sell [more jars] to Gentiles in the land of Israel and to Jews outside of the land.

Explanation
Section one: A potter can sell up to five oil jars and fifteen wine jars, for this is a usual amount that a normal person would need to collect ownerless olives and grapes from the field and turn them into oil and wine.
Section two: If the person gathering the ownerless oil and wine brought in more olives and grapes than just five oil-jars or fifteen wine-jars worth, then one still may use this olive oil and wine. For instance, if I go to your house and you have gathered more than this amount I can still eat your food, as long as you are not making a business out of it or keeping it longer than is allowed. Nevertheless, it is still prohibited for a potter to sell more than five oil jars or fifteen wine jars because we could assume that a greater amount would be used to market the oil or wine.
Section three: The laws of sheviit apply in the land of Israel to Jews only. Therefore, a potter can sell whatever he wants either to a non-Jew living in the land of Israel or to a Jew living outside the land. He is not responsible if the non-Jew should subsequently sell the jars to a Jew or a Jew should bring them to the land of Israel and use them there against the halakhah. There is, after all, a limit to a person’s responsibility to not aid others in transgressing.  Another example would be that while the potter cannot sell the jars in the seventh year, he can sell them in other years, even though they may be used eventually in the seventh year. 
 
