Sheviit, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
As with many mishnayot, our mishnah begins with the first chronological point of the sabbatical laws, the sixth year which proceeds the sabbatical year.  According to the rabbis, some of the sabbatical year prohibitions begin in the sixth year. This concept is called “tosefet sheviit”—the additional time of sheviit.
There is somewhat of a debate in talmudic literature over whether this additional time is from the Torah or is a long-standing tradition. 
Our mishnah discusses “tosefet sheviit” for an orchard.

Mishnah One
1) Until when may they plow an orchard in the sixth year?  
a) Bet Shammai say: as long as such work will benefit the fruit.
b) And Bet Hillel says: till Atzeret (Shavuot).  
2) The views of this [school] are close to those of the other. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to Bet Shammai, as long as the plowing that one does to an orchard is beneficial for that years’ fruit, then it is allowed. Once the plowing starts to be in preparation for the seventh year, it is already prohibited.
Instead of giving a time that is somewhat subjective, Bet Hillel gives a set date—Shavuot.  Until Shavuot it is permitted to plow, and after Shavuot it is forbidden.
Section two:  The anonymous voice in the Mishnah notes that the dates of the two schools are not that far apart from one another. This might cause us to ask why they disagree. There are a few answers that I could think of.  The first is that although there is only a small amount of time difference, it is still significant. This is not a particularly satisfactory answer because then we would have to ask why the mishnah says that the two are indeed so close to one another. A different answer is that Bet Hillel wants an objective, hard and fast date, whereas Bet Shammai is more willing to live with a more subjective criterion. The answer that I prefer is that Bet Shammai prefers to attach the prohibition to nature, or physical reality. At a certain point plowing stops being for this year’s fruit and then it becomes prohibited. Bet Hillel on the other hand wants to tie the prohibition into a legally determined date, a date set by a court and not by nature. 


