Shevuoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Mishnah three discusses one who entered the Temple while impure.  

Mishnah Three
1) If he became impure while in the Temple court [and was aware of it], and then forgot that he was impure, though he remembered that he was in the Temple; 
a) [Or] he forgot that he was in the Temple, though he remembered that he was impure;
b) [Or,] he forgot both; 
c) And he prostrated himself, or waited [in the Temple] the time it takes to prostrate; 
d) Or went out the long way, he is liable; 
i) [If he went out] the shorter way, he is not liable; 
2) This is the positive precept concerning the temple for which they [the court] are not liable. 

Explanation 
Section one:  This section is similar to the teaching in mishnah one, except it presents a new problem:  he is actually in the Temple while he becomes impure. Since it is forbidden to be in the Temple while impure he therefore must leave immediately, and in the shortest possible manner.  To remind ourselves, in order for him to be liable for a sliding scale sacrifice for having been in the Temple while impure he must have awareness, forgetting and then afterwards awareness.  Our mishnah teaches that the forgetting can either be of the fact he was impure or that he was in the Temple or both.  As long as he knew what had happened or where he was and forgot one of those two things or both, and then he worshipped in the Temple by prostrating himself, or even stayed in the Temple long enough to prostrate, or even did not take the quickest way out, he is obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.  In other words, should he delay himself at all within the Temple after having become impure he will be obligated for a sliding scale sacrifice.  Only if he goes out immediately will he be exempt.
Section two:  Usually, if the court gives a mistaken ruling with regards to a mitzvah that is punishable if done intentionally by kareth and obligates one for a sacrifice if done unintentionally, the court must bring a bullock as a sacrifice (see Leviticus 4:12).  However, in this case, if the court told the person who had become impure while in the Temple that it was okay to leave through a longer path, the court is not obligated to bring the sacrifice.  We will learn this law again in Tractate Horayoth 2:4, the last tractate in Seder Nezikin.
   
