Sheviit, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah has to do with oiling and piercing unripe figs while they are on the fig tree.  The oil would speed up the ripening process and the piercing would allow the oil to penetrate into the figs.

Mishnah Five 
1) They may oil unripe figs and pierce them until Rosh Hashanah. 
2) Unripe figs of the sixth year which have [remained on the tree] until the seventh year, or of the seventh year which have remained on the tree until the eighth year, they may not oil them or pierce them.   
3) Rabbi Judah says: In a place where it was the custom to oil, one may not oil them, since that would be considered work; but in a place where it was not the custom to oil, they may oil them. 
4) Rabbi Shimon permitted in connection with the tree, because he is permitted to do all work for the tree.

Explanation
Section one:  Oiling and piercing are allowed up until Rosh Hashanah, just as were the other activities meant to aid the tree that did not work the ground.
Section two:  However, if despite the oiling and piercing, the figs did not ripen until the sabbatical year began, they may not be oiled and pierced during the seventh year. Similarly, figs from the seventh year which have remained on the tree until the eighth year may not be oiled or pierced because they are seventh year produce and as such, cannot be worked.
Section three:  Rabbi Judah provides what might seem to be a paradoxical ruling.  Oiling is forbidden only if it is considered work in that locality.  If it is customary to oil them, then oiling is considered work and it is forbidden to oil them in the seventh year.  However, if oiling is not customary in that place, then it is not considered work and someone who wants to oil them may do so. In this he disagrees with the opinion in the previous section, according to which oiling was always prohibited in the seventh year.
We should note that Rabbi Judah’s statement will make the halakhah vary from place to place.  As we noted earlier in Sheviit, some sages seem to have objected to this phenomenon.  It seems, in contrast, that it did not bother Rabbi Judah at all.
Section four:  Rabbi Shimon allows one to do any work on the tree itself in the eighth year, after the sabbatical year has been completed, because only the fruit carries the sanctity of the seventh year, and not the tree.  Other commentators interpret Rabbi Shimon as permitting the oiling and piercing of seventh year figs which have entered the eighth year because on the eighth year all work done on the tree is permitted.  
