Sheviit, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with selling implements which could be used to transgress the laws of the sabbatical year. The rabbis did not allow one person to aid another to transgress by selling to that person a tool which he could use to transgress another commandment. We should note that according to commentators, the mishnah refers to selling these things to someone who is suspected of not observing the laws of the shemittah. 

Mishnah Six
These are the implements which a craftsman may not sell in the seventh year:   
1) A plow and all its [accompanying] implements, a yoke, a winnowing-fan, and a pickax.
2) But he may sell a sickle used by hand, a scythe, and a cart with all its implements. 
3) This is the general principle: any tools designed for work involving a transgression [in the seventh year] is prohibited; but if for a forbidden and a permissible purpose, it may be [sold]. 

Explanation
Section one:  This section contains a list of implements that are only used for labors prohibited on the seventh year. The plow and the yoke are used for plowing which is clearly forbidden. The winnowing fan is used to separate wheat from chaff. While this is permitted, it is only permitted in small, personal quantities. Since this type of fan is used for large quantities of wheat or other grain, one cannot sell such a fan on the sabbatical year. The pickax was used to dig holes, which was also forbidden.
Section two: This section lists implements which could be used to perform prohibited labors but also could be used to perform permitted labors. One may assume that the person to whom one sells will use them appropriately and hence they may be sold on the seventh year. 
A hand sickle would be used to harvest a small amount, for personal use, which one may do on the sabbatical year. Similarly, a scythe would be used for smaller amounts and is permitted. The cart can be used for forbidden work, but could also be used to transport things that one is allowed to carry. 
Section three: This is the general rule that summarizes the details found in the previous two sections. It is not unusual for the Mishnah to provide both a general rule and detailed examples.   

