Sheviit, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Most of this mishnah deals with the prohibition of selling sabbatical year produce. Sabbatical year produce is supposed to be left ownerless in the field so that anyone who wants to can come and collect.  One should not engage in business with this produce. However, under certain circumstances it can be sold.

Mishnah Three
1) The peels and the blossom of the pomegranate, the nutshells, and fruit seeds—the laws of sabbatical produce apply to them and to their money substitutes. 
2) The dyer may use them for himself, but he may not dye with them for a wage, since one may not engage in business with seventh year produce, or with first-born animals, or with terumah, or with nevelah, or with trefah, or with reptiles or with creeping things.   
3) One should not buy field-vegetables and sell them in the market. 
4) But he may gather them and have his son sell them on his behalf.   
5) If he gathered them for his own use, and some remains over, he may sell them.

Explanation
Section one: Even though all of these parts of the fruits or nuts are not generally eaten, they are still considered to be part of the fruit and the laws of sabbatical produce still apply to them.
Section two: The mishnah uses the details in the previous section as an introduction to the subject of what one can do with sabbatical year produce. A dyer can use the peels of fruit (commonly used in the making of dye) to make dyes for his own personal use. However, he may not use them to make money. 
There are other items that cannot be used to engage in business, meaning a person cannot sell them to earn a wage, although he may be able to sell them occasionally, on an ad-hoc basis. 
First-born animals: given to a priest. The person to whom a first-born animal is born cannot first use it to make money and then later on give it to a priest.
Terumah: this also must be given to a priest, and he cannot use it to engage in business.
Nevelah—an animal that died on its own.
Terefah—an animal killed not in a kosher manner.
Reptiles and creepy-crawly thing: animals that are not kosher. With regard to all three of these things, the rabbis forbade one from engaging in business with them, lest an Israelite come to eat them.
Section three: One should not buy vegetables that have grown on their own (the Mishnah calls these “field vegetable”) and sell them. The same holds true with regard to collecting vegetables that grow on their own. One may not collect them and then bring them to market in order to sell them.
Section four: However, there is a rather large leniency in this halakhah.  A person can gather produce from the field and then give it to his son to sell in the market, on his behalf. According to the rabbis, this doesn’t look like engaging in business, rather it still looks as if he gathered the produce for personal use.
Section five: Finally, if he gathered for personal use but unintentionally gathered too much, he may sell the remainder in the market. As long as his intention was only to collect for personal use, this is not considered to be a case of “trading” in sabbatical year produce. 
