Sheviit, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
Most of our mishnah deals with a case where someone preserved three different types of vegetable in one jar—does he eat these vegetables until the first of them can no longer be found in the field, the last or must he eat each individual vegetable up until the time that vegetable is no longer found in the field. 

Mishnah Five
1) One who preserved three kinds of vegetables in one jar: 
a) Rabbi Eliezer says they may be eaten only so long as the first still remains [in the field]. 
b) But Rabbi Joshua says: even so long as the last remains.   
c) Rabban Gamaliel says: when the like kind is no longer to be found in the field, the same kind in the jar must be removed, [and the halachah agrees with him.] 
2) Rabbi Shimon says: all vegetables are regarded as one [kind] in respect of the law of removal. 
3) Purslane may be eaten until there is no more wild purslane in the valley of Bet Netopha.  

Explanation
Section one: There are three different opinions as to what to do in such a case. Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion is that he can eat all of the vegetables until one of them is no longer found in the field. This is the most stringent opinion. Rabbi Joshua holds that as long as one of them remains he may eat all three of them. This is the most lenient. Rabban Gamaliel’s opinion is somewhat of a compromise. Each vegetable can be eaten as long as that vegetable is found in the field. There is an additional line to the mishnah that notes that the halakhah is in accordance with Rabban Gamaliel. However, these words are missing from better manuscripts of the mishnah.
Section two: Rabbi Shimon is even more lenient than Rabbi Joshua. He says that all vegetables may be eaten as long as any vegetables are found in the field. In other words, “vegetable” is a species; so as long as vegetables are in the field, vegetables may be stored and eaten at home.
Section three: Purslane can be eaten as long as wild purslane is found in the valley of Bet Netopha in the lower Galilee. Evidently, this is the last place in the season where one could find purslane in the land of Israel.   
