Sheviit, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah deals with one who thins out the trees in his field during the sabbatical year so that the other trees will be able to grow. This is permitted because it is permitted to do things during the sabbatical year that will preserve the trees already growing in his field. However, when he does so he needs to make sure that it doesn’t look like he is clearing his field so that he can plant new trees, which is prohibited. 

Mishnah Four
1) One who thins out his olive-trees [in the seventh year]:   
a) Bet Shammai says: he cuts them down to the ground.   
b) Bet Hillel says: he may completely uproot them. 
2) They agree that if one levels his field, he can only cut them down to the ground. 
3) What is considered “thinning out”?  One or two plants. 
a) And what is considered “leveling”?   Three plants next to each other. 
4) This applies to his own property only, but from the property of another, even he that levels may uproot.  

Explanation
Section one: According to Bet Shammai, the one who is thinning out olive trees in his field may only cut them down to the ground. He may not uproot them because according to Bet Shammai, this looks like he is preparing the field for planting.
Bet Hillel, on the other hand, allows the person thinning out his field to completely uproot the trees. Evidently, Bet Hillel is not concerned lest this look like he is preparing the field for planting. Perhaps people will easily be able to notice that he is thinning out his field and not clearing the land.
Section two:  Bet Hillel agrees with Bet Shammai that if one is leveling the trees in his field, which means that he is cutting down more than just one or two in any one spot, he may only cut them down to the ground and he may not uproot them.  Since when he is leveling them it looks more like he is clearing his field in order to prepare it for planting, he must be extra cautious to avoid giving this impression.
Section three: The mishnah now defines the difference between thinning out and leveling.  Thinning out is when he cuts down one or two trees and leaves the third tree next to them. Leveling is when he cuts down three adjacent trees.
Section four: The above halakhot refer to a case where one is working in his own field.  However, if one is working in his friend’s field even one who is leveling may uproot the trees because no one will suspect him of clearing his friend’s field so that it can be planted. This is a similar concept to that which we learned in mishnah 3:6.
