Sheviit, Chapter Six, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah refers to territory called “Syria”(not to be confused with modern Syria). This is land that was conquered by King David but was not conquered by Joshua. For many halakhot it has a semi-status, being in some ways treated like the land of Israel, but in other ways treated differently. 
We should note one other background law required to understand this mishnah. During the sabbatical year a farmer may not keep the produce that he grows in his field for himself. He is obligated to make it ownerless, such that anyone can come and take it. If he doesn’t make it ownerless then it is prohibited to work the field, as it is said in Leviticus 25:5, “You shall not reap the aftergrowth of your harvest or gather the grapes of your untrimmed vines.” Our mishnah, according to most commentators, refers to a person who has not made his field ownerless, and therefore, may not work the field. 

Mishnah Two
1) In Syria, one may perform work on produce that has been detached, but not on produced attached [to the soil].
a) They may thresh, winnow, and tread [the grapes], or make [the grain] into sheaves, but they may not harvest [the crops], nor cut the grapes, nor harvest the olives.   
2) Rabbi Akiva said this principle: the kind of work that is permitted in Eretz Israel may also be done in Syria.  

Explanation
Section one: In Syria some types of work are permitted and some are prohibited. Any work done with produce that has already been detached from the ground may be performed. The mishnah explains that this refers to threshing or winnowing grain, treading on grapes or making sheaves. However, they may not harvest anything. Since Syria is not actually the land of Israel, harvesting is not prohibited biblically, and is only prohibited by decree of the rabbis. The Yerushalmi explains that the rabbis carved out a middle status for Syria. They did not allow one to harvest there, so that Jews wouldn’t abandon the land of Israel and go live in Syria. However, when it came to working with produce detached from the land, the rabbis were not so strict, thereby enabling people who couldn’t earn a living in Israel, to go to Syria for the year and earn some money there.
Section two: Rabbi Akiva disagrees with the previous opinion and formulates a general rule that he applies to this situation. Anything that is permitted to do in Eretz Yisrael as long as it is done in an unusual manner, may be done in Syria in a usual manner (this is how Albeck understands Rabbi Akiva’s statement). For instance in Eretz Yisrael one cannot harvest grapes in a normal manner, but one can do so in an abnormal manner. Therefore, in Syria one can harvest even in a normal manner.
Other commentators explain that Rabbi Akiva is formulating a general principle to explain the previous section. In Eretz Yisrael it is only forbidden derabanan (rabbinically) to work with detached produce, and therefore in Syria it is completely permitted.  

