Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Mishnah eight teaches five types of defendants who must take oaths even though the claimant’s claim is not certain.  

Mishnah Eight
1) And these take an oath though there is no [definite] claim:  partners, tenants, guardians, the wife who transacts the affairs in the house, and the son of the house. 
2) [If] he said to him, “What do you claim of me?”, [and the other replied,] “I want you to swear to me”, he must take an oath. 
3) If the partners or tenants had divided, he cannot impose an oath upon them.   
4) If an oath was imposed upon him in another case, they impose upon him the whole.   
5) And the seventh year cancels the oath.  

Explanation
Section one:  Generally, a person has to swear that he doesn’t owe the claimant, only if the claimant had professed to be certain that he was owed money.  If the claimant is not himself certain, the defendant need not swear.  Our mishnah lists several exceptions to this rule.  
1.  If one partner suspects another partner of not equally sharing the business costs or profits, he may impose upon him an oath.
2. If a landowner suspects that a sharecropper did not honestly report the amount of crops harvested, he may impose upon him an oath.
3. If a person suspects that someone who had been appointed as a guardian over his property, had withheld some of the property for himself, he may impose upon him an oath.
4. If a husband leaves his household and finances in the care of his wife, he may make her take an oath that she did not take any of his property.
5. Similarly, if one brother administers an inheritance, the other brothers impose upon him an oath that he did not take any of the property for himself.  
Section two:  In all of these circumstances the claimant may request that the defendant swear that he didn’t take any of the property, without the claimant having to express a definite claim.
Section three:  Once partners have already split up their partnership, one partner may not force another partner to swear that he didn’t take a part that didn’t belong to him while the partnership still existed.  
Section four:  If a person already must take an oath to another person that he does not owe him something, the claimant may make him swear another oath, that under normal circumstances he would not have the power to impose.  
Section five:  The Sabbatical year cancels all debts.  If Reuven claimed that Shimon owed him money, and Shimon admitted to owing part of the money and denied owing the rest, and then the Sabbatical year arrived, Shimon does not need to swear that he doesn’t owe the rest.  Since the Sabbatical year cancels the debt, it also erases the need to swear with regards to the debt.  

Questions for Further Thought:
 Why does the mishnah rule that in these circumstances a person make another person take an oath without having a definite claim?  Why under normal circumstances must there be a definite claim for an oath to be imposed?

