Shevuoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
Mishnah one discusses the second clause of the first mishnah of chapter one, which dealt with the case where a person either entered the Temple or ate holy food without knowing that he was impure.

Mishnah One
The laws concerning the discovery of having contracted uncleanness are of two kinds, subdivided into four;  
1) [If] he became impure and was aware of it, then he forgot that he had been impure, though he remembered that the food was holy;   
a) [If the fact that it was] holy food was unknown to him, though he remembered that he was impure; 
b) [If] both were unknown to him;
c) And he ate holy food, and was not aware, and after he had eaten, he became aware: — in these cases he brings a sliding scale sacrifice. 
2) [[If] he became impure and was aware of it, then he forgot that he had been impure, though he remembered that [he was entering] the Temple;   
a) [If the fact that he was entering] the Temple was unknown to him, though he remembered that he was impure; 
b) [If] both were hidden from him;
c) And he entered the Temple and was not aware, and after he had gone out, became aware: — in these cases he brings a sliding scale sacrifice.

Explanation
The first line of the mishnah is a quote of the second clause of the first mishnah in chapter one.  After a long digression in chapter one in which the mishnah discussed which goats offered as sin-offerings atone for which types of crimes, our chapter returns to discuss the main topic at hand:  the case where a person unknowingly became impure and entered the Temple or ate holy food.  To refresh our memories, according to chapter one in order to enter into this category one must first have awareness then forgetfulness and then awareness.  Our mishnah explains the four different possibilities for such a scenario.
Section one:  In all of the cases mentioned in this section the transgression is the eating of holy food while impure.  There are actually three different possibilities mentioned in the mishnah, although the mishnah considers them to be two:  1)  He knew that had contracted impurity, and then forgot but he knew that the food that he was eating was holy; 2)  He forgot that the food that he was eating was holy but he knew that he was impure; 3)  He forgot that the food was holy and that he was impure.  In all of these cases if he were to eat of the holy food while being unaware either that he was impure or that the food was holy (or both) and afterwards realized that the food was holy or that he was impure, he is obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.  A sliding scale sacrifice is a sacrifice brought based on the economic means of the sinner.  If he has financial means he must bring either a sheep or goat.  If he cannot afford a sheep or a goat he brings two turtledoves.  If he can’t even afford these, he may bring a grain offering.  This sacrifice is described in Leviticus 5:6-13.
Section two:  This section teaches the exact same law as in section one, except the sin discussed here is entrance into the Temple while impure.  In this case either forgetting that he is entering  the Temple or forgetting that he is impure or both will obligate him to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.   


Questions for Further Thought:
 Why does the mishnah consider the three possibilities in each section to be only two?
