Sheviit, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
If one does not have an adequate pen for his cattle, he may make one for them in his field, even though this may look like he is bringing them out there to fertilize the field.  However, he is limited as to the dimensions of the pen.  Our mishnah teaches what those limitations are.
 
Mishnah Four
1) One who uses his field as a pen for cattle, he [first] makes an enclosure for every two bet se'ahs.  He then uproots three sides, and leaves the middle side.  It turns out that he has made a pen of four seahs.   
a) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: one of eight seahs.   
2) If his entire field is only four seahs in area, he must allow a portion of it to remain [unenclosed] for appearance's sake.   
3) And he may take the dung out from the enclosure, and spread across his field in the manner of those who fertilize their fields.  

Explanation
Section one:  This section teaches how one goes about making a pen for his cattle on his field during the sabbatical year. First he makes the enclosure that covers two whole bet seahs. Once the enclosure is full of manure he removes the fences on three sides and leaves one fence standing and uses it to begin a new enclosure. It turns out that this fence is the middle fence between the old enclosure and the new enclosure. In the end the whole enclosure will be four seahs. According to the first opinion, he cannot make a bigger enclosure. Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel disagrees and allows him to make an enclosure of eight seahs.  According to some commentators, this means that he can make the first enclosure of four and the other of four as well. According to others, he makes the first enclosure two bet seahs, and then he can put a new one on each side, thereby ending up with eight bet seahs that were enclosed.  
Section two:   One thing he cannot do is make his entire field an enclosure for his cattle because this looks like he is putting them there to fertilize the field and not just because he needs a place for his animals. In order to make it clear that his intention is not to fertilize, he must leave at least a portion of his field unpenned.
Section three: Once the pen is full of manure, he can bring it out to the field in the way prescribed by the preceding mishnayot, that is he can make three dung-heaps per bet seah.     
