Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first half of mishnah three explains how an oath of testimony is done.  The second half of the mishnah discusses a witness who falsely swears five times that he had no knowledge of testimony.

Mishnah Three
1) The oath of testimony:  How is it done? 
a) If he said to two [persons]:  “Come and bear testimony for me”; [and they replied:]  “We swear we know no testimony for you”; 
b) Or they said to him:  “We know no testimony for you”, [and he said:]  “I adjure you” and they said,  “Amen! “, they are liable.   
2) If he adjured them five times outside the court, and the they came to the court and admitted [knowledge of testimony], they are exempt.  
i) If they denied, they are liable for each [oath].   
a) If he adjured them five times before the court, and they denied [knowledge of testimony], they are liable only once. 
i) Said Rabbi Shimon: “What is the reason?   Because they cannot afterwards admit [knowledge].   

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  An oath of testimony can be done in one of two ways.  The first way is for the litigant to ask the witnesses to come and testify on his behalf and for them to swear that they have no knowledge of testimony.  Alternatively the witnesses can state that they know no testimony and the litigant can adjure them that they know no testimony.  If they answer amen, they have sworn an oath of testimony.  If they have sworn falsely they are liable.
Section two:  This section discusses a case where a litigant adjured the witnesses five times.  The mishnah asks the question, in what case will they be liable for having sworn falsely five times, in what case they will be liable for having sworn falsely once and in what case will they be exempt.  
If, he adjured them outside of the court, and then when they came to court they admitted that they knew testimony, they are not liable.  As we learned in mishnah one, the denial of knowledge must occur in front of the court.  
If, after having adjured them five times they come to court and continue to deny knowledge, then they are liable for having sworn five false oaths of testimony.  The denial at court makes each oath outside of court a potentially effective oath, and therefore if it was false, it causes them to be liable.
If he adjured them five times in front of the court and they denied knowledge each time, they will be liable for having sworn only one false oath.  Rabbi Shimon explains that since after the first denial in front of the court they will not be able to change their minds, the subsequent oaths were meaningless.  Once a person has in court denied knowing testimony he cannot change his mind and testify.  Since, except for the first oath, the other oaths were meaningless, he can only be liable for one false oath.

