Sheviit, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the question of how the laws of removal with regard to mixtures where one of the things is sabbatical year produce and one of the things is not.

Mishnah Seven
1) If a new rose has been preserved in old oil, the rose may be taken out.
2) But if an old rose was preserved in new oil, it is subject to the law of removal.   
3) New carobs preserved in old wine, or old carobs in new wine, are subject to the law of removal. 
4) This is the general principle: Any thing that imparts taste, he must remove it if it is one kind mixed with a different kind. But if it is mixed with the identical kind, then [the whole is subject to removal] even if only the smallest quantity exists.   
5) Sabbatical year produce renders similar kinds prohibited even [if it exists] in the smallest quantity. But if of different species only when it imparts taste. 

Explanation
Section one: A new rose is one that grew during the sabbatical year whereas the old oil is from olives that were harvested prior to the seventh year. The rose may be taken out of the oil and removed from one’s house at the time when roses must be removed (when they are no longer found in the field) and the oil may still be used afterwards. This is because, according to the mishnah, the rose does not impart taste to the oil.
Section two: However, if it is an old rose from the seventh year, put into new oil from the eighth year, the aged rose (think of potpourri) will impart its taste and both the rose and the oil are subject to the laws of removal.
Section three: When it comes to carobs in wine, in both cases (new sheviit carobs in sixth year wine or old sheviit carobs in eighth year wine) both the carobs and the wine are subject to the laws of removal. Unlike new roses in oil, new carobs do impart taste to the wine and therefore they too are subject to the laws of removal.
Section four: The mishnah now forms a somewhat complex general rule: First of all, as we learned before, if the prohibited item does not impart taste then the non-prohibited item is not rendered forbidden. Thus since the new rose does not impart its taste to the oil, it can be removed and the oil is not subject to the laws of removal. However, this is only true of the mixture is of two different substances, such as a rose and oil. If it is a case of one kind mixed in with a similar kind, then the whole mixture is prohibited, even if the forbidden substance is only of the smallest quantity. So if even a tiny bit of sabbatical year oil became mixed in with non-sabbatical year oil, all of the oil must be treated as if it were sabbatical year oil.
Section five: The above rule is now explicated with regard to sabbatical year produce. Sabbatical year produce mixed in with the same species prohibits in the smallest amount. but if it is of different species, then only if it imparts taste. Thus if sabbatical year carobs are mixed in with wine, the whole mixture must be treated as sabbatical year produce.   
 
 
