Shevuoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The final mishnah of chapter six discusses a dispute between two people over the value of a pledge taken to secure a loan.  We will learn that if the defendant admits to owing part of the claim then he must swear that he does not owe the rest.

Mishnah Seven
1) If a man lends [money] to his neighbor on a pledge, and the pledge was lost, and he said to him: “I lent you a sela on it, and it [the pledge] was worth a shekel,” and the other says, “No! You lent me a sela on it, and it was worth a  sela”, he is exempt.   
a) “I lent you a sela” on it, and it was worth a shekel,” and the other says, “No! You lent me a sela on it, and it was worth three denarii,” he is liable.   
2) “You lent me a sela on it, and it was worth two,” and the other says, “No! I lent you a sela on it, and it was worth a sela”,” he is exempt. 
a) “You lent me a sela on it, and it was worth two,” and the other says: “No! I lent you a sela on it, and it was worth five denarii,” he is liable. 
3) And who takes the oath?   
a) He who had the deposit, lest, if the other take the oath, this one may bring out the deposit.  

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
In the scenario in both sections of our mishnah Reuven lent Shimon money and took from Shimon a pledge, which would generally be returned upon payment of the loan.  Reuven subsequently loses the pledge.  Shimon now owes Reuven the amount of the loan and Reuven owes Shimon the value of the pledge.  Our mishnah will teach that if one side denies part of the claim must an oath be taken.  If the entire claim is denied there will be no oath.  
There are three coins mentioned in our mishnah.  There relative values are:  1 sela = two shekels = 4 denar.
Section one:  Reuven tells Shimon that the loan was a sela and the pledge was worth a shekel.  He is in essence claiming from Shimon a shekel.  Shimon responds that the pledge was worth a full sela, and he therefore does not owe Reuven anything.  Since he denies the entire claim, there is no oath. If Shimon were to say that the pledge was worth three denarii (¾ of a sela), then he has admitted to owing Reuven one denar and denied owing him another denar.  In such a case an oath must be taken.  [At the end of the mishnah we will learn who swears.]
Section two:  Shimon tells Reuven that the pledge was worth two selas and the loan was only one sela.  Reuven responds that the pledge was worth only one sela.  Since he has denied the entire claim, he need not take an oath.  If Reuven were to respond that the pledge was worth five denarii, he has admitted that he owes Shimon one denar.  Since he has admitted part of the claim, he must swear that he doesn’t owe the rest.
Section three:  This section asks who takes the oath.  We would have expected that in the first section Shimon would swear, since he is the one who admitted part of the claim that Reuven made against him, and that in section two Reuven would swear, since he was the one who admitted part of the claim that Shimon made against him.  However, the mishnah teaches that the one who had the deposit, in our case Reuven, is always the one who has to swear.  The simple reading of this mishnah is that Reuven will swear and then take from Shimon the money that he claims.  This is an exception to the general rule that people swear to exempt themselves from paying, but not to allow themselves to take money from others. The reason that this case is exceptional and that the one who holds the pledge must swear is that we are concerned lest Shimon, who does not have the pledge, would swear and then Reuven would take out the pledge.  If Shimon’s claim to the value of the pledge would turn out to be wrong, his oath will have been a false oath.  The Rabbis tried to prevent situations where people might swear falsely, and therefore, in this case, they allowed the claimant, as opposed to the defendant, swear.  
We should note that the Talmud explains the mishnah differently, and there are some difficulties in understanding this last clause.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Why aren’t the Rabbis as concerned in a normal case of a monetary dispute, lest the defendant swear falsely? What makes this case different from the others?      
