Sheviit, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
During the sabbatical year it is permitted to gather non-food material from a field in order to use it for various purposes, such as lighting a fire. However, it is forbidden to gather this stuff in order to improve the field.  

Mishnah One
1) At first they said: a man may gather wood, stones and grasses from his field, just as he was allowed to do from the field of his fellow, the large ones.  
2) When the transgressors increased, they decreed that this one may gather from this one’s field and this one may gather from this one’s field, but not as a [mutual] favor.  
a) It doesn’t need to be said that no stipulation can be made for food.

Explanation
Section one: Originally, a person was allowed to gather large pieces of wood, stones and grass from his own field without being suspected of doing so in order to improve the field, just as he was allowed to collect from his fellow’s field without being suspected of doing so in order to improve someone else’s field. The assumption was that since these were large pieces it would be obvious that he was doing so only in order to use that which he collected for fire.
Section two:  As they are wont to do, people began to transgress this permission and to collect even the smaller pieces and to lie and state that they had only collected the small pieces. Therefore, the sages decreed that a person could no longer collect even the large pieces from his own field. However, what one could do is collect these things from his friend’s field, under the assumption that when one collects wood, stone or grasses from someone else’s field it is not in order to improve the field.  The other person could also collect from his field. However, one wasn’t allowed to grant this right as a mutual favor, as in—“you can collect from my field if I can collect from yours.” The mishnah also notes that it is obvious that one cannot stipulate that one will give someone food in return for collecting the wood in his field and giving it to him.  
