Sheviit, Chapter Two, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that for some types of species the year in which they are tithed depends on how much water they have recently received and how much water they typically are irrigated.

Mishnah Nine
1) Seedless onions and Egyptian beans from which he withheld water for thirty days prior to Rosh Hashanah are tithed with the preceding year, and are permitted in the seventh year. 
2) And if not, they are forbidden in the seventh, and are tithed according to the following year. 
3) And [seedless onions and Egyptian beans grown in a] rain-irrigated field from which two periods of rain have been withheld, the words of Rabbi Meir.
a) But the sages say: three.

Explanation
Section one: This first section refers to a situation where these species are growing in an artificially-irrigated field.  If these types of species had not been watered for thirty days before Rosh Hashanah then they are not treated as vegetables and they are tithed not according to the time that they are harvested (as are vegetables) but according to the previous year.  They are also permitted in the seventh year, because they count as sixth year produce.
Section two:  But if they are watered, then they go according to when they are harvested—if during the sixth year, they are sixth year produce and if during the seventh year, they are seventh year produce.  
Section three: Seedless onions and Egyptian beans grown in a rain-irrigated field subsist mostly on rainwater but they do need occasional watering. However, since they need less artificial irrigation, the period in which water has been withheld must be greater than for the same species grown in a field that is always artificially irrigated.  
Therefore, if he withholds water from them before Rosh Hashanah for two periods in which he would have watered them, then they are tithed with the previous year and if the next year is the sabbatical year, the laws of sabbatical produce do not apply. This is according to Rabbi Meir, according to whom not watering them for two periods causes them to no longer be in the category of vegetables.  
The sages disagree and say that the onions and beans lose the status of vegetables only after three periods of irrigation are withheld from them.     
