Shevuoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah explains the second rule mentioned in mishnah one:  the denial and the claim must be of the same “kind”.  Our mishnah discusses what does “kind” mean, so that we will know when the person who admits to part of the claim must take an oath.

Mishnah Three
1) “You have of mine a litra of gold”, [and he replies], “I have of yours only a litra of silver,” he is exempt.
a) “You have of mine a golden denar”, [and he replies], “I have of yours only a silver denar, or a tresis, or a pundion, or a perutah”, he is liable, for all are one kind of coinage.   
2) “You have of mine a kor of grain”, [and he replies], “I have of yours only a letek of beans”, he is exempt.
a) “You have of mine a kor of produce”, [and he replies], “I have of yours only a letek of beans,” he is liable, for beans are included in produce. 
3) If he claimed from him wheat, and the other admitted barley, he is exempt. 
a) But Rabban Gamaliel makes him liable.   
4) If he claims from his neighbor jars of oil, and he admits [his claim to the empty] jars, Admon says, since he admits to him a portion of the same kind as the claim, he must swear. 
a) But the sages say, the admission is not of the same kind as the claim.   
b) Rabban Gamaliel said, “I approve the words of admon.  
5) If he claims from him vessels and lands, and he admits the vessels, but denies the lands; or admits the lands, but denies the vessels, he is exempt.   
a) If he admits a portion of the lands, he is exempt; a portion of the vessels, he is liable because properties for which there is no security bind properties for which there is security to take an oath for them.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  A litra is a measure of volume (liter in English).  If Reuven claims from Shimon a litra of gold and Shimon admits to owing a litra of silver he need not swear since gold and silver are two different kinds.  However, if Reuven claims gold money, and Shimon admits to owing silver money of any coinage, he is liable to swear since all money is of the same kind.  
Section two:  If Reuven claims from Shimon a kor (a unit of weight) of grain and Shimon admits to owing a kor of beans, he need not swear that he does not owe the difference (grain is worth more than beans) since grain and beans are two different “kinds”.  If Reuven claims a kor of produce and Shimon admits to beans, then he is liable to swear that he does not owe the difference, because beans are a form of produce.
Section three:  If Reuven claims wheat and Shimon admits to barley the first opinion in our mishnah considers these different kinds and therefore Shimon need not swear that he doesn’t owe the difference.  Rabban Gamaliel does think that Shimon needs to swear. 
Section four:  In this scenario Reuven claimed that Shimon owed him jars of oil.  Shimon admitted that he owed Reuven jars but denied that he owed the oil.  According to Admon, an early Sage, this is considered a partial admission to the claim:  Reuven claimed jars and oil and Shimon admitted only to the jars but denied the oil.  Therefore Shimon must swear that he doesn’t owe the oil.  The other Sages who disagree with Admon say that Reuven really only claimed oil.  The fact that Reuven said “jars of oil” was in order to express the amount of oil that he was claiming from Shimon.  Since the claim and the admission were of different kinds, Shimon does not swear.  Rabban Gamaliel says that he agrees with Admon.
Section five:  If Reuven claimed that Shimon owed him land and vessels and Shimon admitted to owing the land and not the vessels or the vessels and not the land, Shimon is exempt from swearing.  This mishnah teaches that oaths are not taken on land (we will learn this again in mishnah five).  Therefore, even if he admits that he owes land, he need not swear with regards to the vessels which he denies.  
If Shimon admitted owing part of the land, he is still not liable to swear, for the same reason mentioned above.  If, however, he admitted to owing some of the vessels, then he must swear with regards to both the other vessels that he denies owing as well as the land that he denies.  He must swear with regards to the vessels because he admitted to owing part and he denied owing part.  He must also swear with regards to the land because property for which there is no security (meaning property that cannot be used as a lien, namely movable property) can force one to swear on property for which there is security (land and slaves).  This means that once someone is liable to swear to another person with regards to movable property the other person can force him to swear about land as well, even though in general one doesn’t swear about land.

Questions for Further Thought:
 Section two:  How do you know that this mishnah assumes that grain is more valuable than beans?
 Section four:  Upon what basis might Rabban Gamaliel disagree with the first opinion?  
