Sheviit, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
In order to write a prozbul over a debt, the debtor must have land.  This is because the lien placed on the land by the debt makes it as if the debt has already been collected by the court at the point of the loan. Therefore when the creditor goes to collect the loan on behalf of the court through the use of the prozbul, it is as if he is collecting a loan that has already been collected. Thus this is not a violation of the prohibition of collecting a debt after the seventh year. 
Our mishnah teaches that this requirement can be in a sense “fictionalized” such that the debtor need not actually own land.  

Mishnah Six
1) A prozbul is written only for [a debt secured by] land. 
2) But if [the debtor] has none, then [the creditor] can give him title to a share, however small, of his own field.   
3) If he had land in pledge in a city, a prozbul can be written on it. 
4) Rabbi Hutzpit says: a prozbul may be written for a man on the security of his wife's property, or for an orphan on the security of property belonging to his guardian. 

Explanation
Section one: As I explained in the introduction above, in order for a prozbul to be written, the borrower must have land.
Section two: The requirement for the debtor to have land may have made receiving a loan difficult, which is again a problem for the poor who are in most need of loans. If a prozbul cannot be written over a loan, a lender may be hesitant about loaning money to someone who really needs it (for instance a sharecropper, who may not own the land and may need a loan to pay for seed). Therefore, the creditor is allowed to give title to a piece of his land to the borrower. This title can in actuality be a fiction, whereby the creditor gives him the smallest piece of land possible on his own property and then he can write a prozbul on as large of a debt as he wishes. 
Section three: If the debtor gave a piece of land as a pledge in order to secure another loan, the creditor may write a prozbul for a different loan, counting the pledged land as if it was actually still fully in the hands of the debtor. Again, we see that the rabbis are relaxing some of the requirements in order to make it easier for a person to write a prozbul so that he could take out a loan.
Section four:  Sometimes, a prozbul can be written for a person even though he does not actually own the property. For instance a man who does not own property but is married to a woman who does own property can have a prozbul written on the basis of his wife’s property. Similarly, orphans who don’t actually own property may have a prozbul written based on the property owned by their guardian.   
