Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses an oath taken by one person in order to collect from another person who is not allowed to take an oath because he is suspected of taking false oaths.

Mishnah Four
1) “He whose opponent is suspected of taking a false oath,” — How so? 
a) Whether it be the oath of testimony, or the oath of deposit, or even a vain oath. 
2) If one [of the litigants] was a dice-player, or usurer, or pigeon-flyer, or dealer in the produce of the seventh year, his opponent takes the oath and collects [his claim].  
3) If both are suspect, the oath returns to its place, these are the words of Rabbi Yose.    
a) Rabbi Meir says:  “They divide [the claim].”

Explanation
Section one:  The fourth category of person who swears and thereby collects is one whose opponent is suspected of taking false oaths.  The mishnah explains that this is true no matter what type of false oath he took, even a vain oath. 
Section two:  The mishnah now expands the list of those who are suspected of taking false oaths.  This category includes all those who are forbidden from testifying (see Sanhedrin 3:3).  Since these people are gamblers or otherwise do not respect the normal societal rules for money, they are not trusted when another claims a debt from them.  
Section three:  If both sides are not trustworthy, Rabbi Yose says that the normal rules return to their place.  This means that the defendant, the one who had a claim made against him, takes an oath and is thereby exempt from paying money.  Rabbi Meir disagrees.  If both are suspected of taking false oaths, the court cannot allow either of them to swear.  This would be in essence encouraging people to take false oaths. Rather they split the claim, meaning that the defendant will have to pay half the claim.  

Questions for Further Thought: 
 Why does the mishnah say “even a vain oath”?  Why might you have thought that if he took a vain oath he would still be trustworthy with regards to other oaths?  Why is he not trustworthy with other oaths after having taken a vain oath?
 Why doesn’t Rabbi Judah disagree on this mishnah, as he has on the three previous mishnayoth in our chapter?  
