Sheviit, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the dates that are written in the prozbul.

Mishnah Five
1) A pre-dated prozbul is valid, but a post-dated one, is invalid.   
2) Pre-dated loan documents [of loans] are invalid, but post-dated one valid.   
3) If one borrows from five persons, then he writes a separate prozbul for each [creditor].
a) But if five borrow from the same person, then he writes only one prozbul for them all.

Explanation
Section one: If a prozbul was written in the month of Tevet, but the date written in it was Cheshvan, which comes before Tevet, the prozbul is still valid. This is because a pre-dated prozbul will be to the detriment only of the creditor since the prozbul will be effective only for loans given out before the prozbul is written. However, if he post-dates the prozbul, i.e. he writes it in Cheshvan but dates it to Tevet, the prozbul is invalid because this is to the benefit of the creditor and to the detriment of the borrower.
Section two: The mishnah now contrasts the prozbul with the loan documents themselves. If one pre-dates a loan document then it is invalid. This is because a loan document creates a lien on the other person’s property and may cause a third party to lose out. For instance, Reuven loans money to Shimon and the loan actually takes place in Nissan but he dates the document to Tishrei. Because the document was dated to Tishrei, the lien will be placed on any property Shimon owned in Tishrei. Thus if Levi bought property between Tishrei and Nissan and Shimon defaults on his loan, Reuven can collect his debt from Levi, even though the loan actually occurred after Levi bought the property. In such a case, there was no lien on Shimon’s property when Levi acquired it, and Reuven’s seizure from Levi is illegal. Therefore, pre-dated loan documents are invalid. However, post-dated loan documents are valid because they are only to the detriment of the creditor. Since no one else will lose out, these documents are valid.
Section three: The prozbul is written for the creditor and not the borrower. Thus if one person borrows money from five different people, each creditor needs his own prozbul. However, if one person lends money to five different people, he needs only one prozbul in order to collect his debt after the seventh year.
