Shevuoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Mishnah four is a digression in the Mishnah, which deals with some laws of stealing.   

Mishnah Four
1) If a man said to one in the market, “Where is my ox which you have stolen?” and he replied, “I did not steal it,” and witnesses testified against him that he did steal it, he pays double.  
a) If he killed it or sold it, he pays four or five times its value.   
b) If he saw witnesses coming nearer and nearer, and he said, “I did steal it, but I did not kill or sell it,” he pays only the principal.

Explanation
This mishnah does not discuss false swearing but rather some laws of stealing.  
As we learned in Bava Kamma, one who steals and is caught must pay back a double payment. If he killed or sold a stolen animal he must pay back four (for a sheep or goat) or five (for an ox or cow) times the value.  We have also learned on several occasions, that one who admits to having stolen the object, without witnesses first testifying against him, only pays back the principal.  
The scenario in our mishnah, in which a person accuses someone (not a guardian, rather any person in the marketplace) of having stolen his ox teaches two new rulings.  First of all, if the accused admits to having stolen the object only because witnesses are about to testify against him, he is nevertheless obligated to pay back the principal but exempt from the double payment.  In other words, even though witnesses were about to testify against him, this still counts as an admission.  Second, if he admits to stealing the object, but does not admit to killing or selling it, he is exempt from paying back four or five times the value.  Although witnesses testify that he did indeed sell or slaughter the ox, since he admitted to stealing it, it is considered an admission and he must pay back only the principal.  There is no case in Jewish law where a person makes the four or five times payment, but is exempt for the double payment.  This is because the Torah states that he will pay back four or five times.  If he didn’t pay the double payment he would end up paying three or four times, an amount not specified anywhere in the Torah.  

Questions for Further Thought:
 How would the ruling in this mishnah differ, if the accused was the unpaid guardian of the ox?    
