Sheviit, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Four

Introduction
One who sells seventh year produce, the money that he receives from the sale has the same status as does the produce. That money has to be used to buy more produce for eating, drinking or anointing, the same things for which seventh year produce itself must be used.
The first half of the mishnah teaches what happens when a person pays a worker to gather vegetables for him in the seventh year. Is this like buying sabbatical year produce?
The second half of the mishnah teaches that while it is permitted to exchange sabbatical year produce for non-sabbatical year produce, it is forbidden to use sheviit produce to pay off debts.

Mishnah Four
1) If one says to a worker: “Take this issar and gather vegetables for me today,” his payment is permitted.
2) [But if he said:] “In return for this [issar], gather vegetables for me today,” then his payment is forbidden.   
3) If one bought a loaf from a baker worth a pondion [and said:] “When I have gathered vegetables from the field, I will bring them to you,” this is permitted.   
4) If he bought it from him without any explanation, he may not pay him his debt with the value of seventh year produce, for no debt can be paid with the value of seventh year produce.

Explanation
Section one: In this case the employer paid the worker an issar (a coin) for his labor and not for the vegetables. Since the money was not exchanged directly for the vegetables, it is “permitted” meaning that it need not be treated as if it was seventh year produce.
Section two: However, if he said that the issar was exchanged more directly for the vegetables, then the money is “forbidden” meaning that it must be treated as seventh year produce.  It all depends on how he phrases the contract.
Section three: The second section deals with a person who wishes to buy a loaf of bread (made from non-sabbatical year produce) worth a pondion (a small coin) from a baker and he wishes to pay his debt with vegetables that he collects from the field. In the first case this is permitted, because one is allowed to exchange sabbatical year produce for food that is made from non-sabbatical produce. The bread now must be treated as if it too was sabbatical year produce, as we will learn in mishnah seven.
Section four: If he bought the loaf of bread on credit without specifying how he was going to pay for it, he may not later pay his debt off with the sabbatical year produce, because one cannot pay a debt with sabbatical year produce. To summarize: one can trade sabbatical year produce for other foodstuffs as long as this is a trade. But when it becomes paying off an already existent debt, it is prohibited. 
