Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Mishnah seven teaches two more categories of people who swear and thereby collect.  

Mishnah Seven
1) So too they have said that she who impairs her kethubah [by admitting that it had already been partially paid] cannot receive [the remainder of the] payment except on oath;   
a) And that if one witness testifies against her that it [the kethubah] has been paid [in full], she cannot receive payment except on oath; 
b) And that from assigned property or orphans’ property she cannot exact payment [for her kethubah] except on oath; 
c) And that if she claims [her kethubah] not in his presence, she cannot receive payment except on oath.
2) So, too, orphans cannot receive payment except on oath [namely]: “We swear that our father did not enjoin in his will, neither did our father say unto us, nor did we find [written] among the documents of our father that this document is paid.”   
a) Rabbi Yochanan ben Beroka says:  “Even if the son was born after his father’s death he may take an oath, and collect his claim.” 
b) Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said:  “If there are witnesses that the father said at the time of his death that this document was not paid, he receives [his claim] without an oath.”

Explanation
Section one:  The previous six mishnayoth listed five cases where a person could swear and collect from others.  Our mishnah lists two other such cases.  There is however a difference between the cases listed here and those listed above.  In those above, the innovation of the mishnah was that the person might take an oath and thereby collect.  Without the mishnah we would have thought that the person could not have collected at all, since they could not prove their claim.  In the cases in our mishnah, the mishnah is teaching that they must swear before they collect.  Without the mishnah we would have thought that they could have collected without an oath, for as we shall see, these people can indeed prove their claims.
The first section discusses women collecting their “kethubah” or marriage document, which has written in it an amount of money paid to the woman upon death or divorce.  In normal circumstances the woman could collect without taking an oath, since she holds the actual document.  However, there are several circumstances where in order to collect, she must take an oath:  1)  a woman who has already received part of the kethubah money; 2)  if one person testifies that she has already received her kethubah (two witnesses are needed for the husband to prove that she has already collected); 3)  if she collects from property that the husband had already given to others (the kethubah creates a lien on all of the husband’s property) or from the husband’s children; 4) if she collects while not in front of him.  In all of these cases, the woman must swear that she has not received her kethubah before she can collect from the husband or from his estate.
Section two:  Similarly, if orphans find amongst their fathers documents a bill that says that others owe him money they must swear that their father did not tell them, either verbally, in a will or in a separate document, that the bill had already collected.  If they take this oath they may then collect the debt.
According to Rabbi Yochanan ben Baroka, even if the son was born after the father’s death, and therefore cannot swear that his father did not tell him that the bill had already been paid, he may still swear that he did not find amongst his father’s other documents a note stating that the debt had already been paid.  After taking this oath the son may collect the debt.  
According to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel if there are witnesses who say that at the time of death the father said to them that the bill was not paid, the father’s heirs may collect the debt without taking an oath.
