Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Mishnah six defines a false oath of testimony as denying testimony that would have aided the litigant in a monetary suit. 

Mishnah Six
1) “I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that so-and-so owes me full damages, or half damages, or double payment, or four or five payment;  
2) Or that so-and-so raped my daughter, or seduced my daughter; 
3) Or that my son struck me;   
4) Or that my neighbor injured me, or set fire to my haystack on the Day of Atonement”;   
a) [And they deny knowledge of testimony] they are liable.  

Explanation
All of the cases mentioned in our mishnah are cases where a person is adjuring witnesses to testify for him in a monetary suit.  In mishnah seven we will learn examples of testimony in non-monetary suits.  Together these two mishnayoth teach that if a person swears a false oath of testimony in a monetary suit he is liable, but if he swears a false oath of testimony in a non-monetary suit he is not liable.  
Section one:  Half-damages are paid in cases where an animal damages in an unusual fashion, and it has not previously done so three times.  Full damages are paid in all other cases.  Double payment refers to a thief’s obligation to pay back double the theft.  Four and five times payment is what a thief must restore if he sold or slaughtered the stolen animal. 
Section two:  One of the penalties for rape and seduction of a virgin is a fine to the father of the girl.
Section three:  Striking one’s parent and not causing a wound is punishable by a financial penalty, as are all cases of personal injury.  In mishnah seven this will be contrasted with striking one’s parent and causing a wound, which is punishable by death.
Section four:   Injuring another person and causing a wound or burning their haystack on the Day of Atonement is punishable by kareth (excommunication) and a financial penalty.  In mishnah seven we will learn that doing either of these two things on the Sabbath is punishable by death.  As we shall learn there, there is a general rule in Jewish law that if a person does one action for which he is liable to pay money and to be executed he is executed and does not owe money (see Bava Kamma 8:5).  However, if by one action he is liable for kareth and to pay money, he gets kareth and still has to pay the money (see Bava Kamma 8:3).    
 
