Sukkah, Chapter One, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Roofs were usually made by first putting on a layer of wooden planks and then covering them with plaster to seal out the rain.  Plaster on a roof would render the sukkah invalid because it does not come from vegetation.  This mishnah discusses a house that has a roof made of wood but there is no plaster on top of it.
 
Mishnah Seven
1) A [wooden] roof that has no plastering: 
a) Rabbi Judah says: Bet Shammai say that he should loosen [the planks] and remove one from between each two.
b) And Bet Hillel say he should either loosen [the planks] or remove one from between two.
2) Rabbi Meir says, he removes one from between two, but he does not loosen [the planks].

Explanation 
Section one: Rabbi Judah relates here the opinions of Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel.  Bet Shammai holds that in order to make this roof valid he must do two things.  First of all, he must pick up every plank, loosen it and only then put it back down in its place. This seems to be a demonstrative act to show that this is a sukkah and not a house.  He must also remove every other plank so that it also looks like a sukkah and not a house.  Bet Hillel is more lenient and allows one to do either—he either loosens the planks by picking them up or he removes one from between two.  He need not do both acts.
Section two:  Rabbi Meir rules differently.  Assumedly, he believes that this is what Bet Hillel actually said and not as Rabbi Judah related.  According to Rabbi Meir, the symbolic act of loosening the planks is not necessary nor does it help.  Rather, he must remove one out of every two planks so that the sukkah does not look like a house. This is in line and somewhat modifies that which Rabbi Meir said in yesterday’s mishnah—wooden planks may not be used.  Here we see that they can be used, but they must not be placed right next to each other.  Rather there must be gaps equal to their thickness.  Assumedly, he will fill in these gaps with other, less controversial, types of skhakh.  
