Sukkah, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah is an introduction to the remainder of the tractate Sukkot.  On Sukkot there are some mitzvot that are observed for the full eight days (seven days of Sukkot and one day of Shmini Atzeret) and there are other mitzvot that are observed for a lesser number of days, either because they are not observed on Shabbat or because they do not apply to Shmini Atzeret.  
Up until now the mishnah has spent two chapters discussing the sukkah and one chapter discussing the lulav.  In the upcoming mishnayot we will learn more about these other mitzvot including some fascinating rituals observed in the Temple. 

Mishnah One
1) [The rituals of] the lulav and the aravah are for six or seven [days]; 
2) The Hallel and the rejoicing are for eight [days]; 
3) The sukkah and the water libation are for seven [days]; 
4) The flute is for five or six [days].

Explanation
Section one: The lulav and the special mitzvah of the aravah are observed for either six days or seven days. We will learn why in mishnayot two and three.  The mitzvah of the aravah refers to circling the altar with the aravah, a mitzvah described in detail in mishnah five.
Section two: The full Hallel is recited for all eight days of Sukkot and Shmini Atzeret.  Similarly, there is a mitzvah to rejoice on all eight days of the festival.  Both of these are referred to in mishnah eight.
Section three:  The mitvah to sit in a sukkah is for only seven days.  On Shmini Atzeret one does not sit in the sukkah.  The water libation was a special libation of water poured onto the altar only on Sukkot.  It is described in mishnah nine.  Here we learn that they would perform this special water libation for all seven days of the festival, even on Shabbat.
Section four:  The flute is played at a special celebration that occurred in the Temple called “Simchat Bet Hashoeva.”  This celebration does not take place on Shabbat, the first day of the festival (Yom Tov) or on Shmini Atzeret.  Hence the flute is played for only five or six days, depending on whether the first day of the festival is on Shabbat. Simchat Bet Hashoeva is described at length in chapter five.    
