Sukkah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Nine

Introduction 
The first part of this mishnah deals with when during the Hallel (Psalms 113-118) one waives the lulav.
The second part of the mishnah deals with when during the day one should perform the mitzvah of taking the lulav.  

Mishnah Nine
1) And where [in the service] do they wave [the lulav]? 
a) At “Give thanks to the Lord” (Psalm 118), at the beginning and at the end, and at “O Lord, deliver us” (118:25), the words of Bet Hillel. 
b) Bet Shammai say: also at “O Lord, let us prosper.”  
c) Rabbi Akiva says:  I was watching Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua, and while all the people were waving their lulavs [at “O Lord, let us prosper”] they waved them only at “O Lord deliver us.” 
2) One who was on a journey and had no lulav to take, when he enters his house he should take it [even if he is] at his table.   
a) If he did not take the lulav in the morning, he should take it at any time before dusk, since the whole day is valid for [taking] the lulav.

Explanation
Section one:  The mitzvah of taking the lulav involves waving it in six directions—to the directions of the four winds and up and down.  The custom was and still is to waive the lulav the first time one takes it up, and then to waive it again in the synagogue at various points during the recitation of Hallel at the morning service. This is the background to our mishnah.  Here we see that there is a debate about one of these wavings.  According to all of the sages, one waves at the beginning of Psalm 118 and at the end, a Psalm that begins and ends with “Give thanks to the Lord.”  Everyone agrees that there is also a waving in the middle of this Psalm, but they disagree as to the extent of the waving.  Bet Hillel says that one waves during the first half of verse 25, “O Lord, deliver us”, but not during the second half, “O Lord, let us prosper.”  Bet Shammai says that one also waves during the second half of the verse.  Rabbi Akiva, who lived long after Bet Hillel and Bet Shammai were no longer really in existence, testifies that he saw all of the people waving at “O Lord, let us prosper” as Bet Shammai stated, while Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua, two of Rabbi Akiva’s elders, waived only at “O Lord, deliver us,” as Bet Hillel posited.  The halakhah is according to Bet Hillel.  As an aside, while it is typical for the rabbis to follow Bet Hillel, it is interesting to note that in this case most of the people acted like Bet Shammai.
Section two:  It is preferable to take up the lulav first thing in the morning before one eats. This is usually done today during the morning prayer service, right before Hallel.  However, one can fulfill the mitzvah any time during the day.  If one is returning from a trip and he didn’t have a lulav with him, he should take one as soon as he gets into his house.  Even if he is in the middle of a meal and then remembers that he hasn’t performed the mitzvah of taking the lulav, he should put aside his meal and take the lulav.  One can perform the mitzvah all the way through dusk.  
