Sukkah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah describes the Simchat Bet Hashoevah. 

Mishnah Four
1) Men of piety and good deeds used to dance before them with lighted torches in their hands, and they would sing songs and praises. 
2) And Levites with innumerable harps, lyres, cymbals and trumpets and other musical instruments stood upon the fifteen steps leading down from the Court of the Israelites to the Court of the Women, corresponding to the fifteen songs of ascents in the Psalms, and it was on these [steps] that the Levites stood with their musical instruments and sang their songs. 
3) Two priests stood by the upper gate which leads down from the Court of the Israelites to the Court of the Women, with two trumpets in their hands. 
When the cock crowed they sounded a teki'ah [drawn-out blast], a teru'ah [staccato note] and again a teki'ah.  
When they reached the tenth step they sounded a teki'ah, a teru'ah and again a teki'ah. When they reached the Court [of the Women] they sounded a teki'ah, a teru'ah and again a teki'ah.  
They would sound their trumpets and proceed until they reached the gate which leads out to the east. 
4) When they reached the gate which leads out to the east, they turned their faces from east to west and said, “Our fathers who were in this place ‘their backs were toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the east, and they worshipped the sun toward the east’, but as for us, our eyes are turned to the Lord.” 
Rabbi Judah said:  they used to repeat [the last words] and say “We are the Lord’s and our eyes are turned to the Lord.”

Explanation
Section one:  After having lit the menorah, the party kicks off with dancing, singing and the playing of musical instruments.  The first participants mentioned are the “Hasidim” or the men of piety and men whom are known for their good deeds. This group’s participation is unusual and noteworthy for these were men chosen based on their deeds and not on their lineage.  In my opinion this was indeed one of the functions of the Simchat Bet Hashoevah, to give a greater role to those who are not of the priestly or Levitical clans.  It is these people whose dancing, songs and praise would probably have stood out the most.  This dancing and singing took place in the Court of the Women.
Section two:  The second group is the Levites who would arrange themselves on the fifteen steps leading up from the Court of the Women to the Court of the Israelites.  The mishnah notes that these fifteen steps correlate with the fifteen Psalms which begin “A Song of Ascents (Shir Hamaalot)” (Psalms 120-134).  One can only imagine how beautiful, indeed sublime, their music must have been. 
Section three:   The third group involved is the priests.  The priests begin the ceremony standing above everyone else, up in the Court of the Israelites.  When the cock crows at the crack of dawn they begin a process of descending and blowing shofar blasts at set stages.  Eventually this leads them down through the women’s court and out to the eastern gate.
Section four: When they get to the eastern gate they are facing the sun.  They turn around so that their backs are to the sun and use this opportunity to profess their faith in God and their denial of the worship of the sun.  They quote from Ezekiel 8:16 in order to highlight that the sin of sun-worship is not just something that “others” or Greeks were engaged in, but something that Israelites themselves were accused of by Ezekiel.  It seems to me likely that there is also a polemic here against other contemporary Jewish groups who had a solar calendar.  A calendar based on the sun and actual worship of the sun could probably have been associated. Certainly it would make sense that the Pharisees/rabbis would claim that their rivals, the Essenes and perhaps the Sadducees, were not just basing their calendar on the sun but were worshipping the sun as well.  We have already seen on a number of occasions that Sukkot was a holiday full of strife between the various sects of ancient Judaism.
The mishnah ends its procession at this point, but it is quite clear that it was not actually over at this moment but that from the eastern gate they would make their way down to the Shiloah spring in order to draw water for the water-libation.  
