Sukkot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah begins to describe the Simchat Bet Hashoevah ritual.  The ritual seems to be centered around fire, which has led some scholars to suggest the Simchat Bet Hashoevah really means “The Celebration of Fire.” 

Mishnah Two
1) At the conclusion of the first festival day of Sukkot they descended to the Women’s Court (Ezrat Nashim) and they would make there a great enactment.   
2) And golden candlesticks were there, and four golden bowls on the top of each of them and four ladders to each, and four youths drawn from the young priests, and in their hands there were jars of oil containing one hundred and twenty logs which they poured into the bowls.

Explanation
Section one:  As we learned in yesterday’s mishnah, they did not celebrate the Simchat Bet Hashoevah on either Shabbat or on the festival.  They would not begin until after the first festival day was completed.  The celebration would start with the people going into the “Women’s Court.” This was a section in the Temple into which both men and women could enter, but it was as far as women could go in the Temple.  Hence it was called the “Women’s Court.” The mishnah says that they would make their a “great enactment” but does not explain what this was.  The Talmud explains that they separated the men and women, putting the men below and the women up into the balcony so that they wouldn’t mix.  The fear was that in the midst of such a raucous occasion the mixture of men and women together could lead to transgression. Hence they separated between the sexes.  However, on normal occasions men and women seem to have been together in the Women’s Court.
Section two:  The first thing they would do was light an enormous menorah.  On each candlestick there were four golden bowls—according to tomorrow’s mishnah, there was enough light to light up all of Jerusalem!  Children would climb ladders to light the menorah and they would use 120 logs of oil, which is the equivalent of fifteen liters of oil.  This works out to about half a liter of oil for each bowl.      
