Sukkah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
The first section of this mishnah continues to discuss walls used as trees for the sukkah.  
The second section begins to discuss a new topic: when a person is obligated to be in the sukkah and what a person is obligated to do there.  This will be the topic of the remainder of the chapter of the mishnah.  Up until now all of the discussions have been about the structure of the sukkah itself.  

Mishnah Four
1) If one makes his sukkah between trees, so that the trees form its walls, it is valid.
2) Those who are agents to perform a mitzvah are exempt from [the obligations of] sukkah.   
3) People who are sick and their attendants are exempt from [the obligations of] sukkah. 
4) One may eat and drink casually outside the sukkah.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case a person uses a tree for all of the sukkah’s walls, not as support for the walls but rather as the walls themselves.  This might easily happen if there were some bushy trees that could block him on at least three sides.  He supports the skhakh with poles and not with the trees. The sukkah is valid and he may even use it on the festival, since the sukkah is not actually resting on the trees.
Section two:  People who are busy performing a mitzvah and find it difficult to eat or sleep in a sukkah are exempt from the sukkah.  This is due to the general rule that one who is engaged in one mitzvah is exempt from performing another mitzvah.  However, this is only true if by eating or sleeping in the sukkah he would be unable or distracted from performing the other mitzvah he set out to perform.  If he could perform both at the same time, then he must do so.
Section three:  People who are sick enough so that being in the sukkah would be a discomfort for them, are not obligated for the laws of the sukkah.  Being in the sukkah is not supposed to be painful and therefore, one who would be pained by being in the sukkah is exempt.  Note, that the mishnah is not addressed to those who might “fake” being sick in order to get out of sleeping or eating in the sukkah.   It is addressed to those who are so zealous about keeping the commandments that they would risk injury or at least illness to do so.  The rabbis tell such a person to get out of the sukkah—the sukkah is not supposed to cause one pain.
Section four: Meals must be eaten in the sukkah.  However, snacking may be done outside of the sukkah.  According to the Rambam, while one can snack outside of the sukkah, one who strives to only eat and drink in the sukkah is praiseworthy.     
