Sukkah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
In 3:13 we learned how the mitzvah of lulav was performed in the synagogue on Shabbat and how they managed to get their lulavs to the synagogue while avoiding the prohibition of carrying.  In today’s mishnah we see how the same problem was addressed when the Temple still stood and the people were bringing their lulav not to the synagogue but to the Temple.

Mishnah Four
1) The mitzvah of the lulav—how was it carried out?   
2) If the first day of the festival fell on Shabbat, they brought their lulavim to the Temple Mount, and the attendants would receive them and arrange them on top of the portico,   and the elders laid theirs in the chamber.  And they would teach the people to say, “Whoever gets my lulav in his hand, let it be his as a gift.”  
3) The next day they got up early, and came [to the Temple Mount] and the attendants threw down [their lulavim] before them, and they snatched at them, and so they used to come to blows with one another. 
4) When the court saw that they reached a state of danger, they instituted that each man should take [his lulav] in his own home.

Explanation
Section one:  The question is not really how the mitzvah of lulav was in general performed, but rather how the mitzvah was performed so as to avoid the problem while avoiding certain halakhic problems that would arise on Shabbat. 
Section two:  The problem of taking the lulav in the Temple on Shabbat is twofold. First of all it is forbidden to carry a lulav through the public domain on Shabbat, so they would have to bring their lulavim to the Temple Mount on Friday.  Secondly, one has to be able to recognize his own lulavim because one can fulfill one's obligation only with one's own lulav.  In 3:13 we read that in the synagogue everyone recognized their lulav.  In the Temple there were just too many lulavim to hope that everyone would recognize which was theirs.  Therefore the leaders in the Temple trained everyone to say that if someone else took their lulav, then that lulav should belong to them.  In this way everyone would own the lulav that they actually ended up with.
Section three: While this solution resolved the halakhic problem, it created a social problem—people were still jostling each other over who gets which lulav.  It might have been that everyone was trying to get their own lulav, despite what they had said the previous day.  Equally likely in my opinion, is that everyone wanted to take the nicest looking lulav they could find, even if the one that they had brought was not the best.  In any case, the mad scramble for lulavim led to brawls. This seems to be another case of people allowing their religious zeal to go overboard causing them to neglect the welfare of their fellow human being.
Section four:  The court was quick to put an end to this situation and ruled that it is better for people just to stay at home then to potentially harm each other over the taking of the lulav.   I think it is essential to notice how far the court was willing to go to ensure the safety of the people and to prevent religious zealotry from becoming a dominant force.  Better that the opportunity to join together in fulfilling the mitzvah of the lulav should be lost than that it should bring violent results.  
