Sukkah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The final mishnah of Sukkah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah which dealt with the division of the showbread.

Mishnah Eight
1) If one day intervened between them [Shabbat and Yom Tov], the watch whose time of service was fixed [for that week] took ten [of the] loaves, while they that were detained   took two.   
2) On all other days of the year the incoming watch took six loaves and the outgoing watch six.   
a) Rabbi Judah said, the incoming watch took seven and the outgoing five.   
3) The incoming watch divided it in the north, and the outgoing in the watch.   
4) [The watch of] Bilgah always divided it in the south; their ring was fixed and their alcove was blocked up.

Explanation
Section one:  Yesterday we learned that if Shabbat fell next to Yom Tov (the first or last day of the festival) then all of the watches divided the showbread evenly.  Today we learn that if there was one day in between Shabbat and Yom Tov, the watch whose week it was would get most of the showbread but not all.  Since some of the watches might not be able to begin their way back home because they lived too far away to make it in one day, or might need to get to Jerusalem before Shabbat, they were compensated by getting at least a little bit of the showbread.
Section two: At all other times of the year the incoming and outgoing watches would split the showbread evenly.  The watches would actually switch their service on Shabbat.  The new watch would arrange the new showbread and the two would split the showbread from the previous week.
Rabbi Judah says that this division was not completely equal.
Section three:  In order that the watches should not get confused, the incoming watch would divide the showbread in the northern section of the Temple and the outgoing watch would divide in the south.
Section four:  Bilgah is the name of one of the watches (see I Chronicles 24:14).  According to the mishnah and other rabbinic sources they were punished for the sins committed by Miriam, the daughter of one of the priests.  Miriam committed apostasy and married a Greek soldier, and when the Greeks entered the Temple during the time of the Maccabees she came in with him and acted in a disrespectful manner to the Temple.  As a collective punishment for the whole watch they always divided in the south, as if to say that even when they were entering their service, it is as if they are on their way out.  Alternatively, the Talmud says that Bilgah may have been punished because they were constantly late in arriving to serve in the Temple.
In the Temple there were twenty-four rings, one for each watch.  When skinning a sacrifice they could put the animal’s neck through the ring and have it held up while they skinned it. Bilgah’s ring was closed up so that they couldn’t use it.  In addition, every watch had its own alcove in which they could store their knives.  Bilgah’s was closed up, again as a punishment for their misdeeds.    
