Tamid, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Our mishnah describes some of the noises and sounds made in the Temple. In an exaggerated fashion, the rabbis claim that these noises could be heard in Jericho. Due to the fact that Jericho is probably 30-40 km’s from the Temple, these claims are clearly hyperbole. 
I shall explain what each of these sounds and smells were.

Mishnah Eight
1) From Jericho they could hear the sound of the great gate being opened. 
2) From Jericho they could hear the sound of the magrephah.   
3) From Jericho they could hear the noise of the wooden pulley which Ben Katin made for the laver.
4) From Jericho they could hear the voice of Gevini the herald. 
5) From Jericho they could hear the sound of the pipes.  
6) From Jericho they could hear the sound of the cymbals.   
7) From Jericho they could hear the sound of the singing [of the Levites].   
8) From Jericho they could hear the sound of the shofar.  
9) Some say also of the high priest when he pronounced the divine name on Yom Kippur. 
10) From Jericho they could smell the odor of the compounding of incense. 
11) Rabbi Elazar ben Diglai said: my father had some goats in Har Michvar, and they would sneeze from the smell of the incense. 

Explanation
Section one: Explained in yesterday’s mishnah.
Section two: The “magrephah” which means “shovel” was a musical instrument that was shaped like a shovel.
Section three: This was described in 1:4.
Section four: He would summon the priests and Levites to their places. See Shekalim 5:1.
Section five: See: Arakhin 2:3.
Section six: The cymbals would be clashed by Ben Arza. See Tamid 7:3.
Section seven: This refers to singing done without instruments.
Section eight: Refers to the daily shofar blasts. See Arakhin 2:3.
Section nine: See Yoma 6:2.
Section ten: That is some powerful incense. I had a roommate in college who seems to have had a mixture with similar potency ☺.
Section eleven: Har Michvar is on the other side of the Jordan river. Super-sensitive goats! 
