Tamid, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with clearing the ashes from the altar. 

Mishnah Four
1) The one who had merited to clear the ashes, would get ready to clear the ashes. 
2) They said to him: “Be careful not to touch any vessel until you have washed your hands and feet from the laver. See, the fire-pan is in the corner between the ascent and the altar on the west of the ascent.” 
3) No one entered with him, nor did he carry any light. Rather, he walked by the light of the altar fire. 
4) No-one saw him or heard a sound from him until they heard the noise of the wooden wheel which Ben Katin made for hauling up the laver, when they said, “The time has come.” 
5) He washed his hands and feet from the laver, then took the silver fire-pan and went up to the top of the altar and cleared away the cinders on either side and scooped up the ashes in the centre. 
6) He then descended and when he reached the floor he turned his face to the north and went along the east side of the ascent for about ten cubits, and he then made a heap of the cinders on the pavement three handbreadths away from the ascent, in the place where they used to put the crop of the birds and the ashes from the inner altar and the ash from the menorah.

Explanation
Section one: After getting the griddle-cakes on their way, its now time to clear the ashes from the altar, the first ritual performed each morning. Mishnah two noted that the priest who performed this ritual was not chosen by lottery, but rather by his being the first to get out of bed and immerse. 
Section two: Despite the fact that he had immersed, he still can’t touch holy vessels until he washes his feet and hands from the water in the laver. This would include the fire-pan. Therefore, before he begins the process, the other priests would remind him not to touch the fire-pan until he first washes his hands and feet. They would also remind him where the fire-pan was kept. This was helpful because it was dark in the courtyard.
Section three: He would not carry a flame in with him—rather he would walk along using only the dim light from the remaining fire on the altar.
Section four:  The other priests couldn’t see him or hear him until he began to draw water using the water wheel invented by Ben Katin. This water wheel is described in Yoma 3:10. The following is my commentary on that mishnah:
Ben Katin is also credited with another improvement in the Temple, this one also connected to issue of water.  He made a wheel that went into the water cistern which would cause the water in the laver to be connected to the water in the cistern.  The reason for this is that any water left out overnight in a vessel in the Temple is rendered unfit.  Without this wheel, the water left over in the laver would need to be emptied out every morning.
Once they heard the wheel, they would say, “The time has come”—meaning the time to wash his hands and feet. 
Section five: The priest would then wash his hands and then clear the ashes and the cinders from the Temple. 
Section six: He would then descend from the altar, and deposit the ashes in the place where they would also dump out other waste-products, including the crop from the heads of bird offerings, and the ashes from the inner altar and the menorah.  
   

