Tamid, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) The priest who had won the firepan, would take the silver pan and ascend to the top of the altar and clear away the live coals to this side and that, and he would rake [the coals]. 
a) He then went down and poured them into a gold [firepan]. 
2) About a kav of the coals was spilt, and these he swept into the channel. 
3) On Shabbat he used to put an overturned pot on them. 
4) This pot was a large vessel which could hold a letekh. 
5) It had two chains; with one he used to draw it down, and with the other he used to hold it above so that it should not roll over.   
6) It was used for three purposes — for placing over live coals, and over a [dead] creeping thing on Shabbat, and for drawing down the ashes from the top of the altar.

Explanation
Section one: The priest who had won the right to bring the firepan into the incense altar found inside the Sanctuary would take a silver pan and go to the top of the outer altar (see 2:5). He would clear the live coals to this side and that and rake the coals into the pan and then he would pour them into a gold firepan.
Section two: The silver pan could hold four kavs and the gold pan could hold three kavs. So a kav of coals would spill onto the floor. During the week these could just be swept into the channel. 
Section three: On Shabbat it was forbidden to put out the coals, or to even move them. Therefore, in order to prevent them from causing damage, he would put a large vessel over them. 
Section four: The pot was large enough to hold a letekh, which is about 90 kav. So it was plenty big to cover the coals.
Section five: This pot had two chains. The first was used to lower it down from the altar with the ashes (see next section). One priest would pull on a chain and the vessel would be lowered. The other chain was used to hold it steady. Another priest would stand up top and hold on to this chain so that it would stay steady. 
Section six: There were three uses for this vessel, two of which have already been described here (to cover the spilled coals on Shabbat and to lower the ashes from the altar). The third use would be to cover a dead sheretz (a creepy crawly thing) so that it wouldn’t cause impurity on Shabbat in the Temple. The sheretz is “muktzeh” so it can’t be moved or even touched on Shabbat. Therefore, they would cover it with the vessel until Shabbat was over. For more on how they dealt with the sheretz in the Temple see Eruvin 10:15. 
