Tamid, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today’s mishnah gives an intricate description of the butchering of the tamid offering. Most of the mishnah is self-explanatory (although unless you’re a butcher or a scientist who has dissected a sheep, you might have trouble picturing the parts). 
By the end of the mishnah, each of the parts that is put onto the altar is in the hands of the priest who won the lottery to bring that piece onto the ramp. They then go back to the Chamber of Hewn Stone to recite the Shema. We shall talk about this when we learn the next chapter.  

Mishnah Three
1) He then took a knife and separated the lung from the liver and the finger of the liver from the liver, but he did not remove it from its place. 
2) He cut out the breast and gave it to the one to the one who had merited [bringing it onto the ramp]. 
3) He came to the right flank and cut into it as far as the spine, without touching the spine, until he came to the place between two small ribs. 
4) He cut it off and gave it to the one who had merited [bringing it onto the ramp], with the liver attached to it. 
5) He then came to the neck, and he left two ribs on each side of it, cut it off and gave it to the one to the one who had merited [bringing it onto the ramp], with the windpipe and the heart and the lung attached to it. 
6) He then came to the left flank in which he left the two thin ribs above and two thin ribs below; and he had done similarly with the other flank. 
7) Thus he left two on each side above and two on each side below. 
8) He cut it off and gave it to the one to the one who had merited [bringing it onto the ramp], and the spine with it and the spleen attached to it. 
9) This was really the largest piece, but the right flank was called the largest, because the liver was attached to it. 
10) He then came to the tail bone, which he cut off and gave it to the one who had merited [bringing it onto the ramp], along with the tail, the finger of the liver and the two kidneys. 
11) He then took the left leg and cut it off and gave it to the one who had merited [bringing it onto the ramp]. 
12) Thus they were all standing in a row with the limbs in their hands
13) The first had the head and the [right] hind leg. The head was in his right hand with its nose towards his arm, its horns between his fingers, and the place where it was severed turned upwards with the fat covering it. The right leg was in his left hand with the place where the flaying began turned away from him.  
14) The second had the two fore legs, the right leg in his right hand and the left leg in his left hand, the place where the flaying began turned away from him. 
15) The third had the tail bone and the other hind leg, the tail bone in his right hand with the tail hanging between his fingers and the finger of the liver and the two kidneys with it, and the left hind leg in his left hand with the place where the flaying began turned away from him.
16) The fourth had the breast and the neck, the breast in his right hand and the neck in his left hand, its ribs being between two of his fingers. 
17) The fifth had the two flanks, the right one in his right hand, and the left one in his left hand, with the place where the flaying began turned away from him. 
18) The sixth had the innards on a platter with the knees on top of them. 
19) The seventh had the fine flour.
20) The eighth had the griddle cakes.
21) The ninth had the wine.  
22) They went and placed them on the lower half of the ramp on its western side, and salted them (see Leviticus 2:13).
23) They then came down and went to the Chamber of Hewn Stone to recite the Shema. 
