Tamid, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
The mishnah now describes the slaughtering of the morning tamid.

Mishnah One
1) They would not tie up the lamb but rather they would string its legs together.   
2) Those who merited [to bring up] the limbs took hold of it. 
a) Thus it was strung up: its head was to the south while its face was turned to the west.
b) The slaughterer stood to the east of it, facing the west. 
3) The morning tamid was killed by the north-western corner of the altar at the second ring.
a) The evening tamid was killed by the north-eastern corner at the second ring. 
4) While one slaughtered another received the blood. 
a) He then proceeded to the north-eastern corner and cast the blood on the eastern and northern sides; he then proceeded to the southwestern corner and cast the blood on the western and southern sides. 
b) The remnant of the blood he poured out at the southern base of the altar.

Explanation
Section one: The lamb was not tied to something else to keep it from running away. Rather it was strung up, with one forefoot tied to one of the hind feet. Note that the word for “strung its legs together” in Hebrew is “akedah” which is the same word used for the binding of Isaac.
Section two: The animal was held still by those priests who had won the right to bring the limbs up to the ramp. It was slaughtered on the northern side of the Temple courtyard, with its head toward the south, the location of the altar. Its head was turned west, so that it faced the Sanctuary and the slaughterer stood on the opposite side, also facing the Sanctuary.
Section three: The morning and evening tamid were sacrificed by different corners of the altar. The “rings” referred to here are rings that were set in the floor of the courtyard, on the northern side of the altar. 
Section four: Once the tamid was slaughtered another priest received the blood in a vessel. By casting the blood on two corners of the altar, he could cast it against both sides. In this way, with two shpritzes he could hit all four sides of the altar. 
He would pour out the remainder of the blood on the southern base of the altar.  
  


