Tamid, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) They went and stood on the steps of the Sanctuary. 
2) The first ones stood at the south side of their fellow priests with five vessels in their hands: one held the teni, the second the kuz, the third the firepan, the fourth the dish, and the fifth the spoon and its covering. 
3) They blessed the people with a single blessing, except in the country they recited it as three blessings, in the Temple as one.  
4) In the Temple they pronounced the divine name as it is written, but in the country by its substitute.   
5) In the country the priests raised their hands as high as their shoulders, but in the Temple above their heads, except the high priest, who did not raise his hands above the diadem.   
a) Rabbi Judah says: the high priest also raised his hands above the diadem, since it says, “And Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them” (Leviticus 9:22). 

Explanation
Section one: The priests now gather back at the steps going down from the Sanctuary to the courtyard.
Section two: The “first ones” are those mentioned at the end of the last chapter: the one who cleared the inner altar, the one who cleared the menorah, the one with the firepan, the one who offered the incense, and his friend/relative. They are each holding their respective vessel in their hands. They stood on the south side. The other priests stood to their north, meaning to their left. 
Section three:  The priests now recite the priestly blessing found in Numbers 6:24-26. In the Temple they would recite this as one blessing, meaning they would not say “amen” after each verse. In the “country,” meaning outside of the Temple, when the blessing was recited in the synagogue, they would recite it as three blessings. This is how it is done, at least in Israel, to this day.
Section four: The mishnah now explains other differences as to how the priestly blessing was done in the Temple versus how it was done outside. In the Temple, they would pronounce the name of God as it is written. We should note that we no longer really know how the name is to be pronounced. Outside the Temple, and to this day, it is pronounced by its “nickname”—Adonai. 
Section five:  Outside of the Temple, the priests would lift their hands to the height of their shoulders (as they do today), whereas in the Temple, they would lift them over their heads. The one exception is the high priest who was not to lift his hands above the diadem (tzitz) on his head. This seems to be because of the holiness of the diadem. Rabbi Judah disagrees and holds that the high priest also would lift his hands above his head.  
