Tamid, Chapter Three, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses removing the ashes from the inner altar and the menorah, both of which were inside the Sanctuary.

Mishnah Nine
1) The one who had been chosen for clearing the ashes from the inner altar went in carrying the teni which he set down in front of it, and he scooped up the ash in his fists and put it into it, and in the end he swept up what was left into it, and then he left it there and went out. 
2) The one who had been chosen to clear the ashes from the menorah went in. If he found the two eastern lights burning, he cleared the ash from the rest and left these two burning. If he found that these two had gone out, he cleared away their ash and kindled them from those which were still lit and then he cleared the ash from the rest. 
a) There was a stone in front of the candlestick with three steps on which the priest stood in order to trim the lights. 
b) He left the kuz on the second step and went out.

Explanation
Section one: The teni is the basket mentioned in mishnah six. The priest would first scoop up whatever ashes he could with his hands, and then would sweep out the remainder. The teni would be left in the Sanctuary for the time being. It will be removed in mishnah 6:1.
Section two: The menorah stood on the southern side of the Sanctuary, aligned from east to west. The eastern lights were on the left side (when facing south). If these two lights were still lit, he would first clear the ashes and waste of the other five and put it into the kuz (see mishnah six). If these two lights were already out, then he would clear their ashes as well, and if necessary add oil and relight them from candles which were still lit. If all of the candles had gone out, then he would light the first two from the fire on the outer altar (as we shall learn in 6:1). He would then remove the ashes from these two candles after the sprinkling of the blood of the tamid, and after the limbs of the tamid had been put onto the ramp. After either relighting, or clearing the ashes from the first two, he would clear the ashes from remainder. 
He would leave the kuz in the Sanctuary until he had completed clearing the ashes from the other two candles, as we shall see in 6:1.   
