Temurah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The final mishnah in Temurah deals with prohibited things that must be burned.

Mishnah Six
1) All dedicated animals which were slaughtered [with the intention of being eaten] after their set time or outside of their set place must be burned.
2) An asham offered by one in doubt [as to whether he has transgressed] is to be burned.  
a) Rabbi Judah says: it is to be buried. 
3) A hatat of a bird that is brought for a doubt is burned.  
a) Rabbi Judah says: it is cast into the sewer.  
4) All things which must be buried must not be burned, and all things which must be burned must not be buried.  
a) Rabbi Judah says: if one wishes to be stringent with himself, to burn things which are buried, he is permitted to do so. 
b) They said to him: he is not allowed to change.

Explanation
Section one: An animal dedicated to be a sacrifice which was slaughtered with a disqualifying intention—to eat it or burn it at the wrong time or place—is fully disqualified and must be burned. The same is true with regard to a sacrifice that is in another way disqualified, such as remnant or a meat that has been made impure (see Leviticus 7:17, 19; see also Leviticus 6:23).
Section two: An “asham offered by one in doubt” is brought by someone who is not sure if he committed a sin that if he knew for certain he had committed he would have had to bring a hatat. If he brings this type of asham and then before its blood is sprinkled on the altar he finds out that he did not sin, the asham is disqualified. According to the first opinion it is to be burned, whereas Rabbi Judah holds that it is buried.
Section three: This section could refer to a case where a woman is not sure if she gave birth (for instance she had a very early miscarriage and is unsure whether it was just some blood or was a miscarriage). After child birth a woman brings a hatat, but in this case her hatat is of doubtful status. It cannot be eaten. According to the first opinion, it is burned. Rabbi Judah says that it can be cast into the sewer that flows through the Temple courtyard, which is, according to the Tosefta, equivalent to burial. Rabbi Judah holds that both this and the doubtful hatat are looked at like non-sacred animals that were slaughtered in the Temple court, which means they are to be buried.  
Section four: According to the sages, if one is obligated to burn or bury a specific item, he must do so in the specified manner. He cannot change from one means of disposal to the other. Rabbi Judah is more flexible and allows one to burn things that can be buried. He does not allow one to bury things that need to be burned. 

Congratulations!  We have finished Tractate Temurah!
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Temurah contained many quite technical details concerning sacrificial law (a topic you should be used to by now) but perhaps you will allow me a little “derashah” at this point. The verses in Leviticus 27 concerning substituting teach us that it is basically impossible to substitute one sanctified animal for another. Once an animal has become sacred, and dedicated to be a sacrifice, it must fulfill its destiny and become a sacrifice. Perhaps in a broader sense this teaches us that sometimes once something has attained a certain status, there just is no substitute for it. Once it has become “holy” in our lives, even if we try to put something else in its place, the holiness of the original object can never be removed. There are many things that play such a role in our lives, and I don’t wish to limit the imagination by specifying. Substitutions, sometimes, simply don’t work, and perhaps, in a very symbolic fashion, that is what these sacrificial laws are trying to teach us. 
I hope you have enjoyed Temurah. Tomorrow we begin Tractate Keritot. 
  
