Temurah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah continues to explain the differences between sacrifices of an individual and those of the congregation.
To understand our mishnah we must discuss the category of a hatat (a sin-offering) that is left to die. There are five types of hatats that must be left to die: 1) the offspring of a hatat; 2) the substitute of a hatat; 3) a hatat whose owners have died; 4) a hatat whose owners were atoned for by a different hatat; 5) a hatat whose year has passed.    
The sages in our mishnah argue whether these laws apply to all hatats, or just to those brought by an individual. The argument is really only over the last two categories, because the first three are not relevant to a congregational hatat. The hatat brought by the congregation is always male and it cannot make a substitute. Furthermore, it is impossible to conceive of a hatat brought by the congregation whose owners have died. Therefore, the argument is only about the last two categories, and whether they apply to the congregational hatat. 

Mishnah Two 
1) A hatat of an individual whose owners have been atoned for is left to die, whereas that of a congregation is not left to die.   
a) Rabbi Judah says: it is left to die.   
2) Rabbi Shimon said: Just as we have found with regard to the offspring of a hatat, the substitute of a hatat and a hatat whose owners died, that these rules apply only to an individual but not a congregation, so too [the rules concerning] the hatat whose owners have been atoned for and [a hatat] whose year has passed apply only to an individual but not a congregation.

Explanation
Section one: If a person sets aside an animal to be a hatat, a sin-offering, and then loses the offering, and then sets aside and brings a different animal as the hatat, the first animal, if found, must be left to die. According to the Bavli, it is put into a pen and is starved to death. Our mishnah limits this to the hatat of an individual. According to the first opinion, the hatat of a congregation is not left to die. Rather, it goes out to pasture until it becomes blemished at which point it can be sold and the proceeds used to buy another sacrifice.
Rabbi Judah disagrees.
Section two: Rabbi Shimon defends the first opinion. Just as the first three types of hatat that are left to die the rules apply only to those of the individual and not to the congregation, so too when it comes to the other two types of hatat, the rules of being left to die apply only to that brought by the individual and not to that brought by the congregation. In other words, although it is possible for there to be a hatat whose congregation has already been atoned for or whose year has passed, nevertheless, these hatats are not left to die. 
