Temurah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today’s mishnah compares the laws that relate to dedicating something to the Temple with the laws that relate to an animal that has been substituted. As the rabbis love to do, they note that sometimes the laws governing dedications are more stringent, whereas at other times, the laws governing substitutes are more stringent.

Mishnah Three
1) In some ways [the laws relating to] dedications are more stringent than [that those relating to] a substitute, and in some ways [those relating to] a substitute are more stringent than [those relating to] dedications. 
2) In some ways [the laws relating to] dedications are more stringent than [those relating to] a substitute, 
a) For dedicated animals can make a substitute whereas a substitute cannot make another substitute.  
b) A congregation or partners can dedicate but cannot make a substitute. 
c) One can dedicate embryos and limbs, but one cannot make a substitute with them. 
3) [The laws relating to] a substitute are more stringent than [those relating to] dedications, since a substitute applies to a permanently blemished animal and it does not become hullin to be sheared or worked.
4) Rabbi Yose son of Rabbi Judah says: they made an error to be the same as intent when it comes to a substitute, but they did not make an error to be the same as intent when it comes to dedication. 
5) Rabbi Elazar says: kilayim, terefah, a fetus extracted by means of a cesarean section, a tumtum and a hermaphrodite, cannot become sacred nor can they make sacred.

Explanation
Section one: This section introduces the rest of the mishnah.
Section two: There are three ways in which dedications are treated more stringently than substitutes, all of which we have learned before. In 1:5-6 we learned that a dedicated animal can make a substitute but that a substitute cannot make another substitute. In 2:1 we learned that only individuals can make substitutes. In 1:3 we learned that one can dedicate embryos and limbs but that one cannot make them a substitute for a dedicated animal.
Section three: One can substitute a permanently blemished animal for an unblemished animal, as we learned in 1:2. When the person comes to redeem the blemished animal from its holiness, which he must do because it cannot be sacrificed, the substituted animal does not become completely hullin, non-sacred. It still retains its holiness in that it cannot be sheared or worked. All that one can do with it is slaughter it for food. In contrast, if one dedicates an animal that already has a permanent blemish, it can be redeemed and when it is redeemed it can be sheared and put to work (see Hullin 10:2). In this way we can see that the laws governing the substitute are more stringent.
Section four: If one substitutes an animal for another animal in error, the substitution works and the animal becomes holy, despite the fact that he didn’t know what he was doing. This is not so when it comes to dedications.
Section five: “Kilayim” is an animal born of two different species, for instance a goat and sheep. A “tumtum” is an animal whose sex cannot be easily determined and a hermaphrodite (“androgynous”) is one who has signs of being both male and female. These animals cannot be dedicated, and if one tries to dedicate them, they are not holy. Furthermore, they cannot cause other animals to become holy. For instance, if they are already holy due to the fact that their parents were dedicated animals, they cannot make a substitute. One who tries to substitute another animal for them, the substituted animal is not holy. This is true even for Rabbi Judah who in mishnah five said that offspring of dedicated animals can make a substitute.  
