Temurah, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah provides some limits to the applicability of the law of substitutes.

Mishnah Six
1) Birds and menahot do not make a substitute, since it only says “a beast” (Leviticus 27:10).   
2) A congregation or partners cannot make a substitute, since it says: “He shall not substitute for it”—an individual can make a substitute but a congregation or partners cannot make substitute. 
3) One cannot make a substitute with [objects] dedicated for Temple repairs.   
a) Rabbi Shimon said:  Now is not tithe included [in the laws of substitutes]? Then why was it specially mentioned?  In order to make a comparison with it: tithe is a private offering, it thus excludes congregational offerings. And tithe is a dedication for the altar, it thus excludes offerings dedicated for Temple repairs.

Explanation
Section one: The laws of substitutes apply only to beasts, cows, goats and sheep. They do not apply to bird offerings or meal offering (menahot). 
Section two: The laws of substitutes apply only to sacrifices brought by individuals and not to those brought by the congregation or to those brought by partners. This is derived from the singular language used by the Torah.
Section three: If someone has an animal that is dedicated not to be a sacrifice but to be sold for profit for Temple repairs, that animal cannot make a substitute. Rabi Shimon derives this midrashically from the comparison of the two sets of verses that deal with substitutes in Leviticus 27. The first set deals with regular animals and the second set (vs. 32-33) deals with tithes. Why would the Torah mention tithes, asks Rabbi Shimon, if not to teach us some extra information that we could not have learned from the first group of verses? Rabbi Shimon answers that these verses are there to compare animal tithes with other sacrifices that can make a substitute. Just as tithes are brought in order to offer them as sacrifices, and not to go to Temple repairs, so too only animals brought to be offered can make a substitute. Similarly, just as tithes are brought by individuals, so too only sacrifices brought by individuals can make substitutes, and not those brought by the congregation. 

