Temurah, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) One can substitute 
a) Herd animals for flock animals and flock animals for herd animals; 
b) Sheep for goats and goats for sheep; 
c) Males for females and females for males; 
d) Unblemished animals for blemished animals and blemished animals for unblemished animals, since Scripture says: “One may not exchange or substitute another for it, either good for bad, or bad for good” (Leviticus 27:10). 
i) What is meant by “good for bad”?  
(1) Blemished animals whose dedication was prior to their blemish.
2) One can substitute one [hullin animal] for two [consecrated animals], and two [hullin animals] for one [consecrated animal]; 
a) One [hullin animal] for a hundred [consecrated animals] and a hundred [hullin animals] for one [consecrated animal]; 
b) Rabbi Shimon says: one can only substitute one for one, as it says, “Then it and its substitute” (ibid), just as “it” [the consecrated animal] is only one, so [its substitute] must also be only one.

Explanation
Section one: One can substitute any type of animal for any other type of animal. The reason this works is that the substitution is not effective, so it doesn’t really matter if there is a match between the original and the substitute. 
One can even substitute a blemished (bad) animal for an unblemished (good) sacrifice. 
The mishnah clarifies that if the original sacrifice was blemished, the blemish must have occurred after it was sanctified. When one sanctifies a blemished animal, he is really sanctifying its value because the animal itself cannot be sacrificed, and when one sanctifies the value of an animal, it cannot be substituted for. 
Section two: According to the first opinion, it doesn’t matter how many animals are substituted or substituted for. Since the substitution is ineffective, all of the original animals remain holy, and all of the substitute animals become holy. 
Rabbi Shimon derives from the verse that one can only do a one for one substitute. The Torah uses singular language to designate that both the original animal and the substitute animal must be singular. So if one tries to substitute many hullin animals for a sacred animal, the hullin animals do not become sacred. 
