Temurah, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) Hatat water does not become hatat water except with the putting of ashes [in the water].   
2) A doubtful graveyard cannot make another doubtful graveyard.   
3) Nor can terumah be made after terumah.   
4) A substitute cannot make another substitute.   
5) The offspring of a dedicated animal cannot make a substitute. 
a) Rabbi Judah says: the offspring of a dedicated animal can make a substitute.   
b) They said to him: a dedicated animal can make a substitute, but neither the offspring of a dedicated animal nor a substitute can make a substitute.

Explanation
Section one: “Hatat water” is the water mixed in the ashes of the red heifer that is used in the purification ritual. The water does not become hatat water until the ashes are put into them. This also can mean that if there is some water that already has the ashes mixed in, and then more water falls in, they must again put more ashes in so that the new water can become “hatat water.” 
Section two: A field in which there was a grave and then was plowed becomes a “doubtful graveyard.” This status extends for 100 cubits from where the grave was. However, if the “doubtful graveyard” is then plowed again, it does not make another doubtful graveyard.
Section three: If one separates terumah from his produce, and then separates terumah a second time, the second batch of terumah is not terumah.
Section four: If one has an animal that is holy because he attempted to substitute it for another animal, and then he tries to substitute another animal for the substitute, the second substitute is not holy. That is what the mishnah means when it says, “A substitute [that has already been made holy] does not make another substitute.
Section five: The sages debate whether when one substitutes an animal for the offspring of a dedicated animal, the substitute is holy. The sages say that it is not, for they hold that only the originally dedicated animal can make another animal into a substitute. Rabbi Judah expands the laws of substitutes and holds that even the offspring can make a substitute. 
