Terumot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
In this mishnah there is another ramification of the debate between Rabbi Eliezer and the sages. As a reminder, Rabbi Eliezer holds that when a seah of terumah falls into a pile of more than 100 seahs of hullin, and a seah is removed, the seah that is taken out is treated as if it were the same seah that fell in. In contrast, the rabbis hold that the amount of terumah in the seah taken out is the same as the amount of terumah in the whole mixture, in this case 1/100. 

Mishnah Six
1) A seah of terumah which fell into less than a hundred [of hullin], and rendered the whole medumma, and part of this mixture fell afterwards into another place:  
a) Rabbi Eliezer says: it renders again medumma as if certain terumah [had fallen in]. 
b) But the sages say: the [first] mixture renders medumma only according to the proportion.   
2) [Similarly], that which is leavened [with terumah] renders other dough leavened [as with terumah] only according to the proportion.
3) And drawn water disqualifies a ritual bath also only according to the proportion.  

Explanation
Section one: The seah that is taken out of a mixture where the ratio was greater than 100 parts hullin to 1 part terumah is treated by Rabbi Eliezer as if it were the same terumah that fell in. Therefore, when it falls into another pile of terumah, it renders the new pile medumma (doubtful terumah) as if it was certain terumah.
The sages hold that it only renders medumma according to the portion of terumah in it. So since it is by definition less than 1/100 terumah, it is doubtful that it will render anything medumma.
Section two: The mishnah now brings several other examples of cases where the rabbis say that something acts according to its proportion. The first is a case of hullin dough that is leavened with terumah starter dough (heavily leavened dough used to preserve the yeast). If this dough falls into another patch of dough it only renders medumma according to the percentage of terumah that is in the part that causes the leavening, the starter dough. In other words, if there is enough terumah in the part that falls in to the second dough in order to leaven the new dough, then it is treated as terumah and it is forbidden to an Israelite.
Section three: A mikveh that doesn’t have 40 seahs of water into which three logs (a small measure) of drawn water fall is disqualified. If this drawn water is mixed in with non-drawn water, which is okay for a mikveh, then the mixture disqualifies the mikveh according to the percentage of drawn water in the mixture.   
