Terumot, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with various scenarios where terumah falls into hullin. Here we deal with cases where the hullin or the terumah is impure. Impure terumah cannot be eaten and rather must be burned. 

Mishnah One
1) If a seah of unclean terumah fell into less than a hundred seahs of hullin, or first tithe, or second tithe, or dedicated property, whether these were unclean or clean, they must all be left to rot.  
2) If the seah [of terumah] was clean, [the mixture] must be sold to priests at the price of terumah, excluding the value of that seah itself.  
3) If it fell into first tithe, he should declare terumah of tithe.
4) And if it fell into second tithe or dedicated property, they must be redeemed.  
5) If the hullin was unclean, it may be eaten in small quantities, or roasted, or kneaded with fruit juice, or divided into pieces of dough so that the size of one egg be not in any one place. 

Explanation
Section one:  If the terumah was unclean it cannot be eaten and since it fell into a pile of less than one hundred parts hullin, it cannot be taken out. It doesn’t matter if the pile was first tithe, or second tithe or property dedicated to the Temple, or whether this pile was clean or unclean. Since the pile has a seah of unclean terumah in it which cannot be eaten, the entire pile must be left to rot. 
Commentators ask why the mishnah teaches that it should be left to rot and not burned, as is customary with unclean terumah. There are two answers. The Rambam states that if this type of produce is eaten raw, for instance, figs, then it must be burned. The mishnah refers to produce not eaten raw-this may be left to rot because no one will eat it in its current state. Other commentators say that it is better to always leave it to rot, lest by telling him that he can burn it, he may come to benefit from it before he burns it.
Section two: This is the standard law—if both the terumah and the pile of hullin was clean, then if there was not a 100-1 ratio, the whole mixture must be sold only to priests at the price of terumah and he must give one of the seahs to the priest for free, since one of the seahs is actually terumah.
Section three:  If the terumah fell into a pile of tithe, then what he should do is declare that he is separating the terumat maaser, the terumah taken from the tithes, and leaving it in this pile. Before he declares the terumat maaser the priest cannot eat it for even a priest cannot eat produce from which the various types of terumah has not been removed. He then can sell the whole mixture to a priest, minus the value of the seah of terumah that fell in, and  minus the amount of terumat maaser that he would have had to take out of that pile and given to the priest for free. 
Section four: If it fell into a pile of second tithe or dedicated property then the pile must be redeemed before he can sell it to the priest. In the case of second tithe, the money would be brought to Jerusalem and used to buy food there, and in the case of dedicated property, the money would be given to the Temple. After having been redeemed, the pile reverts to a normal case of terumah mixed in with hullin and the rules in section two apply.
Section five: The mishnah now refers to a case where the pile was unclean and the terumah was clean and it was sold to a priest, as described in section two. A priest can eat unclean hullin, the problem is how do we make sure that the unclean hullin does not cause the terumah to become unclean? We should first note that just touching the unclean hullin does not make the terumah unclean. This is because the mixture is still dry. Once the mixture is wet the terumah will become unclean.  There are several ways around this problem. The first thing he can do is prepare and eat small amounts at a time, specifically, less than an olive’s worth. Food that is less than the volume of an olive does not transmit impurities, and hence, the mixed-in terumah will not become impure. The second option is to cook the grain without water by roasting it. The third option is to knead the dough made from the grain in fruit juice, since fruit juice is not one of the liquids that causes impurities to be transmitted (the six liquids that cause impurities to be transmitted are: water, dew, milk, honey, wine, blood and oil.) The final option would be to split the dough up into small batches so that each is less than the bulk of an olive.
