Terumot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, which discussed a case where there are two baskets, one of terumah and one of hullin and it is unclear which is of which.

Mishnah Six 
1) If one of these [baskets] fell into hullin, it does not render it medumma (doubtful terumah), but the second is treated as terumah and subject to the law of hallah, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
a) Rabbi Yose exempts it.   
2) If the second falls elsewhere [into hullin] it does not render it medumma. 
3) If both of them fall into one place, they render it medumma according to [the proportion] of the smaller of the two.  

Explanation
Section one: Generally, when terumah falls into hullin and there is less than 100 parts hullin to one part terumah, the terumah renders the hullin “medumma”, doubtful terumah which must be treated as if it was terumah. It must be sold to a priest at the lower price of terumah. However, in this case we can assume that the non-terumah basket fell into the basket of hullin and it doesn’t render it medumma. Since we assumed that the first basket was not terumah, the second basket must be treated as terumah. The dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yose is the same as that which we saw in yesterday’s mishnah. 
Section two: If the second falls into a different basket of produce, it also doesn’t render the other produce “medumma.” This is parallel to the situation in yesterday’s mishnah where different people ate the two baskets. 
Section three: However, if both baskets fall into one basket of hullin, it is clear that there is terumah mixed in with hullin. It will render the hullin “medumma” according to the amount of produce in the smaller basket. Let’s say the larger basket had 3 seahs and the smaller basket had 1 seah. These both fall into a basket of one hundred seahs. They don’t cause the hullin to become “medumma” because there is a ratio of 100-1 between the basket into which they fell and the smaller basket. In this case one seah may be removed and treated as terumah and the rest can remain hullin. Were we to fear that the larger basket was that of terumah, the hullin would all become medumma, and it would all have to be sold to a priest. 
