Terumot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah and the rest of the chapter deals with the issue of a person who planted terumah, which is prohibited. The problem with having planted terumah seeds is that the rabbis decreed that the plants that grow from the seeds will be terumah as well. This seems to have been a way of preventing a person from intentionally planting his terumah seeds.

Mishnah One
1) He who plants terumah, if unwittingly, may overturn it, but if intentionally, he must allow it to remain.  
2) If it had already grown a third of its full size, whether he had planted it unwittingly or intentionally, he must allow it to remain.
3) But in the case of flax, even when planted intentionally he must overturn it.

Explanation
Section one: If one plants terumah accidentally, meaning he didn’t know that the seeds were terumah seeds, the mishnah is lenient and allows him to overturn the plants before they grow into terumah. This way he will be able to replant his field with regular, more lucrative plants (the price of terumah is lower than that of hullin). However, if he plants them intentionally, the mishnah penalizes him for having done so and he must allow them to remain and then he will have to treat the plants as terumah.
Section two: The previous section referred to a situation where the plants had barely begun to grow. If they have already grown to 1/3 of their eventual size, then even if they were planted unintentionally, they must be allowed to remain because it is forbidden to actively destroy terumah. Before they grow to 1/3 of their size they are not treated as terumah, and therefore one can overturn them. 
Section three: The exception to this rule is flax, which must be overturned when planted intentionally even when it has grown to over 1/3 of its eventual size. The reason is that the flax capsules which contain the flax seeds remain hullin. Since he will benefit from the use of these capsules, the rabbis penalized him for having planted terumah seeds in the first place. He shouldn’t receive any “hullin” benefit when what he planted was terumah. However, if he planted flax unintentionally, it is treated like all other plants and it may be overturned if it has not yet grown to 1/3 of its eventual size. 
