Terumot, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
Terumah can be eaten only by priests (Leviticus 22:10, according to how the rabbis understood the verse). According to the rabbis, one who eats terumah intentionally is liable for death at the hands of heaven. Our mishnah deals with the consequences of eating terumah unwittingly.

Mishnah One
1) One who eats terumah unwittingly must repay its value plus a fifth, whether he eats it or drinks it, or anoints himself with it, or whether the terumah is clean or unclean. 
2) [If he eats the added fifth] he must pay its fifth, and a fifth of that fifth.  
3) He may not repay with terumah, but rather with tithed hullin, which becomes terumah. 
4) And whatever may be repaid in its place also becomes terumah and if the priest wishes to forego [the fine], he cannot do so.

Explanation
Section one: One who unwittingly eats, drinks or anoints himself with terumah must pay back the amount he ate plus an added fifth. The fifth in rabbinic literature is what we would call a fourth. It is a fifth of the total amount at the end. Thus if he eats 100 seahs of terumah, he must pay back 125: 100 is the principal and 25 is the 1/5 of the total amount 125. 
Section two: If he sets aside an extra fifth to pay back the priest, and then he unwittingly eats that as well, he must pay back an added fifth of the fifth. This section teaches us that the added fifth has the status of terumah, just as the principle that he pays back has the status of terumah, as we see below.
Section three: It would seem obvious that he can’t pay back with other terumah because that would be cheating the priest (like paying old taxes with new ones). When he pays back he must use hullin from which tithes have been properly separated.
Section four: As we learned above in section two, that which he pays back to the priest becomes terumah. This is true even if the priest forgives him the fine. That which he must pay back becomes terumah regardless of whether the priest wants it to or not. 
It seems that what this section transforms the payment from being restitution to the priest into an obligation upon the person who ate the terumah to make up for his transgression. In a sense, we might say that the payment allows him to receive atonement for his albeit unwitting sin. As such, unlike a normal debt, the priest cannot forgive the debtor his obligation. This is also evident in section one, which states that he must repay even if the terumah was unclean. Unclean terumah cannot be used and therefore he hasn’t really damaged any priest. Nevertheless, he must pay back the amount he used because the issue at stake is atonement and not restitution for a loss. 
