Terumot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses a jar of terumah that may have become impure but is not definitely impure. The problem is that it is forbidden to get rid of terumah (or intentionally make it impure) and it is forbidden to eat impure terumah. So he can’t use this terumah lest it is impure, but he can’t get rid of it, lest it is pure. Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua, the sages who disputed each other throughout the chapter, resume their series of disputes here.

Mishnah Eight 
A jar of terumah which may have become impure:   
1) Rabbi Eliezer says: if it had been deposited in an exposed place, he must now place it in a hidden place; and if it had formerly been uncovered, it must now be covered.   
2) But Rabbi Joshua says: if it had been in a hidden place, he must now place it in an exposed place; and if it had formerly been covered up, he must now uncover it.   
3) Rabban Gamaliel says: let him not do anything new to it.

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Eliezer, one should protect this jar of terumah so that it doesn’t go from being doubtfully impure to certainly impure. For instance, if it had been in an exposed place, where it will likely become impure, he should put it into a more protected place. If it had been uncovered, then he should cover it so that a snake doesn’t put poison in it. In other words, even though he can’t use this terumah, lest it is impure, he should treat it as carefully as possible so that it is not defiled or made poisonous.
Section two: Rabbi Joshua holds that one should do everything he can so that the jar becomes certainly prohibited and he can legally get rid of it. If it had been previously protected in a hidden place, he should now put it in an exposed place so that it is more likely to become impure. If it was covered, he should uncover it so that it becomes prohibited to drink and permitted to pour out. In other words, since he can’t use it, he should cause it to become strictly forbidden, thereby allowing him to pour it out, or burn it (if it was made impure). If he leaves it around, he might accidentally use it, and thereby perhaps transgress (if it was actually impure).
Section three: Rabban Gamaliel says one shouldn’t do anything to the jar. On the one hand, he holds that it is forbidden to intentionally put the jar somewhere where it will become more prohibited. Therefore, he can’t agree with Rabbi Joshua. On the other hand, he is not obligated to go out of his way to protect the jar, as Rabbi Eliezer says. So the best he can do is just leave it wherever it may already be. If it becomes impure, so be it. If it doesn’t then he must refrain from using it in any way.    
