Tevul Yom, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) Sanctified meat over which the porridge crusted, and a tevul yom touched the crust, the slices [of meat] are permitted.
a) But if he touched one of the slices, that slice and all [the crust] that comes up with it form a connective the one with the other. 
b) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: the two of them serve as connectives to each other.   
2) Similarly, with [cooked] beans that have formed a layer over pieces of bread.   
3) Beans or other foods cooked in a pot: when they are still separate, do not serve as connectives; but when they become a solid pulp, they do act as connectives. 
a) If they formed several solid masses, they are to be counted.   
4) If oil floats on wine and a tevul yom touched the oil, only the oil is disqualified.
a) But Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: each serves as a connective with the other.

Explanation
Section one: Sanctified meat, meaning meat that was part of a sacrifice, has been cooked in a pot with some porridge. The porridge crusts over the meat. According to the first opinion, the meat is not considered part of the crust. Thus if a tevul yom touches the crust, the meat is still permitted. It has not been disqualified. However, if he touches the meat itself, the meat and any part of the crust that would be lifted out of the dish with the meat is disqualified. The other parts of the porridge can still be eaten.
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri rules that the entire porridge and meat is considered connected. Thus if he touches any part of the porridge, the meat is disqualified. 
Section two: The same rule as in section one applies to a case where beans have been cooked in a pot with some bread made of terumah.
Section three: Having mentioned beans, the mishnah now discusses general cases of beans or other foods cooked in a pot. If the pieces of the food are still separate from one another, they don't count as connected. But a solid mass is connected and if he touches one part of the mass, it is all disqualified.
If there are several solid masses, then the one he touches has first degree impurity. The mass that is next to it and touching it, has second degree impurity and the third mass will be disqualified if it is of terumah. When the mishnah says "counted" it means that the usual process of counting impurity begins from the mass he touched.
Section four: This is similar to the case in yesterday's mishnah. If the oil floats on the wine, only the oil is disqualified.
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri again disagrees and holds that the substances are considered to be connected. 
