mishnah. Every hand that makes frequent examination is in the case Of women praiseworthy,  but in the case of men it ought to be cut off.  
mishnah. In The case of a deaf,   an imbecile, a blind or an insane   woman, if other Women of sound senses are available   they attend to her,   and she May then eat terumah. 
mishnah. It is the custom of the daughters of israel when having Marital intercourse to use two testing-rags, one for the man and the Other for herself,   and virtuous women prepare also a third rag Whereby to make themselves fit for marital duty.   if a vestige of Blood is found on his rag   they are both unclean   and are also under The obligation of bringing a sacrifice.   if any blood is found on her Rag immediately after their intercourse they are both unclean and Are also under the obligation of bringing a sacrifice. If, however, any Blood is found on her rag after a time they are unclean   by reason of Doubt   but exempt from the sacrifice. What is meant by ‘after a time’? Within an interval in which she can descend from the bed and wash her Face.   but [if blood was found some time] after such an interval she Causes uncleanness retrospectively   for a period of twenty-four Hours   but she does not cause the man who had intercourse with her To be unclean.   r. Akiba ruled: she   also causes the man who had Intercourse with her to be unclean.   the sages, however, agree with r. Akiba that one who observed a bloodstain conveys uncleanness to the Man who had intercourse with her 
mishnah. All women are in the condition of presumptive cleanness for Their husbands.   for those who return from a journey their wives are In the condition of presumptive cleanness. 
mishnah. Beth shammai ruled: a woman needs two   testing-rags for Every intercourse,   or she must perform it in the light of a lamp.   beth Hillel ruled: two testing-rags   suffice her for the whole night.   [ 
mishnah. The sages spoke of a woman in metaphor: [there is in her] Chamber  an ante-chamber  and an upper chamber.  the blood of the Chamber  is unclean, that of the upper chamber  is clean. If blood is Found in the ante-chamber, and there arises a doubt about its Character,  it is deemed unclean, because it is presumed to have come From the source.  
mishnah. Five kinds of blood in a woman are unclean: red, black, a Colour like bright crocus, or like earthy water or like diluted wine.  Beth shammai ruled: also a colour like that of fenugreek water or the Juice of roasted meat; but beth hillel declare these clean. One that is Yellow, akabia b. Mahalalel declares unclean and the sages declare Clean. R. Meir said: even if it does not convey uncleanness as a Bloodstain it conveys uncleanness as a liquid.  r. Jose ruled: it does Neither the one nor the other.  C h a p t e r i i i 
mishnah. If a woman aborted a shapeless object,  if there was blood With it, she is unclean,  otherwise she is clean   . R. Judah ruled: in Either case she is unclean.   If a woman aborted an object that was like a rind, like a hair, like Earth, like red flies, let her put it in water and if it dissolves   she is Unclean,  but if it does not she is clean.   If an abortion was in the shape of fishes, locusts, or any forbidden Animals or creeping things, if there was blood with them she is Unclean,  otherwise she is clean.   If an abortion had the shape of a beast, a wild animal or a bird, Whether clean or unclean,   if it was a male she must continue [in Uncleanness and subsequent cleanness for the periods prescribed] for A male,   and if it was a female she must continue [in uncleanness and Subsequent cleanness for the periods prescribed] for a female,   but if The sex is unknown she must continue [in uncleanness and subsequent Cleanness for the periods prescribed] for both male and female;   so r. Meir. The sages, however, ruled: anything that has not the shape of a Human being cannot be regarded as a human child. 
mishnah. If a woman aborted a sac full of water, full of blood, or Full of matter of various colours, she need not take into Consideration the possibility of its being a valid birth; but if its limbs Were fashioned she must continue [in uncleanness and subsequent Cleanness for the periods prescribed] for both male and female.   if she Aborted a sandal or a placenta she must also continue [in uncleanness And cleanness as] for both male and female.   
mishnah. If a placenta is within a house, the house is unclean;   not Because a placenta is a child but because generally there can be no Placenta without a child. R. Simeon said, the child might have been Mashed   before it came forth.   
mishnah. If a woman aborted a tumtum or an androginos,   she must Continue [in her uncleanness and cleanness as] for both a male   and a Female,   if she gave birth to a tumtum and a male, or to an androginos And a male, she must also continue [in uncleanness and cleanness as] For both a male   and a female.   if she have a tumtum and a female or An androginos and a female, she need continue [in uncleanness as] for A female only.   if the embryo issued in pieces   or in a reversed Position   it is deemed born as soon as its greater part issued forth. If it Came forth in the normal way [it is not deemed born] until the greater Part of its head issued forth. And what is meant [by the issue of] the ‘greater part of its head’? The issue   of its forehead. 
mishnah. If a woman aborted and   it is unknown what was [the sex of The embryo] she must continue [her periods of uncleanness and Cleanness as] for both a male child   and a female child.   if it is Unknown whether it was a child or not, she must continue [her periods Of cleanness and uncleanness as] for a male and a female   and as a Menstruant.   
mishnah. If a woman miscarried on the fortieth day,   she need not Take into consideration the possibility of a valid childbirth; but if on The forty-first day,   she must continue [her periods of uncleanness And cleanness as] for both a male and a female   and as for a Menstruant.   r. Ishmael ruled: [if she miscarried on] the forty-first Day   she continues [her periods of uncleanness and cleanness as] for a Male   and as for a menstruant, but if on the eighty-first day she must Continue [these periods as] for a male and a female and a menstruant; Because a male is fully fashioned   on the forty-first day and a female On the eighty-first day. The sages, however, maintain that both the Fashloning   of the male and the fashioning   of the female take the same Course, each lasting forty-one days. 
mishnah. The daughters of the samaritans   are regarded as Menstruants from their cradle;   and the samaritans impart Uncleanness to a couch underneath as to a cover above,   since they Cohabit with menstruants because [their wives] continue [unclean for Seven days] on account of a discharge of any blood.   on account of Their [uncleanness,]   however, no obligation   is incurred for Entrance into the temple nor is terumah   burnt on their account, Since their uncleanness   is only of a doubtful nature.   
mishnah. The daughters of the sadducees, so long as they are in the Habit of walking in the paths of their fathers, are to be regarded as Samaritan women, if they left those paths   to ‘walk in the paths of Israel. They are to be regarded as israelitish women. R. Jose ruled: they Are always regarded as israelitish women unless they leave the paths Of israel to walk in the paths of their fathers. 
mishnah. The blood  of an idolatress and the clean blood  of a Leprous woman, beth shammai declare clean  and beth hillel hold That it is like her spittle or her urine,  the blood of a woman after Childbirth who did not   undergo ritual immersion, beth shammai Ruled, is like her spittle or her urine,  but beth hillel ruled: it conveys Uncleanness both when wet and when dry, they   agree, however, that If she gave birth while in zibah, it conveys uncleanness both when wet And when dry. 
mishnah. A woman in protracted labour is regarded as a menstruant. If Having been in labour  for three days of the eleven days,  she was Relieved from her pains for twenty-four hours and then gave birth, she Is regarded as having given birth in a zibah;  so r. Eliezer. R. Joshua Ruled: the relief from pain  must have continued for a night and a day,  As the night and the day of the sabbath.  the relief [spoken of is one] From pain, not from bleeding.  how long may protracted labour Continue?  r. Meir ruled: ‘even forty or fifty days.  r. Judah ruled: her [ninth] month suffices for her.   r. Jose and r. Simeon ruled: protracted Labour cannot continue  for more than two weeks. 
mishnah. If a woman was in Protracted labour during the eighty days   prescribed for the birth of A female, all kinds of blood that she may observe   are clean,   until The child is born, but r. Eliezer holds them to be unclean.   they said to R. Eliezer: if in a case where the law was restricted in regard to blood Discharged in the absence of pain,   it was nevertheless relaxed.   in Regard to blood discharged during protracted labour, is there not Even more reason to relax the law   in regard to the blood of labour In a case where   it was relaxed   even in regard to a discharge in the Absence of pain?   he replied: it is enough that the case inferred   shall Be treated in the same manner as the one   from which it is inferred. For In what respect was the law relaxed for a woman in the latter case?   In that of the uncleanness of zibah   only; while she is still subject to The uncleanness of the menstruant. 
mishnah. Throughout all the eleven days   a woman is in a Presumptive state of cleanness.   If she neglected to  examine herself, irrespective of whether the Neglect  was unwitting, under constraint or wilful, she is clean. If the Time of her regular period has arrived and she failed to examine Herself she is definitely unclean.  r. Meir ruled: if a woman was in a Hiding-place  when the time of her regular period arrived and she Failed to examine herself she is definitely clean, because fear suspends The flow of blood. But the days prescribed for a zab or a zabah  or for One who awaits day against day  are  presumed to be unclean.  
mishnah. For a foetus born from its mother's side  there is no need  to Spend  the prescribed days of uncleanness  or the days of cleanness;  Nor does one incur on its account the obligation to bring a sacrifice.  R. Simeon ruled: it is regarded as a valid birth. All women are subject To uncleanness  [if blood appeared] in the outer chamber,  for it is said In scripture, her issue in her flesh be blood;  but a zab and one who Emitted semen convey no uncleanness unless the discharge   came out Of the body. If a man was eating terumah when he felt that his limbs Shivered,   he takes hold of his membrum   and swallows the terumah. And the discharges convey uncleanness, however small the quantity, Even if it is only of the size of a mustard seed or less. 
mishnah. A girl one day old is subject to the uncleanness of Menstruation. One who is ten days old is subject to the uncleanness of Zibah. A boy one day old is subject to the uncleanness of zibah, and to The uncleanness of leprosy and that of corpseuncleanness; he subjects [his deceased brother's widow] to the duty of levirate marriage;   he Exempts [his mother] from the levirate marriage,   he enables her   to Eat terumah and he also causes her to be disqualified from eating Terumah;   He inherits and transmits;  he who kills him is guilty of murder, and he Counts to his father, to his mother and to all his relatives as  a fully Grown man.  
mishnah. A girl of the age of three years and one day may be Betrothed   by intercourse; if the yabam   had intercourse with her, he Acquires her thereby;   the guilt   of adultery   may be incurred Through her,   and she   causes uncleanness to the man who had Intercourse with her so that he in turn conveys uncleanness to that Upon which he lies,   as to a garment which has lain upon [a zab].   if she Was married to a priest, she may eat terumah. If any of the ineligible Persons   cohabited with her he disqualifies her from the priesthood.   If any of the forbidden degrees enumerated in the torah cohabited With her he is to be executed on her account, but she   is exempt [from The penalty]. If one was younger than this age intercourse with her is Like putting a finger in the eye. 
mishnah. If a boy of the age of nine years and one day cohabited with His childless brother's widow, he   acquires her thereby,   but   he Cannot divorce her until he attains his majority. He contracts Uncleanness through intercourse with a menstruant and he in turn Conveys the same degree of uncleanness to that upon which he lies as [does a zab] to that which has lain upon him.   he   disqualifies a woman From the priesthood,   but   cannot confer upon one   the right to eat Terumah.   he renders a beast   invalid for the altar, and it is stoned On his account.   if he had intercourse with any of the forbidden Degrees that are enumerated in the torah, she is to be executed on his Account, though he   is exempt from punishment. 
mishnah. The vows of a girl of the age of eleven years and one day Must be examined;  the vows of one who is of the age of twelve years And one day are valid;  and throughout the twelfth year they are to Be examined.  the vows of a boy of the age of twelve years and one day Must be examined;  the vows of one who is of the age of thirteen years And one day are valid; and throughout the thirteenth year they are To be examined.  prior to this age,  even though they said, ‘we know in Honour of whose name we have made our vow’ or ‘in honour of whose Name we have made our dedication’, their vow  is no valid vow and Their dedication is no valid dedication. Subsequent to this age,  even Though they said, ‘we do not know in the honour of whose name we Have made our vow’ or ‘in honour of whose name we have made our Dedication’, their vow is a valid vow and their dedication is a valid Dedication. 
mishnah. The sages spoke of [the physical development of] a woman in Figurative speech: an unripe fig, a fig in its early ripening stage and a Ripe fig. She is like an unripe fig’ while she is yet a child; a fig in its Early ripening stage’ when she is in the age of   her maidenhood. During Both the latter and the former ages,   they   ruled, her father is Entitled to anything she finds and to her handiwork and to the right Of invalidating her vows. ‘a ripe fig’ — as soon as she becomes a Bogereth, and her father has no longer any right over her. What are the marks [of a bogereth]? R. Jose the galilean says: the Appearance of   the wrinkle beneath the breast. R. Akiba says: the Hanging down of   the breasts. Ben azzai says: the darkening of the Ring around the nipple. R. Jose says: [the development of the breast to a Stage] when one's hand being put on the nipple it sinks and only slowly Rises again. 
mishnah. If a woman at the age of twenty did not produce two hairs,   She must bring evidence that she is twenty years of age and she Becomes confirmed as a woman who is incapable of procreation and Neither performs halizah nor is taken in levirate marriage. If a man of The age of twenty years did not produce two hairs,   they   must bring Evidence that he is twenty years old and he becomes confirmed   as a Saris   and neither submits to halizah nor performs the levirate Marriage; so beth hillel. Beth shammai ruled: with the one as well as With the other [this takes place at] the age of eighteen. R. Eliezer ruled In the case of the male, in agreement with beth hillel, while in that of The female, in agreement with beth shammai, since a woman matures Earlier than a man. 
mishnah. If the lower mark   appeared before the upper one   had yet Made its appearance, she may perform halizah or contract levirate Marriage.   if the upper mark   appeared before the lower one   had Made its appearance, though this is impossible,   r. Meir ruled, she may Neither perform halizah nor contract the levirate marriage; but the Sages ruled, she may either perform halizah or contract the levirate Marriage, because they maintain: it is possible for the lower mark to Appear before the upper one had yet made its appearance, but it is Impossible for the upper mark to appear before the lower one had made Its appearance.   
mishnah. Similarly  any [hole in] an earthen vessel that lets in a Liquid  will  let it out,   but there may be one that will let it out and Will not let it in.   any limb   that grows a nail has also a bone in it   But there may be one that has a bone in it but grows no nail.   Whatever contracts midras-uncleanness   also contracts Corpse-uncleanness   but there are such as contract corpse Uncleanness   and do not contract midras-uncleanness.   
mishnah. Whosoever is fit to try capital cases is also fit to try Monetary suits, but one may be fit to try monetary suits and yet be Unfit to try capital cases. 
mishnah. Whosoever is eligible to act as judge is   eligible to act as Witness, but one may be eligible to act as witness and not as judge. 
mishnah. Whatsoever is subject to tithes is susceptible to Food-uncleanness;   but there is a kind of foodstuff   that is Susceptible to food-uncleanness and is not subject to tithes. 
mishnah. Whatsoever is subject to the obligation of pe'ah   is also Subject to that of tithes; but there is a kind of produce which is subject To the obligation of tithes and is not subject to that of pe'ah. 
mishnah. Whatsoever is subject to the law of the first of the fleece   Is also subject to that of the priestly gifts,   but there may be [a Beast]   that is subject to the law of the priestly gifts and not to that Of the first of the fleece. Whatsoever is subject to the law of Removal   is also subject to the restrictions of the sabbatical year,   But there is [a kind or produce] that is subject to the restrictions of The sabbatical year   and is not subject to the law of removal.   
mishnah. Whatsoever   has scales has fins but there are some that Have fins and no scales. Whatsoever   has horns has hoofs but there Are some that have hoofs and no horns. 
mishnah. Whatsoever requires a benediction after it requires one Before it, but there are things that require a benediction before them And not after them. 
mishnah. If a girl  has grown two pubic hairs she  may either perform Halizah or contract levirate marriage, and she is under an obligation To perform all the commandments that are enumerated in the torah. So also a boy, if he has grown two pubic hairs, is under an obligation to Perform all the commandments enumerated in the torah. He is Furthermore liable to the penalty of a stubborn and rebellious son  As soon as he has grown two hairs until the time when his beard forms A circle.  (this refers to the lower, and not to the upper one, but  the Sages used a euphemism,)  a girl who has grown two hairs  may no Longer exercise the right of mi'un. R. Judah ruled: mi'un may be Exercised until the black  predominates.   
mishnah. The two hairs spoken of in regard to the red heifer   and in Regard to leprosy   as well as those spoken of anywhere else   must be Long enough for their tips to be bent to their roots; so r. Ishmael. R. Eliezer ruled: long enough to be grasped by a finger-nail, r. Akiba Ruled: long enough to be taken off with scissors. Gemara. R. Hisda citing mar ukba stated: the halachah is in agreement with the views of all These in that the law is thereby invariably restricted.   
mishnah. A woman who observed a blood-stain   is in an unsettled Condition   and must   take into consideration the possibility that it Was due to zibah; so r. Meir. But the sages ruled: in the case of Blood-stains there is no [need to consider the possibility of their being] Due to zibah. 
mishnah. If a woman observed a discharge of blood on the eleventh Day   at twilight,   at the beginning of a menstruation period and at The end of a menstruation period,   at the beginning of a zibah period And at the end of a zibah period,   on the fortieth day after the birth Of a male   or on the eightieth day after the birth of a female,   [the Discharge having been observed] at twilight in all these cases,   Behold women in such circumstances   are in a state of perplexity.   Said r. Joshua: before you make provision for the foolish women   come And make provision for the wise ones.   
mishnah. The blood of a menstruant and the flesh of a corpse convey Uncleanness when wet and when dry. But the issue, phlegm and spittle Of a zab, a dead creeping thing, a carcass and semen convey Uncleanness when wet but not when dry. If, however, on being soaked, They are capable of reverting to their original condition they convey Uncleanness when wet and when dry. And what is the duration   of Their soaking?   twenty-four hours in lukewarm water.   r. Jose ruled: If the flesh of a corpse is dry, and on being soaked cannot revert to its Original condition, it is clean.   
mishnah. If a dead creeping thing was found in an alley it causes Uncleanness retrospectively to such time as one can testify, ‘i Examined this alley and there was no creeping thing in it’, or to such Time as it was last swept. So also a bloodstain, if it was found on a Shirt, causes uncleanness retrospectively to such time as one can Testify, ‘i examined this shirt and there was no stain on it’ or to such Time as it was last washed. And it   conveys uncleanness   irrespective Of whether it is wet or dry.   r. Simeon ruled: if it is dry   it causes Uncleanness retrospectively,   but if it is wet   it causes uncleanness Only to a time when it could still have been wet.   
mishnah. All bloodstains   that come from rekem   are clean.   r. Judah declares them unclean, because the people who live there are Proselytes   though misguided.   those   that come from the heathens   Are clean.   those that come from israelites or from samaritans, r. Meir declares, are unclean, but the sages declared them clean   Because they are under no suspicion   in regard to their stains. 
mishnah. All bloodstains, wheresoever they are found,   are clean, Except those that are found indoors   or round about a chamber for   Unclean women.   a chamber for   unclean samaritan women conveys Uncleanness by overshadowing   because they bury miscarriages There. R. Judah stated, they did not bury them but threw them away And the wild beasts dragged them off. They   are believed when they Declare, ‘we buried miscarriages there’, or ‘we did not bury them’. They   are believed when they declare concerning — a beast whether it Had given birth to a firstling   or had not given birth to one. They   are Believed when giving information on the marking of graves,   but they Are not believed either in regard to overhanging branches,   or Protruding stones   or a beth ha-peras.   this is the general rule: in any Matter where they are under suspicion they are not believed. C h a p t e r v i i i 
mishnah. If a woman observed a bloodstain on her body,  if it was Near the pudenda she is unclean  but if it was not near the pudenda she Remains clean. If  it was on her heel or on the tip of her great toe, she is Unclean.  on her thigh or on her feet, if on the inner side, she is Unclean; if on their outer side, she remains clean; and if on the front And back sides  she remains clean. If she observed it on her shirt below The belt, she is unclean,  but if above the belt, she remains clean. If she Observed it on the sleeve of her shirt, she is unclean if it  can reach as Low as the pudenda,  but if it cannot, she remains clean. If she takes it Off and covers herself with it in the night, she is unclean wherever the Stain is found,  since it can turn about.  and the same law  applies to a Pallium.   
mishnah. [a woman] may attribute [a bloodstain] to any [external] Cause to which she can possibly attribute it.  if [for instance] she had Slain a domestic beast, a wild animal or a bird, if she was handling Bloodstains or sat beside those who handled them. Or if she killed a Louse. She may attribute the bloodstain to it. How large a stain may be Attributed to a louse?  r. Hanina b. Antigonus replied: one up to the Size  of a split bean; [and it may be attributed to a louse] even though She did not kill it.   she may also attribute it to her son or to her Husband.   if she herself had a wound that   could open again and Bleed she may attribute it to it. A woman once came to r. Akiba and said To him: i have observed a bloodstain’. ‘had you perhaps’, he said to her. ‘a wound?’ yes’. She replied, ‘but it has healed’. Is it possible he again Asked her, that it could open again and bleed?’ ‘yes’, she replied; and r. Akiba declared her clean. Observing that his disciples looked at each Other in astonishment. He said to them, ‘ why do you find this difficult, Seeing that the sages did not lay down the rule   in order to impose Restrictions but rather to relax them, for it is said in scripture, and if A woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood.   only Blood   but not a bloodstain. If on a testing rag that was placed under A pillow some blood was found, if the stain is round it is clean but if it Is elongated it is unclean; so r. Eliezer son of r. Zadok. C h a p t e r i x 
mishnah. If a woman when attending to her needs  observed an issue Of blood, r. Meir ruled: if she was standing she is unclean  but if she Was sitting she remains clean. R. Jose ruled: in either case she remains Clean. If a man and a woman attended to their needs  in the same bowl And blood was found on the water, r. Jose  ruled that it was clean,  While r. Simeon ruled that it was unclean, since it is not usual for a Man to discharge blood, but the presumption is that blood issues from The woman. 
mishnah. If she lent her shirt to a gentile woman or to a menstruant She may attribute a stain   to either.   if three women had worn the Same shirt or had sat on the same wooden bench and subsequently Blood was found on it, all are regarded as unclean.   if they had sat On a stone bench   or on the projection within the colonnade of a bath House,   r. Nehemiah rules that they are clean;   for r. Nehemiah has Laid down: any thing that is not susceptible to uncleanness is not Susceptible to stains.   
mishnah. If three women slept in one bed and blood was found under One of them, they are all unclean. If one of them examined herself and Was found to be unclean, she alone is unclean while the two others Are clean. They may also attribute the blood to one another.   and if They were not likely   to observe a discharge,   they must be regarded As though they were likely to observe one. 
mishnah. If three women Slept in one bed, and blood was found under the middle one, they are All unclean. If it was found under the inner one,  the two inner ones  Are unclean while the outer one is clean. If it was found under the Outer one,  the two outer ones  are unclean while the inner one  is Clean. When  is this the case?  when they passed  by way of the foot of The bed,  but if they passed across it,   they are all unclean.   if one of Them examined herself and was found clean, she remains clean while The two others are unclean. If two, examined themselves and were Found to be clean they remain clean while the third is unclean. If the Three examined themselves and were found to be clean, they are all Unclean. To what may this be compared? To an unclean heap   that was Mixed up with two clean heaps, where, if they examined one of them and Found it to be clean, it is clean while the two others are unclean; if They examined two of the heaps and found them to be clean, they are Clean while the third one is unclean; and if they examined the three And they were found to be clean, they are all unclean; so r. Meir, for r. Meir ruled: any object that is in a presumptive state of uncleanness Always remains unclean until it is known to you where the Uncleanness is. But the sages ruled: one continues the examination of The heap until one reaches bedrock or virgin soil.   
mishnah. Seven substances must be applied to a stain:   tasteless Spittle,   the liquid of crushed beans, urine, natron, lye Cimolian earth, and lion's leaf. If one immersed it  and, having handled Clean things on it, applied to it the seven substances and the stain did Not fade away it must be a dye; and the clean things remain clean and There is no need to immerse it  again. If the stain faded away or grew Fainter,  it must be a bloodstain and the clean things are unclean and It is necessary  to perform immersion again.  what is meant by tasteless Spittle’? That of a man who on that day  tasted nothing. The liquid of Crushed beans’? Paste made of crushed beans that were naturally  Peeled off. Urine’? This refers to such as has fermented. One must scour The stain three times with each of the substances. If they were not Applied in the prescribed order, or if the seven substances were applied Simultaneously, nothing useful has thereby been done.  
mishnah. For every woman that has a settled period it suffices [to Reckon her period of uncleanness from] her set time. And these are the Symptoms of settled periods: [if the woman]   yawns, sneezes, feels pain At the top of   her stomach or the bottom of her bowels, discharges,   Or is seized by a kind of shivering, or any other similar symptoms.   any Woman who established for herself [one of the symptoms]   three times May be deemed to have   a settled period. 
mishnah. If a woman had the habit of observing her menstrual Discharges at the onset of the symptoms   of her settled periods, all Clean things   that she handled while the symptoms were in progress   Are unclean; but if she had the habit of observing them at the end of The symptoms, all clean things   that she handled while the symptoms Lasted   remain clean. R. Jose ruled: settled periods may also be Determined by days and hours.   if   she had the habit of observing her Menstrual discharges at sunrise she is forbidden intercourse at Sunrise only.   r. Judah ruled: she   is permitted it during all that day.   
mishnah. If a woman had the habit of observing her menstrual Discharges at the onset of the symptoms   of her settled periods, all Clean things   that she handled while the symptoms were in progress   Are unclean; but if she had the habit of observing them at the end of The symptoms, all clean things   that she handled while the symptoms Lasted   remain clean. R. Jose ruled: settled periods may also be Determined by days and hours.   if   she had the habit of observing her Menstrual discharges at sunrise she is forbidden intercourse at Sunrise only.   r. Judah ruled: she   is permitted it during all that day.   
mishnah. Women in regard to their virginity are like vines. One vine may have Red wine  while another has black wine, one vine may yield much wine While another yields little.  r. Judah stated: every normal vine yields  Wine,  and one that yields no wine is but a dorketai.  C h a p t e r x 
mishnah. If a young girl, whose age of menstruation   has not Arrived, married, beth shammai ruled: she is allowed   four nights,   And beth hillel ruled: until the wound is healed.   if the age of her Menstruation has arrived   and she married, beth shammai ruled: she is Allowed   the first night, and beth hillel ruled: four nights, until the Exit of the sabbath.   if she had observed a discharge while she was Still in her father's house,   beth shammai ruled: she is only allowed The obligatory marital intercourse,   and beth hillel ruled: all that   Night. 
mishnah. If a menstruant examined herself on the seventh day   in the Morning and found herself to be clean, and at twilight   she did not Ascertain her separation,   and after some days she examined herself And found that she was unclean, behold she is   in a presumptive state Of cleanness.   if she examined herself on the seventh day   in the Morning and found that she was unclean, and at twilight   she did not Ascertain her separation,   and after a time she examined herself and Found that she was clean, behold she is   in a presumptive state of Uncleanness.   she   conveys, however, uncleanness for twenty-four Hours retrospectively or during the time between the last and the Previous examination, but if she had a settled period, it suffices for her To be deemed unclean from the time of her discharge. R.   judah ruled: Any woman who did not,   following the afternoon, ascertain her Separation to a state of cleanness is regarded as being in a Presumptive state of uncleanness.   but the sages ruled: even if she Examined herself on the second day of her menstruation and found That she was clean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her Separation, and after a time she examined herself and found that she Was unclean, she is regarded as being in a presumptive state of Cleanness.   
mishnah. If a zab and a zabah   examined themselves on the first day   And found themselves clean and on the seventh day   also and found Themselves clean, but did not examine themselves during the other, Intervening, days, r. Eliezer ruled: behold these are in a presumptive Condition of cleanness. R. Joshua ruled: they are entitled [to reckon as Clean] only the first day and the seventh day. R. Akiba ruled: they are Entitled to reckon as clean the seventh day alone.   
mishnah. If a zab, a zabah, a menstruant, a woman after childbirth or A leper have died [their corpses] convey uncleanness by carriage   Until the flesh has decayed. If an idolater has died he conveys no Uncleanness.   beth shammai ruled: all women die as menstruants;   But beth hillel ruled: a woman   cannot be regarded as a menstruant Unless she died while she was in menstruation. 
mishnah. If a woman died and a quarter of a log of blood issued from Her, it   conveys uncleanness as a bloodstain   and it   also conveys Uncleanness by overshadowing.   r. Judah ruled: it does not convey Uncleanness as a stain, since it was detached after she had died.   r. Judah, however, agrees that where a woman sitting on the travailing Stool died and a quarter of a log of blood issued from her, it   conveys Uncleanness as a bloodstain.   r. Jose ruled: hence   it conveys no Uncleanness by overshadowing.   
mishnah. Formerly it was ruled: a woman who abides in clean blood   May pour out   water   for [washing of] the paschal lamb.   Subsequently they changed their view: in respect of consecrated food She is like one who came in contact with a person that was subject to Corpse uncleanness.   this according to the view of beth hillel. Beth Shammai ruled: even as one who is subject to corpse uncleanness.   
mishnah. But they   agree that she   may eat   second tithe; she may Set aside her   dough-offering,   bring it near   to the dough   and Designate it as such;   and that if any of her spittle or of the blood of Her purification   fell on a loaf of terumah the latter remains clean. Beth shammai ruled: she requires immersion at the end [of her days of Purification],   and beth hillel ruled: she requires no immersion at the End. 
mishnah. If a woman observed a discharge on the eleventh day   and Performed immersion in the evening and then had marital intercourse, Beth shammai ruled: they   convey uncleanness   to couch and seat   And they are liable to a sacrifice,    
mishnah  . Any liquid  which was desired at the beginning  though it was not desired at the end, or which was desired at the end though it was not desired at the beginning, comes under the law of ‘if water be put’.  Unclean liquids render unclean  whether [their action] is desired or is not desired.  
mishnah  . If one shook a tree in order to cause food or an unclean thing  to drop down from it, [the rain water dropping down from it] does not come  under the law of ‘if water be put’. If [he shook the tree] in order to cause liquids to drop down from it, beth shammai say: both [the liquids] that drop down and [the liquids] that remain  [on the tree] come under the law of ‘if water be put’. But beth hillel say: [the liquids] that drop down come under the law of ‘if water be put’, but [the liquids] that remain [on the tree] do not come under the law of ‘if water be put’, because his intention was that [the liquids] should drop down from all the tree.   
mishnah  . If one shook a tree  and it fell   on another tree, or a branch and it fell on another branch, and under them were seeds or vegetables [still] joined to the ground, beth shammai say: this comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. But beth hillel say: this does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Joshua said   in the name of abba jose cholikofri,   a citizen of tibeon:   marvel at thyself if there is anything in the torah about a liquid causing susceptibility to uncleanness except one put it on with intention, for it is said: ‘if water be put upon the seed’.    
mishnah  . If one shook   a bundle of vegetables and [water] dropped down from the upper [side] to the lower [side], beth shammai say: this comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. But beth hillel say: this does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. Beth hillel said to beth shammai: if one shakes a stalk, do we apprehend lest water drops from one leaf on the other leaf?   Beth shammai said to them: a stalk is only one, but a bundle has many stalks.   Beth hillel said to them: lo, if one lifted   a sack full of fruit and put it beside the river,   do we apprehend lest water drops from the upper [side] to the lower [side]?   If, however, he lifted two sacks and placed them one upon the other, the lower [sack] comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Jose says: the lower [sack] also remains insusceptible to uncleanness.  
mishnah  . If one rubbed   a leak or pressed his hair   with his garment, r. Jose says: the liquid which came out comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’, but the liquid that remained does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’, because his intention was that the liquid should come out of all of it.    
mishnah  . If one blew on lentils in order to try whether they were good,   r. Simeon says: this does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. But   the sages say: this does come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one ate sesame with his finger   and liquid came on his hand, r. Simeon says: this does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. But the sages say: this does come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one hid his fruit in water from thieves, it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. Once it happened that the men of jerusalem hid their fig cakes in water from the robbers,   and the sages declared that they were not susceptible to uncleanness. If one put his fruit in the stream of a river to make it come down with him, it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . The exudation of houses, of cisterns, of ditches and caverns  does not cause  susceptibility to uncleanness. A man's perspiration does not cause susceptibility to uncleanness. If a man drank unclean water and perspired, his perspiration does not cause  susceptibility to uncleanness. If he entered  into drawn water and perspired, his perspiration causes  susceptibility to uncleanness. If he dried himself and then perspired, his perspiration does not cause susceptibility to uncleanness.  
mishnah  . The exudation of an unclean bath  is unclean,  but that of a clean bath  comes  under the law of ‘if water be put’. If there was a pool in a house which caused the house to exude and the pool was unclean, the exudation of all the house which was caused by the pool   is unclean.  
mishnah  . If there were two pools, the one clean and the other unclean, what exudes near the unclean pool is unclean, and what exudes near the clean pool is clean, and what is at equal distance [from both pools] is unclean.   If   unclean iron   was smelted with clean iron and the greater part [came] from the unclean iron, it is unclean; if the greater part [came] from the clean iron, it is clean; but if there was half of each, it is unclean. If in pots which israelites and heathens used for passing water the greater part [of the contents consisted] of unclean [urine],   it is unclean; if the greater part [of the contents consisted] of clean [urine],   it is clean; but if there was half of each, it is unclean. If in slop-water, in which rain had fallen, the greater part consisted of the unclean water,   it is unclean; if the greater part consisted of clean water,   it is clean; but if there was half of each, it is unclean. When [is this the case]?   When the slop-water came first; but if the rain water came before [the slop-water]. It is unclean   whatever the quantity [of the rain water].  
mishnah  . If one secured his roof or washed his garment   and rain came down upon it,   if the greater part   consisted of the unclean water, it is unclean; if the greater part consisted of the clean water, it is clean; but if there was half of each, it is unclean. R. Judah says: if the dripping increased,   [it is clean].  
mishnah  . If in a city in which israelites and heathens dwelt together there was a bath working   on the sabbath, if the majority [of the inhabitants] were heathens, one may bathe therein immediately   [after the conclusion of the sabbath]; if the majority were israelites, one must wait until the water can be heated;   if they were half and half, one must [also] wait until the water can be heated. R. Judah says: if the bath-basin was small and there was there a [heathen] authority, one may bathe therein immediately   [after the conclusion of the sabbath].  
mishnah  . If one found vegetables sold therein [on the sabbath]. If the majority [of the inhabitants] were heathens, one may buy thereof immediately   [after the conclusion of the sabbath]; if the majority were israelites, one must wait until [vegetables] can arrive from the nearest place;   if they were half and half, one must [also] wait until [vegetables] can arrive from the nearest place; but if there was there a [heathen] authority, one may buy immediately [after the conclusion of the sabbath].  
mishnah  . If an abandoned child was found there, if the majority [of the inhabitants] were heathens, it may be deemed a heathen;   if the majority were israelites, it must be deemed an israelite; if they were half and half, it must [also] be deemed an israelite. R. Judah says: we must consider who form the majority of those who abandon their children.    
mishnah  . If one found there lost property, if the majority [of the inhabitants] were heathens, he need not proclaim   it; if the majority were israelites, he must proclaim it; if they were half and half, he must [also] proclaim it. If one found bread there, we must consider who form the majority of the bakers.   If it was bread of pure flour,   we must consider who form the majority of those who eat bread of pure flour. R. Judah says: if it was coarse bread, we must consider who form the majority of those who eat coarse bread.    
mishnah  . If one found meat there, we must consider who form the majority of the butchers. If it was cooked meat, we must consider who form the majority of those who eat cooked meat.  
mishnah   . If one found fruit by the wayside,   if the majority [of the inhabitants] gathered fruit for their homes,   he is absolved [from tithes];   if [the majority gathered it] for selling in the market,   he is liable [to tithes]; but if they were half and half, the fruit is demai.   If there was a granary into which both israelites and heathens laid in their produce, if the majority were heathens, [the produce must be considered] certainly untithed;   if the majority were israelites, [it must be considered] demai;   if they were half and half, [it must be considered] certainly untithed. This is the opinion of r. Meir. But the sages say: even if they were all heathens, and only one israelite laid his produce into the granary, [it must be considered] demai.    
mishnah   . If the fruit of the second year   exceeded in quantity the fruit of the third year, or the fruit of the third year exceeded the fruit of the fourth year, or the fruit of the fourth year exceeded the fruit of the fifth year,   or the fruit of the fifth year exceeded the fruit of the sixth year, or the fruit of the sixth year exceeded the fruit of the seventh year,   or the fruit of the seventh year exceeded the fruit of the year after the conclusion of the seventh year,   we must consider what forms the greater part; if they are half and half, we must decide according to the more stringent alternative.    
mishnah  . If a sack full of fruit was put by the side of a river or by the side of the mouth of a cistern  or on the steps of a cavern, and [the fruit] absorbed water, all [the fruit] which absorbed the water comes  under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Judah says: all [the fruit] which faced  the water comes under the law of ‘if water be put’, but all [the fruit] which did not face the water does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If a jar  full of fruit was put into liquids, or if a jar full of liquids was put into fruit and [the fruit] absorbed water, all [the fruit] which absorbed the water comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. Of what liquids have they said it? Of water, wine and vinegar;  but all the other liquids  do not cause susceptibility to uncleanness. R. Nehemiah declares pulse insusceptible,  because pulse does not absorb [liquids].  
mishnah  . If  one drew off  hot bread   and put it upon the mouth of a jar of wine, r. Meir declares it susceptible to uncleanness;   but r. Judah declares it insusceptible.   R. Jose declares it insusceptible   in the case of wheaten bread and susceptible in the case of barley bread, because barley absorbs [liquids].  
mishnah  . If one sprinkled his house   [with water] and put wheat therein and it became moist, if [the moisture came] from the water, it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if [the moisture came] from the stony floor, it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one washed his garment in a tub and put wheat therein   and it became moist, if [the moisture came] from the water,   it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if [the moisture came] of itself,   it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one moistened [produce] with sand, this comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. It happened with the men of mahoz   that they used to moisten [their produce] with sand, and the sages said to them: if you have always done thus,   you have never prepared your food in purity.    
mishnah  . If one moistened [produce] with drying clay, r. Simeon says: if there was still in it dripping liquid, it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if there was not, it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one sprinkled   his threshing-floor with water, he need not apprehend lest wheat be put there and it become moist.   If one gathered grass with the dew still on it in order to moisten wheat therewith,   it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if his intention was for this purpose,   it does come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one carried wheat to be milled and rain came down upon it and he was glad of it, it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Judah said: one cannot help being glad of it;   nay, [it comes under the law] only if he stopped [on his way].    
mishnah  . If his olives were put on the roof and rain came down upon them and he was glad of it, it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Judah says: one cannot help being glad; nay, [it comes under the law] only if he stopped up the rain-pipe   or if he shook [the olives] therein.  
mishnah  . If ass-drivers were crossing a river and their sacks [filled with produce] fell into the water and they were glad of it, it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Judah says: one cannot help being glad of it; nay, [it comes under the law] only if they turned over [the sacks].   If one's feet were full of clay (likewise, too, the feet of his beast) and he crossed a river and he was glad of it,   this comes under the law of ‘if water be put’.   R. Judah says: one cannot help being glad of it; nay, [it comes under the law] only if he stopped and rinsed   [the feet]. But in the case of a man   or an unclean beast   it always causes   susceptibility to uncleanness.  
mishnah  . If one lowered into water wheels or gear of oxen at the time of the east wind   in order that they might become tightened, this comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one took down a beast to drink, the water which came up on its mouth comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’, but that which came up on its feet does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If, however, he intended that its feet should be washed, also the water that came up on its feet comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. At the time of footsoreness or of threshing   it always causes susceptibility to uncleanness. If a deaf-mute or an idiot or a minor took it down, even though his intention was that its feet should be washed, it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’, because with these the act alone counts, but not the intention.    
mishnah  . If one stooped down to drink,  the water which came up on his mouth or on his moustache comes under the law of ‘if water be put’;  but [what came up] on his nose or on his head or on his beard  does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one drew water with a jar, the water which came up on the back thereof, or on the rope which was wound round its neck, or on the rope which was needed for its use,  comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. How much rope is needed for its use? R. Simeon b. Eleazar says: a handbreadth. If he put the jar under the rain-pipe, it  does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If rain came down upon a person,  even if he was unclean with a principal defilement,  it does not come  under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if he shook it off, it  does come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one stood under a rain-pipe to cool himself or to wash himself, [the water falling on him] is unclean   if he is unclean; but if he is clean, it [only] comes under the law of if water be put.  
mishnah  . If one inclined a dish against a wall that it might be rinsed,   it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if in order that the wall might not be damaged,   it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If drippings [from a roof] fell   into a jar,   beth shammai say: it should be broken.   But beth hillel say: it may be emptied out.   But they   agree that one may put out his hand and take fruit therefrom and leave it insusceptible to uncleanness.    
mishnah  . If drippings [from a roof] fell   into a tub, the water which splashed out or ran over does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one moved the tub in order to pour out the water, beth shammai say: it comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. But beth hillel say: it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one placed the tub in order that the drippings [from the roof] should fall into it,   beth shammai say: the water that splashes out or runs over   comes under the law of ‘if water be put’, but beth hillel say: it   does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one moved the tub in order to pour out the water, both agree that it   comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one immersed vessels or washed his garment in a cavern,   the water that came up on his hands   comes under the law of ‘if water be put’; but what came up on his feet   does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Eliezer says: if it was not possible for him to go down into the cavern without soiling his feet, what came up on his feet also comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If a basket full of lupines was placed in a mikveh,   one may put   out his hand and take lupines therefrom and leave them clean.   But if he lifted them   out of the water, those that touch the basket are unclean,   but the rest of the lupines are clean.   If there was a radish in a cavern,   a menstruant woman may rinse it and leave it clean.   But if she lifted it, however little, out of the water, it becomes unclean.    
mishnah  . If fruit fell into a channel of water,   and one whose hands were unclean put out his hands and took it, his hands become clean   and the fruit [also] remains clean.   But if his intention was that his hands should be rinsed, his hands become clean and the fruit comes   under the law of ‘if water be put.’  
mishnah  . If a pot   full of water was placed in a mikveh, and a man who was unclean with a principal defilement put his hand into the pot, it becomes unclean.   But if [he was unclean] by the touch of a defilement,   the pot remains clean,   but any of the other liquids   [contained in the pot] becomes unclean, for water cannot purify the other liquids.    
mishnah  . If one drew water through a channel,    it causes   susceptibility to uncleanness for three days. R. Akiba says: if the channel was dried, it at once does not cause   susceptibility to uncleanness; but if it was not dried, it causes susceptibility even for thirty days.  
mishnah   . If unclean liquids fell upon wood and rain came down upon it   and [the rain water] exceeded [the liquids] in quantity. They become clean;   but if the wood had been taken outside in order that rain should come down upon it, they are unclean   even though [the rain water] exceeded in quantity. If [the wood] had absorbed unclean liquids,   they become clean even though the wood had been carried outside in order that rain should come down upon it.   But one may not light the wood in an oven except with clean hands.   R. Simeon says: if the wood was freshly-cut when it was lighted, and the liquids that came out of it   exceeded in quantity the liquids which it had absorbed, they become clean.    
mishnah  . If a man immersed himself in a river  and there was in front of him another river and he crossed it,  the second [water] purifies  the first [water]. If his fellow who was intoxicated pushed him in or his beast,  the second [water] purifies the first [water]; but if [he did it] out of playfulness, it comes  under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If a man swam in water, the water that splashed out  does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if it was his intention to splash his fellow, this comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one made a ‘blrd’  in the water, neither [the water] that splashed out  nor what remained in it  comes under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If drippings [from a roof] came down into fruit and it was mixed up in order that it might become dry   [quickly]. R. Simeon says: it comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. But the sages say: it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If a cistern was measured whether for its depth of for its breadth, it comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. This is the opinion of r. Tarfon. But r. Akiba says: if [it was measured] for its depth,   it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if for its breadth, it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . If one put his hand or his foot or a reed into a cistern in order to ascertain whether it had any water, it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if to ascertain how much water it had, this comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If one threw a stone into a cistern to ascertain whether it had any water, [the water] that was splashed does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’, and also [the water] that is on the stone   is clean.    
mishnah  . If one beat upon a hide   outside the water, it comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if [he beat it] inside the water,   it does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. R. Jose says: it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’ also if [he beat it] inside the water, because his intention was that the water should come off together with the filth.    
mishnah  . The water that comes up into a ship or into the bilge or on the oars does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. The water that comes up in snares, nets, or gins, does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if they were shaken,   it does come   under the law of ‘if water be put’. If a ship was led out into the great sea   in order to tighten it,   or if a nail   was taken out into the rain in order to temper it. Or if a brand was left in the rain in order to extinguish it, this comes   under the law of ‘if water be put’.  
mishnah  . [water on] the covering of tables or on the matting of bricks does not come   under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if they were shaken, it does come   under the law of ‘it water be put’.  
mishnah  . Any uninterrupted flow of liquid   is clean,   except [the flow] of honey of ziphim   and of batter.   Beth shammai say: also [the flow of] thick pottage of grits, or of beans, because it bounds backwards.  
mishnah   . [the flow] of hot water poured   into hot water, of cold water [poured] into cold water, of hot water [poured] into cold water remains clean; but [the flow] of cold water [poured] into hot water becomes unclean.   R. Simeon says: also [the flow] of not water poured into not water becomes unclean if the strength of the heat of the lower [water] is greater than that of the upper [water].    
mishnah   . If a woman whose hands were clean stirred   an unclean pot and her hands perspired, they become unclean.   If her hands were unclean and she stirred a clean pot and her hands perspired the pot becomes unclean.   R. Jose says: only if her hands dripped.   If grapes were weighed in the scale of a balance, the wine   in the scale is clean   until it is poured into a vessel.   Lo, this is like baskets of olives and grapes when they are dripping [with sap].    
mishnah  . If one carried up his fruit to the roof because of maggots,  and dew came down upon it, it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’; but if his intention was for this purpose,  it comes under the law of ‘if water be put’. If a deaf-mute, or an idiot, or a minor carried it up, although he expected that dew should come down upon it, it does not come under the law of ‘if water be put’, because with these the act alone counts, but not the intention.   
mishnah  . If one carried up to the roof bundles [of vegetables] or cakes of figs or garlic so as to keep them fresh, it does not come  under the law of ‘if water be put’. All bundles [of vegetables] in the market places are unclean.  R. Judah declares them clean if they are fresh.  R. Meir said: wherefore have they declared them unclean? Only because of liquid from the mouth.  All coarse and fine flours of the market places are unclean.  Crushed wheat, groats, and pearl- barley  are unclean everywhere.    
mishnah  . All eggs may be presumed clean except those of dealers in liquids;   but if they sold with them dry fruit, they are clean.   All fish may be presumed unclean.   R. Judah says: pieces of iltith,   egyptian fish which arrives in a basket, and spanish tunny, these may be presumed clean.   All kinds of brine may be presumed unclean. Concerning all these   an ‘am ha-arez   may be trusted when he declares them to be clean, except in the case of fish,   since they   are usually stored with any ‘am ha-arez.   R. Eliezer b. Jacob says: clean brine into which water fell in any quantity must be deemed unclean.    
mishnah  . There are seven liquids:   dew, water, wine, oil, blood,   milk and bees’ honey. Hornets’ honey does not cause susceptibility to uncleanness and may be eaten.  
mishnah  .a sub-species of water   are the liquids that come forth from the eye, from the ear, from the nose and from the mouth, and urine, whether of adults or of children,   whether [its flow is] conscious or unconscious. A sub-species of blood are blood from the slaughtering of cattle and wild animals and birds that are clean, and blood from blood letting for drinking.   Whey is deemed like milk, and the sap of olives is deemed like oil, since it is never free from oil.   This is the opinion of r. Simeon. R. Meir says: even though it contains no oil. The blood of a creeping thing is deemed like its flesh,   it causes uncleanness but does not cause susceptibility to uncleanness, and we have nothing like it.    
mishnah  . The following cause uncleanness and also susceptibility   [to uncleanness]; the issue   of a person who has a running issue, his spittle, his semen and his urine, a quarter-log from a corpse, and the blood of a menstruant woman. R. Eliezer says: semen does not cause susceptibility. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah says: the blood of a menstruant woman does not cause susceptibility. R. Simeon says: the blood of a corpse does not cause susceptibility, and if it fell on a gourd, it should be scraped off,   and it remains clean.  
mishnah  .the following cause neither uncleanness nor susceptibility to uncleanness: sweat,   ill-smelling secretion, excrement, blood issuing with any of these, liquid   [issuing from a still-born child] of eight months (r. Jose says: except its blood).   [the discharge from the bowels of] one who drinks the water of tiberias   even though it comes out clean, blood from the slaughtering of cattle and wild animals and birds that are unclean, and blood from bloodletting for healing.   R. Eliezer declares these   unclean. R. Simeon b. Eleazar says: the milk of a male is clean.    
mishnah  . A woman's milk renders unclean whether [its flow is] desired or is not desired,   but the milk of cattle renders unclean only if [its flow is] desired. R. Akiba said: the matter can be proved by an inference from minor to major: if a woman's milk, the use of which is confined to infants, can render unclean whether [its flow is] desired or is not desired, all the more should the milk of cattle, the use of which is common to infants and to adults, render unclean both when [its flow is] desired and when it is not desired. But they   said to him: no; a woman's milk renders unclean when [its flow is] not desired, because the blood issuing from her wound is unclean;   but how could the milk of cattle render unclean when [its flow is] not desired, seeing that the blood issuing from its wound is clean? He said to them: i adopt a more rigorous ruling in the case of milk than in the case of blood, for if one milks for healing,   [the milk] is unclean,   whereas if one lets blood for healing, [the blood] is clean.   They said to him: let baskets of olives and grapes prove   it; for liquids flowing from them are unclean only when [the flow is] desired, but when [the flow is] not desired they are clean.   He said to them: no; if you say [thus] of baskets of olives and grapes which are at first a solid food and at the end become a liquid, could you say [the same] of milk which remains a liquid from beginning to end?   Thus far was the argument.   R. Simeon said: from thenceforward we   used to argue before him: let rain water prove it, for it remains a liquid from beginning to end, and renders unclean only when [its flow is] desired. But he said to us: no; if you say [thus] of rain water, it is because most of it is intended not for man   but for the soil and for trees, whereas most milk is intended for man.  
mishnah  . If a man has seen one issue of the flux,  beth shammai say: he is to be compared to [a woman] who awaits day against day;  but beth hillel say: he is to be compared to one who has suffered [nocturnal] pollution.  Should he see an issue [one day]. And on the second it stopped, and on the third day he saw two [issues], or one [issue] that was as copious as two,  beth shammai say: he is a real zab;  but beth hillel say: he defiles those objects on which he sits or lies, and must also obtain immersion in running water, but he is exempt from the offering.  R. Eleazar b. Judah said: beth shammai concur that in such a case he cannot be deemed a real zab;  where they do dispute is in the case of one who had suffered two [issues], or one [issue] that was as copious as two [on one day], and stopped on the second day, and on the third day he saw another [issue]. In such a case beth shammai say: he is a real zab;  but beth hillel say: he only defiles those objects on which he sits or lies, and must obtain immersion in running water, but is exempt from the offering.   
mishnah  . If one suffers an issue of semen on the third day of counting after his flux,   beth shammai say: it renders void the two clean days that have preceded;   but beth hillel say: it renders void only that day.   R. Ishmael says: if he suffered it on the second day,   it renders void the preceding day;   but r. Akiba says: it matters not whether he suffered it on the second or third day   — [in either case] beth shammai say, it renders void the two preceding days, and beth hillel say, it renders void only that day itself. But they   concur that if he suffered it on the fourth day [of counting] it renders void only that day [of the counting],   provided it was a discharge of semen; but if it had been an issue of flux, then even if this had occurred on the seventh day, it renders void all the days that had preceded.    
mishnah  . If he saw one issue on one day and two on the next day, or two on one day and one on the morrow, or three on three [consecutive] days, or three nights, he is deemed a real zab.    
mishnah  . If he saw one [issue] and a pause took place of sufficient duration to allow an immersion and a drying,   and after that he saw two issues, or one as copious as two,   or if he saw two [issues] or one as copious as two, and an interval took place of sufficient duration to allow an immersion and a drying, and after that he again saw an issue, he is a real zab.  
mishnah  . If he saw one issue which was as copious as three, lasting as long [as it takes to go] from gad-yawan   to siloah,   in which time one can bathe and dry twice,   he becomes a real zab. If he saw one issue which was as copious as two, he defiles [objects] on which he lies or sits and must obtain immersion in running water, but is exempt from bringing a sacrifice. R. Jose said: they have not spoken of one issue as copious unless there was sufficient therein to make up three.    
mishnah  . If he beheld one issue at day-time and another at twilight, or one at twilight and the other on the morrow, then if it were known   that part of the issue   occurred at day-time and part thereof on the morrow,   his status is certain in respect of a sacrifice and uncleanness;   but if it is in doubt whether part [of the issue] occurred during the day and part there of [on what is] the day following,   he is in a status of certainty in respect of defilement,   but in one of doubt in respect of a sacrifice.   If he had seen issues on two separate days at twilight,   his status is in doubt both in respect of defilement   and in respect of a sacrifice.   If [he had seen only] one issue at twilight, there is a doubt [also] in respect of [his] defilement.    
mishnah  . All persons  become unclean through a flux, also proselytes and slaves whether freed or not, a deaf-mute, an imbecile or minor, a eunuch whether [he had been emasculated] by man, or was a eunuch from [the time of seeing] the sun.  Upon one whose sex was unknown, or upon a hermaphrodite,  the stringencies appertaining to both man and woman are imposed: they defile through blood like a woman, and through flux  like a man. Their uncleanness, however, still remains in doubt.   
mishnah  . Along [the following] seven lines is a zab examined as long as he had not entered the bounds of zibah:  [enquiries] as to [what was] his food,  drink,  as [to what] he had borne, whether he had jumped, whether he had been ill, what he had seen,  or [whether he had] obscene reflections. [it differed little] whether he had reflected [obscenely] prior to seeing [a woman], or whether he had seen [a woman] prior to his [obscene] reflections.   R. Judah adds: even if he had watched beasts, wild animals or birds having intercourse with each other, and even when he had seen a woman's dyed garments. R. Akiba added: even if he had eaten any kind of food, be it good or bad, or had drunk any kind of liquid.   Whereupon they exclaimed to him: [‘according to your view] there will be no zabim in the world henceforth!’   his retort to them was: you are not held responsible for the existence of zabim!’   as soon, however, as it had entered the bounds of zibah,   no further examination took place.   [his flux] resulting   from an accident, or that was at all doubtful,   or an issue of semen, these are unclean,   since there is whereon to rely.   If he beheld a first [issue] he is examined; on the second [issue] he is examined,   but on the third [issue] no examination takes place.   R. Eliezer says: also on the third [issue] he is examined to ascertain his liability to a sacrifice.  
mishnah  . If one suffered [a discharge of] semen he does not convey uncleanness by reason of a flux   for twenty-four hours.   R. Jose says: [only] that day. If a gentile experienced a discharge of semen, and he became a proselyte, he becomes immediately unclean by reason of a flux.   If [a woman] had [an issue] of blood,   or had experienced difficulty [in childbirth],   [the time prescribed] is twenty-four hours.   If one smites his servant, the ‘day or two’   is twenty-four hours. If a dog ate a corpse's flesh, the three days [during which it continues within] in a natural state are of twenty-four hours.    
mishnah  . A zab   defiles those objects on which he lies   by five ways, with the result that they [in turn] defile men and garments.   [these are:] by standing, sitting, lying, lounging or leaning. What he lies upon defiles man by seven ways, so that he [in turn] defiles garments.   [these are:] by standing, sitting, lying, lounging, or leaning upon it, or by touching or carrying it.    
mishnah  . If a zab and one that was clean sat together in a boat, or on a raft, or rode together on a beast, they,  though their garments had not actually touched,  suffer midras  uncleanness. If they sat together on a plank, a bench or a bedframe,  or on a beam, when these were not fixed tightly,  [or] if they had both climbed a tree of inferior strength,  or [were swaying] on a branch of inferior strength  of a firm tree; or if they were both [climbing] on an egyptian ladder,  not secured by a nail,  or if they sat together on a bridge, rafter or door, not secured by clay, they   are unclean. According to r. Judah they are clean.  
mishnah  . If they were both   closing or opening [a door], [he that was clean and his garments become unclean]. But the sages say: [uncleanness is not conveyed]   unless one was shutting and the other opening [it].   If one was lifting the other out of a pit [un cleanness is conveyed]. But r. Judah said, only if he that was clean was pulling out him that was unclean.   If they were twisting ropes together [uncleanness is conveyed]. But the sages say, unless the one pulled one way and the other pulled the other way. If they were both weaving together, whether they were standing or sitting, or grinding wheat, [uncleanness is conveyed]. R. Simeon declares [the clean man] in every case undefiled, except where they [both] were grinding with a hand-mill. If they [both] were unloading or loading an ass, they   are unclean if the load was heavy, but clean if the load was light. In both cases,   however, they are clean for members of the synagogue,   but are unclean for heave-offering.    
mishnah  . If the zab and the clean person sat together in a large boat (what is a large boat? R. Judah said: one that does not sway with a man's weight), or if they sat on a plank, bench, bed-frame, or beam when these were firmly secured;   or if they both climbed a strong tree, a firm branch, or a tyrian   ladder, or an egyptian ladder fixed by a nail; or if they sat on a bridge, rafter or door, when these were fastened with clay, if only at one end, they remain clean. If the clean man struck the unclean, he still remains clean;   but if the unclean struck him that was clean, he becomes defiled; for [in that case] if he that was clean drew back, the unclean would have fallen.    
mishnah  . R. Joshua said: if a menstruant  sat in one bed with one that was clean, [even] the cap on her  head suffers midras uncleanness; and if she sat in a boat, the vessels on the top of the mast [also] contract midras uncleanness.  If she took a tub full of clothes and their weight was heavy, they become unclean,  but if their weight was light, they remain clean. If a zab knocked against a balcony and thereby caused a loaf of terumah to fall down, it remains clean.   
mishnah  . If he knocked against a joist, a rafter-frame, water-spout, or shelf, though fixed with ropes,  or if [he knocked against] an oven, or a flour container,  or the lower mill-stone, or the jack  of a hand-mill, or the se'ah measure  of an olive-grinder, [the loaf remains clean].   R. Jose adds: also [if he knocks] against the beam of the bath-keeper.   It remains clean.  
mishnah  . If he knocked against a door, doorbolt,   lock, oar,   mill-stone frame,   or against a weak tree, or weak branch of a strong tree, or against an egyptian ladder unsecured by nails, or against a bridge, beam or door, not made secure with clay, they become unclean.   [if he knocked] against a chest,   box or cupboard, they become unclean. R. Nehemiah and r. Simeon, however, pronounce them clean in such cases.    
mishnah  . A zab who lay lengthwise across five benches, or five money-bags, [makes them] unclean,   but [if he lay across] their breadth, they are clean.   If he slept [on them],   and it was feared lest he had turned himself about   on them, they are unclean. If he was lying on six seats, with two hands on two [seats]. Two feet on another two, his head on one, with his body on another one, only that one on which his body lay   is rendered unclean. If [a zab] stood on two seats, r. Simeon says: if these were distant one from the other, they remain clean.    
mishnah  . If there were piled ten cloaks one on top of the other and he sat on the uppermost one, all are unclean.   If the zab was in one scale of the balance and in the other scale opposite there were objects fit to sit or lie upon, and the zab overweighed, they are clean;   but if they overweighed, they are unclean. R. Simeon says:   if there was but one [place]   it becomes unclean;   but if there were many   they remain clean, since none of them had borne the greater part [of the zab's weight].    
mishnah  . If a zab [sat] in one scale of the balance, whilst food and liquids were in the other scale, [the latter become] unclean;   in the case of a corpse,   however, everything   remains clean,   save a man.   This is [an example of] the greater stringency applying to a zab than to a corpse; and there is also another instance of greater stringency in the case of a zab than a corpse.   For whereas the zab defiles all objects on which he sits or lies upon, so that these likewise convey uncleanness to men and garments,   and convey, moreover. To what is above him a middaf uncleanness,   so that these in turn defile food and liquids. In the case of a corpse no such uncleanness takes place.   Greater stringency is also found in the case of a corpse, since it can convey uncleanness by overshadowing,   and imposes seven days’ defilement, whereas in the case of a zab no such uncleanness is conveyed.  
mishnah  . If he sat on a bed and there were four cloaks under the four legs of the bed, all become unclean, since the bed cannot stand on three legs;   but r. Simeon declares them clean.   If he rode on a beast   and there were four cloaks under the legs of the beast, they are clean, since the beast can stand upon three legs.   If there was one cloak under its two forelegs or its two hindlegs, or under a foreleg and a hindleg, it becomes unclean.   R. Jose says: a horse conveys uncleanness through its hindlegs. But an ass through its forelegs, since a horse leans upon its hindlegs and an ass upon its forelegs. If he   sat on a beam of an olive-press, the vessels in the olive-press   are unclean; but if he sat on a fuller's press, the garments beneath it are clean;   r. Nehemiah, however, declares them unclean.    
mishnah  . He who touches a zab, or whom a zab touches, who moves  or whom a zab moves, defiles food and liquids and vessels that are rinsed  by touch, but not by carriage.  This was the general principle which r. Joshua formulated: all those that defile garments  while still in contact [with their source of uncleanness] also defile foods and liquids so as to become [unclean] in the first grade, and the hands  so that they become [unclean] in the second grade; but they do not defile men or earthenware vessels. Once, however, they have been separated from their source of uncleanness they defile liquids so as to become [unclean] in the first grade,  and food and the hands so that they become [unclean] in the second grade,  but they do not defile garments.  
mishnah  . Yet another general principle did they formulate: all that is carried above a zab becomes defiled,  but all those things above which he is carried are clean;  excluding such objects on which he can sit or lie upon,   and a man. How so? If a zab had his finger   beneath a layer of stones and one that was clean was above,   he conveys uncleanness at two [removes]. And renders unfit [terumah] at one [further remove]. If he separated [from the source of uncleanness].   He still defiles with first-grade uncleanness and renders [terumah] unfit at yet one [further remove]. If the unclean was above, and the clean person below,   he conveys uncleanness at two [removes],   and renders [terumah] unfit at yet one [further remove]. If he separated [from the source of uncleanness], he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at yet one [more remove]. If foods or liquids, or objects on which he could sit or lie upon or other articles   were above,   they defile at the two removes,   and render [terumah] unfit at one [further remove]. If they had become separated [from the source of uncleanness], they defile at one [remove] and render [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. All objects fit to sit or lie upon that were below   defile at two [removes], and render [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. Foods and liquids and other articles   that are below, remain clean.    
mishnah  . Since it was said   that whatsoever carries or is carried by objects on which one sits or lies upon remain clean, excluding the case of a man;   whatsoever carries or is carried by carrion is clean,   save him that moves it.   R. Eliezer adds: also he that carries it.   He who carries or is carried upon a corpse remains clean, save when overshadowing takes place,   or a man when he moves it.    
mishnah  . If part of an unclean person   rests upon a clean person, or part of a clean person rests upon an unclean person, or if the connectives   of an unclean person rest upon a clean person, or the connectives of a clean person upon one unclean, he   becomes unclean. R. Simeon says: if part of an unclean person is upon a clean person, he is unclean;   but if part of a clean person is upon one that is unclean, he is clean.  
mishnah  . If an unclean person   rests upon part of an object fit to lie upon, or a clean person   rests upon part of an object fit to lie upon,   it becomes unclean.   If part of an unclean person rests on an object fit to lie upon, or part of a clean person rests upon such an object,   it remains clean.   Thus we find that uncleanness is contracted and conveyed by the lesser part thereof.   Similarly,   if a loaf of terumah was placed upon an object fit to lie upon [that was unclean]. And there was a layer of paper between, whether it   was above or below, it remains clean. Similarly, in the case of a stone smitten with leprosy   it   remains clean;   but r. Simeon pronounced such a case unclean.    
mishnah  . He who touches a zab, or a zabah, a menstruant, or a woman after childbirth, or a leper, or any object on which these had been sitting or lying, conveys uncleanness at two [removes]. And renders [terumah] unfit at one [further remove].   If he had become separated,   he still conveys uncleanness at one [remove], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [further remove]. This is the case whether he had touched, or had moved, or had carried, or was carried.    
mishnah  . If one touches the flux of a zab, his spittle, semen or urine, or the blood of a menstruant, he conveys uncleanness at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]; but if he became separated,   he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. This is the case whether he had touched or moved it.   R. Eliezer said: also if he had lifted it.    
mishnah  . If he carried that which was ridden upon,   or if he was carried thereon, or had moved it, he defiles at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]; but if he became separated [from the uncleanness], he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. If he carries carrion, or the water of the sin-offering of which there was sufficient for a sprinkling,   he defiles at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]; but if he became separated,   he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].  
mishnah  . He who ate of the carrion of a clean bird, and it still is in his gullet,   he defiles at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. If he put his head within the air-space of an oven,   both he and the oven are clean;   but if he vomited or swallowed it, he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].   But as long as it is still in his mouth, that is prior to swallowing it, he remains clean.    
mishnah   . He who touches a dead reptile, or semen, or him that has suffered corpse uncleanness, or a leper during his days of counting,   or water of sin-offering of insufficient quantity with which to perform the sprinkling,   or carrion, or an object ridden upon,   defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].   This is the general principle: all who touch any object regarded by the torah as a ‘father of uncleanness’   defile at one [remove] and render [terumah] unfit at one [more remove], with the exclusion [of the corpse] of a man.   If he   had become separated,   he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].  
mishnah   . He who has suffered a [nocturnal] pollution is like one who has touched a dead reptile,   and he that has had connection with a menstruant is like one who has suffered corpse uncleanness.   He who has had connection with a menstruant, however, has the more stringent imposition in that he conveys minor grades of uncleanness to what he lies or sits upon, so as to make foods and liquids unclean.    
mishnah   . The following render terumah unfit:   one who eats foods of first or second grade uncleanness, and who drinks unclean liquids,   and the one who has immersed his head and the greater part of him in water which had been drawn,   and a clean person upon whose head and greater part of him there fell three logs of drawn water,   and a scroll [of scriptures],   and [unwashed] hands,   and one that has had immersion that same day,   and foods and vessels which have become defiled by liquids.   Mishna - mas. Tevul yom chapter    
mishnah  . If one  had collected dough-offering  [portions] with the intention of segregating them afterwards again, but in the meantime they had become stuck together,  beth shammai say: they serve as connectives  in the case of a tebul yom. But beth hillel say: they do not serve as connectives. Pieces of dough  that had become stuck together, or loaves  that had become joined, or a batter-cake that had been baked on top of another batter-cake before it could form a crust in the oven, or if there was froth  on the water that was bubbling, or the first scum  that rises when boiling groats of beans, or the scum of new wine (r. Judah says: also that of rice) beth shammai say: all serve as connectives in the case of the tebul yom. But beth hillel say: they do not serve as connectives.  They  concur, however, [that they serve as connectives] if they come into contact with other kinds of uncleanness, whether they be of minor   or major grades.    
mishnah  . If one had collected pieces of dough-offering not with the intention of segregating them afterwards, or a batter-cake that had been baked on another after a crust had formed in the oven,   or a froth had appeared in the water prior to its bubbling up, or the second scum that appeared in the boiling of groats of beans, or the scum of old wine, or that of oil of all kinds,   or of lentils (r. Judah says: also that of beans   ) — all these are rendered unclean   when touched by a tebul yom. And needless to say, [this is the case if touched] by other sources of uncleanness.  
mishnah  . The knob   on the back of the loaf, or the small globule of salt,   or the burnt crust less than a finger's breadth — r. Jose says: whatsoever is eaten with the loaf becomes unclean [when touched by the tebul yom].   And needless to say, this is so [when touched] by other unclean things.  
mishnah  . A pebble in a loaf or a large globule of salt, or a lupine,   or a burnt crust larger than a finger's breadth,   [do not serve as connectives]. But r. Jose says: [only] whatsoever that is not eaten with the loaf remains clean even when touched by a father of uncleanness’;   and need less to say [is this so when touched] by a tebul yom.  
mishnah  . Unshelled   barley or spelt, root of crowfoot,   asafoetida,   silrhium   (r. Judah says: black beans)   remain clean   even [when coming into contact] with a ‘father of uncleanness’, let alone [if touched] by a tebul yom. So r. Meir: but the sages say: they are clean if touched by a tebul yom, but unclean [when touched] by other sources of defilement. In the case of shelled barley or spelt, or wheat either with the husk on or without it, or black cummin, or sesame or pepper (r. Judah says: also white beans), they become unclean even when touched by a tebul yom,   let alone [when they have come into contact] with other sources of uncleanness.  
mishnah  . Liquids that issue  from a tebul yom are like those  which he has touched: neither of them has power to defile.  With regard to all others that are unclean, be they of minor  or major  [degree]. The liquids issuing from them are like those they touch; both are considered of first grade uncleanness.  The sole exception being such liquid that is in itself a ‘father of uncleanness .   
mishnah  . If a pot was full of liquid and a tebul yom touched it, the liquid becomes unfit if it is terumah, but the pot is clean.  But if the liquid is common food [hullin] then all remains clean.  If his hands were soiled, all becomes unclean.   Here greater stringency is applied to soiled hands than to a tebul yom; but greater stringency is applied to a tebul yom than to soiled hands, since any doubt respecting the tebul yom renders terumah unfit, but any doubt concerning [soiled] hands is deemed clean.    
mishnah  . If the porridge was of terumah and the garlic or oil [it contained] was of hullin, and a tebul yom touched part of them, then the whole becomes unfit;   but if the porridge was of hullin and the garlic or oil it contained was of terumah, and a tebul yom touched part of them, he renders unfit only the part he has touched.   If the greater part was garlic then they go after the majority.   When is it so?   Said r. Judah: when it   formed one cohesive mass in the pot, but if it was scattered small in the mortar, then it is clean, since it is his wish that it should be so scattered.   [similarly] with all other mashed foods which were mashed with liquids;   those, however, which are usually mashed   with liquids and yet were mashed without liquids, though   they formed one cohesive mass in the pot, are regarded as a cake of preserved figs.    
mishnah  . If the porridge and batter-cake   were of hullin and the oil of terumah was floating above them, and a tebul yom touched the oil, he renders unfit only the oil. If, however, he stirred it altogether, all the places whither the oil goes become unfit.    
mishnah  . If a film of jelly   had formed over the flesh of hallowed things, and a tebul yom had touched the jelly, the slices [of flesh] are clean;   but if he touched one of the slices, that slice and all [the jelly] that comes up with it   form a connective the one with the other. R. Johanan b. Nuri says: the two of them serve as connectives to each other.   Similarly, with [cooked] beans that have formed a layer over pieces of bread.   Beans cooked in a pot, as long as they are still separate, do not serve as connectives; but when they become a solid pulp,   they do act as connectives. If they formed several solid pulps,   they are to be counted.   If oil floats on wine and a tebul yom touched the oil, only the oil is rendered unfit; but r. Johanan b. Nuri says: each serves as a connective with the other.    
mishnah  . If a jar   had sunk into a cistern containing wine,   and a tebul yom touched it, and [he touched it] within the rim,   it serves as a connective;   but if outside the rim,   it does not act as a connective. R. Johanan b. Nuri, however, says: even though [the level of wine in the cistern] is the height of a man   [above the sunken jar], and he touched [the wine] directly above the mouth of the jar, it serves as a connective.  
mishnah  . If a jar   had a hole either at its neck,   bottom or sides, and a tebul yom touched it [at the hole], it becomes unclean.   R. Judah says: only if the hole is at its neck or bottom it becomes unclean; but if on its sides, on this side or on that, it remains clean.   If one poured [liquid] from one vessel into another, and a tebul yom touched the stream, and there was something within the vessel, then [whatsoever he touches] is neutralized in a hundred and one.    
mishnah  . If a bubble   of a jug was pierced with holes on its inner side and on its outer side, whether above or below,   [and the holes are] opposite one another, it becomes unclean [if touched] by a ‘father of uncleanness’;   and it [likewise] becomes unclean if it is in a tent wherein lies a corpse.   If the inner hole is below and the outer above, it becomes unclean [if touched] by a ‘father of uncleanness’, and it becomes unclean in a tent wherein there is a corpse; if the inner hole is above and the outer below, it remains clean if touched by a ‘father of uncleanness’,   but it becomes unclean in a tent wherein there is a corpse.    
mishnah  . All [stalks that serve as] handles to fruits, which count as connectives when touched by a ‘father of uncleanness’, also count as connectives when touched by a tebul yom. If a foodstuff was severed yet a small part was still attached, r. Meir says: if one takes hold of the larger part and the smaller part is pulled away with it, then the latter is regarded as the former.  R. Judah. However, says: if one takes hold of the smaller part find the greater is also pulled away with it, then the latter is like the former. R. Nehemiah says: [this refers only] to the case of the clean portion,  but the sages say: [it refers only] to the unclean portion.  In the case of all other fruits,  those usually held by the leaf should be taken by the leaf, and those usually held by the stalk should be taken by the stalk.   
mishnah  . If a beaten egg was on top of vegetables of terumah,  and a tebul yom touches the egg, then he renders unfit only that stalk [of the vege tables] that is opposite the part [of the egg] he touched.  R. Jose, however, says: it affects the whole of the upper layer;  and if it was arranged like a cap  it does not serve as a connective.  
mishnah  . The streak of an egg   that had become congealed on the side of a pan that had been touched by a tebul yom within the rim [of the pan]. Serves as a connective;   but if outside the rim, it does not serve as a connective. R. Jose maintains that only the streak and the part that can be peeled away with it [serves as a connective].   The same applies to beans that had formed a layer of jelly on the rim of the pot.    
mishnah  . Dough   that had been mixed [with dough of terumah]. Or that had been leavened with yeast of terumah, is not rendered unfit by [the touch of] a tebul yom;   r. Jose and r. Simeon, however, pronounce it unfit. Dough   that had become susceptible [to uncleanness] by a liquid,   and it was kneaded with fruit juice,   and later touched by a tebul yom, r. Eleazar b. Judah of barthotha says in the name of r. Joshua: it becomes totally unfit.   R. Akiba, however, says in his name: he renders unfit only the part that he touched.    
mishnah  . If vegetables of hullin were cooked with oil of terumah and a tebul yom touched it, r. Eleazar b. Judah of barthotha says in the name of r. Joshua: it becomes totally unfit.   R. Akiba, however, says in his name: he renders unfit only the part that he touched.    
mishnah  . If a clean person chewed food and it fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, it   is not rendered susceptible to uncleanness.   If he ate crushed olives or moist dates with the intention of sucking the stone thereof, and it fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, [the latter] becomes susceptible to uncleanness.   . If, however, he ate dried olives, or dried figs without the intention of sucking the stone thereof, and they fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, the latter is not rendered susceptible to uncleanness.   This is the case irrespective of the fact whether it was a clean man or a tebul yom [who was eating]. R. Meir says: in either case it becomes susceptible to uncleanness in the case of a tebul yom, since liquids issuing from unclean persons render anything susceptible regardless of the acceptability of their presence or not. But the sages say: a tebul yom is not regarded as an unclean person.    
mishnah  . If food that was tithe-offering had been rendered susceptible by a liquid, and a tebul yom or unwashed hands  touched it, terumah of tithe  may still be set apart from it in purity, since it only suffered third grade uncleanness, and third grade uncleanness counts as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . A woman that had immersed herself the same day may knead dough, cut off the dough-offering,  and set it apart, but must place it on an inverted basket of twigs,  or on a tray  , and then bring it near  and declare it by its name.  For it  suffered only third grade uncleanness,  and third grade uncleanness is deemed as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . In a trough which had been immersed that very day, one may knead dough and cut off the portion for hallah and bring it near and even pro nounce it by name [as hallah];   for it   suffers only third grade uncleanness and a third grade counts as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . If a flagon that had been immersed the same day and had been filled out of a cask containing tithes from which the heave-offering   had not yet been taken, and one said, let this be heave-offering of tithe after nightfall,   it becomes heave-offering of tithe. But if he said: let this be the food for the [sabbath] ‘erub,   his remarks are not valid at all.   If the cask was broken,   the contents of the flagon still remain tithe from which heave-offering had not yet been taken;   if the flagon is broken,   then what is in the cask still remains tithe from which heave-offering had not yet been taken.    
mishnah  . Formerly they used to say: one may redeem   for the produce of an am ha-arez.   Later they reconsidered and said: also for money of his.   Formerly they used to say: if a man is led out in chains   and commands: write a bill of divorce for my wife’, it had to be written and delivered;   but after consideration they added the case of a man undertaking a sea voyage, or setting out with a caravan.   R. Simeon of shezur added the case of one who was at the point of death.    
mishnah  . Ashkelon levers   that had become broken, only their hooks still remaining, are susceptible to uncleanness.   A pitch-fork, winnowing-fan, rake   [so-too, a hair comb]. Which had lost one of its teeth, and another of metal was constructed for it, are all susceptible to uncleanness.   Concerning all these,   r. Joshua said: this is a new thing which the scribes have made and i have nothing to reply.    
mishnah  . If one was taking terumah   from a cistern and said: ‘let this be terumah provided it comes up safely’, [it is implied that he meant] safely from being broken or spilled,   but not from contracting uncleanness;   but r. Simeon declares: also from uncleanness.   If it were broken,   it does not render [the contents of the cistern] subject to the restrictions of terumah. How far away   can it be broken and still not make it subject to terumah restrictions? Only so far that if it rolls back, it can reach the cistern.   R. Jose adds: even if one had the intention of making such a stipulation, but did not do so, and it got broken, it does not nevertheless make it subject to terumah restrictions, for this is a stipulation laid down by the beth din.    
mishnah  . [a minimum of] a quarter [of a log]  of water must be poured  over the hands  [to be sufficient] for one [person] and is even [sufficient] for two;  a minimum of half  a log must be poured over the hands [to be sufficient] for three or four persons;  one log or more [is sufficient] for five, ten, or one hundred persons.  R. Jose says: but provided only there is not less than a quarter of a log left for the last person among them. More [water] may be added to the second water,  but more may not be added to the first water.   
mishnah  . Water may be poured over the hands out of any kind of vessel, even out of vessels made of animal ordure,   out of vessels made of stone   or out of vessels made of clay.   Water may not be poured from the sides of [broken] vessels   or from the bottom of a ladle   or from the bung of a barrel.   Nor may anyone pour [water] over the hands of his fellow out of his cupped hands because one may not draw, nor sanctify,   nor sprinkle   the water of purification,   nor pour water over the hands except in a vessel. And only vessels closely covered with a lid protect [their contents from uncleanness]   and   only vessels protect [their contents from uncleanness] from earthenware vessels.    
mishnah  . If water has become so unfit   that it cannot be drunk by cattle, if it was in a vessel it is invalid,   but if it was in the ground   it is valid. If there fell into it ink, resin,   or vitriol   and its colour changed, it is invalid.   If a person did any work with it   or soaked his bread therein, it is invalid.   Simeon of teman says: even if he intended to soak his bread in one water and it fell in another water [do you still consider the other water to be invalid? In such a case i consider that the other water] is valid.    
mishnah  . If he cleansed vessels therein or scrubbed   measures therein, [the water] is invalid; if he rinsed therein vessels which had already been rinsed or new vessels, it is valid. R. Jose declares it to be invalid if they were new vessels.    
mishnah  . Water in which the baker dips gelusk   n   is invalid;   but if he [merely] moistened his hands therein   it is valid. All are fit to pour water over the hands, even a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor. A person may place the barrel between his knees and pour out the water   or he may turn the barrel on its side and pour it out.   An ape   may pour water over the hands. R. Jose declares these [latter] two cases invalid.    
mishnah  . If a person pours  water over one of his hands with a single rinsing his hand becomes clean.  If over both his hands with a single rinsing, r. Meir declares them to be unclean until he pours a minimum of a quarter of a log of water over them.  If a loaf of terumah  fell on the water the loaf is clean.  R. Jose declares it to be unclean.   
mishnah  . If he poured the first water  over his hands [whilst standing] in one place, and the second water over his hands [whilst standing] in another place, and a loaf of terumah fell on the first water,  the loaf becomes unclean. But if it fell on the second water it remains clean.  If he poured the first and the second water [whilst standing] in one place, and a loaf of terumah fell thereon, the loaf becomes unclean.   If he poured the first water over his hands and a splinter or a piece of gravel is found on his hands, they remain unclean,   because the latter water only makes the first water on the hands clean. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel. Says: if any water-creature [falls on the hands whilst they are being cleaned] they nevertheless become clean.    
mishnah  . Hands become unclean and are made clean as far as the wrist. How so? If he poured the first water over the hands as far as the wrist and poured the second water over the hands beyond the wrist and the latter flowed back to the hands, the hands nevertheless become clean.   If he poured the first and the second water over the hands beyond the wrist and they flowed back to the hands, the hands remain unclean.   If he poured the first water over one of his hands and then changed his mind and poured the second water over both his hands, they remain unclean.   If he poured the first water over both his hands and then changed his mind and poured the second water over one of his hands, his one hand becomes clean. If he poured water over one of his hands and rubbed it on the other hand it remains unclean.   If he rubbed it on his head or on the wall   it becomes clean. Water may be poured over the hands of four or five persons, each hand being by the side of the other, or being one above the other, provided that the hands are held loosely so that the water flows between them.  
mishnah  . If there was a doubt whether any work has been done with the water or not,   or whether the water contains the requisite quantity or not, or whether it is unclean   or clean, then where there is such a doubt the water is considered to be clean. Because they   have said in a case of doubt concerning hands as to whether they have become unclean or have conveyed uncleanness or have become clean, they are considered to be clean. R. Jose says: in a case [of doubt as to] whether they have become clean they are considered to be unclean. How so? If his hands were clean and there were two unclean loaves before him and there was a doubt whether he touched them or not;   or if his hands were unclean and there were two clean loaves   before him and there was a doubt whether he touched them or not; or if one of his hands was unclean and the other clean and there were two clean loaves   before him and he touched one of them and there was a doubt whether he touched it with the unclean hand or with the clean hand; or if his hands were clean and there were two loaves before him one of which was unclean and the other clean and he touched one of them and there was a doubt whether he touched the unclean one or the clean one; or if one of his hands was unclean and the other clean and there were two loaves before him one of which was unclean and the other clean, and he touched both of them, and there is a doubt whether the unclean hand touched the unclean loaf or whether the clean hand touched the clean loaf or whether the clean hand touched the unclean loaf or whether the unclean hand touched the clean loaf, the hands remain in the same state as they were before and the loaves remain in the same state as they were before.  
mishnah  . If a person puts his hands inside a house smitten with leprosy,  his hands become unclean in the first degree.  [these are] the words of r. Akiba. But the sages say: his hands become unclean in the second degree. Whoever conveys uncleanness to the garments at the time when he touches [the uncleanness]  conveys a first degree of uncleanness to the hands.  [these] are the words of r. Akiba. But the sages say: in such a case he conveys a second degree of uncleanness. They said to r. Akiba: where do we find anywhere that the hands become unclean in the first degree? He said to them: but how is it possible for them to become unclean in the first degree without his whole body becoming unclean,  save only in these cases?  Foodstuffs and vessels which have been rendered unclean by liquids convey a second degree of uncleanness to the hands. [these are] the words of r. Joshua. But the sages say: that which has been rendered unclean by a father of uncleanness conveys uncleanness to the hands, but that which has been rendered unclean by an offspring of uncleanness  does not convey unclean ness to the hands. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: a practical instance occurred when a certain woman came before my father and said to him, my hands protruded into the air-space inside an earthenware vessel.  He said to her: my daughter, what was the cause of its uncleanness?  But i did not hear what she said to him. The sages said: the matter is clear. That which has been rendered unclean by a ‘father of uncleanness’ conveys uncleanness to the hands, but if by an offspring of uncleanness’ it does not convey uncleanness to the hands.  
mishnah  . Everything which renders terumah unfit   conveys a second degree of uncleanness to the hands.   One [unwashed] hand can convey uncleanness to the other hand. [these   are] the words of r. Joshua.   But the sages say: that which is in the second degree of uncleanness cannot convey a second degree of uncleanness. He said to them: but do not the holy scriptures which are in the second degree of uncleanness   render unclean the hands?   They said to him: the laws of the torah may not be argued from the laws of the scribes, nor may the laws of the scribes be argued from the laws of the torah, nor may the laws of the scribes be argued from [other] laws of the scribes.    
mishnah  . The straps of the tefillin   [when connected] with the tefillin render unclean the hands.   R. Simeon says: the straps of the tefillin do not render unclean the hands.  
mishnah  . The margin on a scroll   which is above   or below or at the beginning   or at the end renders unclean the hands. R. Judah says: the margin at the end does not render unclean [the hands] until a handle is fastened to it.    
mishnah  . A scroll   on which the writing has become erased and eighty-five letters remain thereon, as many as are in the section beginning, ‘and it came to pass when the ark set forward’,etc.   Renders unclean the hands. A single sheet   on which there are written eighty-five letters, as many as are in the section beginning, ‘and it came to pass when the ark set forward’, renders unclean the hands. All the holy writings   render unclean the hands. The song of songs and ecclesiastes render unclean the hands.   R. Judah says: the song of songs renders unclean the hands, but there is a dispute about ecclesiastes.   R. Jose says: ecclesiastes does not render unclean the hands, but there is a dispute about the song of songs. R. Simeon says: [the ruling about] ecclesiastes is one of the leniencies of beth shammai and one of the stringencies of beth hillel.   R. Simeon b. Azzai said: i received a tradition from the seventy-two   elders on the day when they appointed r. Eleazar b. Azariah head of the academy   that the song of songs and ecclesiastes render unclean the hands. R. Akiba said: far be it! No man in israel disputed about the song of songs [by saying] that it does not render unclean the hands. For the whole world is not as worthy as the day on which the song of songs was given to israel; for all the writings are holy but the song of songs is the holy of holies. So that if they had a dispute, they had a dispute only about ecclesiastes. A. Johanan b. Joshua the son of the father-in-law of r. Akiba said: in accordance with the words of ben azzai so they disputed,   and so they reached a decision.    
mishnah  . On that day  the votes were counted and they decided that a footbath holding from two logs to nine kabs  which was cracked could contract midras  uncleanness. Because r. Akiba said a footbath [must be considered] according to its designation.   
mishnah  . On that day they said: all animal sacrifices  which have been sacrificed under the name of some other offering  are [nevertheless] valid,  but they are not accounted to their owners as a fulfilment of their obligations,  with the exception of the paschal-offering  and the sin-offering.  [this applies to] the paschal-offering in its due time   and to the sin-offering at any time. R. Eliezer says: [with the exception] also of the guilt-offering.   [so that this applies to] the paschal-offering in its due time and to the sin- and guilt-offerings at any time. R. Simeon b. Azzai said: i received a tradition from the seventy-two elders on the day when they appointed r. Eleazar b. Azariah head of the college that all animal sacrifices which are eaten and which have not been sacrificed under their own name are nevertheless valid, but they are not accounted to their owners as a fulfilment of their obligations, with the exception of the paschal-offering and the sin-offering. Ben azzai only added [to these exceptions] the burnt-offering, but the sages did not agree with him.  
mishnah  . On that day they said: what is the law applying to ammon and moab in the seventh year?   R. Tarfon decreed tithe for the poor;   and r. Eleazar b. Azariah decreed second tithe.   R. Ishmael said: eleazar b. ‘azariah, the onus is upon you to produce your proof because you are expressing the stricter view;   for the onus is upon the person who expresses a stricter view to produce the proof. R. Eleazar b. Azariah said to him: ishmael, my brother, i have not deviated from the sequence of years,   tarfon, my brother, has deviated therefrom and the onus is upon him to produce the proof. R. Tarfon answered: egypt is outside the land of israel, ammon and moab are outside the land of israel: just as egypt must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year,   so must ammon and moab give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah answered: babylon is outside the land of israel, ammon and moab are outside the land of israel: just as babylon must give second tithe in the seventh year,   so must ammon and moab give second tithe in the seventh year. R. Tarfon said: on egypt which is near, they imposed tithe for the poor so that the poor of israel might be supported thereby during the seventh year; so on ammon and moab which are near, we should impose tithe for the poor so that the poor of israel may be supported thereby during the seventh year. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah said to him: behold, thou art like a person who would benefit them with gain, yet thou art really as one who causes souls to perish. Wouldst thou rob the heavens so that dew or rain should not descend?   As it is said, will a man rob god? Yet ye rob me. But ye say wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and heave-offerings.   R. Joshua said: behold, i shall be as one who replies on behalf of tarfon, my brother, but not in accordance with the subject matter of his arguments. The law regarding egypt is a new act and the law regarding babylon is an old act, and the law which is being argued before us is a new act. A new act should be argued from [another] new act, but a new act should not be argued from an old act. The law regarding egypt is the act of the elders and the law regarding babylon is the act of the prophets, and the law which is being argued before us   is the act of the elders. Let one act of the elders be argued from [another] act of the elders, but let not an act of the elders be argued from an act of the prophets. The votes were counted and they decided that ammon and moab should give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. And when r. Jose b. Durmaskith   visited r. Eliezer   in lydda he said to him: what new thing did you have in the house of study to-day? He said to him: their votes were counted and they decided that ammon and moab must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. R. Eliezer wept and said: the counsel of the lord is with them that fear him: and his covenant, to make them know it.   Go and tell them: do not have any apprehension on account of your voting. I received a tradition from r. Johanan b. Zakkai who heard it from his teacher, and his teacher from his teacher, and so back to an halachah given to moses from sinai,   that ammon and moab must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year.  
mishnah  . On that day judah, an ammonite proselyte, came and stood before them in the house of study. He said to them: have i the right to enter into the assembly?   Rabban gamaliel said to him: thou art forbidden. R. Joshua said to him: thou art permitted. Rabban gamaliel said to him: the scriptural verse says, an ammonite or a moabite shall not enter into the assembly of the lord: even to the tenth generation, etc.   R. Joshua said to him: but are the ammonites and moabites still in their own territory? Sennacherib, the king of assyria, has long since come up and mingled all the nations, as it is said: in that i have removed the bounds of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures, and have brought down as one mighty the inhabitants.   Rabban gamaliel said to him: the scriptural verse says, but afterward i will bring back the captivity of the children of ammon,   so that they have already returned. R. Joshua said to him: the scriptural verse says, i will turn the captivity of my people israel and judah.   Yet they have not already returned. So they permitted him to enter the assembly.  
mishnah  . The aramaic sections in ezra and daniel render unclean the hands.   If an aramaic section was written   in hebrew, or a hebrew section was written   in aramaic, or hebrew script,   it   does not render unclean the hands. It never renders unclean the hands until it is written in the assyrian script,   on hide, and in ink.  
mishnah  . The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, because you say that the holy scriptures render unclean the hands,   but the books of hamiram   do not convey uncleanness to the hands. R. Johanan b. Zakkai said: have we nothing against the pharisees excepting this?   Behold they say that the bones of an ass are clean, yet the bones of johanan   the high priest are unclean.   They said to him: proportionate to the love for them, so is their uncleanness, so that nobody should make spoons out of the bones of his father or mother. He said to them: so also the holy scriptures; proportionate to the love for them, so is their uncleanness. The books of hamiram which are not precious do not convey uncleanness to the hands.    
mishnah  . The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, that you declare an uninterrupted flow of a liquid to be clean.   The pharisees say: [do] we complain against you, o ye sadducees, that you declare a stream of water which flows from the burial-ground to be clean?   The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, in that you say, my ox or ass which has done injury is liable,   yet my manservant or maidservant who has done injury is not liable’.   Now if in the case of my ox or my ass’ for which i am not responsible if they do not fulfil religious duties,   yet i am responsible for their damage, in the case of my manservant or maidservant for whom i am responsible to see that they fulfil religious duties,   how much more so that i should be responsible for their damage? They said to them: no, if you argue about my ox or my ass’ which have no understanding, can you deduce anything therefrom concerning my manservant or maidservant who have understanding? So that if i were to anger either of them they would go and burn another person's stack and i should be liable to make restitution?    
mishnah  . A galilean sadducee   said: i complain against you, o ye pharisees, that you write the name of the ruler and the name of moses together on a bill of divorcement.   The pharisees said: [do] we complain against you, o galilean sadducee, that you write the name of the ruler together with the divine name on a single page? And furthermore that you write the name of the ruler above and the divine name below? As it is said, and pharoah said, who is the lord that i should hearken unto his voice to let israel go?   But when he was smitten what did he say? The lord is righteous.         
