Mishna - mas. Kelim chapter  


   	
   	 

   	Mishnah  . There are ten grades of holiness: the land of israel is holier than all other lands. And what is the nature of its holiness? That from it are brought the ‘omer,   the firstfruits   and the two loaves,   which may not be brought from any of the other lands.

   	Mishnah  . Cities   that are walled   are holier,   for metzoras must be sent out of them and a corpse, though it may be carried about within them as long as it is desired,   may not be brought back once it has been taken out.

   	Mishnah  . The area within the wall   is holier, for it is there   that holy things of a minor degree and second tithe may be eaten. The temple mount   is holler, for neither zavs nor zavahs nor menstruants nor women after childbirth may enter it. The rampart   is holier, for neither idolaters nor one who contracted corpse impurity may enter it. The court of women   is holier, for no tebul yom   may enter it, though no sin-offering is thereby incurred. The court of the israelites   is holier, for a man who has not yet offered his obligatory sacrifices   may not enter it, and if he enters he incurs thereby a sin-offering. The court of the priests   is holier, for no israelites may enter it except when they are required to do so   in connection with the laying on of hands,   slaying or waving.  
Mishnah  . The area between the ulam   and the altar is holier,   for men afflicted with blemishes or with a wild growth of hair may not enter it. The hekal is holier, for no one whose hands or feet are unwashed may enter it. The holy of holies is holler, for only the high priest, on the day of atonement, at the service,   may enter it.   R. Jose stated: in five respects is the area between the ulam and the altar on a par with the hekal, for those afflicted with blemishes or with a wild growth of hair, or who have drunk wine or whose hands or feet are unwashed may not enter there,   and the people must keep away from the area between the ulam and the altar   when the incense is being burned.    
Mishnah  . Vessels of wood, vessels of leather, vessels of bone or vessels of glass that are flat are clean  and those that form a receptacle are unclean.  If they were broken they become clean  again. If one remade them into vessels they are susceptible to impurity henceforth.  Earthen vessels and vessels of alum- crystals are on a par in respect of impurity: they contract and convey  impurity through their air-space,  they contract impurity  through their [concave] bottoms but not  through their backs;  and when broken  they become clean. 
Mishnah  . As regards the smallest earthen vessels, and the bottoms and sides [of the larger but broken vessels] that can stand   unsupported,   the prescribed size   is a capacity to hold oil sufficient for the anointing of a little finger of a child if   their former capacity   was that of   a log. If   their former capacity   was from one log to se'ah their present capacity   must be a quarter of a log; if it was   from a se'ah to two se'ah it must be   half a log; if   from two se'ah to three se'ah or as much as five se'ah it must be   a log; so r. Ishmael. R. Akiba stated: i do not prescribe any size for the unbroken vessels,   but   this is the rule: as regards the smallest earthen vessels, and the bottoms and sides [of larger but broken ones] that can stand   unsupported,   the prescribed size   is a capacity to hold enough oil to anoint the little finger of a child. [this size is prescribed for pots] that are not bigger than   the small cooking-pots. For small cooking-pots and for those between these and the lydda jars the prescribed capacity   is a quarter of a log. For those which have a size between that of lydda jars and the bethlehem jars the capacity   must be that of half a log. For those between the bethlehem jars and large stone jars the capacity   must be that of a log. R. Johanan b. Zakkai ruled: the prescribed capacity   for the fragments of large stone jars is two logs, and that for the bottoms of broken galilean cruses and small jars is any whatsoever, but the fragments of their sides are in no case susceptible to impurity
Mishnah  . The following   are not susceptible to impurity among earthen vessels: a tray without a rim, a fire-pan with broken sides, a tube for roasting corn, gutters even if they are bent   and even if they have   some form of receptacle,   a basket-cover   that was turned into a bread-basket,   a pitcher   that has been adapted   as a cover for grapes,   a jar   for swimmers,   a small jar   fixed to the sides of a ladle,   a bed, a stool, a bench, a table, a ship,   and an earthen lamp, behold these are insusceptible to impurity. The following is a general rule:   any among earthen vessels that has no inner part is not susceptible to impurity on its outer sides.  

   	Mishnah  . A lantern that has a receptacle for oil is susceptible to impurity, but one that has none is insusceptible. A potter's mould on which one begins to shape the clay is insusceptible to impurity,   but that on which one finishes it is susceptible.   A funnel for home use   is insusceptible to impurity,   but that of pedlars is susceptible because   it also serves as a measure;   so r. Judah b. Bathyra. R. Akiba said: because one puts it on its side   so as to let the buyer smell it.  

   	Mishnah  . The covers of wine jars and oil jars and the covers of papyrus   jars   are insusceptible to impurity, but if they were adapted for use as receptacles they are susceptible. The cover of a stew-pot is not susceptible to impurity when it has a hole   or a pointed top,   but if it has neither hole nor pointed top it is susceptible because she   drains the vegetables into it. R. Eliezer b. Zadok said: because she turns out the contents [of the pot] on to it.

	Mishnah  . If a damaged jar   was found in a furnace,   before its manufacture was complete   it is not susceptible to impurity,   but if after its manufacture was complete   it is susceptible.   As to a sprinkler,   r. Eliezer b. Zadok holds it to be insusceptible to impurity; but r. Jose holds it to be susceptible because it lets the liquid out in drops only.  

   	Mishnah  . The following among earthen vessels are susceptible to impurity: a tray with a rim, an unbroken fire-pan, and a tray made up of   dishes. If one of them   contracted impurity from a [dead] creeping thing   they do not all become unclean, but if the tray had a rim that projected above the rims of the dishes and one of them   contracted impurity all are rendered unclean.   Similarly with an earthen spice-pot   and a double ink-pot.   But if one container of a wooden spice-box   contracted impurity from a liquid,   the other is not rendered unclean.   R. Johanan b. Nuri ruled: its thickness   is deemed to be divided   and that side which serves the unclean one is unclean while that which serves the clean one remains clean. If its rim projects above the others and one of them   contracted impurity the other also is rendered unclean.

   	Mishnah  . A torch   is susceptible to impurity,   and the reservoir   of a lamp contracts impurity   through its air- space.   The comb   of a cooler,   r. Eliezer ruled, is not susceptible to impurity,   but the sages ruled that it was susceptible.
Mishna - mas. Kelim chapter  

Mishnah  . The size of a hole that renders an earthen vessel clean  is the following: if the vessel was used for foodstuffs the hole must be big enough for olives [to fall through],  if it was used for liquids it suffices for the hole to be big enough for liquids [to be admitted through it],  and if it was used for both it is subjected to the greater restriction, viz., that the hole must be big enough for olives [to fall through]. 

   	Mishnah  . As regards a jar the size of the hole  must be such that a dried fig [will fall through];  so r. Simeon. R. Judah said: walnuts.  R. Meir said: olives.  The size of a hole  in a stew-pot or a cooking pot must be such that olives [will fall through]; in a cruse and a pitcher, such that oil [will penetrate through it];  and in a cooler, such that water [will penetrate through it].  R. Simeon ruled: the size of the hole in the case of all three groups  must be such that seed [will fall through it]. In a lamp the size of the hole  must be such that oil [will penetrate through it].  R. Eliezer said: such that a small perutah [will drop out through it].  A lamp   whose nozzle has been removed is clean;   and one made of earth   whose nozzle has been burnt by the wick is also clean.  

   	Mishnah  . If a jar   that had a hole   was mended with pitch   and then was broken again,   if the fragment that was mended with the pitch can contain a quarter of a log   it is unclean, since the designation of vessel has never ceased to be applied to it. If a potsherd had a hole that was mended with pitch, it is clean though it can contain a quarter of a log, because the designation of vessel has ceased to be applied to it.
Ishnah  . If a jar was cracked   but   , was lined with cattle dung, although the potsherds would fall apart were the dung to be removed,   it is unclean,   because   it never ceased to bear the name of vessel. If it was broken   and some of its sherds were stuck together again,   or if some potter's clay was brought for the purpose   from elsewhere, and   it was also lined with cattle dung, even though the potsherds hold together when the dung is removed, it is clean,   because it   ceased to bear the name of vessel. If it   contained one sherd that could hold   a quarter of a log,   all its   parts   contract impurity by contact,   but that sherd   contracts impurity through its air-space.

   	Mishnah  . If a sound vessel was lined, r. Meir and r. Simeon ruled: the lining   contracts impurity;   but the sages ruled: a lining over a sound vessel is insusceptible to impurity,   , and only one over a cracked vessel is susceptible.   And the same dispute   applies to the hoop   of a pumpkin shell.  

   	Mishnah  . As to scutchgrass wherewith the largest jars   are lined, any one that touches it   becomes unclean.   The plug of a jar   is not regarded as connected.   That   , which touches the lining of an oven   is unclean.  
Mishnah  . If a cauldron   was lined with mortar and with potter's clay, that which touches the mortar is unclean   but that which touches the potter's clay   is clean.   If a kettle   was punctured and the hole was stopped with pitch, r. Jose rules that it is clean since it cannot hold hot water   as cold.   The same ruling he also gave   concerning vessels made of pitch. If copper vessels were lined with pitch the lining   is clean,   but if they are used for wine   , it is unclean.  

   	Mishnah  . If a jar was perforated and the hole was stopped up with more pitch   than was necessary, that   which touches the needed portion is unclean, but that which touches the unneeded portion   is clean. If pitch dripped upon a jar,   what touches the former   remains clean. If a wooden or earthen funnel was stopped up with pitch, r. Eleazar b. Azariah rules that it is unclean.   R. Akiba rules that it is unclean where it is of wood   and clean where it is of earthenware.   R. Jose rules that both are clean.    
Mishnah  . A potsherd  that cannot stand unsupported on account of its handle,  or a potsherd whose bottom is pointed and that point causes it to overbalance, is clean.  If the handle was removed or the point was broken off it is still clean.  R. Judah rules that it is unclean.  If a jar was broken  but is still capable of holding something in its sides, or if it was split into a kind of two troughs, r. Judah declares it clean  but the sages declare it to be unclean. 

   	Mishnah  . If a jar was cracked and cannot be moved about with half a kab of dried figs in it, it is clean.  If a damaged vessel  was cracked and it cannot hold any liquid, even though it can hold foodstuffs, it is clean,  since one remnant  is not used for the sake of another remnant.  

   	Mishnah  . What is meant by a ‘damaged vessel’?   One whose handles were removed.   If sharp ends projected from it,   any part of it which can contain olives   contracts impurity by contact, while any impurity opposite an end   conveys impurity to the vessel through its air-space, but any part of it which cannot contain olives   contracts impurity by contact. While an impurity opposite an end   does not convey impurity to the vessel through its air-space. If it   was leaning on its side   like a kind of cathedra,   any part of it which can contain olives   contracts impurity by contact, while any impurity opposite an end conveys impurity to the vessel through its air-space, but any part of it which cannot contain olives   contracts impurity by contact, while an impurity opposite an end does not convey impurity to the vessel through its air-space.   Bowls with korfian   [bottoms]   , and cups with zidonian   bottoms,   although they cannot stand unsupported, are susceptible to impurity, because they were originally fashioned in this manner. 

Mishnah  . A potsherd  that cannot stand unsupported on account of its handle,  or a potsherd whose bottom is pointed and that point causes it to overbalance, is clean.  If the handle was removed or the point was broken off it is still clean.  R. Judah rules that it is unclean.  If a jar was broken  but is still capable of holding something in its sides, or if it was split into a kind of two troughs, r. Judah declares it clean  but the sages declare it to be unclean. 

   	Mishnah  . If a jar was cracked and cannot be moved about with half a kab of dried figs in it, it is clean.  If a damaged vessel  was cracked and it cannot hold any liquid, even though it can hold foodstuffs, it is clean,  since one remnant  is not used for the sake of another remnant.  

   	Mishnah  . What is meant by a ‘damaged vessel’?   One whose handles were removed.   If sharp ends projected from it,   any part of it which can contain olives   contracts impurity by contact, while any impurity opposite an end   conveys impurity to the vessel through its air-space, but any part of it which cannot contain olives   contracts impurity by contact. While an impurity opposite an end   does not convey impurity to the vessel through its air-space. If it   was leaning on its side   like a kind of cathedra,   any part of it which can contain olives   contracts impurity by contact, while any impurity opposite an end conveys impurity to the vessel through its air-space, but any part of it which cannot contain olives   contracts impurity by contact, while an impurity opposite an end does not convey impurity to the vessel through its air-space.   Bowls with korfian   [bottoms]   , and cups with zidonian   bottoms,   although they cannot stand unsupported, are susceptible to impurity, because they were originally fashioned in this manner.
Mishnah  . As regards an earthen vessel that has three rims, if the innermost one projects above the others all outside it is not susceptible to impurity;   if the outermost one projects above the others all within it is susceptible to impurity;   and if the middle one projects above the others, that which is within it is susceptible to impurity,   while that which is without it is not susceptible to impurity.   If they   were equal in height, r. Judah ruled: the middle one is deemed to be divided.   But the sages ruled: all   is insusceptible to impurity.   When   do earthen vessels become susceptible to impurity? As soon as they are baked in the furnace, that being the completion of their manufacture.    

Mishnah  . The original height of a baking-oven  must be no less than four handbreadths  and what is left of it  four handbreadths;  so r. Meir. But the sages ruled: this applies only to a large oven but in the case of a small one  any height suffices for its original build  and  the greater part of this for what is left of it.  [susceptibility to impurity  begins] as soon as the oven's manufacture is completed.  What is regarded as the completion of its manufacture? When it is heated to a degree that suffices for the baking of spongy cakes.  R. Judah  ruled: when a new oven   has been heated to a degree that sufficed for the baking of spongy cakes in an old one.  

   	Mishnah  . As regards a double stove   its original height   must be no less than three fingerbreadths and what is left of it   three fingerbreadths.   [its susceptibility to impurity begins] as soon as its manufacture is completed.   What is regarded as the completion of its manufacture? When it is heated to a degree that suffices for the cooking on it of the lightest of eggs when broken and put in a saucepan. As regards a single stove,   if it was made for baking its prescribed size   is the same as that for a baking-oven,   and if it was made for cooking its prescribed size   is the same as that for a double stove.   A stone that projects one handbreadth from a baking-oven   or three fingerbreadths from a double stove   is considered a connection.   For one that projects from a single stove, if the latter was made for baking, the prescribed size   is the same as that for a baking-oven, and if it is made for cooking the prescribed size is the same as that for a double stove. Said r. Judah: they   spoke of a ‘handbreadth’   only where the projection was between the oven   and a wall.   If two ovens were adjacent to one another   one handbreadth   is allowed to the one and another   to the other while the remainder   remains clean.  
	Mishnah  . The crown   of a double stove is clean.   As to the fender around an oven, when it is four handbreadths high it contracts impurity by contact and through its air-space,   but if it was lower it is clean.   If it   was joined to it,   even if only by three stones,   it is unclean.   The sockets [on the stove]   for the oil cruse, the spice-pot, and the lamp contract impurity by contact   but not through their air-space;   so r. Meir. R. Ishmael   rules that they are clean.  

   	Mishnah  . An oven that was heated from without,   or one that was heated   without the owner's knowledge, or one that was heated while still in the craftsman's house   is susceptible to impurity. It once happened that a fire broke out among the ovens of kefar signah,   and when the case was brought up at jabneh rabban gamaliel ruled that they were unclean.  

   	Mishnah  . The chimney-piece   on a householder's oven is clean,   but that of bakers is unclean because one rests on it the roasting spit.   R. Johanan hasandelar   said: because one bakes on it when pressed [for space].   Similarly the rim   of a boiler used by olive seethers is susceptible to impurity,   but that of one used by dyers   is not susceptible.
   	Mishnah  . If an oven was half filled with earth,   the part from the earth downwards contracts impurity by contact only   while the part from the earth upwards contracts impurity from its air- space also.   If an oven was placed over the mouth of a cistern or over that of a cellar and a stone was inserted at its side,   r. Judah ruled: if when heated below   it becomes also heated above   it   is susceptible to impurity.   But the sages ruled: since it was heated, no matter how,   it is susceptible to impurity.  

   	Mishnah  . If an oven contracted impurity how is it to be cleansed? It must be divided into three parts   and the plastering   must be scraped off so that [the oven] touches the ground.   R. Meir ruled: it is not necessary to scrape off the plastering nor is it necessary for [the oven] to touch the ground, but it   need only be reduced within   to a height of less than four handbreadths. R. Simeon ruled: it   must also be moved [from its position]. If it was divided into two parts, one large and the other small, the larger remains unclean and the smaller becomes clean. If it was divided into three parts one of which was as big as the other two together, the big one remains unclean and the two small ones become clean.
Mishnah  . If an oven was cut up breadthwise into rings that are each less than four handbreadths in height, it is clean. If it was subsequently   plastered over with clay, it becomes susceptible to impurity when   it is heated to a degree that suffices for the baking of spongy cakes. If the plastering was removed,   and sand or gravel was put between it and the oven sides — of such an oven it has been said, ‘a menstruant as well as a clean woman may bake in it and it remains clean’.  

   	Mishnah  . If an oven came in sections   from the craftsman's house and hoops were prepared for it and put upon it   while it was clean, and when   it contracted an impurity its hoops were removed, it is again clean.   Even if they are put on again the oven remains clean.   If, however, it was   plastered with clay, it becomes susceptible to impurity and there is no need to heat it since it   was once heated.

   	Mishnah   . If an oven was cut up   into rings, and sand was inserted between each pair of rings,   r. Eliezer rules: it is clean;   but the sages rule: it is unclean.   Such an oven is known as the oven of aknai.   As regards the arabian pots, which are holes dug in the ground and plastered with clay, if the plastering can stand of itself it is susceptible to impurity;   otherwise it is not susceptible. And this kind of oven is known as the oven of ben dinai.  
Mishnah   . An oven of stone or of metal is clean,   but the latter is unclean as a metal vessel.   If a hole was made in it, or if it was damaged or cracked, and it was provided with a lining of plaster or with a rim of clay, it is unclean.   What must be the size of the hole?   It must be big enough for the flame to come through. The same applies also to a stove. A stove of stone or of metal is clean,   but the latter is unclean as a metal vessel.   If a hole was made in it or if it was damaged or cracked but was provided with props   it is unclean. If it was lined with clay, whether inside or outside, it remains clean. R. Judah ruled: if [the lining was] inside it is unclean but if outside it remains clean.  
Mishnah  . If three props  were put upon the ground  and joined together with clay  so that a pot could be set on them, [the structure] is susceptible to impurity.  If three nails were fixed in the ground  so that a pot could be set on them, even though a place was made on the top  whereon a pot could rest, [the structure] is insusceptible to impurity.  If one made a stove of two stones, joining them together with clay, it is susceptible to impurity.  R. Judah rules that it is insusceptible to impurity,  unless a third stone is added or [the structure] is placed near a wall.  If one stone was joined to the other with clay and the third was not joined to it with clay, [the structure] is insusceptible to impurity. 

   	Mishnah  . A stone   on which a pot is set, [resting it on it] and on an oven, or on a double stove, or on a stove,   is susceptible to impurity. If the pot rested on the stone   and on another stone,   on a rock   or on a wall,   [such stove] is insusceptible to impurity;   and such   was the stove of the nazirites in jerusalem   which was set up against a rock. As regards the stove of the butchers,   whenever the stones are placed side by side,   if one of the stoves contracted impurity all the others do not become unclean.  
Mishnah  . If one made of three stones two stoves   and one of the outer ones contracted an impurity the half of the middle one that serves the unclean one   is unclean but the half of it that serves the clean one remains clean. If the clean one was removed, the middle one is regarded as completely transferred to the unclean one.   If the unclean one was removed, the middle one is regarded as completely transferred to the clean one. Should the two outer ones contract impurity, if the middle stone was large each outer stone is allowed such a part of it as suffices for the support of a pot   and the remainder is clean. But if it was small all of it is unclean. Should the middle stone be removed, if a big kettle can be set on the two outer stones   they are unclean. If the middle stone is restored all becomes clean again.   If it was plastered with clay   it becomes susceptible to impurity when   it is heated to a degree that suffices for the cooking of an egg.  

   	Mishnah  . If two stones were made into a stove and they contracted an impurity, and a stone was set up near the outer side   of the one and another stone near the outer side of the other,   [the inner half] of each [inner stones]   remains unclean   while [the outer] half of each [of these stones]   is clean. If the clean stones   are removed the others   revert to their impurity.  
Mishnah  . If a domestic  fire-basket  was hollowed out  to a depth of less than three handbreadths,  it remains susceptible to impurity, because when it is heated from below  a pot above would still boil. If, however, it was hollowed out  to a lower depth it is insusceptible to impurity.  If subsequently a stone or gravel was put into it,  it is still insusceptible to impurity.  If it was plastered over  with clay, it may contract impurity henceforward.  This was r. Judah's reply   in connection with the oven that was placed over the mouth of a cistern or over that of a cellar.  

   	Mishnah  . A hob   that has a receptacle for pots   is clean as a stove   but unclean as a receptacle.   As to its   sides,   whatever touches them does not become unclean as if the hob had been a stove,   but as regards its wide side,   r. Meir holds it to be clean   while r. Judah holds it to be unclean.   The same law   applies also where a basket was inverted and a stove was put upon it.  

   	Mishnah  . If a double stove was split into two parts longitudinally it becomes insusceptible to impurity.   But if crosswise   it remains susceptible to impurity. If a single stove was split into two parts, whether longitudinally or crosswise, it becomes insusceptible to impurity.   As to the fender around a stove,   whenever it   is three fingerbreadths high it contracts impurity by contact and also through its air-space, but if it is less it contracts impurity through contact and not through its air- space.   How   is the air-space   determined?   R. Ishmael says: a spit   is inclined from above   downwards   and all below it   is the air-space   through which impurity is imparted. R. Eliezer b. Jacob ruled: if the stove contracted impurity the fender   also becomes unclean, but if the fender contracts impurity the stove does not become unclean.
Ishnah  . If the fender was detached from the stove, whenever it was three fingerbreadths high it contracts impurity by contact and through its air-space, but if it was lower or if the fender was flat   it is clean.   If three props   on a stove were three fingerbreadths high, they contract impurity by contact and through their air-space. If they were lower they contract impurity all the more,   even where they were four in number.  

   	Mishnah  . If one of them   was removed, the remaining ones contract impurity by contact but not through their air-space;   so r. Meir. R. Simeon rules that they remain clean. If originally only two props were made, one opposite the other,   they contract impurity by contact and through their air-space; so r. Meir. R. Simeon rules that they are clean. If they were more than three fingerbreadths high, the parts that are three fingerbreadths high and downwards   contract impurity by contact and through their air-space but the parts that are more than three fingerbreadths high contract impurity by contact and not through their air-space; so r. Meir. R. Simeon rules that they   are clean. If they were withdrawn from the rim,   the parts which are within three fingerbreadths   contract impurity by contact and through their air-space, and those parts that are removed more than three fingerbreadths   contract impurity by contact but not through their air-space; so r. Meir. R. Simeon rules that they are clean.
Mishnah  . How is their air-space   measured?   R. Simeon b. Gamaliel says: the measuring-rod   is placed between them,   and any part that is outside the measuring-rod is clean while any part inside the measuring-rod, including the place of the measuring-rod itself, is unclean.  
Mishnah  . If within an oven  a partition of boards or hangings  was put up and a [dead] creeping thing was found in one compartment all the oven becomes unclean.  If a hive that was broken through  and its gap was stopped up with straw  was suspended within the air-space of an oven  while a [dead] creeping thing was within it, the oven becomes unclean.  If a [dead] creeping thing was within the oven, any foodstuffs within the hive become unclean;  but r. Eliezer rules that they are clean. R. Eliezer argued: if such a hive affords protection in the case of a corpse  which is subject to the greater restrictions,   should it not afford protection in the case of an earthenware which is subject to lighter restrictions?   They answered him: if it affords protection in the case of corpse impurity (though it is subject to greater restrictions) on account of the fact that tents may be duly divided,   should it also afford protection in the case of an earthenware (though it is subject to lighter restrictions) where tents cannot be usefully divided?  

   	Mishnah  . If a hive was in a sound condition, and so too in the case of a hamper or a skin-bottle, and a [dead] creeping thing was within it   the oven remains clean.   If the [dead] creeping thing was in the oven, any foodstuffs in the hive remain clean.   If it   was perforated, a vessel that is used for foodstuffs must   have a hole that is large enough for olives to fall through, if it is used for liquids the hole must be large enough for liquids to pass into it,   and if it is used for either it is subjected to the greater restriction, viz., the hole need only be large enough for liquids to pass into it.  
Mishnah  . If a colander   placed over the mouth of an oven was slightly sinking into it,   and it had no rims,   and a [dead] creeping thing was in it the oven becomes unclean, and if the creeping thing was in the oven, foodstuffs in the colander become unclean, since only vessels   afford protection against an impurity in an earthen vessel.   If a jar that was full of clean liquids   was placed beneath the bottom of an oven, and a [dead] creeping thing was in the oven, the jar and the liquids remain clean.   If it   was inverted, with its mouth projecting into the air-space of the oven, and a dead creeping thing was in the oven, the liquid that clings to   the bottom of the jar remains clean.  

   	Mishnah  . If a pot was placed in an oven and a [dead] creeping thing was in the oven, the pot remains clean since no earthen vessel   imparts impurity to vessels. If it   contained dripping liquid, the latter contracts impurity and the pot also becomes unclean.   This   might well say,   ‘that   which made you unclean did not make me unclean, but you have made me unclean’.

   	Mishnah  . If a cock that swallowed a creeping thing fell   within the air-space of an oven, the oven remains clean;   but if the cock died,   the oven becomes unclean.   If a [dead] creeping thing was found in an oven, any bread in it contracts a second grade of impurity since the oven   is of the first grade.  
Mishnah  . If a leaven pot   that had a tightly fitting lid   was put within an oven, and there was some leaven and a [dead] creeping thing within the pot, but there was a partition   between them,   the oven is unclean   but the leaven   is clean. But if it   was an olives bulk of corpse,   both the oven and the house   become unclean,   but the leaven   remains clean. If, however, there was in the partition   an aperture one handbreadth square,   all   become unclean.

   	Mishnah  . If a [dead] creeping thing was found in the outlet   of an oven or of a double stove or of a single stove outside the inner edge,   it   remains clean.   If it   was in the open air,   even though an olive's bulk of corpse was found in the outlet, it   remains clean.   If, however, there was in the outlet an opening of one handbreadth,   all   become unclean.  

   	Mishnah  . If a [dead] creeping thing was found in the aperture   through which wood is put in, r. Judah ruled: if it   was within the outer edge of the aperture the stove becomes unclean.   But the sages ruled: if it   was without the inner edge the oven remains clean.   R. Jose ruled: if it   was found beneath the spot where the pot is set, inwards, the stove becomes unclean, but if beneath the spot where the pot is set, outwards, it remains clean. If it   was found on the place   where the bath-keeper   sits, or where the dyer sits, or where the olive seethers sit, the stove remains clean. The stove becomes unclean   only when the creeping thing is found within and beyond that opening which is blocked up by the pot.  
Mishnah  . A pit   which has a place on which a pot may be set is unclean;   and so also an oven of glass-blowers. If it has a place on which a pot may be set, is unclean.   The furnace of lime-burners, or of glaziers, or of potters is clean. A large sized baking-oven   , if it has a rim,   is unclean.   R. Judah ruled:   if it has a perforated roof.   R. Gamaliel ruled:   if it has a border.  

   	Mishnah   . If a man who came in contact with one who has contracted corpse impurity   had foodstuffs or liquids in his mouth and he put his head into the air-space of an oven that was clean, they   cause the oven to be unclean.   If a man who was clean had foodstuffs or liquids in his mouth and he put his head into the air-space of an oven that was unclean, they   become unclean.   If a man was eating a pressed fig   with soiled hands   and he put his hand into his mouth to remove a small stone,   r. Meir declares the fig to be unclean   and r. Judah regards it as clean.   R. Jose ruled: if he   turned it over   the fig is unclean   but if he did not turn it over   the fig remains clean.   If the man had a pondion   in his mouth, r. Jose ruled: if he kept it there to relieve his thirst it becomes unclean.  

   	Mishnah   . If milk that dripped from a woman's breasts   fell into the air-space of an oven, the oven becomes unclean,   since a liquid   conveys impurity irrespective of whether [its presence] is acceptable or not acceptable. If she   was sweeping it   out when a thorn pricked her and she bled, or if she burnt herself and put her finger into her mouth, the oven becomes unclean.  
  
Mishnah  . Metal vessels, whether they are flat or form a receptacle, are susceptible to impurity. On being broken they become clean.  If they were re-made into vessels they revert  to their former impurity. Rabban simeon b. Gamaliel ruled: this  does not apply to every form of impurity but only to that contracted from a corpse.

   	Mishnah  . Every metal vessel  that has a name of its own  is susceptible to impurity, excepting a door, a bolt, a lock, a socket under a hinge, a hinge, a clapper, and the [threshold] groove under a door post, since these are intended to be attached to the ground. 

   	Mishnah  . If vessels are made from iron ore, from smelted iron, from the hoop  of a wheel, from sheets,  from plating,  from the bases, rims or handles of vessels, from chippings or filings, they are clean.  R. Johanan b. Nuri ruled: this  applies also to those made of shattered vessels. [vessels that are made] of fragments of vessels, from small ware, or from nails that were known to have been made from vessels, are unclean.  [if they were made] from ordinary nails,   beth shammai rule that they are unclean,   and beth hillel   rule that they are clean.

   	Mishnah  . If unclean iron   was smelted together with clean iron and the greater part was from the unclean one, [the vessel made of the composition] is unclean;   but if the greater part was from the clean iron the vessel is clean. If each represented a half it is unclean.   The same law also applies to a mixture of cement   and cattle dung.   A door bolt   is susceptible to impurity, but [one of wood] that is only plated with metal is not susceptible to impurity.   The clutch and the crosspiece [of a lock] are susceptible to impurity. As regards a door-bolt, r. Joshua ruled: it may be drawn off one door and   hung on another on the sabbath. R. Tarfon ruled: it is like all other vessels and may be carried about in a courtyard.

   	Mishnah  . The scorpion [-shaped] bit of a bridle is susceptible to impurity, but the cheek-pieces are clean.   R. Eliezer rules that the cheek-pieces are susceptible to impurity, and the sages hold that the scorpion bit alone is susceptible to impurity, but while they   are joined together the whole is susceptible to impurity.

Mishnah  . A metal spindle-knob, r. Akiba declares to be susceptible to impurity but the sages declare it insusceptible.   If it   was only plated [with metal] it is clean.   A spindle, a distaff, a rod, a double flute and a pipe are susceptible to impurity if they are of metal, but if they are only plated [with metal] they are clean. If a double flute has a receptacle for the wings   it is susceptible to impurity in either case.  

   	Mishnah  . A curved horn   is susceptible to impurity   and a straight one   is clean. If its mouthpiece was of metal it   is unclean. Its wide side   r. Tarfon declares to be susceptible to impurity and the sages declare it clean. While they are joined together the whole instrument is susceptible to impurity. Similarly the branches of a candlestick are clean and the cups and the base are susceptible to impurity, but while they are joined together the whole candlestick is susceptible to impurity.
Mishnah  . A helmet is susceptible to impurity and the cheek- pieces are clean, but if the latter have a receptacle for water   they are susceptible to impurity. All weapons of war are susceptible to impurity: a javelin. A spear-head, greaves, and breastplate are susceptible to impurity. All women's ornaments are susceptible to impurity: a golden city,   a necklace, ear-rings, finger-rings (whether the ring is with a seal or without one) and nose-rings. If a necklace has metal beads on a thread of flax or wool and the thread broke, the beads are still susceptible to impurity, since each one is a vessel in itself. If the thread was of metal and the beads were of precious stones or pearls or glass, and the beads were broken while the thread alone remained, it is still susceptible to impurity. The remnant of a necklace long enough for the neck of a little girl, is susceptible to impurity. R. Eliezer ruled: even if only one ring remained it is unclean, since it also is hung around the neck.

   	Mishnah  . If an ear-ring was shaped like a pot   at its bottom and like a lentil at the top and the sections fell apart, the pot-shaped section   is susceptible to impurity as a receptacle, while the lentil shaped section is susceptible to impurity in itself.   The hooklet   is clean. If the sections of an ear-ring that was in the shape of a cluster of grapes fell apart, they   are clean.  

Mishna - mas. Kelim chapter   

Mishnah  . A finger-ring for a man is  susceptible to impurity. A ring for cattle or for vessels and all other rings are clean.  A beam  for arrows is susceptible to impurity,  but one for prisoners  is clean.  A neck-iron  is susceptible to impurity. A chain that has a lock-piece is susceptible to impurity,  but one used for tying on cattle is clean. The chain of wholesale provision dealers  is susceptible to impurity.  But that of householders   is clean.   R. Jose explained: this applies only where   it   consists of one link, but if it consisted of two links or if it had a slug [-shaped] piece at its end   it is susceptible to impurity.  

   	Mishnah  . The beam of the wool-combers’ balance is susceptible to impurity   on account of the hooks;   and that of the householder, if it has hooks is also susceptible to impurity. The lading hooks of porters are clean but those of pedlars   are susceptible to impurity.   R. Judah ruled: in the case of that of the pedlars the hook that is in front is susceptible to impurity   but that which is behind is clean.   The hook of a bed- frame is susceptible to impurity but that of bed poles   is clean. [the hook of] a chest is susceptible to impurity but that of a fish trap is clean. That of a table is susceptible to impurity but that of a wooden candlestick is clean. This is the rule: any hook that is attached to a susceptible vessel   is susceptible to impurity, but one that is attached to a vessel that is insusceptible to impurity is clean. All these, however, are by themselves   clean.  

   	Mishnah  . The metal cover of a basket of householders, rabban gamaliel declares, is susceptible to impurity,   and the sages hold that it is clean;   but that of physicians   is susceptible to impurity. The door   of a cupboard of householders is clean but that of physicians   is susceptible to impurity. Tongs   are susceptible to impurity but firebars are clean. The scorpion [-shaped] hook in an olive-press is susceptible to impurity but the hooks for the walls   are clean.  

   	Mishnah  . A blood-letters’ lancet is susceptible to impurity but [the style] of a sundial is clean. R. Zadok rules that it is susceptible to impurity. A weaver's pin is susceptible to impurity; the chest of a grist-dealer, r. Zadok rules, is susceptible to impurity, but the sages rule that it is clean. If its wagon was made of metal it is susceptible to impurity.
Mishnah  . If a nail   was adapted to open or to shut a lock it is susceptible to impurity, but one that is only used as a safeguard   is clean. If a nail was adapted to open a jar, r. Akiba rules that it is susceptible to impurity, and the sages rule that it is clean unless it was forged anew. A money-changer's nail   is clean,   but r. Zadok ruled that it is susceptible to impurity.   There are three things which r. Zadok holds to be susceptible to impurity and the sages hold clean: the nail of a money-changer, the chest of a grist-dealer and the style of a sundial. R. Zadok rules that these are susceptible to impurity and the sages rule that they are clean.

   	Mishnah  . There are four things which rabban gamaliel declares to be susceptible to impurity, and the sages declare clean: the metal cover of a basket of householders, the hanger of a strigil, unfinished metal vessels, and an earthen slab   that was broken into two equal parts. The sages, however, agree with rabban gamaliel that where a slab was broken into two parts, one large and the other small, the larger is susceptible to impurity and the smaller is clean.

   	Mishnah  . If a denar that had been invalidated   was fashioned for hanging around a young girl's neck it is susceptible to impurity. So, too, if a sela that had been invalidated was adapted for use as a weight, it is susceptible to impurity. How much may it   depreciate while one is still permitted to keep it? As much as two denars   if its value is less it must be cut up.  

   	Mishnah  . A penknife, a writing pen, a plummet, a weight, pressing plates, a measuring-rod, and a measuring-table are susceptible to impurity. All unfinished wooden vessels also are susceptible to impurity, excepting those made of boxwood.   R. Judah ruled: one made of an olive-tree branch is also clean unless it was first heated.    
Mishna - mas. Kelim chapter   

Mishnah  . The sword, knife, dagger, spear, hand-sickle, harvest-sickle, clipper,  and barbers’ scissors, even though their component parts were separated, are susceptible to impurity. R. Jose ruled: the part that is near the hand  is susceptible to impurity, but that which is near the top  is clean. If the two parts of shears were separated r. Judah rules that they are still susceptible to impurity  but the sages rule that they are clean.

   	Mishnah  . A shovel-fork  whose shovel  has been removed is still susceptible to impurity on account of its fork;  if its fork has been removed it is still susceptible on account of its shovel. A kohlstick  whose [ear-] spoon is missing is still susceptible to impurity on account of its point; if its point was missing it is still susceptible on account of its [ear-] spoon. A stylus whose writing point is missing is still susceptible to impurity on account of its eraser;  if its eraser is missing it is susceptible on account of its writing point. A soup-ladle   whose spoon is lost is still susceptible to impurity on account of its fork; if its fork is lost it is still susceptible on account of its spoon. So also is the law in regard to the prong of a mattock.   The minimum size   for all these instruments is one that would suffice for the due performance of their usual work.
Mishnah  . A coulter that is damaged   remains susceptible to impurity until its greater part is lost, but if its shaft-socket is broken it is clean. A hatchet-head whose cutting edge is lost remains susceptible to impurity on account of its splitting edge; if its splitting edge is lost it remains susceptible on account of its cutting edge. If its shaft-socket is broken it is clean.

   	Mishnah  . A shovel whose blade was missing is still susceptible to impurity, since it is still like a hammer; so r. Meir. But the sages rule that it is clean. A saw whose teeth are missing one in every two   is clean, but if an hasit   length of consecutive teeth   remained it is susceptible to impurity. An adze, scalpel, plane, or drill that was damaged remains susceptible to impurity, but if its sharp edge was missing it is clean. In all these cases, however, if an instrument was split into two parts both remain susceptible to impurity, excepting the drill. The block of a plane by itself   is clean.

   	Mishnah  . A needle whose eye or point was missing is clean. If it was subsequently adapted as a stretching-pin it is susceptible to impurity. A pack-needle whose eye was missing is still susceptible to impurity since one writes with it.   If its point was missing it is clean. A stretching-pin is in either case   susceptible to impurity. A needle that has become rusty is clean if this hinders it from sewing, but otherwise it remains susceptible to impurity. A hook that was straightened out is clean. If it is bent back it resumes its susceptibility to impurity.
Mishnah  . Wood that serves [as a subsidiary part of] a metal vessel is susceptible to impurity but metal that serves as a subsidiary part of a wooden vessel is clean. For instance,   if a lock is of wood and its clutches are of metal, even if only one of them is so, it is susceptible to impurity; but if the lock is of metal and its clutches are of wood, it is clean. If a ring was of metal and its seal of coral, it is susceptible to impurity, but if the ring was of coral and its seal of metal, it is clean. The tooth in the plate of a lock or in a key is susceptible to impurity by itself.  

   	Mishnah  . If ashkelon grappling-irons were broken but their hooks remained, they remain susceptible to impurity. If a pitch-fork, winnowing-fan, or rake (and the same applies to a hair   -comb) lost one of its teeth   and it was replaced by one of metal, it is susceptible to impurity. And concerning all these r. Joshua remarked: the scribes have here introduced a new principle of law,   and i have no explanation to offer.  
Mishnah  . If the teeth of a flax-comb were missing but two remained, it is still susceptible to impurity. If only one, however, remained it is clean. As regards all the teeth   each one individually   is susceptible to impurity. If of a wool-comb one tooth out of every two is missing   it is clean. If three consecutive teeth   remained, it remains susceptible to impurity. If the outermost tooth   was one of them, the comb is clean. If two teeth were removed from the comb and made into a pair of forceps, they are susceptible to impurity. Even if only one was removed but it was adapted to be used for a lamp or as a stretching-pin, it is susceptible to impurity.  
Mishna - mas. Kelim chapter   

Mishnah  . What is the minimum size  of metal vessels?  A bucket must be of such a size as one can draw water with; a kettle must be such as water can be heated in it; a boiler, such as can hold sela's; a cauldron, such as can hold jugs; jugs, such as can hold perutahs; wine-measures, such as can measure wine; and oil-measures, such as can measure oil. R. Eliezer ruled: the size prescribed for all these is a capability to hold perutahs. R. Akiba ruled: a vessel that lacks trimming  is susceptible to impurity, but one that lacks polishing is  clean. 

   	Mishnah  . A staff  to the end of which is attached a metal knob in the shape of a chestnut bur is susceptible to impurity.  If the staff was studded with nails it is also unclean. R. Simeon ruled: this applies only where three rows  were put in. In all cases, however, where they are put in for ornamentation the staff is clean.  If a tube   was attached to its end, and so also in the case of a door,   it is clean.   If it   was once an independent vessel and then it was fixed to the staff, it remains susceptible to impurity.   When does it attain purity? Beth shammai ruled: when it is damaged; and beth hillel ruled: when it is joined on.  
Ishnah  . The auger of a builder and the pick of a carpenter are susceptible to impurity.   Tent-pegs and surveyors’ pegs are susceptible to impurity.   A surveyor's chain is susceptible to impurity, but one used for faggots   is clean.   The chain of a big bucket [is susceptible to impurity to a length of] four handbreadths,   and that of a small one [to a length of] ten handbreadths.   A blacksmith s jack is susceptible to impurity. A saw   the teeth of which were inserted   in a hole   is unclean,   but if they were turned from below upwards   it is clean.   All covers are clean   except that of a boiler.  

   	Mishnah  . The parts of a wagon that are susceptible to impurity are the following: the metal yoke,   the cross-bar, the side-pieces that hold the straps, the iron bar under the necks of the cattle, the pole-pin, the metal girth, the trays, the clapper, the hook, and any nail that holds any of its parts together.

   	Mishnah  . The clean parts of a wagon are the following: the yoke   that is only plated [with metal]. Side-pieces made for mere ornamentation, tubes that give out a noise,   the lead at the side of the necks of the cattle, the rim of the wheel, the plates   and mountings,   and all other nails.   All these are clean. Metal shoes of cattle are susceptible to impurity and those made of cork are clean. When does a sword become susceptible to impurity? When it has been polished. And a knife? When it has been sharpened.
Ishnah  . A metal basket-cover   which was turned into a mirror is, r. Judah rules, clean;   and the sages rule that it is susceptible to impurity.   A broken mirror, if it does not reflect the greater part of the face, is clean.

   	Mishnah  . Metal vessels may remain unclean   and become clean   even when broken;   so r. Eliezer. R. Joshua ruled: they can be made clean only when they are whole.   If they were sprinkled upon   and on the same day they were broken and then they were recast   and sprinkled upon on the same day, they are clean;   so r. Eliezer. R. Joshua ruled: there can be no effective sprinkling earlier than on the third   and the seventh day   respectively.

   	Mishnah  . A knee-shaped key that was broken off at the knee   is clean.   R. Judah rules that it is unclean because one can open with it from within.   A gamma-shaped key,   however, that was broken off at its shorter   arm   is clean.   If it   retained the teeth and the gaps it remains unclean. If the teeth were missing it is still unclean on account of the gaps; if the gaps were blocked up it is unclean on account of the teeth. If the teeth were missing and the gaps were blocked up, or if they were merged into one another,   the key becomes clean. If in a mustard-strainer   three holes in its bottom were merged into one another the strainer becomes clean;   but a metal mill-funnel   is   unclean.    
Mishnah  . Of  vessels of wood, leather, bone or glass those that are flat are clean  and those that form a receptacle are susceptible to impurity. If they are broken they become clean again. If one remade them into vessels they are susceptible to impurity henceforth.  A chest, a box, a cupboard,a straw basket,  a reed basket,  or the tank of an alexandrian ship,  that have flat bottoms and contain a minimum of forty se'ah in liquid measure which represent two kor in dry measure, are clean.  All other vessels, however, whether they contain the minimum  or do not contain it, are susceptible to impurity;  so r. Meir. R. Judah ruled: the tub of a wagon, the food chests of kings, the tanners trough, the tank of a small ship, and an ark,  even though they contain the minimum,  are susceptible to impurity, since they are invariably intended to be moved about with their contents. As to all other vessels, those that contain the minimum  are clean and those that cannot contain it are susceptible to impurity. The only practical difference between the ruling of r. Meir  and that of r. Judah   is the ruling concerning a domestic baking trough.  

   	Mishnah  . Bakers’ baking-boards are susceptible to impurity.   Those in domestic use   are clean, but if they were coloured red or saffron they are susceptible to impurity. If a bakers’ shelf   was fixed to a wall, r. Eliezer rules that it is clean   and the sages rule that it is susceptible to impurity.   The bakers’ frame   is susceptible to impurity but one in domestic use is clean. If a rim was made on its four sides it is susceptible to impurity, but if one side was open it is clean. R. Simeon ruled: if it was so shaped that one can cut the dough upon it, it is susceptible to impurity.   A rolling-pin is similarly susceptible to impurity.  
	Mishnah  . The container of the flour-dealers’ sifter is susceptible to impurity, but the domestic one   , is clean. R. Judah ruled: also one that is used by a hairdresser is susceptible to impurity as a seat,   since girls sit in it when their hair is dressed.

   	Mishnah  . All hangers   are susceptible to impurity, excepting those of a sifter and a riddle that are for domestic use;   so r. Meir. But the sages ruled: all hangers are clean, excepting those of a sifter of flour-dealers, of a riddle used in threshing-floors, of a hand-sickle and of an exciseman's staff, since they afford aid when the instrument is in use.   This is the general rule: [a hanger] that is intended to afford aid when the instrument is in use is susceptible to impurity and one intended to serve only as a hanger is clean.

   	Mishnah  . The grist-dealers’ shovel is susceptible to impurity   but the one used in grain stores   is clean. The one used in wine- presses is susceptible to impurity   but that used in threshing- floors   is clean. This is the general rule: [a shovel] that is intended to hold anything is susceptible to impurity but one intended only to heap stuff together is clean.
Mishnah  . Ordinary harps   are susceptible to impurity,   but the harps of the sons of levi   are clean.   All liquids   are susceptible to impurity, but the liquids   in the shambles   are clean. All books   convey impurity to the hands,   excepting the scroll of the temple court.   A wooden toy horse   is clean.   The lute, the niktimon   and the drum are susceptible to impurity. R. Judah ruled: the drum is unclean as a seat   since the wailing woman sits on it. A weasel-trap is susceptible to impurity,   but a mouse- trap   is clean. 

Mishnah  . Any wooden vessel that was broken into two parts  becomes clean,  excepting a folding table,  a dish with compartments for [different kinds of] food,  and a domestic footstool.  R. Judah ruled: a double dish  and a babylonian tray are subject to the same law.  At what stage  do wooden vessels begin to be susceptible to impurity? A bed and a cot, after they are rubbed over with fishskin.  If the owner determined not to rub them over they are susceptible to impurity [forthwith].  R. Meir ruled: a bed becomes susceptible to impurity as soon as three rows of meshes have been knitted in it.

   	Mishnah  . Wooden baskets [become susceptible to impurity] as soon as their rims are bound round and their rough ends are smoothed off; but those that are made of palm-branches [become susceptible to impurity] even though their ends were not smoothed off on the inside, since they are allowed to remain in this condition. A basket [of reed-grass   becomes susceptible to impurity] as soon as its rim is bound around it, its rough ends are smoothed off, and its hanger is finished. A case of wickerwork for flagons or for cups [is susceptible to impurity] even if the rough ends were not smoothed off on the inside, since these are allowed to remain in this condition.

   	Mishnah  . Small reed baskets and women's work baskets [are susceptible to impurity] as soon as their rims are bound round and their rough ends smoothed off; large reed baskets and large hampers, as soon as two circling bands have been made round their wide sides; the container of a sifter or a sieve and a cup of the balances, as soon as one circling band has been made round their wide sides; a willow   basket, as soon as two twists have been made around its wide sides; and a rush   basket,   as soon as one twist has been made round it.
 


