Toharot, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
When learning this mishnah it is important to remember that produce is not susceptible to impurity until it has been made wet.  

Mishnah One
1) A woman who  was preserving vegetables  in a pot and touched  a leaf outside the pot on a dry spot, even though the leaf had an egg's bulk of volume, it alone becomes unclean  while all the rest  remains clean.  
2) If she touched it at a wet spot: 
a) If there was an egg's bulk in the leaf, everything becomes unclean.   
b) If there was not an egg's bulk in it, it alone becomes unclean but all the rest remains clean. 
c) If it is returned into the pot, everything becomes unclean.   
3) If the woman was unclean due to contact with one who had corpse uncleanness, and she touched the leaf either at a wet spot or at a dry spot:
a) If there was an egg's bulk in the leaf, everything becomes unclean;   
b) If there was not an egg's bulk in it, it alone becomes unclean but all the rest remains clean. 
4) If a woman who was a tevulat yom emptied out the pot with unwashed hands, and she observed some liquid on her hands, and it is uncertain whether it was splashed from the pot or whether a stalk had touched her hands, the vegetables are invalid   but the pot remains clean.

Explanation
Section one: The woman is preserving some vegetables that are either terumah or are regular vegetables whose purity she wishes to preserve as if they had the sanctity of terumah. She is preserving the vegetables in either vinegar or salt. Note that the only reason a woman and not a man is mentioned is that it seems that women were more likely to do this work than men. The same laws would apply to men.
Before the pickling, the vegetables had not come into contact with liquid to make them susceptible to impurity. The vegetables and the leaf sticking out of the pot did become susceptible when she poured liquid on them to begin the preserving process.
If she touches the leaf at a dry spot the leaf becomes impure with third degree impurity because hands have second degree impurity. In this case it doesn't matter how big the leaf is, only the leaf will be impure. The leaf doesn't convey impurity to the attached vegetables because things with third degree impurity don't defile terumah.
Section two: In this case the leaf was wet when she touched it. 
If the leaf is the size of an egg, then it will convey its impurity to other things. The liquid on it now has first degree impurity, and it conveys second degree impurity back to the leaf. The leaf will convey third degree impurity to the vegetables in the pot. 
However, if the leaf is smaller than the size of an egg, while it is impure because there is no minimum size for produce to receive impurity, it will not convey uncleanness because food needs to be the size of an egg to convey impurity.
If the leaf goes back into the pot, then the liquid on the leaf will convey its impurity to the liquid in the pot and everything will be impure. There is no minimum amount for liquids for them to convey impurity.
Section three: In the previous two sections the woman's hands had second degree impurity, as do all hands unless they have been ritually cleansed. In this section, she had contact with something (either a person or a vessel) that had been defiled by a corpse. The woman has first degree uncleanness. The difference here is that the leaf will have second degree uncleanness even if it is not wet. Again, if it is large enough it will convey its impurity back into the pot.
Section four: A "tevulat yom" is one who has been to the mikveh but has not yet had the sun set. She has second degree impurity. She pours out the pot while her hands also have second degree impurity. While doing so she notices that some water has gotten onto her hands. If the water sprayed out of the pot, then it doesn't affect the contents of the pot. But if her hand touched the stalk of one of the vegetables in the pot, then the liquid on it would be impure and it would convey impurity back into the pot. 
The rule is that in cases of doubt with regard to a tevul yom, they do disqualify terumah. Therefore, the vegetable(s) itself is impure and if it is terumah will not be able to be eaten. However, the pot itself remains pure for a tevul yom does not defile liquids causing them to have first degree impurity (see Parah 8:7). 
  
