Toharot, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) If one is emptying out the cistern [into jars] and a [dead] sheretz was found in the first jar, all the other jars are deemed unclean; but if it was found in the last, only that one is unclean but all the others remain clean.   
2) When does this apply? When the wine was drawn directly with each jar, but if it was drawn with a ladle and a [dead] creeping thing was found in one of the jars, it alone is unclean.   
3) When does this apply? Only when the man examined [the jars] but did not cover them up or covered them up but did not examine them;   
4) But if he both examined them and covered them up and a [dead] creeping thing was found: 
a) If in one jar, all the contents of the cistern are deemed unclean. 
b) If it was found in the cistern, all its contents are deemed unclean 
c) And if it was found in the ladle all the contents of the cistern   are deemed unclean. 

Explanation
Section one: A person is emptying out the wine from a cistern and placing it into jars. He finds a dead sheretz which will defile the wine (and make it a bit gross, but that's another matter). If he finds it in the first jar, we must assume that all of the wine put into all of the jars is impure, for the sheretz might have been in the cistern and then got into the first jar. Alternatively, if the sheretz was in the first jar (and not in the cistern) when he dipped that jar into the cistern, the rest of the wine in the cistern was defiled.
However, if he finds it in the last jar, then we can assume that the sheretz was originally in the last jar. Only the contents of that jar are impure.
Section two: If he draws with a ladle and pours that wine into each jar, and a dead sheretz is found in one of the jars, then only that jar's wine is impure. This is because it is possible that the sheretz was originally in that jar and never was in the cistern.
Section three: The leniencies in the previous two sections can only occur if he wasn't cautious with the jars. If he didn't cover the jars up, it is possible that a sheretz got in directly to the jar. If he didn't check the jars before he filled them then it is possible that the sheretz was there before he filled them (from the ladle). In any of these cases, it is possible to isolate the impurity to one jar.
Section four: However, if he checked and covered the jars, then it is clear that the sheretz came from the cistern. Therefore, no matter where the sheretz is found, all of the wine in all of the containers is unclean. 
