Toharot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with a person who wants to take some olives that are in a condition that doesn't make them susceptible to impurity and bring them to the olive press to press them into oil. In other words, he has changed his mind about what to do with the olives. At first he didn't want them to sweat because he wasn't using them for oil, but now he changed his mind.  

Mishnah Seven
If one wants to take from them [a quantity sufficient for] one pressing or for two pressings:
1) Bet Shammai says: he may scrape off [what he requires] in a condition of uncleanness, but he must cover up [what he takes] in a condition of cleanness.   
2) Bet Hillel says: he may also cover it up in a condition of uncleanness.   
3) Rabbi Yose says: he may dig out [what he requires] with metal axes and carry it to the press in a condition of uncleanness.

Explanation
Section one: According to Bet Shammai when he goes to scrape off some of the olives he doesn't need to do so in a state of purity. Since the olives have not yet been made susceptible to impurity, they will not become impure even if he is impure.
However, after he takes those olives out, they are immediately susceptible to impurity. Therefore, if he wishes to cover the olives so that they can be pressed he must do so in a state of purity, otherwise they will become impure. In other words, Bet Shammai holds that the sweat that they exuded previously now causes them to be susceptible.
Section two: Bet Hillel disagrees and holds that he can even cover them up in a state of uncleanness. The sweat they exuded before does not make them susceptible to impurity. 
However, Bet Hillel agrees that if he takes the entire lot of olives, he has changed their status and made them all susceptible to impurity. In this case, he will have to cover them in a state of purity. 
Section two: Rabbi Yose rules even more leniently. He can even take metal axes and remove all of the olives that were set aside in a state in which they were not susceptible. They are still not susceptible to impurity.   
