Toharot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Twelve

Mishnah Twelve
1) "A condition of doubt concerning non-sacred food"--this refers to the cleanness practiced by Pharisees.   
2) "A condition of doubt concerning a sheretz" –according [to their condition at] the time they are found.   
3) "A condition of doubt concerning negaim"  — it  is deemed clean in the beginning before it had been determined to be unclean, but after it had been determined to be unclean, a condition of doubt is deemed unclean. 
4) "A condition of doubt concerning a nazirite vow"   — [in such a condition of doubt   he] is permitted [all that is forbidden to a nazirite].   
5) "A condition of doubt concerning first-borns"   —whether they are human firstborn or firstborn of cattle, whether the firstborn of an unclean beast or a clean one, for the one who wishes to extract from his fellow bears the burden of proof. 

Explanation
Section one: The Pharisees are known, at least in rabbinic literature, to have eaten regular non-sacred food in a state of purity. Nevertheless, the mishnah notes that they ruled leniently if a doubt occurred as to the purity of the food. In this case, the doubt is ruled pure. The leniency is because the law does not actually require non-sacred food to be eaten in a state of purity. 
Section two: This is a general principle that we learned in 3:5—all cases of impurity are judged by what we can see when they are found. The mishnah will return to the case of the sheretz, the creepy crawly thing which is a father of impurity, at the end of chapter 9. We should note that the mishnah uses "sheretz" merely as an example. The same would be true of any "father of impurity." All cases are judged by the time at which they are found. 
Section three: We learned this in Negaim 5:4-5. Briefly—if a doubt arises concerning a nega, a sign of scale disease, and the person has not yet been deemed impure, then the doubt is ruled clean. But if it occurs after the person was deemed impure, then the doubtful case is deemed unclean.
Section four: Here a doubt occurs as to whether a person is a nazirite or not. For instance, he said, "I am a nazirite if my wife gives birth to a child." His wife then has a baby who dies and it is unknown whether the child was viable and something just happened that caused it to die, in which case he is a nazirite, or the child was never viable, which means he is not a nazirite, because he never had a child. In such a case, he is deemed not to be a nazirite.  
Section five: In this case there is some doubt whether a human or an animal is a first-born. If the human was a first-born the father must redeem the boy by giving five selas to the priest. If a clean animal was the first-born the animal itself must be given to the priest. If it was a donkey, an impure animal, then the owner must give a sheep to the priest (see Bekhorot for more info on all of this). In all of these cases we invoke the rule that the one who wishes to extract something from his fellow must bring proof. Since the priest cannot prove that the animal was a first-born, the owner or father need not give anything to the priest.    
