Toharot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
1) If a man sat in a public domain and someone came and trod on his clothes, or spat and he touched his spit, on account of the spit terumah must be burnt, but on account of the clothes the majority principle is followed.   
2) If a man slept in the public domain, when he rises his clothes have midras uncleanness, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
a) But the sages say that they are clean. 
3) If a man touched someone in the night and it is not known whether it was one who was alive or dead, but in the morning when he got up he found him to be dead:
a) Rabbi Meir says that he is clean.
b) But the sages rule that he is unclean, since all doubtful cases of uncleanness are [determined] in accordance with [their appearance at] the time they are discovered. 

Explanation
Section one: Spit of undetermined origin found in the public domain is considered impure (see 4:5). Therefore, if the person who was spit upon (yuck) then touched terumah, the terumah must be burned lest it is impure.
However, when it comes to this person's clothes we follow a majority principle. If a majority of the people who were walking past him were pure, then the clothes that one of them touched are pure. If the majority is impure (for instance the person finds himself in a zav colony), then the clothes are impure.
Section two:  If a person slept out in the public domain then it is likely that many people have stepped on his clothes. If any one of them was a zav, he would have imparted midras impurity, the type of impurity that is transmitted by pressing on something (leaning, sitting, standing etc.), to the clothes. Rabbi Meir rules strictly and says that the clothes are impure.
The other sages retain the rule that cases of doubtful impurity in the public domain are pure.
Section three: In this case, Rabbi Meir follows the rule that cases of doubtful impurity in the public domain are pure. But the sages say that in this case we must follow the rule that was found in 3:5—we always judge cases of doubtful impurity according to how they appear at the time they are discovered. Since the person was dead when he was discovered, and we are not sure if he was alive when the person touched him, we must consider the person to be impure.  
