Toharot, Chapter One, Mishnah Nine

Mishnah Nine
1) Holy loaves  in whose hollows there was holy water, if one contracted uncleanness from a sheretz, they all become unclean.   
2) In the case of loaves of terumah, uncleanness is conveyed to two loaves and one is invalidated.   
3) If there was dripping liquid between them, even in the case of terumah all become unclean.

Explanation
Section one: The holy loaves are for instance the showbread or the two loaves brought on Shavuot. There is holy water, meaning water whose purity was preserved in order to be used with sacrifices, in the hollows within the loaves. This water, as we shall see, can act as conveyor of impurity. The first loaf has contact with a sheretz, which causes it to have first degree impurity. The next loaf has second degree impurity and the third loaf has third degree impurity. The third loaf defiles the water in its hollows such that the water has first degree impurity. The reason for this is that anything that defiles holy food, meaning even something with third degree impurity, causes holy water to have first degree impurity. The water then ups the level of defilement within that very loaf causing it to have second degree impurity, which will then defile the next loaf. Thus all the touching loaves will be defiled, if all of them are holy loaves. 
Section two: If the loaves are terumah, the process is arrested quicker. The first loaf has first degree impurity and the loaf that touches it has second degree impurity. The third loaf is invalid, although not impure. It doesn't convey impurity to the fourth loaf. It also doesn't defile the water in its hollows. This is because this loaf, or anything with third degree impurity in cases of terumah, doesn't cause water to become impure. 
Section three: In this case the liquid is dripping, meaning that if one puts one's hand on it, it will become moist. The first loaf has first degree impurity and every subsequent loaf has second degree impurity. This is because since there is a greater quantity of water it becomes defiled with first degree impurity. It then causes the loaf that touches it have second degree impurity and on and on, no matter how many loaves there are. 
In sum, we can see that water is a great conduit for impurity and that things that are really moist are even better conduits of impurity. 
   
