Toharot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah goes back to the case of the two paths, one pure and one impure. The case discussed here is one where he walks down both paths. 

Mishnah Three
1) If there were two paths, the one unclean and the other clean, and one walked on one of them and then prepared clean foods which were then eaten and, then he was sprinkled upon once and a second time and he performed immersion and became clean, then he walked on the second path and then prepared clean foods, the latter are clean.   
2) If the first foods were still in existence both must be held in suspense.   
3) If he had not become clean in the meantime, the first is held in suspense and the second must be burnt.

Explanation
Section one: This case is a bit complicated. The man walks down one of the paths and doesn't know which one he walked down. After walking down the first path, he goes and prepares food, probably terumah. After having prepared the food, he realizes that he might have become unclean so he cleanses himself by having the hatat waters sprinkled on him and by going to the mikveh. He is now certainly clean. Then he goes down the second path (seems to have forgotten that this was not a wise thing to do). And then he prepares food again.
The first food was originally deemed clean because of the sages' opinion in mishnah one. The second is also deemed clean because we also don't know if it was impure, since he was purified after having walked down the first path. In other words, each set of food is judged on its own, as if the other case didn't even happen.
Section two: However, if both sets of food are still in existence, then we can't look at each set individually. In this case, we must consider both of them as potentially impure. If they are terumah, both are "suspended." This means that they are not burned, because they might not be impure, but neither can they be eaten because it is forbidden to eat impure terumah.
Section three: If he didn't become clean in the meanwhile then we know that the second set of food must be impure because by this point he has walked down both paths. If the first set of food is still in existence, it is suspended, as it was in section two.  
  
