Toharot, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of the list of 13 rules regarding the carrion of a clean bird. 

Mishnah Two
1) The large feathers and the down contract uncleanness and  convey uncleanness  but do not combine [with the flesh to constitute the prescribed minimum].   
a) Rabbi Ishmael says: the down does combine [with the flesh]. 
2) The beak and the claws contract uncleanness  and  convey uncleanness and also combine [with the flesh to constitute the prescribed minimum].   
3) Rabbi Yose says: also the ends  of the wings and the end  of the tail combine [with the flesh to constitute the minimum] since they are left unplucked on fattened birds.

Explanation
Section one: When it comes to matters of purity and impurity, the large feathers and the downy feathers both count as part of the bird. Therefore, they can both be defiled and defile other things.
However, when it comes to making up enough to have a minimum measure to defile (the amount of an egg if the issue is food defilement, or the amount of an olive if the issue is the defilement caused in the gullet) the feathers do not join together with the flesh of the bird. In other words, let's say one has 3/4 of an egg's worth of bird flesh and 1/4 of an egg's worth of feathers, the total amount if impure does not convey impurity because it is not sufficient. You would need a sufficient amount of flesh or feathers alone. The reason seems to be that the feathers and flesh are both part of the bird but they are off different categories. Therefore, they don't join together.
Rabbi Yishmael says that the downy feathers are like the flesh and therefore they do join together to convey impurity. 
Section two: The beak and the claws are considered to be part of the bird for all purposes. They even join with the flesh to constitute a minimum measure. Perhaps this is because, unlike feathers which can't be eaten, the beak and claws could either be eaten (I'm pretty sure that I read a story about how claws were a delicacy in China) or at least put into some kind of soup.
Section three: Rabbi Yose adds that the tips of the wings and tip of the tail are left on fattened birds and eaten with them. Therefore, they too join with the rest of the flesh to convey impurity and to become impure.     
