Toharot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) One who loses something during the day and finds it on the same day it remains clean.  
a) If it was lost during the daytime and found in the night, or if it was lost in the night and found during the day or if it was lost on one day and found on the next day, it is unclean.   
b) This is the general rule: if the night or part of the night has passed over it, it is unclean. 
2) One who spreads out his clothes: 
a) If in a public domain, they remain clean;   
b) But if in a private domain they are unclean.  
c) If he kept watch over them, they remain clean.   
d) If they fell down and he went to bring them, they are unclean.   
3) If one's bucket fell into the cistern of an ‘am ha-arez and he went to bring something to draw it up with, it is unclean, since it was left for a time in the domain of an am haaretz. 

Explanation
Section one: If one loses an object during the day and finds it the same day, he can be sure that no one impure had touched it, for had someone stumbled over it, he would have picked it up and taken it. However, at night someone might have stumbled over it without seeing it. Therefore, if night passes over it, it must be assumed to be impure. 
Section two: The person here spreads out his clothes in a high place in order for them to dry. If he does this in the public domain, then we have a case of doubtful impurity in the public domain and the clothes are pure. But if he does so in the private domain  and there is a chance that someone impure touched the clothes, they have to be assumed impure. 
If he watches over them, they are pure.
If they fall down from the high place in which they were, then someone might have stepped on them. Therefore, even if they are on the ground only for a very short while, they must be treated as impure. 
Section three: The person left his bucket in the domain of the am haaretz while he went to get a rope to bring it up. Even though it is unlikely that the am haaretz touched the bucket, he must treat it as if it is impure. 
