Toharot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) Rabbi Meir says: oil always remains unclean in the first degree.
a) And the sages say: honey also.  
b) Rabbi Shimon Shezuri says: also wine.  
2) A mass of olives that fell into an oven that was heated:
a) If [the olives] were exactly the size of an egg it [the oven] remains pure;   
b) But if it was more than that of an egg the oven becomes unclean, for as soon as the first drop came out it became unclean by contact with an egg's bulk. 
c) If the olives were separated even if there was a se'ah of them, it remains clean.

Explanation
Section one: Rabbi Meir says that unclean oil retains its first degree of impurity even if it becomes solid and then melts again and there is exactly the volume of an egg (see yesterday's mishnah, which discussed sauce, barley-mash, and milk). This is because when it became solid it was neither a liquid nor was it considered food. Therefore, when it turned back into a liquid, it is considered as never having lost its status as liquid. 
The sages add that the same is true of honey. This refers to honey directly flowing from the hive. R. Shimon Shezuri adds in wine as well.
Section two:  A mass of olives that are stuck together and are impure falls into a hot oven. As food, the olives do not defile the oven because food does not defile vessels. But if liquid comes out of the olives and is impure it will defile the oven because liquid can defile vessels.
If the olive mass is only exactly the amount of an egg, it won't defile the oven. Even if liquid begins to flow from the mass when it hits the oven, the remainder of the mass is less than an olive, so it doesn't defile.
But if it was more than an egg, then as soon as the first drop comes out, the food will defile the liquid and the liquid will then defile the oven.
If the olives fall separately into the oven, then each is less than the size of an egg, and even if liquid comes out of the olive, the oven will remain pure.  
