Toharot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eight

Mishnah Eight
1) If a kneading trough was sloping downwards and there was dough in the higher part and dripping moisture in the lower part, then three pieces that jointly make up the bulk of an egg cannot   be combined together, but two are combined.   
2) Rabbi Yose says: the two also cannot be combined unless they compress liquid between them.   
3) If the liquid was level, even though the piece was the size of a mustard seed they   are combined together.   
4) Rabbi Dosa says: crumbled food cannot be combined together.

Explanation
Section one: There is a kneading trough with a sloping side. On the top of the slope, stuck to the sides, are pieces of impure dough. Below them and beneath each piece is some moist liquid. If the dough defiles the moist liquid, then the liquid will defile the trough as well.
According to the first opinion, if the dough is in three pieces and together they make up the minimum amount to cause defilement (the bulk of an egg), then they do not join together to defile the liquid. This is because there is not an egg's worth of dough touching any portion of liquid, for each part of the liquid only touches 2/3 of the volume of an egg. 
However, if there are only two pieces that add up to the volume of an egg, then the pieces do defile the liquid between them because the liquid touches the entire volume of an egg.
Section two: Rabbi Yose says that for the two pieces of dough to combine they must be pressing the liquid in between them. This means that the liquid is not simply below the pieces of dough, it is right between them, and the dough holds the liquid up, preventing it from flowing to the bottom of the trough.
Section three: If there is liquid simply standing at the bottom of the trough and there is a lot of it, not just moistness on the sides as there is in sections one and two, then even if the pieces are in small crumbs the size of a piece of mustard, they defile the liquid which defiles the trough. 
Section four: Rabbi Dosa says that crumbs don't add up to the requisite amount to transmit impurity. He disagrees only with the opinion in section three, not those in sections one and two.    
