Toharot, Chapter Ten, Mishnah One

Introduction
Chapter ten continues to deal with purity laws related to the pressing of olives. 
Today's mishnah deals with the owner of an olive press who locks the workers in the olive press so that they won't go out and become impure. [Not very nice to the workers, but I guess they'll be okay]. 

Mishnah One
1) If one locked in olive-workers in the olive-press and there were objects in there that had midras uncleanness:
2) Rabbi Meir says: the olive-press is deemed to be unclean.  
3) Rabbi Judah says: the olive-press remains clean.  
4) Rabbi Shimon says: if they regard them  as clean, the olive-press is deemed unclean;  but if they regard them as unclean,the olive-press remains clean. 
5) Rabbi Yose: why are they unclean?  Only because the am haaretz is not an expert in the laws of hesset. 

Explanation
Section one: The owner first purified the olive-workers and then locked them in the olive press. Unfortunately for his sake, there were objects inside the olive-press that had become impure through contact with a zav. This gives them "midras impurity" which means that they defile a person who has contact with them, who carries them or who shifts them (even without touching them). 
Section two: Rabbi Meir says that we must be concerned lest the olive-workers became defiled through contact with the objects and therefore the entire olive-press is unclean.
Section three: Rabbi Judah rules leniently. Since the owner went through the process of purifying the workers, they know that they must be careful. Assuming that they know that the objects are impure, they will be careful and not have contact with them. 
Section four: Rabbi Shimon says that it depends on what the am haaretz thinks about the objects. If he mistakenly thinks that they are pure, then he won't be careful about touching them, and the rest of the olive press is impure. However, if he thinks they are impure, then he won't touch other things and the olive press is pure. It is interesting to note that Rabbi Shimon assumes that the am haaretz will try to preserve the purity of the olive press. He just doesn't always know what objects are pure and what are not. In other words, he is trustworthy, but ignorant. 
Section five: Rabbi Yose says that the am haaretz doesn't know that shifting causes impurity. Therefore, even if he thinks that the stuff is impure and he refrains from touching it, he will not know not to shift the objects and he will be defiled. Therefore, he agrees that everything in the olive press is considered unclean.   
