Toharot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today's mishnah is about a person who deposits vessels with an am haaretz. What kind of impurity do we assume that these vessels have contracted?

Mishnah Two
1) One who deposited vessels with an am haaretz they are unclean with corpse uncleanness  and with midras uncleanness.  
2) If he knew that he eats  terumah,  they are free from corpse uncleanness  but  are unclean with midras uncleanness.   
3) Rabbi Yose says: if he deposited with him a chest full of clothes, they are deemed to be unclean with midras when they are tightly packed,   but if they are not tightly packed they are only unclean with madaf uncleanness, even though the key is in the possession of the owner.

Explanation
Section one: The person who gave over his vessels (this term can include clothes and other items) to an am haaretz must suspect that they have become defiled with corpse uncleanness, which would make them unclean for seven days. 
He must also treat the clothes as if they have midras uncleanness, which is the uncleanness caused when a zav, zavah or niddah sit or apply pressure on a vessel. Something that has midras uncleanness defiles another person even if it is carried and not touched. Thus the law is stringent in both the length of the impurity and the manner in which the object defiles.
Section two: If the am haaretz knows that the person who deposited the clothes (or other vessels with him) is one who eats terumah, then we can assume that the am haaretz would be careful not to contract corpse impurity. However, his wife might have sat on the vessel or clothes while she was a niddah (a menstruant) and therefore the vessels have to be treated as if they have midras impurity. Thus we can assume that he was diligent, but not that his wife was. We should also note that once she has menstruated she will be considered a niddah until she goes to the mikveh. So if she never went to the mikveh, she wills always count as a niddah. 
Section three: Rabbi Yose deals with a situation in which the depositor gives the am haaretz a chest full of clothes. If the chest is tightly packed then it is likely that someone sat on it, including the am haaretz's wife, while she was a niddah. Therefore, in this case it has to be treated as if it has midras impurity. However, if it is not full then it only has the lightest form of impurity, which is called madaf impurity. The chest and clothes will only defile food and liquids, but not other vessels or people. 
The clothes are defiled even if the owner retained possession of the keys to the chest. The problem is that if a niddah shifts the chest, she defiles it, even without touching the clothes. Therefore, the fact that the am haaretz and his wife could not touch the clothes does not mean that they are free of defilement.   
