Toharot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Today's mishnah discusses how spoiled food can be for it no longer to count as food such that it would be susceptible to uncleanness. 

Mishnah Six
1) They said a general rule with regard to clean food: whatever is designated as food for human consumption is susceptible to uncleanness unless it is rendered unfit to be food for a dog; 
a) And whatever is not designated as food for human consumption is not susceptible to uncleanness unless it is designated for human consumption. 
2) How so? If a pigeon fell into a wine-press and one intended to pick it out for an idolater, it becomes susceptible to uncleanness; but if he intended it for a dog it is not susceptible to uncleanness. 
a) Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri rules that it is susceptible to uncleanness. 
3) If a deaf mute, one not of sound senses or a minor intended it as food, it remains insusceptible.
a) But if they picked it up it becomes susceptible; since only an act of theirs is effective while their intention is of no consequence.

Explanation
Section one: If food is meant to be human food it stays susceptible to uncleanness until it becomes so despoiled that even a dog won't eat it.  
However, if the food was meant to be animal food, it is not susceptible to impurity until someone changes his mind and designates it for human consumption. In other words, even if it is fit for human consumption it remains pure unless someone actually decides to eat it.
Section two: A pigeon living in a pigeon cote above a winepress dies and falls into the winepress (yuck!). When it was alive, the pigeon would have been fit for human consumption (yes, people often ate pigeons back then). However, once it dies and falls into the wine it is no longer considered fit for human consumption.
If the owner decides to give it to a Gentile it is impure. This is bird carrion and as we learned in the first mishnah of this tractate, the carrion of pure birds is impure. However, if he decides to give it to a dog, the pigeon is considered animal food and it is pure. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri holds that the pigeon is impure for pure bird carrion does not need to be considered food for it to defile.
Section three: The three people in this section do not have legal consequences to their intention. They are considered to lack "da'at"—which I translate as awareness. Therefore, if they intend to eat the food it still is not considered food. 
However, their actions do have legal consequences. When they pick the food up to eat it, it becomes human food and it is susceptible to impurity.  
 
