Toharot, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Mishnah One
1) A place that was a private domain and then became a public domain  and then was turned again into a private domain: while it is a private domain any condition of doubt arising in it is unclean but while it is a public domain any condition of doubt arising in it is deemed clean. 
2) If a man who was dangerously ill in a private domain was taken out into a public domain and then brought back into a private domain, while he is in the private domain any condition of doubt arising through him is deemed unclean but while he is in the public domain any condition of doubt arising through him is deemed clean.  
a) Rabbi Shimon says: the public domain causes a break.  

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah discusses a place that was essentially a private domain and then many people passed through it, causing it to become a public domain temporarily. Basically, if a situation of doubtful impurity arises, the place is judged as it is at the moment when the doubt arises. If the doubt arises when it is a private domain, the rule is strict, as it always is in a private domain. But there is room to be lenient if the doubt arises in a public domain. 
Section two: This is a similar rule with regard to a person who is dangerously ill and about to die. He begins in a private domain, others then take him out, assumedly on a stretcher and he passes through a public domain and then he goes back into a private domain. If he is found dead in the public domain, then only the things that are with him in the public domain are impure. We don't assume that he died in the first private domain because when a doubt occurs in a public domain, the doubt remains pure. However, if he is found dead in the second private domain then anything that was with him in the first private domain is also considered impure. This is because we apply the normal rule—any case of doubt that arises in the private domain is impure. The doubt here is whether he was dead when he went through the first private domain. 
Rabbi Shimon rules that the public domain interrupts because we can't say he was dead in the first private domain, alive in the public domain and then dead again in the second private domain. Since we treat the things that were with him in the public domain as pure, then we are in essence saying he must have died in the second private domain. Only the things found there are impure. 
