Toharot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
Today's mishnah begins a new subject which will be discussed until the end of chapter six—cases of doubtful impurity.
Our mishnah deals with a doubt concerning when something became impure or became susceptible or unsusceptible to impurity.

Mishnah Five
1) All cases of uncleanness are determined according to their appearance at the time they are found: 
a) If they were then unclean they are assumed to have been unclean [all the time];
b) And if clean they are assumed to have been clean [all the time].
2) If they were then covered they are assumed to have been covered [all the time];
a) And if uncovered they are assumed to have been uncovered [all the time].
3) If a needle was found full of rust or broken it is clean, for all doubtful cases of uncleanness are determined according to their appearance at the time they are found.

Explanation
Section one: This clause means that if a substance is found and it currently is large enough to convey impurity or to be impure, then it is assumed to have been unclean at an earlier time as well. For instance, if the food has an egg's bulk then any food that is known to have touched it earlier is assumed to be impure (if this is a case in which the food would convey impurity, such as to a liquid). The opposite is true as well. If the food is currently too small to be impure, we assume that it was always too small to be impure.
Section two: If a piece of corpse impurity is found in a tent (an ohel) that is covered in a way that would prevent the impurity from escaping, we do not have to be concerned lest the impurity was once uncovered and has defiled the vessels that were above or below it. 
If the corpse impurity is not covered, we must assume that vessels which had been above it or below it were defiled even if they are not there now. 
Section three: A needle is now found in an unusable state and therefore it is pure. Again, anything that touched it earlier is assumed to be pure because we judge doubtful cases as they are currently found, and not as they might have been earlier.  
