Toharot, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Last mishnah in Toharot!

Mishnah Eight
1) [The space] between the rollers and grape skins is regarded  as a public domain.   
2) A vineyard in front of the grape harvesters is deemed  to be a private domain and one which is behind the harvesters  is deemed   to be a public domain.   
3) When is this so? When the public enter at one end and go out at the other.   
4) The vessels of the olive-press, the wine-press and the basket-press, if they are of wood, need only be dried  and they become clean; 
a) But if they are of reed grass they must be left unused for twelve months, or they must be scalded in hot water.
b) Rabbi Yose says: if he put them  in the current of the river, it is sufficient.

Explanation
Section one: The rollers are used to press the grapeskins to try to get more juice out of them after the grapes have already been trodden upon. The area between the rollers and the grapeskins is considered a public domain, such that if a case of doubtful impurity is found there, the doubt is ruled pure. It is considered a public domain because many people are found in this area. 
Section two: The part of the vineyard that the grape harvesters still have not harvested is considered a private domain. This is because people are not allowed into that area, since the grapes are still on the vines. Once the grape harvesters have been through a section of the vineyard, it is considered a public domain.
Section three: However, it is only considered a public domain if people will go in one side and out the other. If there is only one way to go in and out, then it seems less people will go there and it can be considered a private domain. 
Section four: The mishnah now discusses what must be done to vessels used in presses in order to purify them. If these vessels are of wood, all one needs to do is dry them off from the liquid that defiled them and they are pure. This is because the wood is not assumed to have absorbed the liquid. 
However, the vessels are more absorbent if they are made of reed grass. In this case they either need to be scalded in hot water in order to get the impure liquid out. Or they can be left unused for 12 months (this is probably impractical).
Rabbi Yose says that he can put them in the river and (according to the Tosefta) leave them there for 12 hours. The current will wash them out and they will be pure. 

Congratulations! We have completed Tractate Toharot!
As I always write, it is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Tractate Toharot was not easy. It contains somewhat of a random assortment of purity laws, which are in general difficult for us to relate to. I thought that there were two very interesting parts. The first was what to do with cases of doubtful impurity. In a world in which people were very concerned with these laws, it is certain that these situations would have arisen quite frequently. The second interesting part were the laws governing interaction between the "haver" (one who is careful about the laws of purity) and the am haaretz, who does not observe many of these laws. I found these laws interesting because we can see how people of different religious inclinations and practices can live together.
As always, a hearty yasher koach on completing the tractate and keep up the good work. Tomorrow we begin Mikvaot.   
 

 
