Toharot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
Chapter nine deals with olives that were pressed in an olive press in which an am haaretz was working. For olives (or any produce) to become susceptible to impurity they must have had contact with one of seven liquids (water, dew, oil, wine, milk, blood or date honey). The secondary requirement is that the produce became wet with the approval of the owners—meaning they were not opposed to the produce getting wet.  We will learn more about this when we get to tractate Makhshirin, a whole tractate about this subject!
Our mishnah deals with the liquid that comes out of the oil and whether that is sufficient for the olives to be susceptible to impurity. 

Mishnah One
 At what stage do olives become susceptible to uncleanness?  
1) When they exude the moisture [produced] by [their lying in] the vat  but not the one [produced while they are still] in the basket, according to the words of Bet Shammai. 
a) Rabbi Shimon says: the minimum time prescribed for proper exudation is three days.  
2) Bet Hillel says: as soon as three olives stick together.  
3) Rabban Gamaliel says: as soon as their preparation is finished, and the sages agree with his view. 

Explanation
Section one: There are three opinions as to when olives have exuded moisture that makes them susceptible to impurity. Bet Shammai holds that the moisture they exude must occur in the vat into which they are placed to "warm up." This is before they are pressed. The moisture that might have been exuded in the basket in which they were first placed does not count. However, Bet Shammai seems to hold that any moisture that comes out in the vat is to the "approval" of the owners and therefore it makes them susceptible. 
Rabbi Shimon modifies Bet Shammai's opinion. The moisture that comes out during the first three days does not count. They must be in the vat for three days and then if they remain there, the moisture makes them susceptible to impurity.
Section two: Bet Hillel rules more leniently. The olives must become so soft that three of them will stick together.
Section three: Rabban Gamaliel rules even more leniently. The olives are not susceptible to impurity until he has completed their preparation in the vat. Once he decides to bring them to the press, they are susceptible. The sages agree with this opinion.
  
