Yevamoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Mishnah nine continues to discuss various scenarios of yibbum.  

Mishnah Nine
1) If the brother of the yavam had betrothed the sister of the shomeret yavam, in the name of Rabbi Judah ben Batera they said:  they say to him “Wait until your older brother has done something”.   
2) If his brother performed halitzah for her or married her, he may marry his [betrothed] wife. 
3) If the yevamah died he may marry his [betrothed] wife. 
4) If the yavam died, he must divorce his wife with a get and [release] his brother’s wife by halitzah.

Explanation
Section one:  Rachel becomes liable to have yibbum or halitzah with Reuven, her dead husband’s brothers.  Before Shimon, the oldest surviving brother does yibbum or halitzah with her, Levi betroths Leah, Rachel’s sister. This is problematic because Leah is the sister of his z’kukah, a woman who is tied to him by her requiring yibbum or halitzah.  However, the betrothal is valid.  According to Rabbi Judah ben Batera, they tell Levi, the betrother, that he should not fully marry Leah until Shimon (or another brother) has done yibbum or halitzah with Rachel.  That would end any ties between Rachel and Levi and allow Levi to fully marry Leah.
Section two:  If Levi’s brother does halitzah or yibbum, Levi can now marry Leah.
Section three:  If Rachel dies, Levi can marry Leah, for she is no longer the sister of a woman tied to him.  The woman who was tied to him is now dead.
Section four:  If Shimon dies, and there are no other brothers, Levi is now in quite a pickle.  Levi must perform halitzah or yibbum for Rachel for he is the only surviving brother.  However, he cannot do either while he is betrothed to Rachel’s sister Leah.  Therefore he must first divorce Leah and then perform halitzah for Rachel.  He cannot have yibbum with her because she is the sister of his divorcee.  Furthermore, the mishnah teaches that although generally the sister of one’s divorcee is exempt from either yibbum or halitzah (as we learned in yesterday’s mishnah), in this case since the ties to Rachel existed before the betrothal to Leah, Rachel is not exempt.  
