Yevamoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) If the yavam gave her a get and then ma’amar, she needs [another] get and halitzah.   
2) If he gave her a get and then had intercourse with her, she needs [another] get and halitzah.   
3) If he gave her a get and then did halitzah, there is nothing after halitzah.
4) If the yavam did halitzah and then he did ma’amar or gave her a get, or had intercourse with her; 
a) Or if he had intercourse with her and then did ma’amar, or gave her a get, or did halitzah, there is nothing after halitzah.  
5) [And the law is the same] whether there is one yevamah to one yavam or two yevamoth to one yavam.

Explanation
Section one:  As we learned above, only halitzah exempts the yevamah from her requirement for yibbum.  When the yavam gave her a get, her ties to him were not completely severed.  The only effect was that it was subsequently forbidden for him to have yibbum with her. When he then does ma’amar with her, she now requires another get in order to sever the ties created by this ma’amar.  Finally, she still requires halitzah to sever the ties created by the need for yibbum.
Section two:  In this case, after giving her the get, he has intercourse with her.  This intercourse was forbidden, since she had already received a get.  Therefore, since this was forbidden, it does not count as an act of yibbum.  However, the mishnah teaches that it still has enough power to obligate him to give her another get, to sever the ties created by the intercourse [intercourse is one of the three means by which betrothals are contracted]. Finally, she still requires halitzah to sever the ties created by the need for yibbum.
Section three:  Here the mishnah teaches that once he has performed halitzah, she is totally free and there is no longer anything preventing her from marrying anyone else.
Section four:  The first part of this section teaches that once he does halitzah, whatever he does afterwards, be it give her ma’amar, a get or have intercourse, does not count for anything.  The halitzah severs all ties and anything done afterwards is inconsequential.
The second part of this section teaches that just as there is no validity to anything after halitzah, so too there is no validity to anything after yibbum.  For instance, were he to do halitzah after having already performed yibbum, the halitzah would be inconsequential.  Of course, if he gives her a get after having done yibbum she is a divorcee, as is any wife who receives a divorce.  The mishnah intends only to teach that yibbum turns a yevamah into a full wife and halitzah totally exempts her from any subsequent need for yibbum.
Section five:  With regard to all the combinations that we have been learning in the previous mishnayoth, it matters not whether they were done by one yavam with one yevamah or with two different yevamoth.  The general rule is always true:  there is “something” after a get and after ma’amar, and after halitzah and yibbum there is nothing.  The following mishnayoth will continue to explain these complex possibilities.     
