Yevamoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches that one yavam can perform yibbum for several women if they were widows of different brothers.  However, if they were all from the same brother he can have yibbum with only one of them.

Mishnah Eleven
1) If four brothers were married to four women, and they died, if the eldest [surviving brother] desires he may contract yibbum with all of them.
2) If a man was married to two women and died, sexual relations or halitzah with one of them exempts her rival.
3) If one of them was eligible [to marry a priest] and one ineligible [to marry a priest], then if he performs halitzah it should be to her who is ineligible, and if he contracts yibbum it may be with her who is eligible.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case four widows from four different brothers all fall before the same brother for yibbum or halitzah.  The mishnah teaches that this one yavam may have yibbum with all of them.  The Talmud, however, notes a certain reservation. He is allowed to do so only if he is going to be able to provide well for them all.  Bigamy was permitted under Jewish law, but only on the condition that the husband provide equally well for each wife. Also, the Talmud notes that it is not such a good idea to have four wives for there will be much strife in his home.  Nevertheless, it is theoretically possible.
Section two:  If two women who were married to the same brother fall in front of the yavam for yibbum, he need perform halitzah or yibbum for only one of them. He is not allowed to have yibbum nor halitzah with both.  
Section three:  If one of these two women was already ineligible to subsequently marry a kohen, for instance she was a divorcee from a previous marriage, the yavam should do halitzah with her and not with the other sister.  This is because halitzah makes her forbidden to subsequently marry a kohen and there is no reason to needlessly disqualify the eligible widow from marrying a kohen.  However, if he is going to do yibbum, he can have yibbum even with the sister eligible to the kohen, since this does not disqualify her from later marrying a priest.  
