Yevamoth, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
In mishnah 2:4, we learned that there are secondary incest prohibitions that were instituted by the scribes.  

Mishnah Three
[Concerning] relatives of the second degree [of incest laws who are forbidden] by the words of the scribes:
1) [A woman who is] a second degree of kinship to the husband but not a second degree of kinship to the yavam, is forbidden to the husband and permitted to the yavam; 
2) [A woman who is] a second degree of kinship to the yavam but not a second degree of kinship to the husband is forbidden to the yavam and permitted to the husband; 
3) [A woman who is] a second degree of kinship to the one and to the other is forbidden to the one as well as to the other. 
4) She cannot claim her ketubah or usufruct or support money, or her worn clothes.
a) The child is fit [to marry a priest], but the husband is compelled to divorce her. 
5) A widow who was married to a high priest, a divorcee or halutzah who was married to an ordinary priest, a mamzer or a netinah who was married to an Israelite, or the daughter of an Israelite who was married to a natin or a mamzer is entitled to her ketubah.

Explanation
Section one:  A woman could be a second degree of kinship to her husband but not to her yavam if she was the husband’s grandmother, and her husband had a brother with the same father but not the same mother.  The mishnah teaches that although the marriage was forbidden, she may still have yibbum.  This is because the prohibition of second degree kinship is only of rabbinic origin.
Section two:  The same is true in the opposite case, if she is a second degree of kinship to her yavam but not to her husband.  As we learned above in 2:3-4, in such a case she must have halitzah and not yibbum.
Section three:  If she was a second degree to both, she is forbidden to both.
Section four:  If a couple transgressed the rabbinic prohibition and the man married a woman who was a second degree of kinship, there are serious economic consequences for the woman.  The woman does not receive her ketubah (marriage payment), nor does she receive in return the usufruct, meaning the profit that the husband accrued from the use of her property while they were married.  She does not receive support (food, clothing or shelter), nor does she receive in return the reduction in the value of her things that he has used while married.  However, the status of the child is not effected, since the level of prohibition was only derabbanan.  He is forced to divorce her.  In summary, the consequences of this forbidden marriage are mostly economic and they are mostly upon the woman.  
Section five:  The mishnah now contrasts this type of forbidden marriage, with a marriage that was forbidden according to Torah law, but that was nevertheless an effective marriage.  That is to say if a man betrothed one of these women, he has transgressed the prohibition, but she still requires a divorce.  In all of these cases the woman receives her ketubah and all of the other rights listed in the mishnah.  
In the comparison of these two sections, we see that the consequences of marrying a second degree of kinship which is only a rabbinic prohibition are more serious than those of marrying one who is biblically prohibited.  The reason is that a rabbinic prohibition needs the extra “strengthening” while the biblical prohibition does not.  
