Yevamoth, Chapter Sixteen, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah talks about the acceptability of hearsay regarding a person’s death.  Note that such testimony is generally not acceptable in a court of law.  The Sages were lenient in these cases in order to make it somewhat easier for a woman to remarry.

Mishnah Five
1) Even if he only heard from women saying, “so-and-so is dead”, this is enough.   
2) Rabbi Judah says: even if he only heard children saying, “behold we are going to mourn for a man named so-and-so and to bury him” [it is enough].   
3) Whether [such statement was made] with the intention [of providing evidence] or was made with no such intention [it is valid]. 
a) Rabbi Judah ben Bava says: with an Israelite [the evidence is valid] only if the man had the intention [of acting as witness].  In the case of a non-Jew the evidence is invalid if his intention was [to act as witness].

Explanation
Section one:  If one hears women saying amongst themselves that a certain man has died, the one who overhears them may go to the court and testify as to his death.  This is true even though the women themselves did not intend to testify.  If they had intended to testify their testimony would certainly be acceptable, as we learned in the previous chapter.  Indeed, they themselves may come to court.
Section two:  A second category of people who cannot generally provide testimony is children.  However, in this case, in order to make it easier to establish a man’s death, overhearing children speaking about a certain person’s funeral or burial is sufficient.  
Section three:  According to the first opinion, hearing a person say that so-and-so is dead always allows the hearer to testify as to his death in court, whether or not the person intended to testify.  Rabbi Judah ben Bava holds that an Israelite must intend to testify for the one who hears him to be able to repeat his words in court.  A non-Jew’s words can be brought to court only if he doesn’t intend to testify.  
Note that there are some versions of the mishnah in which Rabbi Judah ben Bava says, “with an Israelite [the evidence is valid] even if the man had the intention [of acting as witness].”  According to this reading, Rabbi Judah ben Bava agrees with the previous opinion about the Israelite’s testimony (it is acceptable whether or not he intended to testify), but disagrees about the non-Jew’s.  
