Yevamoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah and the three that follow it, deal with situations in which there are three brothers, Reuven, Shimon and Levi, two of whom are married to two sisters, Rachel and Leah or a mother and her daughter, or a mother and her granddaughter.  The commonality to all of these cases is that a man may not have relations with both of these women.  Therefore, if both women should become liable for yibbum with the surviving brother, he may not have yibbum with either, because each one is the relative of his z’kukah (the other woman who becomes liable for yibbum).  We have learned most of these rules above in mishnah two.

Mishnah Four
I) Three brothers:  two of whom were married to two sisters, or to a woman and her daughter, or to a woman and her daughter’s daughter, or to a woman and her son’s daughter, behold, these must perform halitzah but may not be taken in yibbum.   
A) Rabbi Shimon exempts them.  
II) If one of them was forbidden to him by a prohibition of incest, he is forbidden to marry her but is permitted to marry her sister. 
III) If the prohibition is due to a commandment or to holiness, they must perform halitzah but may not be taken in yibbum.

Explanation
Section one:  If Reuven marries Rachel and Shimon marries Leah, who are either sisters or a mother and her daughter or a mother and her granddaughter, and then Reuven and Shimon both die without children, Levi cannot have yibbum with either woman.  This is because each woman is the immediate relative of the other woman who is his z’kukah.  Just as we have learned before that one cannot marry the sister of a z’kukah, here we learn that one cannot marry the mother, daughter, grandmother or granddaughter of a z’kukah.
Rabbi Shimon holds that since he cannot have yibbum with either one of them, neither are even obligated for yibbum.  
Section two:  If one of the two women was forbidden to him by a prohibition of incest, for instance if Leah’s daughter was married to Levi already, since Leah is not obligated for yibbum, Levi may have yibbum with Rachel (in this case Leah’s sister).  We have already learned this rule in mishnah two.
Section three: If one of the two women was forbidden but only due to a prohibition of a commandment or a prohibition due to holiness, both women are technically liable for yibbum.  Since he cannot have yibbum with either, he must do halitzah with both.  Again, this law was learned above in mishnah two.
