Yevamoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with several categories of people who are of doubtful gender status.  A hermaphrodite is a person who has the outer sexual signs of both a male and a female.  A tumtum is a person who has no outer sexual signs.

Mishnah Six			
1) If a priest who was eunuch by nature married the daughter of an Israelite, he confers upon her the right to eat terumah. 
2) Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Shimon stated: if a priest who was an hermaphrodite married the daughter of an Israelite, he confers upon her the right to eat terumah.
3) Rabbi Judah stated: if a tumtum was opened up and found to be a male, he may not perform halitzah, because he has the same status as a eunuch. 
4) The hermaphrodite may marry [a wife] but may not be married [by a man].   
5) Rabbi Eliezer stated: concerning the hermaphrodite, [the one who has relations with him] is liable to be stoned like one [who has relations with] a male.  

Explanation
Section one:  A eunuch by nature is not forbidden from marrying Israelite women (he is not considered to be a “petzua daka”, one whose testes were crushed.  Therefore, if he is a priest and he marries the daughter of an Israelite, the marriage is valid and he is allowed to eat terumah.  
Section two:  A priest who is a hermaphrodite is allowed to marry the daughter of an Israelite.  With regard to marriage, he is treated as if he was fully male.  Therefore, if he is a priest, his wife may eat terumah.
Section three:  A tumtum may have been born with his sexual organs covered by a thin sac of skin. Even if they open up this sac and find that he is male, he may not perform halitzah, since his status is like that of a eunuch.  Assumedly, the tumtum cannot procreate and therefore is exempt from the laws of halitzah and yibbum.
Section four:  As we learned in section two, a hermaphrodite is treated like a male.  He may marry a woman but may not be married by a man.  
Section five:  According to Rabbi Eliezer, if another man has relations with a hermaphrodite, he is liable to be stoned, as are all men who engage in intercourse with other men.  This is Rabbi Eliezer’s way of stating that the hermaphrodite is to be treated completely as if he is a male.  
