Yevamoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
When a man dies and leaves children, his wife’s status with regard to terumah goes according to the child’s status.  If the father was a priest and his child eats terumah, the wife continues to do so as well.  If the father was an Israelite, even if his wife was the daughter of a priest, if the father had a child with her, she does not go back to eating the terumah from her father’s house.  In other words a child fixes a wife into the status of her husband.
Our mishnah discusses a situation where a priest died while his wife was pregnant.  The issue at hand is do the tzon barzel slaves, who are now in a sense owned by the fetus, eat terumah.

Mishnah Three
1) If the daughter of an Israelite was married to a priest who died and left her pregnant, her slaves may not eat terumah because of the share of the fetus, since a fetus prevents [its mother] from eating [terumah] but does not cause her to be able to eat [terumah], the words of Rabbi Yose. 
2) They said to him: since you have testified to us concerning the daughter of an Israelite who was married to a priest, even concerning the daughter of a priest who was married to a priest, and he died and left her pregnant her slaves may not eat terumah because of the share of the fetus!

Explanation
Section one:  If a priest dies and leaves his wife pregnant, her tzon barzel slaves do not eat terumah, even if she has other children and she, her children and her melog slaves can eat terumah. This is because the fetus, as an inheritor of its father, has ownership over the tzon barzel slaves, and a fetus disqualifies its mother from eating terumah and does not qualify her to eat terumah.  A fetus disqualifies its mother from eating terumah in that if she is the daughter of a priest who married an Israelite and he dies with no kids and she is pregnant, she does not return to her father’s home to eat terumah.  In the opposite case, if she was the daughter of an Israelite married to a priest and her husband dies with no children and she is pregnant, the fetus does not allow her to eat terumah.  Rabbi Yose reasons that just as a fetus does not allow a wife to eat terumah, so too it does not allow tzon barzel slaves to eat terumah.  
Section two:  The rabbis respond to Rabbi Yose, that if his testimony about the daughter of an Israelite married to a priest is correct, then even concerning the daughter of a priest married to a priest, if her husband died leaving her pregnant, her tzon barzel slaves do not eat terumah.  After all, in either case we could explain that a fetus disqualifies tzon barzel slaves from eating terumah.    
The difficulty with this section is whether or not the rabbis disagree with Rabbi Yose.  According to a literal reading of the mishnah they only point out a consequence of Rabbi Yose’s halakhah, without expressing their opinion on the matter.  However, it would seem that they only point this out if they disagree with Rabbi Yose.  According to the Talmud, the rabbis do disagree with Rabbi Yose.  The rabbis hold that the fetus does not actually own the slaves and therefore cannot prevent them from eating terumah.  
