Yevamoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues to teach that once one of the yavamim has performed halitzah or yibbum with one of the yevamoth, any subsequent action done with the other yevamah, be it halitzah, a get, ma’amar or intercourse, is meaningless.

Mishnah Five
1) If he performed halitzah [for one] and then performed halitzah [for the other], 
2) Or performed halitzah [for one] and did ma'amar [with the other], or gave her get, or had intercourse with her; 
3) Or if he had intercourse [with one] and then with the other, 
4) Or had intercourse [with one] and then ma'amar with the other, or gave her a get, or performed halitzah—there is nothing after halitzah.   
5) [There is no difference in the law] whether there was one yavam to two yevamoth or two yavamim to yevamah.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case the yavam has halitzah with one of the yevamoth and then halitzah with the other.  As we will learn in section four, since the second halitzah was unnecessary, it has no effect.  He can marry that halutzah’s relatives and she can marry his.  
Section two:  Similarly, if he has halitzah with one and then ma’amar, a get or intercourse with the other, the subsequent actions are invalid.  The woman who received ma’amar does not need a get, nor does the woman with whom he had intercourse.  The woman who received the get is not a divorcee but a widow, who may subsequently marry a kohen.  In all of these cases, he can marry her relatives and she may marry his.
Sections three and four:  These sections teach the same ruling, but with regard to yibbum, performed through intercourse.  Once the yavam has yibbum with one of the yevamoth, all subsequent actions are invalid.  Although the mishnah states only that “there is nothing after halitzah”, the meaning is that there is nothing after halitzah or yibbum, as was taught in mishnah one of our chapter. 
Section five:  The rule that there is nothing after halitzah (or yibbum) is true whether or not there was one yavam who had halitzah with one of two yevamoth (and then did something else with the other yevamah), or two yevamim, one of whom had halitzah or yibbum first with one yevamah (and then the other brother did something else with the same yevamah).  In all cases, once one brother has had halitzah or yibbum with one yevamah, all subsequent actions are meaningless.  
