Yevamoth, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah discusses whether or not a woman eats terumah or tithe (which the Levites eat) in situations where she might be moving from an Israelite home to a priest’s domain, and whether she loses the right to eat terumah in situations where she might be leaving her priestly or Levite home and going to an Israelite home.

Mishnah Four
1) The daughter of an Israelite who was betrothed to a priest, or who was pregnant from a priest, or was a shomeret yavam to a priest; 
a) And similarly, the daughter of a priest [who was in such relationship] with an Israelite, may not eat terumah.   
2) The daughter of an Israelite who was betrothed to a Levite, or who was pregnant from a Levite, or was a shomeret yavam to a Levite; 
a) And similarly, the daughter of a Levite [who was in such a relationship] with an Israelite may not eat tithe. 
3) The daughter of a Levite who was betrothed to a priest, or who was pregnant from a priest, or was a shomeret yavam to a priest; 
a) And similarly, the daughter of a priest [who was in such relationship] with a levite, may eat neither terumah nor tithe.

Explanation
Section one:  The daughter of an Israelite may eat terumah when she is fully married to a priest. She may not eat terumah when she is merely betrothed.  If she is pregnant but not married (either he died or she became pregnant before marriage) she may not eat terumah.  Finally, if she is a shomeret yavam waiting to for yibbum with a priest, she may not eat terumah.  However, if she was the daughter of a priest and the man was an Israelite in one of these situations, she loses the right to eat terumah.  These states are in-between states, states where the woman may lose the right to eat terumah but may not gain the right.  Note that we have taught exactly this halakhah in 7:4 above:  the fetus, the yavam and betrothal disqualify her from eating terumah and cannot allow her to eat terumah.
Section two:  This section teaches the exact same laws with regard to tithes, which are eaten by Levites.  The Talmud points out that according to the halakhah, a non-Levite may eat tithe (although he is commanded to give it to the Levite).  Our mishnah goes according to Rabbi Meir who holds that only Levites can eat tithe.  
Section three:  The logic of this section is that a woman in one of these situations is not tied enough to the priest to eat terumah, nor does she remain tied enough to her Levite family to continue eating tithe.  Note that according to this section, even priests cannot eat tithe.

