Yevamoth, Chapter Sixteen, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah deals with deciding whether a person who has entered into a body of water and not reappeared can be assumed to have drowned.

Mishnah Four
1) If a man fell into water, whether it had [a visible] end or not, his wife is forbidden [to marry again].  
2) Rabbi Meir said: it once happened that a man fell into a large cistern and came out after three days.   
3) Rabbi Yose: it once happened that a blind man descended into a cave to immerse and his guide went down after him; and after waiting long enough for their souls to depart, permission was given to their wives to marry again.   
4) Another incident occurred at Asia where a man was lowered into the sea, and only his leg was brought up, and the Sages ruled: [if the recovered leg contained the part] above the knee [the man’s wife] may marry again, [but if it contained only the part] below the knee, she may not marry again.  

Explanation
Section one:  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, even though a man may have fallen into a large body of water and not reappeared, we cannot assume that he is dead.  In the Talmud, this opinion is ascribed to Rabbi Meir.  The Sages hold that if the water has an end, then his wife may remarry.  If the water has an end and we did not see him come out, then we know that he didn’t come out the other side and we can assume that he has drowned.  However, if the water has no end, he might have washed up alive on some distant shore and his wife should not remarry.
Section two:  Rabbi Meir now offers a story that illustrates his principle, that even if the water has an end, the person might be alive.  In such a case, if people saw that he didn’t come up, they might have left the place where he allegedly drowned, assuming that he was dead.  Therefore, we cannot make such an assumption and his wife cannot remarry.
Section three:  Rabbi Yose disagrees with Rabbi Meir.  He brings a story where a blind man and his guide fell into a cave that had water in it and the Sages waited a while and then left and declared that the wife could remarry.  If we extrapolate, we can conclude that if the water has an end, she may remarry.
Section four:  This mishnah deals with a case where a person was cast into the sea and according to the Talmud he was bound.  Later, they drag his leg out of the water.  If when they drag the leg out of the water, it is from the knee and up, then we can assume that the person is dead.  Even if he survived the loss of part of his leg, he would not be able to swim without a full leg.  However, if only the lower part of the leg was cut off, the man might have been able to swim and he might have come out of the water somewhere else.  Therefore his wife cannot remarry. 

Note that this mishnah became all too relevant in determining whether widows of Sept. 11 victims could remarry.  Since the World Trade Center is like “water that has an end”, it can be assumed that someone who didn’t show up afterwards had indeed died, and his widow was allowed to remarry.    
