Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Our mishnah gives a general rule about yibbum and then begins to discuss a different issue, namely one who is suspected of having relations with a woman who is forbidden to him.

Mishnah Eight
I) The commandment to perform yibbum is upon the oldest brother. 
A) If a younger brother preempted him [by performing yibbum], he has acquired [a wife].
II) If a man is suspected of [having relations] with a slave and then she was freed, or with a non-Jewish woman who then converted, he must not marry her.  
A) If, however, he did marry her they do not take her away from him.   
B) If a man is suspected of [having relations] with a married woman, and then [in consequence] she was taken away from her husband, even though he married her, he must divorce her.

Explanation
Section one:  Any brother of the deceased husband may perform yibbum or halitzah.  However, the first option is supposed to go to the oldest remaining brother.  If, contrary to what is supposed to happen, a younger brother does perform yibbum, the yibbum is valid and she is his wife.  We will learn more about this in chapter four, mishnah five.
Section two:  The three parts of this section all deal with a man who is suspected of having relations with a woman who is forbidden to him.  In the first part, he is suspected of having relations with either a slave or a non-Jew.  Both of these women are prohibited to him.  Subsequently, the slave is freed (thereby becoming a fully Jewish woman) and the non-Jewish woman converts to Judaism.  In their current state both women are permitted to him.  Nevertheless, he is not allowed to marry them.  There are two reasons given for this.  One, so that people will not confirm the original rumor that he had relations with a woman forbidden to him.  Two, so that people won’t say that she only converted in order to marry him.  
In contrast, if he is suspected of having an affair with a married woman, and then she is forced to separate from her husband, and the suspected adulterer marries her, the court imposes a divorce.  Adultery is a much more serious crime than relations with non-Jews and therefore just a suspicion that he had adultery with her, rules out all future marriages.  Note that this rule is ultimately meant to protect marriages.  A man whose wife has had adultery can no longer remained married to her.  To prevent a situation whereby she sets her eyes on another man and forces her husband to divorce her by committing adultery, the rabbis permanently forbade her to the adulterer.   
. 
Questions for Further Thought:
 Why does section two follow section one?  What is the connection, if any, between the two laws?  
