Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Mishnah ten is a continuation of mishnah nine.

Mishnah Ten
I) A sage who has pronounced a woman forbidden to her husband because of a vow   must not marry her himself.   
A) If, however, a woman made a declaration of refusal or performed halitzah in his presence, he may marry her, since he [is part of a] court.  
II) If any of these had wives who [subsequently] died, [the other women] are permitted to marry them.  
A) If [the women] were married to others and were [subsequently] divorced, or widowed, they may be married to these.  
B) They are permitted to their sons or brothers. 

Explanation
Section one:  The sage may not marry the woman whom he has declared forbidden to her husband due to a vow.  This could happen if the woman vowed to receive no benefit from her husband, and then came in front of the sage to release her vow (we will learn how a vow is released in tractate Nedarim).  If the sage could not find an opening to release the vow, then the woman remains forbidden to her husband.  The sage may not marry her lest he did not search hard to find a way to release the vow because he wanted to marry the woman himself.
However, if a woman performs the declaration of refusal (an annulment of marriage made by a woman upon reaching majority in a case where her marriage was contracted by her brother or mother) or halitzah in front of a sage, that sage may still marry her.  In this situation he is part of a court, and we are not suspicious of courts.  Furthermore, with a court, if he wanted to illegally accept her declaration of refusal or halitzah just so that he could marry her, he would have to get the rest of the court to agree.  Since this would not be so simple, we are not suspicious and he may marry her.
Section two:  This section places certain limits on the preceding laws in this mishnah and the previous one.  If these men, who testified and thereby allowed the woman to be freed from her husband (the one who brought the get, or the one who testified about the husband’s death or the sage who did not release the vow), had other wives at the time, then they may later, after their current wives die, marry these other women.  Since at the time of their testimony there is little chance that they would marry the woman about whom they are testifying, they are not suspected of lying.  Note that this mishnah assumes that bigamy is not common, even though it is permitted.
Furthermore, if these women subsequently marry other men and then are again divorced or widowed, they may marry the men who testified in order to “free” them from their previous marriage.  The fact that they married someone else first, means that the original testimony did not directly allow them to marry the one who brought the get, testified about the death or did not release the vow.  The step in between gets rid of the suspicion that they were lying.
Finally, these women may marry the children or brother of these men.  While we suspect that one may lie in order to free a woman for himself, we do not have such suspicions for his son or brother.  
