Yevamoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that certain women must wait three months before remarrying in order that there will be no confusion as to whether the subsequent pregnancy is from the previous husband or the new husband.

Mishnah Ten
1) The yevamah shall neither perform halitzah nor be taken in yibbum before three months have passed [since her husband’s death].   
2) Similarly all other women shall be neither be betrothed nor married before three months have passed.  
a) Whether they were virgins or non-virgins, whether divorcees or widows, whether married or betrothed.
b) Rabbi Judah said: those who were married may be betrothed [immediately], and those who were betrothed may be married [immediately], with the exception of the betrothed women in Judea, because there the bridegroom was intimate with [his bride].
c) Rabbi Yose said: all [married] women may be betrothed [immediately] with the exception of the widow because of her mourning.

Explanation
Section one:  The yevamah may not perform halitzah or be taken in yibbum for three months lest she be pregnant with her first husband’s child.  We encountered this problem in mishnayoth one and two of this chapter.  There the mishnah dealt with the problems that could occur if she does get married or perform halitzah within this period.  Here the mishnah states that in order to avoid those problems, she should wait three months.
Section two:  The mishnah now broadens its scope and says that all widows and divorcees should not remarry within three months, again so that it is clear whose child the new baby is.  Note that in these cases the only issue is inheritance and status of the child (i.e. is the child a kohen).  
There are now three opinions in the mishnah as to which women must wait three months.  According to the first opinion, all women, even if they were merely betrothed must wait three months.  Although generally betrothed women should not have had sexual relations with their husbands, and hence it should be clear that the pregnancy with her new husband is from him, she should still wait.  The idea may be that in order not to create confusion, all women wait an equal period. 
According to Rabbi Judah a woman who was divorced or widowed from a full marriage may be betrothed within three months, because betrothal does not usually entail sexual relations.  A woman who was divorced or widowed from betrothal may even be married within three months for the same reason.  The only exception is the betrothed woman in Judea.  According to this source and Mishnah Ketuboth 1:5, there was a suspicion that in Judea men might have relations with their betrothed wives before proper marriage.  Therefore in Judea the betrothed woman is treated like a married woman and she must wait.
Rabbi Yose says that all women may be betrothed within three months, but not widows.  The reason that widows have to wait (and divorcees do not) is not in order to recognize whose child the new baby is, but because the widow cannot even be betrothed while mourning.  We can see in this mishnah that betrothal was seen to be a joyous occasion and that they probably would celebrate it with a party.  The Talmud states that this period is one month.  Hence divorcees can be betrothed immediately and widows must wait a month.  Of course, both would have to wait three months for proper marriage. 
