Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah continues to provides scenarios whereby two men betroth two women, but neither know who betrothed whom.  
For the sake of clarity I will use names in explaining this complex mishnah.  There are two families of men in the mishnah.  The first family I will call Reuven, Shimon and Levi, who are all brothers.  The second family of men I will call George, Bill and Ron, again all brothers.  The two sisters in the mishnah I will again call Rachel and Leah.  This should make the mishnah somewhat easier.

Mishnah Seven
I) If two men betrothed two sisters and one does not know whom he betrothed and the other does not know whom he betrothed, this one gives two bills of divorce and the other gives two bills of divorce. 
II) If they died and this one has a brother and this one has a brother, this brother performs halitzah for both widows and this brother performs halitzah for both widows.  
III) If  one has one brother and the other has two brothers, one brother performs halitzah for both widows and [as regards] the two, one performs halitzah and the other may perform yibbum.   
IV) If they both preempted and married they do not take [the women] away from  them.   
V) If this one had two brothers and the other had two brothers, one brother of one performs halitzah for one widow and one brother of the other performs halitzah with the other widow, [and then the other] brother of the first may have yibbum with the halutzah of the second and [the other] brother of the second may have yibbum with the halutzah of the first. 
VI) If both preempted and performed halitzah, the [other] two must not perform yibbum, rather one must perform halitzah and the other may then have yibbum.   
VII) If they both preempted and married they do not take [the women] away from  them.
 
Explanation
Section one: Reuven and George betroth Rachel and Leah but neither knows who betrothed whom.  They both must then divorce both women in order for the women to go marry other men.
Section two:  If Reuven and George die, and each has only one brother (Shimon and Bill), Shimon must perform halitzah with both women and Bill must perform halitzah with both women.  Neither can have yibbum with either women because each woman might be the sister of the woman with whom he is truly liable to have yibbum, the z’kukah (because we don’t know who betrothed whom).
Section three:  If Reuven has two brothers, Shimon and Levi and George still only has Bill as a brother, Bill must have halitzah with both Rachel and Leah.  With regard to Shimon and Levi, one brother must have halitzah with both women but the other brother can have yibbum.  This rule was explained in the above mishnah as well.  The second brother can have yibbum with either women because if she was truly the woman who Reuven betrothed, then yibbum is proper.  If Reuven betrothed the other sister, then the sister with whom this brother now has yibbum is no longer the sister of his z’kukah, because this other sister has already received halitzah from his other brother.  
Section four:  As we learned above in mishnah six, if both brothers preemptively marry both sisters, they are not forced to have a divorce.  Certainly the second marriage is okay, and even the first marriage was only problematic in the beginning, before the second sister had yibbum.  Even though the woman whom he married may have once been the sister of his z’kukah, after she has had yibbum the other sister is no longer a z’kukah.  For further explanation see mishnah six.
Section five:  If both Reuven and George have two brothers, one brother of each dead brother has halitzah with both sisters.  Let’s say that Shimon and Bill have halitzah with both sisters.  Now Levi can have yibbum with the sister who had halitzah with George and Ron can have yibbum with the sister who had halitzah with Shimon.  This is permitted because if this sister was the one whom his brother had betrothed than yibbum is proper.  If she is not the correct sister, then his other brother has already had halitzah with the other woman and she is no longer a z’kukah.  The reason that Levi cannot have yibbum with the sister who had halitzah with Shimon and that Ron can’t have yibbum with the sister who had halitzah with Bill is that it is forbidden to marry a woman with whom your brother had halitzah. 
Section six:  If Shimon and Levi preemptively perform halitzah with both Rachel and Leah, the other two, Bill and Ron, cannot both have yibbum with Rachel and Leah, because the first to do yibbum might do so with the sister of his z’kukah.  Rather one (either Bill or Ron) should do halitzah and then the other may have yibbum.  
Section seven:  Again, if Bill and Ron both do yibbum, after Shimon and Levi both performed halitzah, neither are forced to divorce them.  This is the same ruling as in section four and in the previous mishnah. 
