Yevamoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah is quite complex so I recommend paying careful attention to the details.  If you are beginning to despair, we are almost out of the most complex section of Yevamoth.

Mishnah Nine
I) Three brothers were married to three women who were strangers [to one another] and one of them died and the second brother did ma’amar with her and then he died, behold, these must perform halitzah but may not be taken in yibbum; for it is said “And one of them died…her husband’s brother shall unite with her” (Deuteronomy 25:5)—only she who is bound due to one yavam but not she who is bound to due to two yavamim.   
II) R. Shimon says: he may have yibbum with whichever of these he wishes and then perform halitzah for the other.  
III) If two brothers were married to two sisters, and one of the brothers died, and afterwards the wife of the second brother died, behold, she is forbidden to him   forever, since she was forbidden to him for one moment.

Explanation
Section one:  Reuven, Shimon and Levi are married to Rachel, Tovah and Yael, none of whom are sisters.  Reuven dies and Shimon does ma’amar with Rachel.  When Shimon dies, Rachel and Tovah should, we would think, become liable for yibbum r halitzah with Levi.  Our mishnah, using a midrash based on Deut. 25:5, states that neither woman may have yibbum with Levi.  This is because Rachel is bound to Levi through her marriage to two of Levi’s brothers.  She is still bound to him by force of her marriage with Reuven, because the ma’amar that Shimon did with her was not as strong as a full yibbum.  [If Shimon had done yibbum, her ties to Reuven would have been fully severed.]   She is bound to Levi through her marriage to Shimon because of the ma’amar she did do with him.  In other words ma’amar is strong enough to create a relationship with the second brother, but not strong enough to sever the ties with the first brother.  Therefore Rachel is bound to Levi through the force of her marriage to two brothers who are now deceased.  The mishnah understands the words “And one of them died” to exclude a case where two brothers died.  Since Rachel is exempt, her rival wife, Tovah, is also exempt.  However, since ma’amar is not a biblical institution, and therefore the ties to Shimon are not complete, halitzah must be performed.
Section two:  Rabbi Shimon holds that ma’amar either completely acquires the woman for the man who does ma’amar, in other words it creates a complete and valid relationship according to the Torah, or it doesn’t create any legal relationship whatsoever, not even a rabbinicly ordained marriage.  If it creates a complete betrothal, then Rachel’s ties to her first husband, Reuven, are ended by Shimon’s ma’amar.  When Shimon dies, she becomes liable to yibbum with Levi only because of her marriage to Shimon.  If it doesn’t create any tie, then she was never at all married to Shimon, and she is liable for yibbum with Levi only because of her marriage to Reuven.  In either case, she does not fit the category of one who is liable to yibbum through two dead husbands at the same time.  Therefore, either of these wives may have yibbum.  The second wife must have halitzah, lest the ma’amar not have created a tie with Shimon, and therefore Rachel became obligated for yibbum because of her marriage with Reuven and Tovah became obligated because of her marriage with Shimon.  He cannot have yibbum with the second one as well, lest the ma’amar did create a tie, and a yavam cannot have yibbum with two wives of one dead husband.
Section three:  Reuven and Shimon are married to Rachel and Leah.  Reuven dies and Rachel then would become liable for yibbum with Shimon, except she is exempt because he is married to her sister.  The mishnah teaches that even though Leah subsequently dies, and hence Rachel might be able to have yibbum with Shimon, she cannot because she was at one point forbidden to him.  Note that this law was already explained in mishnah seven.    
