Yevamoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses all of the potential violations that could occur in a case where two brothers betroth two women and the women are accidentally switched when the two couples enter the bridal chamber (huppah).  In other words, Reuven has relations with Shimon’s wife and vice versa.  Note that the mishnah is only discussing a situation where this occurred accidentally.  Had the switch been intentional, they would all be intentional adulterers and the men would have to divorce their wives.  

Mishnah Ten
I) If two men betrothed two women, and as they were entering into the bridal chamber, they exchanged the one for the other, behold, they are guilty of having relations with a married woman. 
II) If they were brothers they are guilty of having relations with a brother’s wife. 
III) If they were sisters, they are guilty of having relations with a wife’s sister.   
IV) If they were menstruants [they are guilty] of having relations with a menstruant.
V) They must be kept apart for three months, lest they are pregnant.   
A) If they were minors incapable of bearing children, they may be returned [to their rightful husband] at once. 
VI) If the women were of priestly families they are disqualified from eating terumah.

Explanation
Section one:  At the time of the mishnah, in typical situations a man would betroth a woman and only some time later marry her.  The marriage was actualized by him bringing her into the huppah, which was a true bridal chamber, and not the symbolic huppah used today.  In the huppah the couple would have sexual relations.
Once the woman is betrothed, she is considered like a full wife with regard to adultery.  Therefore, if the two brides were switched, each brother who has relations with the other’s wife has violated the prohibition of adultery.
Section two:  He has also violated the prohibition of having relations with your brother’s wife.  See Leviticus 18:16 and 20:21.
Section three:  If they were sisters he has also violated the prohibition of having relations with one’s wife’s sister.  See Leviticus Leviticus 18:18.
Section four:  If they were menstruating, the brothers have violated the prohibition of having relations with a menstruant.  See Leviticus 18:19.  
Section five:  Before each wife can return to having relations with her lawful husband, she must wait three months, lest she was impregnated on her wedding night. The three months allows us to recognize whether the child is from the wrong husband. If she was impregnated by the wrong husband, the child will be a mamzer.  
If she was a minor who could not become pregnant, the three month waiting period is unnecessary.
Section six:  If these women were from priestly families, they will no longer be allowed to eat terumah, for any woman who has had relations with someone forbidden to her, can no longer marry a priest or eat terumah.  If her husband should die without children, she does not return to her priestly family and resume eating terumah, as would a normal widow in such a situation (see Leviticus 22:13).  
