Yevamoth, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah continues to list types of women who are either forbidden to their husbands or to their yevamim.

Mishnah Two
The following  are permitted to their yevamim and forbidden to their husbands: 
1) A high priest who betrothed a widow and has a brother who is an ordinary priest; 
2) A fit [priest] who married a halalah and has a brother who is a halal; 
3) An Israelite who married a mamzeret and has a brother who is a mamzeret;
4) A mamzer who married the daughter of an Israelite and has a brother who is an Israelite. 
[In these cases the women] are permitted to their yevamim and forbidden to their husbands.
5) The following are forbidden to both;   
6) A high priest who married a widow has a brother who is a high priest, or who is an ordinary priest;
7) A fir [priest] who married a halalah and has a brother who was a fit [priest];
8) An Israelite who married a mamzeret and has a brother who is Israelite;
9) A mamzer who married the daughter of an Israelite and has a brother who is a mamzer, 
[In these cases the women] are forbidden to both [the husband and the yavam].   
All other women are permitted to both their husbands and their yevamim.

Explanation
Section one:  A high priest is not allowed to marry a widow.  If he betroths a widow and then dies, his brother, the ordinary priest, may have yibbum with her.  However, if he married her, she would fall into the category of a halalah, that is a woman who has been disqualified from the priesthood.  She would then be forbidden to the yavam brother as well.
Section two:  A priest may not marry a halalah.  However, if he has a brother who is a halal (for instance they have different mothers), then the brother may have yibbum with her.
Section three:   An Israelite may not marry a mamzeret.  However, if he has a brother who is a mamzer (they have different mothers), then the brother may have yibbum with her.
Section four:  The opposite situation of that in section three.
Section five:  The mishnah now begins to list women who are forbidden both to their husbands and, should the husbands die, to the yavam as well.
If a high priest marries a widow and dies and his brother is also a high priest, just as the first marriage was prohibited, so too is yibbum.  Furthermore, since the first marriage was consummated (and did not remain only a betrothal, as in section one above), the woman became a halalah and is therefore prohibited to his brother even if he is only an ordinary priest.
Section six:  If a fit priest marries a halalah, who is forbidden to him, she may not have yibbum with his brother who is also a fit priest.
Section seven:  Just as the mamzereth was forbidden to the first husband, who was an ordinary Israelite, so too she is forbidden to his brother, if he is an ordinary Israelite.
Section eight:  Just as the Israelite woman was forbidden to her first husband, who was a mamzer, so too she is forbidden to his mamzer brother.
