Yevamoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
The first section of this mishnah broadens the category of those who disqualify women from eating terumah but cannot allow them to eat terumah. 
The second two sections discuss cases of doubt.  

Mishnah Four
1) A fetus, a yavam, betrothal, a deaf-mute, and a boy who is nine years and one day old, disqualify [a woman] from [terumah], but do not allow her to eat terumah,   
2) If it is doubtful whether the boy is nine years and one day old or not, or whether he   has produced two hairs or not, 
3) If a house collapsed upon a man and upon his brother’s daughter, and it is not known which of them died first, her rival must perform halitzah but may not be taken in yibbum.

Explanation
Section one:  In all of the cases listed in this section, if the boy/man was an Israelite he disqualifies the woman from eating terumah, and if he was a priest, he does not allow his wife to eat terumah.  For instance, if a priest dies and leaves his wife pregnant, the fetus does not allow her to eat terumah. If he was an Israelite and she was the daughter of a priest, the fetus disqualifies her from eating terumah.  
When the daughter of an Israelite is betrothed to a priest she does not yet begin to eat terumah.  However, if she is the daughter of a priest betrothed to an Israelite she already loses the right to eat terumah.  
A deaf-mute cannot contract marriage, according to Torah law.  This is because he is not considered to have intelligence.  [As a side note, now that sign language has been developed this concept no longer exists.]  The status of his marriage is only derabbanan (of rabbinic origin).  If he is a priest he does not allow his wife to eat terumah, but if he is an Israelite he disqualifies her from eating terumah.  
Intercourse with a boy less than nine years and one day of age is not considered real intercourse.  The mishnah teaches that once the boy reaches this age, if he has intercourse with a woman forbidden to him, he disqualifies her from eating terumah.  However, if he is a priest, he does not cause her to be able to eat terumah, since a boy who has not reached puberty (concretized by the appearance of two pubic hairs) cannot contract betrothal or marriage.
Section two:  According to the Rambam, this section is the beginning of the second halakhah in this mishnah.  If it is doubtful whether a boy is nine years old and he does yibbum with her, or it is doubtful whether he has reached puberty or not, and he does halitzah with her, the woman still requires another halitzah, lest the first yibbum or halitzah was done by a child incapable of such an action.  However, she may not have subsequent yibbum, lest the first action was valid.
Section three:  This section deals with another case of doubt.  If a house falls on a husband and his wife, who is his brother’s daughter, and it is not known who died first, the rival wife must have halitzah and cannot have yibbum.  She must have halitzah, lest her rival wife died first, and she was obligated to yibbum, because at the time of her husband’s death she had no rival wife who was forbidden to the yavam.  She cannot have yibbum lest the husband died first, and therefore at the time of his death she was the rival wife of a woman forbidden to the yavam (the yavam’s sister). 
