Yevamoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The first half of this mishnah discusses how the brothers divide the inheritance from the dead brother.   
The second half of the mishnah teaches that when a man performs halitzah, he is thereafter forbidden to marry his halutzah’s relatives and she is forbidden to marry his.  

Mishnah Seven
1) He who performs halitzah with his yevamah, behold he is regarded as one of the other brothers in respect of inheritance.   
a) If the father was living, the estate belongs to the father.  
2) He who marries his yevamah acquires his brother’s estate. 
a) R. Judah said: in either case, if the father was living the estate belongs to the father.
3) He who performs halitzah with his yevamah, he is forbidden to marry her relatives and she is forbidden to marry his relatives:  
a) He is forbidden to marry her mother, her mother’s mother and her father’s mother; her daughter, her daughter’s daughter and her son’s daughter; and also her sister while she is alive. 
1) The other brothers are permitted.  
b) She is forbidden to marry his father and his father’s father; his son and his son’s son; his brother and his brother’s son.
4) A man is permitted to marry the relative of the rival of his halutzah but is forbidden to marry the rival of the relative of his halutzah.

Explanation
Section one:  When a man dies without children, his primary inheritor is his father.  If his father is not alive, then his brothers split the inheritance.  When a man performs halitzah for his dead, childless brother’s widow, he now reverts to being like one of the other brothers with respect to his dead brothers inheritance.  His having performed halitzah does not acquire for him any special rights vis-a-vis the inheritance.  If his father was still alive, the father inherits as usual.
Section two:  If, however, he performed yibbum, he has now taken the place of his dead brother.  Therefore, according to the first opinion in the mishnah, he inherits his brother’s entire estate, even if the father is alive.  R. Judah disagrees and holds that if the father is still alive, the father’s right to the inheritance trumps the yavam’s right.  
Section three:  Just as a man cannot marry the relatives of his wife or his divorcee, so too, our mishnah teaches, a man cannot marry his halutzah’s relatives and she cannot marry his.  The mishnah now lists which relatives are forbidden.  These relatives are forbidden even if the halutzah should die, just as they are forbidden to a man should his divorcee die.  The list includes her mother, grandmothers, daughter and granddaughters.  The yavam may not marry the halutzah’s sister, but this prohibition is only while the halutzah is alive. After she dies he may marry them, just as a man may marry his divorcee’s sister after the divorcee dies.
The mishnah teaches that only the brother who performs halitzah is forbidden from marrying her relatives.  The other brothers of the deceased brother are not forbidden, since once halitzah has been performed their ties to her have been severed.
The halutzah is forbidden to marry his relatives as well.  These include his father and grandfathers, his son and grandsons, and his brother and his brother’s son.  
Note that most of these relatives would have been forbidden to her because of her marriage to the first brother.  For instance, she cannot marry the father of the yavam, because he is also the father of her deceased husband and a man may not marry his daughter-in-law, even after his sons death. 
Section four:  Although the rabbis declared that a man may not marry the relatives of his halutzah, he may marry the relatives of the rival wife of his halutzah.  For instance, if Reuven dies and leaves two wives, Rachel and Tovah (not sisters), and Shimon performs halitzah for Rachel, even though he cannot marry Tovah, for she is the rival wife of his halutzah, he may marry Tovah’s relatives.
The final piece of the mishnah presents the following scenario.  Reuven dies leaving two wives, Rachel and Tovah, and Shimon performs halitzah for Rachel.  Leah, Rachel’s sister was married to Chaim who is not related to Shimon.  Chaim has another wife named Chana.  Then Chaim dies.  Just as Shimon cannot marry Rachel, because she is the relative of his halutzah, so too he cannot marry Chana, for she is the rival wife of the relative of his halutzah.  This is how Rashi explains this piece, but there are others who explain it differently.
