Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah explains how “the wife of his brother who died before he was born” exempts her rival wife from yibbum.  This category of women was mentioned in the first mishnah of chapter one (there it was the 14th category). 

Mishnah One
What is the case of “the wife of his brother who died before he was born”?
I) If there were two brothers, and one of them died, and then a third brother was born, and then the second brother had yibbum with his dead brother’s wife and then died himself, the first woman is exempt as the wife of his brother who died before he was born, and the second wife [is exempt] because she is her rival wife. 
II) If he had ma’amar with her and died, the second wife, must perform halitzah but may not have yibbum.

Explanation
Section one:  Reuven and Shimon are brothers and Shimon dies.  Afterwards, Levi is born.  Reuven then takes Shimon’s widow in yibbum.  Afterwards Reuven also dies without children.  This same widow, who was originally Shimon’s wife and then became Reuven’s wife, now technically should become liable to have yibbum or halitzah with Levi, the third brother. However, since Levi was not yet born when Shimon died, she is not liable for yibbum with Levi.  Since she is exempt, all of her rival wives are exempt as well.
Section two:  In order to understand this section, we must remind ourselves that ma’amar is the giving of money from the yavam to the yavamah, a parallel to the betrothal money given as “kiddushin” in regular marriages.  As I explained in the introduction, according to the Torah there is no marital process for the widow who goes through yibbum.  All that really happens is that he has relations with her, and thus yibbum is performed.  However, the rabbis created an institution called “ma’amar” whereby the yavam would give her betrothal money similar to the betrothal money given in regular marriages (we will learn these laws in tractate Kiddushin).  Ma’amar, however, does not make the woman the yavam’s full wife.  The status of their marriage is only rabbinic.  This will have many important implications in future mishnayoth.
In our mishnah, Reuven does not have full yibbum with the woman, but only does ma’amar, and then dies.  The woman therefore, is not biblically liable to have yibbum with Levi, the third brother, but only rabbinically liable.  Since she is only rabbinically liable, her rival wife is not truly exempt, and according to biblical law she could have yibbum.  However, since Reuven did perform ma’amar with the other wife, the rival wife can only have halitzah.  
