Yevamoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah demonstrates the different possibilities and combinations of halitzah, yibbum, ma’amar and a get and their consequences on a case where there is one yavam and two yevamoth (i.e. the brother who died without children left two wives). 

Mishnah Four
How is this so?
1) If the yavam did ma'amar with this one and ma'amar with the other one, they need two letters of divorce and [one of them must have] halizah.  
2) If he did ma'amar with one and gave a get to the other, the [first one] needs a get and [one of them must have] halitzah.  
3) If he did ma'amar with one and had intercourse with the other, they need two gets and [one of them must have] halitzah.  
4) If he had ma'amar with one and gave halitzah to the other, the first needs a get.  
5) If he gave a get to one and a get to the other, [one of them] requires halitzah.   
6) If he gave a get to one and had intercourse with the other, [the second one] requires a get and [one of them must have] halitzah.   
7) [If he gave] a get to one and had ma'amar with the other, [the second] requires a get and [one of them must have] halitzah. 
8) [If he gave] a get to one and halizah to the other, there is nothing after halitzah.

Explanation
Section one:  The ma’amar performed with both yevamoth means that both require a get if they wish to marry someone else.  In addition, one of them requires halitzah to end the ties created by their need for yibbum.  As we recall, they don’t both need halitzah, since the halitzah of one wife exempts all of her rival wives.  He could not have yibbum with either, since he gave ma’amar to both.
Section two:  In this case he must give the get to the first one, the one with whom he had ma’amar, and he can have halitzah with either. Again, the halitzah of either releases them both.  He cannot have yibbum even with the one with whom he had ma’amar since he gave a get to her rival wife.  
Section three:  Once he had ma’amar with one wife, he should not have gone and had intercourse with the other wife.  The intercourse was in an essence an ineffective act of yibbum.  Therefore, they both need gets, one to end the ties created by the ma’amar and the other to end the ties created by the intercourse (which can be an act of betrothal) and one requires halitzah in order to release them both from the ties of yibbum.
Section four:  Although in this case he did have halitzah with the second wife, the ma’amar that was previously done with the first wife means that she still needs a get. In other words, the ties created by the necessity of yibbum have already been severed, but there are still the ties created by the ma’amar.  He could not have yibbum with her, since he has already done halitzah with the other wife, and it is forbidden to marry the wife of one’s halutzah.
Section five:  After having given a get to both women, he still needs to perform halitzah to totally release them.  The get is not sufficient to sever those ties.  However, he may not have yibbum with either woman since they both already received gets.
Section six:  In this case, once he has given a get to the first wife, the yibbum done by intercourse with the second wife, was invalid.  Therefore, he must give a get to the second wife, with whom he has already had intercourse, to sever the ties created by the intercourse.  One of them still needs halitzah.
Section seven:  Similar to the previous case, if he gave a get to the first one, the ma’amar with second one is not valid.  He could not subsequently have yibbum with her.  However, he must still give her a get to sever the ties created by the ma’amar.  As always, one of them still needs halitzah.
Section eight:  As we learned in mishnah three, once he has performed an act of halitzah, there are no more steps which must be taken.  Both women may now go marry other men.
