Zevahim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Since the past chapter and a half have dealt with the prohibition of offering a sacrifice outside the Temple, the mishnah now notes that in the past, before the Temple was built, there were periods where it was permissible to offer a sacrifice anywhere one wished. These local altars are called “bamot,” which is close to the Hebrew word for the pulpit, “bimah.

Mishnah Four
1) Before the Tabernacle was set up bamot (local altars) were permitted and the service was performed by the firstborn. 
2) After the Tabernacle was set up bamot were forbidden and the service was performed by priests. 
3) Most holy sacrifices were [then] eaten within the curtains, and lesser sacrifices [were eaten] anywhere in the camp of the Israelites. 

Explanation
Section one: Before the Israelites set up the Tabernacle in the desert it was permitted to offer a sacrifice anywhere. This was the way that sacrifices were performed from the time of Adam until the Tabernacle was set up in the desert. In addition, the Temple service was performed by the firstborns. This is hinted at in several places. First of all, Numbers 3:12 states, “I hereby take the Levites from among the Israelites in place of all the first-born.” This seems to state that at some earlier point in Israelite history, the firstborns performed the worship that the Levites (which here includes priests) used to perform. Second, in Exodus 24:5 Moses designates “some young men among the Israelites” to offer sacrifices. The rabbis understand these “young men” to be firstborns.
Section two: After the Tabernacle was set up, it became forbidden to offer sacrifices elsewhere, as it says in Leviticus 17:5, “This is in order that the Israelites may bring the sacrifices which they have been making in the open…to the priest at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.” At this point, the worship was performed at the Tabernacle and by priests.
Section three: When in the desert, most holy sacrifices, the asham and hatat, had to be eaten within the curtain of the Tabernacle. Lesser sacrifices, such as the shelamim and todah, had to be eaten within the camp of Israel.  
