Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Eight

Mishnah Eight
1) As for a hatat whose blood was received in one goblet: 
a) If one [first] sprinkled [the blood] outside and then sprinkled [it] inside; 
b) [Or] inside and then outside, he is liable, because the whole of it was eligible inside. 
2) If the blood was received in two goblets: 
a) If he sprinkled both inside, he is exempt; 
b) Both outside, he is liable. 
c) One inside and one outside, he is exempt; 
d) One outside and one inside, he is liable on account of the one outside, while the one inside makes atonement.   
3) To what may this be compared? To one who set aside [an animal for] a hatat, then it was lost, and he set aside another in its place; then the first was found, and [so] both are present. 
a) If he slaughtered both of them inside, he is exempt; 
b) Both of them outside, he is liable. 
c) [If he slaughtered] one inside and one outside, he is exempt;   
d) One outside and one inside, he is liable on account of the one outside, while the one inside makes atonement. 
4) Just as the blood exempts its own flesh, so does it exempt the flesh of its companion [the other animal]. 

Explanation
Section one: The first scenario is one in which the priest received the blood of the hatat in one goblet. All of this blood should be poured out on the altar inside the Temple. Therefore, it doesn’t matter if he first pours some blood inside the Temple and then some outside, or some outside and then some inside, he is always liable. This matches Rabbi Nehemiah’s opinion in mishnah six, who held that even if one offers up the remainder of the blood outside the Temple he is liable. Once he pours out the blood inside the Temple, he still is liable for pouring the remainder outside.
Section two: The situation is now more complex. The priest receives the blood in two goblets.
A) If he sprinkled both inside he is obviously exempt, since he has not offered anything outside the Temple. The mishnah did not need to state this; it only did so in order to exhaust all of the possibilities.
B)  If he sprinkled both outside, he is liable. Again, this seems obvious.
C) Once he sprinkles one inside the other cannot be sprinkled on the altar and is to be poured out into the aqueduct which cleans out the Temple. Therefore, if he offers up this one outside the Temple he is exempt. 
D) If he first offers up one of the goblets of blood outside, he is liable, for this one should have been offered up inside. If he then offers the other goblet inside, it is valid and it effects atonement, as the sprinkling of the blood always does. The fact that the other goblet was spilled outside does not render invalid the goblet to be spilled inside.
Section three: The mishnah compares this situation to a person who set aside an animal to be a hatat, lost the animal, then set aside another animal and then found the first one. The two animals are now both hatats, but only one can effect atonement. The mishnah now runs through all of the possible scenarios, as it did above.
A) Obviously, if he slaughters both inside he is exempt.
B) Similarly, if he slaughters both outside, he is liable.
C) If he first slaughters one inside and then the second one outside he is exempt, because the first animal already effected atonement. In this case the rule with the second one is that it cannot be a valid sacrifice and therefore he is not liable for offering it outside the Temple.
D) When he slaughters the first one outside the Temple he is liable for slaughtering outside the Temple. However, the second one can still effect atonement when it is slaughtered inside because the first one does not affect its status.
Section four: The mishnah now makes a final note with regard to the situation of the two hatats. This section is not really connected to the issue of slaughtering outside the Temple. 
In this situation if one was to slaughter both hatats inside the Temple and then pour the blood of one of them on the altar, the pouring of the blood exempts one who benefits from the flesh of that animal from being punished for illicit benefit from Temple property. The flesh is exempt from this prohibition because after the blood is spilled the animal can be eaten by the priest. The mishnah teaches that just as the pouring of the blood exempts the flesh of the animal whose blood was poured, so too it exempts one who benefits from the other animal. The second animal cannot be a sacrifice and it is forbidden to derive benefit from it. However, since it is no longer in the category of sacrifice, the laws of illegal use of Temple property no longer apply to it.     

 
