Zevahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah discusses what permits the parts of various sacrifices to be burned or eaten. The importance of this is that if one has an improper intent while performing an action with the blood that permits this sacrifice to be eaten or burned, then the sacrifice is piggul and one who eats it is liable for karet (if the improper intent was to eat or burn it after the time in which it must be eaten or burned).
 
Mishnah Four
1) [The sprinkling of] the blood of the olah permits its flesh for [burning on] the altar, and its skin to the priests. 
2) [The sprinkling of] the blood of the olah of a bird permits its flesh to the altar. 
3) [The sprinkling of] the blood of the hatat of a bird permits its flesh to the priests. 
4) [The sprinkling of] the blood of the bullocks that are burned and the goats that are burned permits their innards to be offered [on the altar]. 
a) Rabbi Shimon said: whatever is not [sprinkled] on the outer altar, as in the case of shelamim, one is not liable for it on account of piggul.

Explanation
Section one: Once the blood of the olah sacrifice has been sprinkled on the altar, its flesh can be burned on the altar and the skin goes to the priests. Thus, if one has an improper intent while sprinkling the blood, the olah is piggul. 
Section two: The same holds true for the bird olah, except that in this case the skin is also burned (what would the priests do with the skin of a dove?).
Section three: A hatat bird can be eaten by the priests, once its blood has been sprinkled.
Section four:  There are three types of bullocks referred to here: 1) The bullock offered on Yom Kippur; 2) the bullock offered by a high priest for issuing a mistaken instruction; 3) the bullock offered by the court that makes a mistaken instruction. There are two types of goats that are referred to here: 1) The goat offered on Yom Kippur; 2) The goat offered by a court for making a mistaken instruction concerning a law related to idol worship. In all of these cases the blood is sprinkled on the inner altar, their flesh is burned and their innards are burned on the altar. Therefore, if one has an improper intent while sprinkling the blood, the flesh is piggul.
Rabbi Shimon disagrees and holds that in these cases, since the blood is not sprinkled on the outer altar, as is the case in shelamim concerning which the laws concerning piggul were written (Leviticus 7:18), the laws of piggul don’t apply.  So in this case, even if he has an improper thought, the flesh is not piggul.  
