Zevahim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah introduces several principles as to when taste is transferred from one thing to another. Again, while the principles here relate directly to sacrificial law that is no longer practiced today (and wasn’t practiced at the time of the Mishnah either), these principles are also applicable to the laws of kashrut and thus historically were and remain significant practical halakhah. 

Mishnah Eight
1) If one boiled sacrifices and hullin in it [the copper pot], or most holy sacrifices and lesser sacrifices, if they were sufficient to impart their flavor, the less stringent must be eaten as the more stringent of them;   
2) But they do not necessitate scouring and rinsing; 
3) And they do not disqualify by touch.   
4) If [an unfit] wafer touched a [fit] wafer, or an [unfit] piece of meat touched a [fit] piece of meat, not the whole wafer or the whole piece of meat is forbidden; only the part that absorbed [of the unfit] is forbidden.

Explanation
Section one: In both cases mentioned here, a person boils two different things in one pot, one of greater stringency (sacrifices, or most holy sacrifices) and one of lesser stringency (hullin, or less holy sacrifices). If there is enough of the sacrifices to impart a taste to the hullin, or enough most holy sacrifices to impart taste to the less holy sacrifices, then the rules of the stringent will apply to everything in the pot. Thus the hullin would have to be treated like sacrificial meat and the less holy sacrifices like most holy sacrifices. But if there is not enough to impart taste, then the more lenient rules remain in place. 
Section two: This line seems to say that even if the sacrifices impart their flavor, the pot still need not be scoured and rinsed. However, the Talmud emends the line to read “they do necessitate scouring and rinsing and they do disqualify by touch; if there is not enough to impart taste, then the less stringent need not be eaten as the more stringent ….” In other words, the Talmud emends the line to read the opposite of what it actually says. As long as the more stringent stuff does not impart taste, the less stringent rules apply.
Section three: Leviticus 6:20 states that anything that touches the flesh of the hatat shall become holy. The rabbis rule that any food that absorbs the taste of sacrifices becomes holy like the sacrifice. If the sacrifice is unfit then it too is unfit. If he cooks a mixture of sacrifices and hullin in a pot, and there is not enough sacrifice to impart a taste to the mixture, then the mixture does not disqualify other food which absorbs its taste. (This is according to the talmudic reading of this line, which I mentioned above in my commentary to section two).
Section four: When a permitted thing and a forbidden thing touch and the permitted thing absorbs some of the taste of the forbidden thing, only the part that absorbed the taste would become prohibited. The mishnah illustrates this with regard to the wafer (brought as an accompaniment to a sacrifice) or a piece of sacrificial flesh. 
  
