Zevahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we dealt with sacrifices that were mixed up with animals that either were already disqualified from being sacrifices, or were not sacrifices. Today’s mishnah discusses sacrifices that were mixed up with other sacrifices. 

Mishnah Two
1) A sacrifice [which was mixed up] with another sacrifice, both being of the same kind: this one is offered in the name of whoever is its owner, and the other is offered in the name of whoever is its owner.  
2) A sacrifice [which was mixed up] with a sacrifice, both being of different kinds: they must graze until they become unfit, and then he purchases at the price of the better of them [an animal] of each kind, and he pays the loss of the excess out of his own pocket.   
3) If they were mixed up with a firstling or tithe, they must graze until they become unfit, and then they are eaten as firstling or tithe.   
4) All [sacrifices] can be mixed up, except the hatat and the asham.  

Explanation
Section one: If both sacrificial animals are the same kind, for instance both are hatats, then both can be offered as hatats. When they are offered, instead of mentioning the name of the owner, the priest should use a general formula, “in the name of whoever is its owner.” In this way both owners can get credit.
Section two: In this case the two sacrifices are different kinds. For instance a hatat becomes mixed up with an olah. It is impossible to sacrifice either because their sacrificial rituals are different. Therefore, he let both graze until they become unfit by having a defect which disqualifies them from being sacrifices. Then the animals themselves can be redeemed and the money used to buy new sacrifices. However, he must pay for each new sacrifice at the higher price at which the animals were sold. For instance, if one animal was sold for two selas, and the other for one sela, then he must buy two new sacrifices, each for two selas. The extra sela he must make up from his own pocket. In this way, he can ensure that no sacrifice has lost out by being worth less than the original animal. 
Section three: If a sacrifice is mixed up with a tithe or firstling, then they must let all the animals graze until they become unfit for sacrifice. The tithe and the firstling cannot be redeemed for money until they have a defect, so he has to wait with all of the animals. At this point he can eat all of the animals as if they were all firstling or tithe. What this means is that they can’t be sold at a butcher’s shop, nor can their flesh be weighed out on scales. In addition, he must redeem the animal that was set aside as a sacrifice at the value of the most expensive of the animals and with that money he has to buy a new sacrifice to make up for the one that was lost.
Section four: All sacrifices can possibly be mixed up together, except for an asham and a hatat because a hatat almost always has to be brought from a female animal, (the exception is the male goat brought by the chieftain (Leviticus 4:23)]. The asham is always a male ram or sheep and never a goat. Thus there is no possibility that these two sacrifices could ever be confused. 
