Zevahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Mishnah One
1) Bet Shammai says: any [blood] which is to be sprinkled on the outer altar, if [the priest] applied [it] with one sprinkling, he has made atonement, [and in the case of a hatat two applications, but Bet Hillel says: also the case of the hatat if the priest applied it with one sprinkling it atones—
2) Therefore if he made the first application in the proper manner and the second [with the intention to eat the flesh] after the prescribed time, it atones.   
3) If he made the first application [with the intention to eat the flesh] after the prescribed time and the second outside the prescribed place, it is piggul and involves [the punishment of] karet.  

Explanation
Section one: When it comes to sacrifices offered on the outer altar, some require four sprinklings of blood, some two and some one (we will learn more about this in chapter five). Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel agree that for most of these sacrifices if he sprinkled the blood only one time atonement has been effected. They disagree with regard to the hatat. To Bet Shammai the hatat doesn’t atone without two applications of the blood, whereas Bet Hillel holds that one application is sufficient. 
Section two: The previous section was all just an introduction. The consequence of this rule (that one application of blood is sufficient to atone, and for Bet Shammai two in the case of the hatat) is that if he made the first application of blood in a proper manner and the second with an improper intention, the sacrifice effects atonement and is valid. The second application was put on the altar after atonement had already been effected by the first application, and therefore it does not render the sacrifice invalid.
Section three: Again, we see here that the second application does not affect the status of the sacrifice. Thus if the first application was done with the intent of eating the sacrifice after the prescribed time, the sacrifice is piggul, and the fact that while sprinkling the blood for a second time he had a different improper intention does not matter. Concerning which improper intention causes the sacrifice to be piggul and is punished by karet, see 2:4-5.    
