Zevahim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
When it comes to sacrificing outside the Temple, according to rabbinic reckoning one can transgress three commandments: 1) A negative commandment—“Take care not to sacrifice your burnt offerings in any place you like” (Deuteronomy 12:13); 2) A positive commandment—“But only in the place that the Lord will choose in one of your tribal territories” (ibid 14);  3) A commandment punished by karet—“If anyone of the house of Israel or of strangers who reside among them offers a burnt offering or a sacrifice and does not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting to offer it to the Lord, that person shall be cut off from his people” (Leviticus 17:8-9).
Our mishnah deals with various situations in which one might transgress one of these commandments, but not all of them.

Mishnah Nine
1) All sacrifices consecrated while bamot were forbidden and offered outside while bamot were forbidden involve the transgression of a positive and a negative commandment, and one is liable for karet on their account.   
2) If one consecrated them while bamot were permitted, but offered them without when bamot were forbidden, they involve the transgression of a positive and a negative commandment, but one is not liable for karet on their account.   
3) If one consecrated them when bamot were forbidden, and offered them when bamot were permitted, they involve the transgression of a positive commandment, but they do not involve the transgression of a negative commandment.

Explanation
Section one: The simplest situation is one in which a person consecrated the animal to be a sacrifice while bamot were forbidden and then offered it up outside Shiloh/Jerusalem also while bamot were forbidden. Such a person has transgressed both the positive and negative commandment and is liable for karet.
Section two: If he consecrated the animal when it was permitted to offer sacrifices at bamot, for instance when the Tabernacle stood in Gilgal, and when the Tabernacle came to Shiloh he didn’t offer it there but rather at a local altar, he is not liable for karet. However, he has transgressed both a positive and negative commandment.
Section three: If he consecrated the animal when bamot were forbidden, for instance when the Tabernacle stood in Shiloh, and then offered it once Shiloh was destroyed and bamot were again permitted, he has transgressed the positive commandment of not bringing the animal to Shiloh while the Tabernacle was still there. However, he has not transgressed the negative commandment, nor is he liable for karet. 
