Zevahim, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our chapter discusses what parts of the sacrifices the priests receive. Our mishnah begins by pointing out which priests do not receive a share. 

Mishnah One
1) A tebul yom and one who lacks atonement do not share in sacrifices for consumption in the evening.  
2) An onen may handle [sacrifices], but he may not offer them, and he does not receive a share for consumption in the evening. 
3) Priests with blemishes, whether permanent or passing, receive a share and may eat [of the sacrifices] but they may not offer them. 
4) Whoever is not eligible for service does not share in the flesh.
5) And he who does not share in the flesh does not share in the hides. 
6) Even if one was unclean when the blood was sprinkled but clean when the fats were burned [on the altar], he does not share in the flesh, for it is said: “he among the sons of Aaron, that offers the blood of the shelamim, and the fat, shall have the right thigh for a portion” (Leviticus 7:33).

Explanation
Section one: A tebul yom is a priest who immersed in a mikveh in order to cleanse himself of his impurity but the sun has not yet set upon him. He cannot eat sacrifices, although he is clean once he has been in the mikveh.  “One who lacks atonement” is an impure priest, for instance one who had been a zav, who had to bring a sacrifice the day after he immerses in a mikveh. He cannot eat sacrificial meat until after he brings the sacrifices, even though he is clean after having gone in the mikveh. Both of these types of priest do not receive their share of sacrificial meat today, in order to eat it tomorrow, or tonight. Since they cannot currently eat sacrifices, they lose out on their share.
Section two: An onen is a person (in this case a priest) whose close relative has died. The priest remains an onen on the day of the death according to Torah law, but the rabbis add that he remains an onen throughout the following night as well. An onen is not allowed to eat sacrifices, but he can touch them, for he is not impure. He does not receive a share in order to eat that night, since this is rabbinically forbidden.
Section three: A priest with a blemish cannot offer sacrifices, but he can eat them and therefore he receives his share with the other priests. See Leviticus 21:21-23. 
Section four: A priest who is not eligible to take part in the service, for instance a priest who is impure, does not receive part of the sacrificial flesh. The exception is those with blemishes, as stated in section three. 
Section five: Someone who doesn’t get his part of the flesh, also loses out on his part of the hides of the sacrifices. 
Section six: Even if the person was impure during the day when the blood was sprinkled on the altar, and then pure in the evening when the fats were burned, he still doesn’t get a share of the flesh or hides, until he is pure at the point when the blood is sprinkled. This is derived from the verse which says that one who offers both the blood and the fat gets a portion of the flesh – but if he can’t offer the blood, he loses his portion. In other words, no blood, no flesh!
