Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with various differences between the laws governing the prohibition of slaughtering a sacrifice outside of the Temple and those prohibiting offering a sacrifice outside of the Temple.

Mishnah Three
1) Slaughtering [outside the Temple] is more stringent than offering up [outside], and offering up [is more stringent] than slaughtering. 
2) Slaughtering is more stringent, for he who slaughters [a sacrifice] to a man is liable, whereas he who offers up to a man is not liable.   
3) Offering up is more stringent: two who hold a knife and slaughter are not liable, [whereas] if two take hold of a limb and offer it up, they are liable. 
4) If one offered up, then offered up again, then offered up again, he is liable in respect of each [act of] offering up, the words of Rabbi Shimon. 
a) Rabbi Yose says: he is liable for only one. 
5) He is liable only when he offers up on the top of an altar.
a) Rabbi Shimon says: he is liable even if he offers up on the top of a rock or a stone.

Explanation
Section one: This is a classic style of introduction in the Mishnah. The rabbis seem to have been fascinated by these types of situations, sometimes the laws of x (here slaughtering) are stricter than those of the related prohibition y (here offering) whereas sometimes the situation is opposite and the laws governing y are more stringent than x.
Section two: The laws governing slaughtering are more stringent, for he who slaughters an animal to a man, in worship of that man, is liable. However, one who offers up a sacrifice in worship of a man is not liable. This distinction is derived midrashically from the verses in Leviticus 7.
Section three: If two people together hold a knife and slaughter an animal then neither is liable. This is because each could have done the act on his own, and often when an act that could be done by one person is performed jointly by two, both are exempt. However, we would not say about offering that it is an act that could be performed by one person. It could be performed by as many people who wish to do so. Therefore, each person who offers up a limb of the animal outside of the Temple is liable for karet or a hatat.
Section four: According to Rabbi Shimon, if one offers up the limb of an animal multiple times, he is liable for each and every act. Rabbi Shimon looks at each act as being separate and therefore each carries its own culpability.
Rabbi Yose says that one cannot really offer up the same animal (or piece thereof) twice. Thus he is liable for only one hatat, even though he offered it up multiple times.
Section five: According to the first opinion he is liable only if he offers up the sacrifice on an altar which he built outside the Temple. Without an altar, something is not really a sacrifice. Rabbi Shimon disagrees and holds that even if he offers it on a rock or a stone, which are not properly built altars, he is still liable for offering a sacrifice outside of the Temple. 
