Zevahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
When a priest offers a sacrifice, he must have six things in mind while doing so. Our mishnah teaches what these six things are.

Mishnah Six
The sacrifice is slaughtered for the sake of six things: 
1) For the sake of the sacrifice, 
2) For the sake of the sacrificer, 
3) For the sake of the [Divine] Name, 
4) For the sake of fire-offerings, 
5) For the sake of fragrance, 
6) For the sake of pleasing; 
7) And a hatat and an asham for the sake of sin. 
8) Rabbi Yose said: even if one did not have any of these purposes in his heart, it is valid, because it is a regulation of the court.
9) Since the intention is determined only by the worshipper. 

Explanation
Section one: The priest must have in mind what type of sacrifice is being offered, for instance an olah must be offered with the intent that it be an olah, and not a shelamim.
Section two: The priest must have in mind the person who is bringing the sacrifice. In other words, he must intend that the sacrifice should “count” for that person.
Section three: The priest must have in mind that the sacrifice is for God (our God, of course) and not for some other god, or any other entity one could think of.
Section four: When sacrificing the priest has to have in mind that it will be burned on the altar, and not that it will merely be burned.
Section five: The sacrifice must be offered with the intent to produce a fragrance for God, as it says in Leviticus 1:9, “an olah, a fire-offering of pleasing fragrance.” 
Section six: The final word (in Hebrew) of the above-verse is “pleasing.” The priest must have in mind that the sacrifice be pleasing to God.
Section seven: A hatat and an asham come to atone for sins. They must be offered with the sake that they atone for the sin that they are intended to atone for.
Section eight: According to Rabbi Yose, even if the priest did not have any of these intentions, the sacrifice is still valid. This is because the court stipulates that any sacrifice done without one of these intentions (but not with an improper intention) is valid. 
Section nine: This line explains the entire mishnah. The intent of the worshipper, meaning the priest, is what is determinative of the sacrifice, and not the intent of the owner of the sacrifice. If the worshipper had these six things in mind when offering the sacrifice, the sacrifice is valid even if the owner had an intent that would disqualify the sacrifice.  
 


