Zevahim, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with the bullocks and goats whose blood was offered inside the sanctuary, in the inner altar. Specifically, the question is when do these carcasses defile the clothes of those who deal with them and cause him to defile any clothes that he touches.

Mishnah Six
1) They would carry them on staves [out of the Temple courtyard].
2) If those in front had passed outside the wall of the Temple courtyard, but those in the back had not [yet] gone out, those in front defile their garments, while those in the back do not defile their garments, until they go out. 
a) When they both go out, both defile their garments. 
b) Rabbi Shimon says: neither defile [their garments] until the fire is burning in the greater part of them.  
3) When the flesh is dissolved, he who burns [it] does not defile his garments.

Explanation
Section one: After the rites were performed inside the Sanctuary, they would carry the carcasses outside using staves.
Section two: The Torah (Leviticus 16:28) states that the one who burns these sacrifices shall wash his clothes. The debate in this section is when does someone become “one who burns.” According to the first opinion, the one who deals with these sacrifices defiles clothes once they have left the walls of the Temple courtyard. If some of those carrying the carcasses have left and some have not, then only those who have left the walls defile clothes. Once they have all left, they all defile. According to this interpretation “one who burns” is one who has left the Temple in order to burn one of these sacrifices. 
Rabbi Shimon holds that only once the fire has begun to consume a majority of the carcass of the bullock or goat does the one who burned it defile clothing. He interprets “one who burns” in a much more limiting fashion—to defile one must actually begin the burning process.
Section three: Burning is over once the flesh has been dissolved. One who deals with the burning after this point does not defile clothes.   
