Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
1) As for the fistful and the frankincense, if one offered one of them [without the other] outside [the Temple], he is liable. 
a) Rabbi Elazar says: he is exempt unless he offers the second too.   
b) [If one offered] one inside and the other outside, he is liable.
2) As for the two dishes of frankincense, if one offered one of them outside, he is liable. 
a) Rabbi Elazar says: he is exempt unless he offers the second too.   
b) [If one offered] one inside and the other outside, he is liable.
3) If one sprinkles part of the blood outside, he is liable. 
4) Rabbi Elazar says: also one who makes a libation of the water of the Festival [of  Sukkot] on the festival, outside is liable.  
5) Rabbi Nehemiah says: if one offered the residue of the blood outside, he is liable.

Explanation
Section one: In order for the non-sacrificed parts of the minhah (meal) offering to be eaten, the fistful of the minhah and the frankincense must both be burned on the altar (see Leviticus 2:2-3). If one offers one of these outside of the Temple, he is still liable, according to the first opinion, even though he didn’t offer the other one.
Rabbi Elazar says that he is exempt until he offers both the fistful and the frankincense, because one is not effective without the other. This matches his opinion in mishnah four.  
Rabbi Elazar agrees with the sages that if he offers one of them inside and then the other outside, he is liable. This is similar to the case in mishnah four where he offered most of a certain type of sacrifice inside the Temple, but left over an olive’s worth which he offered outside the Temple. Since this completes the offering, all agree that he is liable. 
Section two: Burning the two dishes of frankincense allows the priests to eat the showbread. Both dishes must be burned. Again, the first opinion holds that if he offers one of them outside the Temple he is liable, whereas Rabbi Elazar holds that he is not liable unless he offers both. As above, if he offers one inside the Temple and the other outside, Rabbi Elazar agrees that he is liable.
Section three: Every sprinkling of the blood is considered its own separate entity. Therefore, if one offers even one sprinkling of blood outside the Temple, he is liable, even if he didn’t perform the requisite two or four sprinklings. In this case Rabbi Elazar would agree.
Section four: On Sukkot there is a water libation. If one performs this water libation outside the Temple he is liable. 
Section five:  The remainder of the blood after some of it has been sprinkled is poured onto the base of the altar. If one offers this blood outside the Temple, he is liable. 
