Zevahim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
1) If [blood] spurted [direct] from the [animal's] throat onto a garment, it does not require washing.
2) From the horn or from the base [of the altar], it does not require washing. 
3) If it spilled out on to the floor [of the Temple] and [the priest] collected it, [and then it splattered onto a garment] it does not require washing. 
4) Only blood which was received in a vessel and is fit for sprinkling requires washing.
5) If [the blood] spurted on to the hide, before it was flayed, it does not require washing.
6) [If it spurted] after it was flayed, it requires washing, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
a) Rabbi Elazar says: even [if it spurted on the skin] after it was flayed [it does not require washing]. 
7) Only the place of the blood requires washing.
8) And whatever is eligible to contract uncleanness,   
9) And whatever is fit for washing.

Explanation
Sections one-four: In section four the general rule that explains the first three sections of the mishnah is stated. The blood which if spilled on a garment requires the garment to be washed is only blood that was in a vessel and was fit for being sprinkled on the altar. In other words, totally valid blood, ready to be spilled onto the altar, contaminates the garment, because that’s not where the blood is supposed to be. But if the blood was not valid blood in a vessel, the garment need not be ritually washed. 
The mishnah lists three such possibilities.
1) Blood which splatters directly from the neck of the animal onto the garment. Since it is not in a vessel, the blood doesn’t contaminate the garment.
2) If the blood was already spilled on the horn or the base of the altar, and then it gets on the garment, the blood doesn’t contaminate. This blood has already fulfilled its purpose and therefore it no longer contaminates.
3) If it had spilled onto the floor of the Temple, it can no longer be sprinkled onto the altar. Since it is no longer eligible for the altar, it doesn’t contaminate.
Section five: Before the hide is flayed from the animal, it is not a “garment” and not even in a state from which it can become a garment. Therefore, if blood spills on it, it is not contaminated.
Section six: According to Rabbi Judah, once it has been flayed, the hide is close enough to a garment, that it can become contaminated by the hatat blood. Even though a hide usually cannot become impure until it has been processed, if one should decide to use it as a garment in its current state, it would become susceptible to impurity. [We will learn more about this when we learn Seder Toharot]. Therefore, Rabbi Judah says it does require washing. 
Rabbi Elazar says that since it is not at this moment susceptible to impurity, it does not require washing. 
Section seven: The entire garment does not require washing, just the point that came into contact with blood.
Section eight: Only a garment that is susceptible to impurity must be washed. This would seem to exclude a piece of cloth so small that it can no longer become impure.
Section nine: Finally, if the garment cannot be washed, for instance a garment made of wood (I know, sounds weird), then it doesn’t require washing. The Torah only requires that washables be washed.
