Zevahim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The earthen vessel is broken and the copper vessel scoured and rinsed if sacrifices were cooked in them. Our mishnah continues to deal with this law. 
We should note that again a mishnah concerning sacrificial law later becomes halakhically significant by being applied to other areas. The laws concerning cleansing the vessel in which a sacrifice is cooked are eventually used as a source for laws for how vessels are “kashered.” 

Mishnah Seven
1) Whether one boiled in it or poured boiling [sacrificial flesh] into it, whether most sacred sacrifices or lesser sacrifices, [the pot] requires scouring and rinsing. 
a) Rabbi Shimon says: lesser sacrifices do not require scouring and rinsing.
2) Rabbi Tarfon says: if one boiled [sacrifices in a pot] at the beginning of a festival, he can boil in it during the whole festival.
a) But the sages say: until the time of eating, scouring and rinsing.   
3) Scouring is done as the scouring of a goblet; and rinsing is as the rinsing of a goblet, 
4) Scouring [in hot water] and rinsing in cold [water].
5) The spit and the grill are cleansed with hot water.   

Explanation
Section one: The earthen vessel must be broken and the copper vessel scoured and rinsed whether they were used to boil a sacrifice or whether a boiled sacrifice was poured into them. The important thing is that since the sacrifice was hot when it was in the vessel, the vessel absorbed some of the taste of the sacrifice and it must subsequently be cleansed. This remains a normative law in kashrut – vessels absorb the taste of that which is cooked in them only if the food is hot. 
The verses from Leviticus 6 refer only to the hatat. Nevertheless, the rabbis extend these laws to other sacrifices. Just as the taste of the hatat needs to be removed from the vessels, so too does the taste of other sacrifices. The first opinion holds that this is true for most holy sacrifices, like the hatat and the asham, and for less holy sacrifices like the shelamim and todah. Rabbi Shimon says that if the vessel was used to cook a less holy sacrifice, it need not be scoured and rinsed.
Section two: Rabbi Tarfon says that if a vessel was used to cook a sacrifice at the beginning of a seven day festival (Sukkot or Pesah), one can continue to use that vessel throughout the entire festival without scouring and rinsing it. Since the vessel will be in continuous use due to the large number of sacrifices offered during the festival, each time it is used the vessel will discharge the taste of the previous sacrifice cooked in it, and thereby the taste of that sacrifice will never become “remnant,” sacrifice left over past the time when it must be eaten. 
The other rabbis hold that the vessel must be scoured and rinsed before the time in which any sacrifice that was in it had to be eaten. For instance, if a hatat is put into the vessel, then the vessel must be scoured and rinsed by midnight, for that is when the hatat becomes remnant. This is true even if another sacrifice, for instance a shelamim, is cooked in there before this time. The rabbis disagree that the taste of the sacrifice will be completely discharged through cooking another sacrifice. Since the taste will remain, it must be scoured and rinsed within the time that any sacrifices are cooked in it. 
Section three: Scouring and rinsing are done to the copper vessels as is done with a goblet, which means that they are thoroughly cleansed.
Section four: There are two different versions of this line. According to one version, not found in manuscripts but accepted by the Rambam, scouring is done with hot water. Since the taste came in to the vessel through hot water, it can only be removed through hot water. 
According to the other version, the scouring need only be done through cold water. According to both versions, rinsing is done through cold water.
Section five: A spit or grill upon which a sacrifice was roasted, must be cleansed by being put into boiling water. Since these were directly on the fire, the requirements for cleansing are greater. 
