Zevahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the todah, or thanksgiving offering (Leviticus 7:11 ff.) and the ram brought by the nazirite upon the completion of his naziriteship.
 
Mishnah Six
1) The todah and the nazirite's ram are sacrifices of lesser sanctity. 
2) They are slaughtered anywhere in the Temple Court, and their blood requires two sprinklings, which constitute four; 
3) And they are eaten in any part of the city, by any person, prepared in any manner, the same day and the night following, until midnight. 
4) The parts of them which are raised are governed by the same law, save that these are eaten [only] by the priests, their wives, their children and their slaves.

Explanation
Section one: Both of these sacrifices are of lesser sanctity, and this will be expressed in some of the halakhot which we will see below. These halakhot are more lenient than those governing the most holy sacrifices which we dealt with above. 
Section two: Unlike sacrifices of most holy sanctity, which must be slaughtered north of the altar, these sacrifices can be slaughtered anywhere in the Temple courtyard. The blood is sprinkled on the altar in the same way as was done for the olah (see mishnah four).
Section three: Most holy sacrifices must be eaten within the walls of the Temple (or the curtains of the Tabernacle when the Israelites were in the desert). Lesser holy sacrifices can be eaten anywhere within the walls of the city of Jerusalem. Anyone can eat them, not just priests. These two sacrifices can be prepared in any manner and must be eaten by midnight of the night following their offering (like the hatat in mishnah three).
Section four: The breast and the thigh are raised from these sacrifices and given to the priests (see Leviticus 7:34). All of the rules that apply to the rest of the sacrifice apply to these two parts, except that these can only be eaten by priests and their households (wives, children and slaves). They can be eaten anywhere in Jerusalem, prepared in any manner and until midnight. 
