Zevahim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
1) All hatats in the Torah precede ashams, except the asham of a metzora (one with a skin affliction), because it comes to make [a person] fit.   
2) All ashams of the Torah must be two-year olds and [two] silver shekels in value, except a nazirite’s asham and the asham of a metzorah, for they are a year old, and need not be [two] silver shekels in value. 

Explanation
Section one: As we learned in mishnah two of this chapter, the hatat takes precedence over the asham because its blood is sprinkled on all four corners of the altar, whereas the blood of the asham is sprinkled on only two corners. 
There is one exception to this rule and that is the asham of the metzora (Leviticus 14:14). The blood of this asham is placed on the ear, thumb and large toe of the metzora and it purifies him from his skin affliction. This makes him fit to participate in rituals which require purity. The metzora also brings a hatat and this sacrifice is also required in order for him to be purified from his affliction. However, since it is the blood from the asham and not the blood of the hatat that is placed on his body, it takes precedence. 
Section two: The mishnah now begins to discuss some general principles with regard to the asham. The Torah describes most ashams as being “rams.” In order to be a ram the animal must be at least two years old. 
The asham must also be worth at least two silver shekels. In describing the asham brought for illegal trespass of Temple property Leviticus 5:15 states that it must be worth “shekalim” which is the plural of “shekel.” The minimum number of a plural is two, and therefore the asham ram must be worth at least two shekels.
There are two exceptions to this rule: the asham brought by the nazirite and the asham brought by the metzora. When it comes to the nazirite’s asham, Numbers 6:12 says that he must “bring a lamb (keves) in its first year as an asham.” The same word “keves” is used in Leviticus 14:12 with regard to the metzora’s asham, and hence we can learn that it too is one year old, and not two. 
If a two-year old ram is worth two shekels, then a one year old lamb is not worth two shekels (at least not usually). Therefore, the rabbis waive the requirement that these ashams, which are lambs and not rams, must be worth two silver shekels.  
