Zevahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with a case where a priest did melikah (nipping the bird) and the bird turned out to be a terefah, an animal with some flaw which would have caused it to die. Such a bird cannot be sacrificed—the question in our mishnah is does it defile in the gullet, like the nevelah (improperly slaughtered) bird. 

Mishnah Six
1) If one performed melikah, and he found it [the bird] to be a terefah: 
a) Rabbi Meir said: it does not defile in the gullet; 
b) Rabbi Judah said: it does defile in the gullet. 
2) Rabbi Meir said: if with regard to a beast, when it is carrion (a nevelah) it defiles through contact or carrying, yet slaughtering it purifies its terefah from defiling, when it comes to carrion (nevelah) of a bird which does not defile through contact or carriage, is it not logical that slaughtering would cleanse its terefah? Now, just as we have found that slaughtering, which makes it [a bird of hullin] fit for eating, cleanses its terefah from its uncleanness; so melikah (nipping), which makes it [a bird sacrifice] fit for eating, cleanses its terefah. 
3) Rabbi Yose says: it is sufficient for it to be like the nevelah of a beast, which is cleansed by slaughtering, but not by melikah (nipping).

Explanation
Section one: Rabbi Meir says that if a bird sacrifice has its head nipped (melikah) and it is found to be a terefah, it does not defile when swallowed. According to Rabbi Meir melikah purifies a terefah sacrificial bird from defiling as does a nevelah (carrion), just as slaughtering (shechitah) purifies a terefah beast from imparting carrion impurity. Rabbi Judah says that when a bird is slaughtered or nipped and it is found to be a terefah it still defiles in the gullet, as does a nevelah. 
Section two: Rabbi Meir now proceeds to argue out his position. When it comes to a beast, its nevelah (carrion—it died without having been slaughtered properly) defiles when it is touched or even when it is carried. Nevertheless, if one slaughters it and it turns out to be a terefah (an animal with some defect that would have caused it to die) it now does not defile through contact and carrying. The nevelah of a bird is less stringent for it never defiles through contact or carriage. Therefore, Rabbi Meir argues, it is logical that if one slaughters a hullin (non-sacred) bird and it turns out to be a terefah, it is purified from defiling in the way it would have had it been a nevelah (in the gullet). Rabbi Meir now proceeds with his argument. Slaughtering a hullin bird is parallel to nipping (melikah) a sacrificial bird. Both make the birds fit (for eating or sacrifice) and both cleanse the terefah from defiling in the gullet.
Section three: Rabbi Yose says that the laws concerning carrion of a bird do not need to be any more lenient than the laws concerning the carrion of a beast. Just as slaughtering and not melikah (nipping) purifies a beast’s terefah from carrion impurity (because there is no such thing as melikah with a beast) so too when it comes to birds—slaughtering purifies them from carrion impurity but not melikah. So if the bird was hullin (non-sacred) and one slaughtered it and it turned out to be a terefah it would not impart carrion impurity. But if it was a sacrificial bird and one nipped it and it turned out to be a terefah it would still impart carrion impurity. 
Again, the argumentation in this mishnah was classic mishnaic type of argumentation. While the mishnah was certainly not easy, if you want to see what type of logic the sages employed, this is a great example.   
