Zevahim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that when a sacrifice is placed on the altar, it is not taken off, even if it turned out to be unfit. Today’s mishnah discusses what types of disqualifications require that the sacrifice be left on the altar.

Mishnah Two
1) The following do not descend once they have ascended: 
a) [Sacrificial flesh] that was kept overnight, 
b) Or that which becomes unclean
c) Or that that which goes out [of its permitted boundaries],
d) Or which was slaughtered [with the intention of consuming it] after the appropriate time or outside the appropriate place; 
e) Or if unfit [persons] received and sprinkled its blood. 
2) Rabbi Judah says: that which was slaughtered at night or whose blood was spilt or whose blood went outside the curtains, if it ascended, it must descend. 
3) Rabbi Shimon says: it does not descend, because Rabbi Shimon says: anything whose disqualification arose in sanctity, the sacred [altar] receives it; if its disqualification did not arise in sanctity, the sacred [altar] does not receive it.

Explanation
Section one: If one of the following disqualifications occurs to a sacrifice and then it is put on the altar, the flesh is not removed from the altar.
A) This refers to parts of the sacrifice that are burned on the altar that were outside the Temple overnight. This disqualifies them from being sacrificed. 
B) Sacrificial flesh is subject to uncleanness.
C) Sacrificial flesh cannot be taken out of the Temple courtyard.
D) The person offering it had a disqualifying intention (see 2:2).
E) Unfit persons can receive and sprinkle the blood of a sacrifice (2:1).
Section two: Rabbi Judah lists a few other cases in which, in his opinion, the sacrifice is taken off of the altar even if it was already put up there. There are three such cases:
1) It was slaughtered at night—sacrifices must be slaughtered during the day.
2) If the blood spilled and therefore they could not sprinkle it on the altar, as is done with all sacrifices.
3) If the blood was taken out of the curtains, which is another way of saying that the blood was taken out of the Temple courtyard. 
Section three: Rabbi Shimon disagrees with Rabbi Judah concerning the last category—the blood taken out of the courtyard. He holds that only if the disqualification occured “in sanctity” meaning within the Temple courtyard does the sacrifice not descend from the altar. If the disqualification occurred outside of the sacred Temple courtyard, then the sacred altar does not receive it, and it must be taken down.
Tomorrow’s mishnah will explain what disqualifications occur outside the Temple’s courtyard.    
