Zevahim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
1) [As for an ox] that had sexual relations with a woman or one with whom a man had sexual relations; or an animal set aside [for idolatry], or that had been worshipped [as an idol]; or that was the fee of a whore, or [a dog's] exchange; or that was kilayim; or a terefah; or an animal born through caesarean section, if one offered any of these outside, he is not liable, because it says, “Before the Tabernacle of the Lord” (Leviticus 17:4): whatever is not eligible to come before the Tabernacle of the Lord, one is not liable on its account. 
2) [As for] blemished animals, whether with permanent blemishes or with passing blemishes, if one offers them outside, he is exempt. 
a) Rabbi Shimon says: [if one offers] animals with permanent blemishes, he is exempt; [if one offers] animals with passing blemishes, he violates a negative commandment. 
3) [As for] turtledoves before their time and young pigeons after their time, if one offered them outside, he is exempt. 
a) Rabbi Shimon says: [if one offers] young pigeons after their time, he is exempt; turtledoves before their time, he violates a negative commandment. 
4) [One who offers] an animal together with its young [on the same day], and [one who offers] an animal before its time, is not liable.  
a) Rabbi Shimon says: he violates a negative commandment. 
5) For Rabbi Shimon would say: whatever is eligible to come [onto the altar] later entails a negative commandment, but does not entail karet.  
a) But the sages say: whatever does not entail karet also does not entail a negative commandment.

Explanation 
Section one: All of the animals on this list were explained in 8:1, so for a more detailed explanation, look there. None of these animals can be sacrificed and they all became unfit to be put onto the altar outside the Temple. Since none of these can be sacrificed, one who offers one of them up outside the Temple is not liable.
Section two: Blemished animals cannot be offered as sacrifices. Animals that have permanent blemishes will never be able to be used as sacrifices whereas animals that have passing blemishes are only temporarily disqualified. According to the sages (the first opinion in the mishnah), since the animal cannot now be sacrificed in the Temple, one is not liable if one offers it outside the Temple.
Rabbi Shimon says that if one offers up outside the Temple an animal that is only temporarily disqualified from being used as a sacrifice on the Temple’s altar, he has transgressed the negative commandment found in Deuteronomy 12:13, “Take care not to sacrifice your burnt offerings in any place” but he has not transgressed the commandment found in Leviticus 17:8-9, which is punished with karet. This seems to be Rabbi Shimon’s way of answering why the Torah repeats the same prohibition, once in Leviticus 17 and once in Deuteronomy 12. The case in Deuteronomy refers to a person who sacrifices outside the Temple an animal that is only temporarily disqualified from being put on the altar inside the Temple. 
Section three: Turtledoves are valid as sacrifices only when they are older (about three months) whereas pigeons are valid as sacrifices when they are younger (before three months). According to the sages, if one sacrifices either of these outside the Temple at a time when it cannot be sacrificed in the Temple, he is not liable. Rabbi Shimon holds that since a turtledove that is not yet three months will eventually become fit for the altar, if one sacrifices it outside the Temple, he is liable for transgressing a negative commandment although he is exempt from karet. 
Section four: Leviticus 22:28 prohibits one from slaughtering a mother animal and her offspring on the same day. If one already slaughtered one of these animals, he can’t then slaughter the other and the other animal would not be fit on that day to be a sacrifice. Thus, according to the sages, if one offers up the other animal outside the Temple he is liable. Rabbi Shimon says that since the animal can be offered on the next day, if he offers it on the day its mother/offspring was already slaughtered, he has transgressed a negative commandment.
It is also forbidden to sacrifice an animal before it is eight days old (Leviticus 22:27). The same rules apply here: the sages hold that he is exempt if he sacrifices it outside the Temple whereas Rabbi Shimon holds that he has transgressed a negative commandment, since the animal can be sacrificed after it is eight days old. 
Section five: In this section we see the debate that serves as the basis for the particular debates in sections 2-4. Rabbi Shimon holds that Deuteronomy 12:13 applies to one who sacrifices an animal outside the Temple that cannot currently be sacrificed on the altar, but that will be fit later on. The other sages disagree and hold that if karet (Leviticus 17) doesn’t apply, then he doesn’t transgress the negative commandment found in Deuteronomy either.    
