Zevahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction
This mishnah deals with blood from a hatat, which should be sprinkled on the outer altar (found in the Temple courtyard). 

Mishnah Twelve 
1) If the blood of a hatat was received in two goblets and one of them went outside [the Temple courtyard], the inside one is fit.   
2) If one of them entered within [the Sanctuary]:
a) Rabbi Yose the Galilean declares the outer one fit.   
b) The sages disqualify it. 
3) Rabbi Yose the Galilean: if the place where an intention [directed to it] disqualifies, i.e. without, you do not treat what is left [inside] as what went out; then the place where an intention [directed to it] does not disqualify, i.e. within, is it not logical that we do not treat what is left [outside] as what entered within? 
4) If it entered within to make atonement, even if he [the priest] did not make atonement, it is unfit, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. 
a) Rabbi Shimon said: [it is not unfit] unless he makes atonement. 
b) Rabbi Judah said: if he took it in unwittingly, it is fit. 
5) For all unfit blood which was put on the altar, the head plate [of the high priest] does not propitiate, save for the unclean, for the headplate propitiates for that which is unclean, but does not propitiate for what goes out.  

Explanation
Section one: In this case the outside one is rendered invalid but the inside one, which never left the Temple courtyard, remains fit. 
Section two: When one of the two goblets goes into the Sanctuary, it becomes unfit, as we learned in yesterday’s mishnah. The debate is over whether the goblet of blood that remained outside of the Sanctuary, in the Temple courtyard (where it belongs) is also unfit. Rabbi Yose the Galilean argues that the outer one remains fit, but the sages say that in this case, since part of the blood which came from the animal became unfit by going inside the Sanctuary, it all becomes unfit. 
Section three: Rabbi Yose now argues his position. Had the priest thought to bring the blood of the hatat outside of the Temple, it is already invalid. Nevertheless, if one of the goblets is brought out of the Temple, the other goblet remains valid, as we learned in section one. In contrast, had he thought to bring the blood into the Sanctuary he has not rendered the sacrifice unfit. Therefore, Rabbi Yose argues, all the more so if he actually brings one of the goblets into the Sanctuary, the other one remains fit. 
It is interesting that the other rabbis do not respond to this argument. It seems likely that they just don’t believe that this argument works here—rather, once part of the blood goes into the Sanctuary, all of the blood is rendered unfit no matter where it is.
Section four: In this section, there is a debate over whether blood that enters the sanctuary is always rendered unfit, or only under certain circumstances. According to Rabbi Eliezer, if he brought the blood into the Sanctuary in order to sprinkle it on the golden altar, then it is unfit, even if he did not end up sprinkling it. 
Rabbi Shimon says that it is not rendered unfit until he actually sprinkles it on the altar. 
Rabbi Judah is even more lenient. If he brings the blood in accidentally, it is not rendered unfit, even if he sprinkles it on the altar. It is unfit only if he intentionally brings it in and sprinkles it on the altar.
Section five: According to Exodus 28:38, the head plate worn by the high priest “bears the iniquity of any holy things (sacrifices).” The mishnah explains that the head plate propitiates, meaning cleanses, in a case where a sacrifice becomes impure. In such a case the sacrifice will count, even though it should not have been offered. However, it does not propitiate for a sacrifice whose blood has gone out of the Temple courtyard. If they offer such a sacrifice, it is invalid.   
