Hagigah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
From here until the end of the tractate the mishnah teaches laws of purity and impurity. The reason why these laws are here is that when Israel would come to Jerusalem and to the Temple for the festival they had to be pure in order to eat their sacrifices.  They would immerse their vessels to purify them before Yom Tov. During the festival all of the people of Israel acted like the Pharisees and were extra stringent on eating only while in a state of ritual purity.  
Our mishnah deals with the topic of washing hands versus washing one’s whole body. There are some foods which only required one’s hands to be washed while holier foods required one to immerse one’s entire body.
 
Mishnah Five
They wash hands for [eating] unconsecrated [food], and [second] tithe, and for terumah [heave-offering].
But for sacred food they must immerse [their hands in a mikveh].  
With regard to the [water of] purification, if one’s hands became impure, one’s [whole] body is impure. 

Explanation
Section one:  One of the things that the Pharisees were famous for was washing their hands before they ate even regular unconsecrated food.  There is nothing wrong with eating impure food but the Pharisees wished to preserve the laws of purity on a higher level than was required.  During the festival, in Jerusalem everyone was expected to purify their hands before eating, even unconsecrated food.  Second tithe and terumah are holy and therefore they certainly require one to wash one’s hands before being touched. The handwashing referred to here is done with water poured over one’s hands with a vessel. 
Section two: Before eating sacred food, such as the thanksgiving offering eaten by Israelites and the sin and guilt offerings eaten by the priests the hands must be immersed in a valid mikveh.  In the Talmud they debate what this section refers to. According to one opinion this clause refers only to hands which were certainly made impure.  Unless one knows that one’s hands had become impure, it would be sufficient to wash them with a vessel.  According to the other opinion, in all cases before one eats sacrificial meat one must wash hands by immersing them in the mikveh.
Section three:  The “water of purification” refers to the water with the red heifer’s ashes in it used to purify people who had contracted a serious level of impurity.  One who comes to prepare the waters must be completely pure. If his hands had become impure then his whole body was also considered impure and he would have to immerse his whole body.  
