Hagigah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah delineates who is obligated to make the pilgrimage to Jerusalem on the three festivals.  Exodus 23:17 says, “Three times a year all your male shall appear before the Sovereign, the Lord.”  Our mishnah elaborates on this verse.

Mishnah One 
All are obligated to appear [at the Temple], except a deaf person,  an imbecile and a minor, a person of unknown sex [tumtum], a hermaphrodite, women, unfreed slaves, a lame person, a blind person, a sick person, an aged person, and one who is unable to go up on foot.  
Who is a minor?  
Whoever is unable to ride on his father’s shoulders and go up from Jerusalem to the Temple Mount, the words of Bet Shammai.
But Bet Hillel say: whoever is unable to hold his father’s hand and go up from Jerusalem to the Temple Mount, as it is said: “Three regalim” (Exodus 23:14).  

Explanation
Section one:  I will explain each category of persons exempted from making the pilgrimage one at a time. 
A deaf person, an imbecile and a minor: These three people are usually lumped together because they are not considered to have “awareness/intelligence” (daat).  They are exempt from all commandments, this one included.
A person of unknown sex [tumtum], a hermaphrodite, women:  Exodus 23:17 says that only males are obligated.  The mishnah therefore exempts anyone whose sex as a male is not certain.  A tumtum is a person with neither male nor female genitalia.  A hermaphrodite has both.  Since neither is a certain male, neither is obligated. 
Unfreed slaves:  Slaves are not obligated for any mitzvah from which a woman is exempt.
A lame person, a blind person, a sick person, an aged person, and one who is unable to go up on foot:  Except for the blind person, the other people in this list will have great difficulty in walking up to the Temple Mount.  Since the word for festival is “regel” which also means “leg,” these people are exempt.  The blind person is exempt because the Torah says that the mitzvah is “to be seen” there. Since the blind person cannot see, he does not have to be seen.
Section two:  Bet Hillel and Bet Shammai debate the age at which a minor is obligated to make the pilgrimage.  According to Bet Shammai, as long as the child can ride on his father’s shoulders he must go to the Temple.  Shammai (and his eponymous house) is generally strict when it comes to the observance of commandments by children. For instance, Shammai made a sukkah for his infant son, and he wanted the same son to fast on Yom Kippur.  For Shammai, as long as the child can physically perform the commandment, he must do so.  
Bet Hillel holds that the child must be able to walk on his own.  This is derived from the fact that the Torah uses the word “regel” which also means leg. The Torah’s choice of this word, as opposed to “Three pa’amim” (three times) implies that the child must be able to walk on his own.  On a perhaps deeper level, Bet Hillel holds that the mitzvah is for the person to go there on his own, through the power of his own body.  Having someone else carry one there is simply not a fulfillment of the mitzvah.  


