Hagigah, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
In the previous two mishnayot we learned that the rules regarding eating “sacred things,” namely sacrifices, are more stringent than the rules regarding eating terumah.   Our mishnah teaches several more aspects in which eating sacred things is treated more stringently.

Mishnah One
Greater stringency applies to sacred things than to terumah, that they may immerse vessels within vessels [together] for terumah, but not for sacred things. 
The outside and inside and handle [of a vessel are regarded as separate] for terumah, but not for sacred things.   
One that carries anything possessing midras-uncleanness may carry [at the same time] terumah, but not sacred things. 
The garments of those who eat terumah posses midras-uncleanness for [those who eat] sacred things.   
The rule [for the immersion of garments] for [those who would eat terumah is not the same as the rule for [those who would eat] sacred things: for in the case of sacred things, he must [first] untie [any knots in the unclean garment], dry it [if it is wet, then] immerse it, and afterwards retie it; but in case of terumah, it may [first] be tied and afterwards immersed.

Explanation
Section one: When it comes to immersing impure vessels in order to purify them, if they are going to be used to hold terumah, one vessel may be immersed inside another vessel.  If the vessel is going to be used for sacrifices, then the vessels cannot be immersed one inside the other.
Section two:  When it comes to terumah, each part of the vessel is considered as being separate.  So if an impure thing touches the handle of the vessel, only the handle is impure and the contents inside the vessel are still pure.  If something touches the outside of the vessel, only the outside is impure and not the inside.  Finally, if something impure touches the inside only the inside is impure.  When it comes to sacred things, if one part of the vessel is impure, the whole vessel is impure and will cause other things to become impure as well.  
Section three:  I explained “midras-impurity” in yesterday’s mishnah.  Today’s mishnah teaches that if someone is holding an object that had become impure through midras (someone sat, stood, lied or applied pressure on it) he can hold in his other hand terumah. The vessel does not make him impure such that he makes the terumah impure.  However, he cannot hold sacred things at the same time.  
Section four:  This is the exact same halakhah as that found in section three of yesterday’s mishnah.
Section five:  When one wants to immerse something to be used for sacred things must first untie all of the knots, dry them all off, then he may immerse it and then once it’s been immersed he may retie the knots. In contrast, if a vessel is going to be used for terumah, the knots don’t have to be taken out before it is immersed.


