Hagigah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
During the festival the am haaretz, the uneducated “person of the land” is believed with regard to issues of purity far more than he is during the rest of the year.  The first part of our mishnah deals with how far this trustworthiness extends.
The second part deals with the period after the festival has passed and with the question of how to cope with the fact that there have been people in the Temple courtyard who may have been impure.
  
Mishnah Seven 
One who opened his jar [of wine] or broke into his dough [to sell them] on account of the festival [and an am haaretz touched the wine or dough]:
Rabbi Judah says: he may finish [selling them after the festival];   
But the sages say: he may not finish.  
When the festival was over, they undertook the purification of the Temple court. 
If the festival ended on Friday, they did not undertake [the purification of the Temple court] because of the honor of the Shabbat.   
Rabbi Judah said: even not on Thursday, for the priests are not free.

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah is addressed to a store owner who is cautious about matters of purity. He is what is called a haver or an associate, a member of the rabbinic circle, the opposite of an am haaretz.  During the festival he opens up jugs of wine and he breaks into prepared dough to sell these products to customers for their use during the festival.  Some of the customers are amei haaretz and they touch the wine and dough. We have already stated that during the festival the am haaretz is trusted to say that he is pure. The question is, can the store owner continue to sell these items after the festival as if the amei haaretz really were pure.  
Rabbi Judah says that he can.  According to Rabbi Judah, since we assume that the am haaretz was pure during the festival, we can assume that the wine and dough are pure even after the festival.
The other sages disagree.  During the festival they are believed not so much because we are sure that the am haaretz is pure but because the sages wished to be lenient during the festival.  We might even say that the sages wished to be lenient in order to encourage all of the people from the land to participate in the festival and its sacrifices.  However, when the festival was over the rules return to normal and we must be concerned lest the wine or dough had been made impure.
Section two:   When the festival was over they had to face the fact that the people may have made the Temple’s vessels impure. The trustworthiness bequeathed to everyone during the festival was over.  They would then begin to purify the Temple’s vessels. How they did so will be described in tomorrow’s mishnah.  If the festival was over on Friday, meaning that Thursday was the last day of the festival, the priests would not have had time on Friday to purify the vessels because they were busy preparing for Shabbat.  Therefore they would wait until Sunday to purify the vessels.  According to Rabbi Judah, even if the festival was over on Wednesday, they wouldn’t begin the purification until Sunday.  On Thursday the priests were not available because they were cleaning out all of the ashes that had accumulated on the altar during the entire festival. They would not have had time on Thursday to purify the vessels.  On Friday they were busy preparing for Shabbat.   

