Hagigah, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
As I have explained in the previous mishnayot, the pilgrimage offering is a wholly burnt offering and is not eaten, whereas the celebratory offering is a thanksgiving offering and is eaten.  Our mishnah gives four different possibilities for how much of each offering a person should bring.

Mishnah Five
He that has many people to eat [with him] and little money, brings many thanksgiving-offerings and few burnt-offerings.
[He that has] a lot of money and few to eat [with him] brings many burnt-offerings and few thanksgiving-offerings. 
[He that has] little of either, for him is it is said:  “One ma'ah of silver’, ‘two pieces of silver.”  
He that has a lot of both, of him it is said: “Every man as he is able, according to the blessing that the Lord your God has bestowed upon you” (Deuteronomy 16:17).

Explanation
Section one:  If a person has a lot of people he needs to feed and not a lot of money with which to buy the animals to use as sacrifices, he should spend more money on the edible thanksgiving offerings and less on the burnt offerings.
Section two:  If he has a lot of money and wishes to spend it on sacrifices and he doesn’t have a lot of people to eat with him, he should spend more money on the burnt offerings.  If he buys too many thanksgiving offerings (or too large of an animal) the meat will have to be burned (not as a sacrifice but as the remnant of uneaten sacrifice).  
Section three:  If he has few people to feed and little money, he should buy the minimum amount of each sacrifice.  Our mishnah makes reference to mishnah 2 above where Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel debated the minimum amount for each sacrifice.
Section four: If he is lucky enough to have brought a lot of people with him on the pilgrimage, and to have a lot of money, then he has been blessed by God. The mishnah quotes the verse which says that each brings according to his own blessing, meaning he can bring as many sacrifices as he wants.     


