Hagigah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Atzeret (the rabbinic term for the festival of Shavuot) is the only festival that lasts for just one day.  Since Bet Shammai holds that the wholly burnt offering brought as the pilgrimage offering cannot be offered on Yom Tov but they agree that this sacrifice must be offered at some point, the question must be asked, when should it be brought.

Mishnah Four
Atzeret (Shavuot) which fell on a Friday:
Bet Shammai say: the day of the slaughter [of the wholly burnt offerings] is after Shabbat. 
And Bet Hillel say: the day of the slaughter is not after Shabbat.   
They agree, however, that if it falls on Shabbat, the day of the slaughter is after Shabbat.   
The high priest does not [in that case] put on his [special] garments, and mourning and fasting are permitted, in order not to confirm the view of those who say that Atzeret is after Shabbat. 

Explanation
Section one:  Since Bet Shammai holds that the wholly burnt offering cannot be brought on Yom Tov itself, they have to posit that there is a “day of the slaughter” that comes the day afterward Atzeret.  Bet Hillel says that there is no special “day of the slaughter” because the sacrifice is brought on Atzeret itself.
Section two:  If Atzeret falls on Shabbat, then Bet Hillel agrees that the sacrifice is offered the day after because the sacrifice of the hagigah and the pilgrimage wholly burnt offering do not override the prohibition of slaughtering an animal on Shabbat. This is because they can be sacrificed on another day.
Section three:  Perhaps the bitterest dispute between the Sadducees and Pharisees was over the date of Atzeret.  The Sadducees held that the Omer began to be brought on the day after Shabbat, hence Shavuot would always fall on Sunday, seven weeks later. The Pharisees/rabbis held that the Omer began to be brought on the second day of Pesah, and hence the day of the week of Shavuot would vary from year to year depending upon the day of the week upon which the first day of Pesah fell.  We just learned that if Atzeret fell on Shabbat, they would slaughter the wholly-burnt offerings on Sunday. The problem this creates is that people will think that the halakhah is like the Sadducees.  To avoid creating this impression, the rabbis distinguished between this day of slaughter and a normal festival in several ways which would have been evident to the public. First of all the high priest would not wear his eight special garments that he normally wears while performing his worship service. Second, mourning and fasting was permitted. People who saw these changes would understand that the only reason that they were offering the sacrifices on Sunday was that they could not be offered on Shabbat. They would not think that the sages were actually postponing Shavuot to Sunday.  
   

