Sukkah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with the recitation of Hallel and “rejoicing”, two mitzvoth which one fulfills on all eight days of the festival.  The second section deals with the sukkah in which one dwells for seven days but not on Shmini Atzeret, the eighth day of Sukkot.

Mishnah Eight
The Hallel and rejoicing are on all eight days:
How is this so? This teaches that one is obligated for the Hallel, for rejoicing and for honoring the festival on the last day, just as he is on all the other days of the festival.
The sukkah is for seven days. 
How so? Once he finished eating [his meal on the seventh day], he should not untie his sukkah, but he removes its contents from the time of minhah and onwards in honor of the last day of the festival.

Explanation
Section one:  On all eight days of Sukkot and Shmini Atzeret the full Hallel is recited.  This is different from Pesah on which a full Hallel is recited on the first day only.  “Rejoicing” has a general meaning in that one is supposed to be happy on the festival, as it says in Leviticus 23:40, “And you shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days.”  Despite the fact that the Torah specifies “seven days” the rabbis expanded this to include Shmini Atzeret.  “Rejoicing” also has a more specific ritual sense—during the festival one should bring sacrifices and eat them because eating meat, a much rarer luxury in mishnaic times than it is now, was considered one of the consummate signs of rejoicing.
Section two:  While the Hallel and rejoicing are for the full eight days, one sits in the sukkah for only seven days. Shmini Atzeret is distinguished by the fact that we do not sit in the sukkah.  The mishnah teaches that one should eat his last meal in the sukkah for lunch on the seventh day of Sukkot and then start to bring his nice things, his dishes, his bed, his couch etc., into the house as a sign of respect for Shmini Atzeret.  However, he should not undo his sukkah because he might still need to eat in there if he wants to eat again before the day is over.  Taking the sukkah down before Sukkot is completely over might also be perceived as a sign of disrespect for Sukkot.  It might make it look like he couldn’t wait to take down his sukkah.    	

