Sukkah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The Torah says calls an etrog “the beautiful fruit of the tree” or “the fruit of the beautiful tree.”  Due to the mention of the word “beautiful (hadar)" the rabbis were more demanding regarding the physical perfection of the etrog than of the other three species.  Indeed, to this day people are very concerned that they should have a beautiful “mehudar” etrog.  An extreme example of this is the man who paid one thousand dollars for an etrog in the movie “Ushpizin,” a movie which I recommend.  

Mishnah Six
If a rash spread out on a majority of it, or if its pitom is removed, if it is peeled, split, or perforated so that any part is missing, it is invalid. 
If a rash spread out on a lesser part of it, if its stem was missing, or if it is perforated but no part of it is missing, it is valid. 
An etrog [which is black] as an Ethiopian is invalid. 
An etrog which is green as a leek: 
Rabbi Meir declares it valid 
And Rabbi Judah declares it invalid.

Explanation
Sections one and two:  If there is a rash, which might refer to some discoloration, or things like warts (not just bumps, which are considered desirable in an etrog) on a majority of the etrog, than it is invalid.  The pitom is the funny looking mushroom which sticks out of the ends of some etrogim (Google pitom and etrog and you can find some nice pictures). I should note that not all etrogim have a pitom.  An etrog without a pitom is valid, indeed in some ways it is preferable because it is less likely to become invalid.  The etrog is invalid only if the pitom was there and was then removed. However, if its stem, the part of it which attached it to the tree is removed, it is still valid.  The stem is basically not part of the etrog.
Likewise it is invalid if it is peeled, split or any part of it is missing.  
Section three:  A black etrog is invalid.
Section four:  There is a debate over the green etrog, Rabbi Meir declaring it valid and Rabbi Judah invalidating it.  In Israel one sees many green etrogim, which never fails to surprise my family (as does the pitom-less etrog).  

