Sukkah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Two

Introduction
There are two completely separate topics addressed in this mishnah. The first deals with a person who supports his sukkah on bedposts. 
The second deals with the necessary thickness and orderliness of the skhakh.

Mishnah Two
One who supports his sukkah with the posts of a bed, it is valid. 
Rabbi Judah says: if it cannot stand on its own, it is invalid.
A disorderly sukkah (and one) whose shade is more than its sun is valid. 
One whose [skhakh] is thick like [the roof] of a house is valid, even though the stars cannot be seen through it.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case a person used his bedposts to support his sukkah. The bedposts served as the poles upon which the skhakh rested.  The sages say that it is valid but Rabbi Judah requires a structure that cannot be carried around and hence he invalidates it.  We should note that on several occasions we have seen that Rabbi Judah validates permanent like structures for a sukkah (see 1:1, 1:7).  Here we see that he invalidates portable sukkot.
Section two: There are two readings of this mishnah.  According to the reading which has the words “and one,” the mishnah discusses two matters:  1) a disorderly sukkah and 2) a sukkah whose skhakh provides more shade than the sun that it allows in.  A disorderly sukkah according to this explanation is a sukkah whose skhakh looks disorganized.  Some of it is poking up and some of it is sticking down.  As long as there is more shade than sun, this sukkah is valid. 
According to the other explanation and reading of the mishnah the words “and one” are not part of the mishnah.  Rather the mishnah refers to a sukkah without a lot of skhakh. Such a sukkah is valid as long as the shade is more than the sun.
Section three:  Despite common belief, the skhakh of a sukkah can be so thick that one cannot even see anything through it.  However, the halakhah is that although such a sukkah is valid, it is not desirable. One should strive to have skhakh that is not quite this thick.  


