Sukkah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
In the time of the Mishnah not every person in the synagogue would recite the Hallel on his own, as we normally do today. Rather, the leader would recite part, or perhaps most of the verse and the rest of the congregation would respond with the second half of the verse, or with “Halleluyah.”  In this way, the leader would aid the congregation in fulfilling their obligation to recite Hallel.  
In this mishnah we learn that slaves, women and minors cannot aid a free adult male in his recitation of the Hallel because they themselves are not obligated to recite Hallel.  This fits in with two general rules:  1) women and slaves are exempt from positive time-bound commandments; 2) a person who is not obligated for something cannot fulfill that obligation on behalf of someone who is.

Mishnah Ten 
One who has a slave, a woman, or a minor read [the Hallel] to him, he must repeat after them what they say, and a curse be upon him. 
If an adult recited to him, he repeats after him [only] Halleluyah.

Explanation
Section one:  The mishnah describes an adult man who doesn’t know how to recite Hallel and therefore needs someone else to recite it for him.  Usually, this would be done by another free adult male, but for some reason, this person cannot find another free adult male who knows how to recite the Hallel.  He therefore turns to a slave, a woman or a minor who does know how to recite Hallel.  This is allowed, except unlike a normal case where the person would only answer “Halleluyah” (as is the case in section two), in this case he must repeat the entire verse after the slave, woman or minor.  In this way, he fulfills the obligation himself and they do not fulfill it on his behalf.
It is interesting to note that it sounds like the rabbis had to confront the possibility that a slave, woman or minor would be more educated, at least religiously, than a free man.  It is hard to know how realistic this situation was or how often it might arise. Nevertheless, it is at least a theoretical possibility.  The mishnah is clearly disturbed by the man’s lack of knowledge and hence it says that a man who allows this situation to happen should be cursed.  
Section two:  This is the normal way in which Hallel was recited during the time of the Mishnah and Talmud.  
