Sukkah, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that a person who sleeps underneath a bed inside the sukkah has not fulfilled his obligation to dwell in the sukkah. This is because the bed, which is not valid skhakh acts as a barrier between him and the valid skhakh above. 
We should note that in mishnaic and talmudic times it was clearly customary and obligatory to sleep inside the sukkah.  The practice of not sleeping in the sukkah has its origins in cold medieval Europe where a person would truly suffer by sleeping in the sukkah.

Mishnah One
He who sleeps under a bed in the sukkah has not fulfilled his obligation.   
Rabbi Judah said: we had the custom to sleep under a bed in the presence of the elders, and they didn’t say anything to us. 
Rabbi Shimon said: it happened that Tabi, the slave of Rabba Gamaliel, used to sleep under the bed.   And Rabban Gamaliel said to the elders, “Have you seen Tabi my slave, who is a scholar, and knows that slaves are exempt from [the law of] a sukkah, therefore he sleep under the bed.” And incidentally we learned that he who sleeps under a bed has not fulfilled his obligation. 

Explanation
Section one:  The problem with sleeping under a bed inside a sukkah is that there is a covering which creates a barrier over the person so that the skhakh is not what is covering him.  In the Talmud they restrict this halakhah to a bed that is ten handbreadths high, the minimum height of a sukkah.  Sleeping under such a bed would be akin to sleeping in an invalid sukkah inside a valid sukkah. However, one may sleep under a smaller bed and still fulfill one’s obligation to dwell in the sukkah.  Note that this is what allows one to sleep under a blanket in the sukkah.  The blanket is less than ten handbreadths from the body.   
Section two: Rabbi Judah holds that the bed does not serve as a barrier between him and the sukkah and hence one who sleeps under a bed has fulfilled his obligation.  Interestingly, Rabbi Judah notes that this was actually their custom.  It might be that students visiting their rabbis on Sukkot, which seems to have been a norm on festivals, found the sukkot quite crowded.  Hence, some people would sleep under the beds, causing the question to arise: is this legitimate behavior?
Section three:  Rabbi Shimon agrees with the sages in section one and he brings a story to illustrate his point.  Rabban Gamaliel owned a famous slave named Tabi.  In tractate Berakhot 2:7 that Rabban Gamaliel respected his slave, and that when Tabi died he even mourned for him.  In this mishnah, Tabi exemplifies his knowledge of halakhah by sleeping under the bed in the sukkah.  He knew that he was exempt from the sukkah, as are all slaves, so he did a demonstrative act to let others know that one who sleeps under the bed has not fulfilled his sukkah obligation.      
