Sukkah, Chapter One, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction 
This mishnah contains two debates between Rabbi Eliezer and the other sages. The first concerns one who makes his sukkah by leaning one wall against the other. The second concerns the validity of reed mats as skhakh.

Mishnah Eleven
One who makes his sukkah like a cone-shaped hut or leans it against a wall: 
Rabbi Eliezer invalidates it since it has no roof, 
But the sages declare it valid.
A large reed mat:  if made for lying upon it is susceptible to [ritual] uncleanliness and is invalid as skhakh. 
If made for a skhakh, it may be used for skhakh and is not susceptible to uncleanliness. 
Rabbi Eliezer says, whether small or large: 
if it was made for reclining upon, it is susceptible to uncleanliness and is invalid as skhakh; 
if made for a covering, it is valid as a skhakh and is not susceptible to uncleanliness.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case a person made a sukkah in a cone-shape, somewhat like a teepee.  It seems that the upper sections of the walls must have been made of valid skhakh. Alternatively, he leaned a wall made of skhakh against another wall not made of skhakh, somewhat like a lean-to. Rabbi Eliezer rules that this is invalid since a sukkah needs to have a roof.  The sages rule that it is valid.  In the Talmud, they claim that the positions should be reversed, Rabbi Eliezer ruling that it is inivalid and the sages that it is invalid.  The halakhah is that these types of sukkot are invalid.  
Section two:  This section requires a few words of introduction concerning the susceptibility of objects to impurity.  Objects are susceptible to impurities if they are “vessels”.  This halakhic category includes most objects that have been fashioned to be of use for people, but not things that are used for building.  For instance a cup is susceptible to impurity but a brick is not.  In the case under discussion here, a reed mat made to be sat upon is susceptible to impurities whereas a reed mat made to be used as skhakh is not.  
According to the sages, all small mats may have been made to be sat upon and hence they are all susceptible to impurity.  We learned above in mishnah four that anything that is receptive to impurity cannot be used as skhakh. Hence, small reed mats cannot be used for skhakh.  A large reed mat may have been made either to sit upon or to use as skhakh.  Hence, its susceptibility to impurity and its validity as skhakh depend upon the intent in which it was made. If it was made to be used for sitting it cannot be used as skhakh, but if it was made to be used as skhakh then it is valid.
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer says that the size of the skhakh does not matter.  All that matters is whether the mat was made for sitting or for skhakh.  As long as it was made for skhakh it can be used as such, no matter its size.    
