Sukkah, Chapter One, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah discusses the height of the walls as well as the proximity of the skhakh to the walls.

Mishnah Nine
If he hangs walls down from above to below, if they are higher than three handbreadths from the ground, it is invalid. 
If he raises them from the bottom to the top, if they are ten handbreadths high, it is valid.
Rabbi Yose says: just as from the bottom to the top ten handbreadths [suffices] so from the top to the bottom ten handbreadths [suffice].
If he distances the skhakh three handbreadths from the walls, it is invalid. 

Explanation
Section one:  The walls of the sukkah must be ten handbreadths high.  However, there is a special rule according to which a gap of less than three handbreadths is not considered sufficient to render a sukkah invalid. Therefore, if he suspends the walls on a pole above the ground and the walls do not fully reach the ground but they are less than three handbreadths from the ground, the sukkah is valid.  In other words, we look at those three handbreadths as if they don’t exist.  Of course, the total height of the walls must be ten handbreadths, as we learn in the next section. But if the gap is larger than three handbreadths, then we can't count the walls as having reached the ground. 
Section two:  If he raises the walls from the ground upwards, the walls do not have to go all the way up to reach the skhakh.  It is sufficient for the walls to be ten handbreadths high, when measured from the ground. Ten handbreadths is about one meter high. This is the standard minimum height for matters which require a wall.  
Section three:  Rabbi Yose disagrees with the opinion in section one.  He says that the same rule concerning raising the walls from the floor to the skhakh applies if he suspends the walls from the skhakh.  As long as the walls are ten handbreadths they are valid, even if they don’t reach within three handbreadths of the ground.  To reiterate:  the debate between Rabbi Yose and the other sages is with regard to a ten handbreadth wall hanging down from the skhakh (assumedly from a pole upon which the skhakh rests) which does not reach to within three handbreadths of the ground.  Rabbi Yose says this is valid whereas the other sages say it is not.  According to the sages it must reach within three handbreadths of the ground.
Section four:  This section discusses how close the walls must be horizontally to the skhakh; the previous discussions were about their vertical distance from the skhakh.  The walls must be no less than three handbreadths from the skhakh.  Otherwise there is a three handbreadth gap in the roof of the sukkah, which would mean that that wall could count as one of the walls of the sukkah.

