Sukkah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Tractate Sukkah begins with a mishnah that is remarkably similar to the first mishnah of Eruvin.  It states the maximum and minimum height of a sukkah.  We should note that the word “sukkah” in the mishnah sometimes refers to the “skhakh”, the dead branches used to make the sukkah’s roof.  The mishnah pays far more attention to the roof of the sukkah than to its walls.
The second half of the mishnah deals with an old sukkah, one which was not built to be a sukkah for the festival of Sukkot, but was built to serve as shade in general.  In the Middle East many farmers build such structures in order to provide shade from the hot sun.  

Mishnah One
A sukkah which is more than twenty cubits high is not valid.
Rabbi Judah validates it. 
One which is not ten handbreadths high, or which does not have three walls, or which has more sun than shade, is not valid.
An old sukkah:  Bet Shammai invalidates it and Bet Hillel validates it. 
What is an “old sukkah”? Any one which he made thirty days before the festival; but if he made it for the purpose of the festival, even at the beginning of the year, it is valid.


Explanation
Section one:  The roof of the sukkah cannot be more than 20 cubits higher than the ground.  This is about 10 meters, which would make a very high sukkah.  There are several reasons provided for this in the Talmud.  At such a great height, one would not notice the skhakh, and noticing that one is sitting under skhakh is part of the experience of sitting in the sukkah.  Another possibility is that if the skhakh is above twenty cubits one will be sitting in the shade of the walls and not the shade of the skhakh.  Finally, a sukkah that is higher than twenty cubits will of necessity have to be built stronger.  As it becomes more permanent, it becomes less like a sukkah and more like a house.
As Rabbi Judah did with regard to the “post and beam” in Eruvin (see the intro to Eruvin, and the first mishnah) so too with regard to the sukkah he sets no limit as to a sukkah’s height.
Section two:  The second section of the mishnah provides three requirements that everyone agrees with. First of all, the mishnah must be 10 handbreadths high.  This is equivalent to about a meter high, still quite small. Were the sukkah smaller than ten handbreadths a person could not even sit inside it.  Secondly, the sukkah must have three walls.  Finally, the skhakh must provide more shade than the amount of sun it allows in.  
Section three:  Bet Hillel allows a person to use an old sukkah. For Bet Hillel the intention that went in to building the sukkah is not critical, what is critical is the use of the sukkah.  In contrast, for Bet Shammai an old sukkah, one that was not made with the intent to use it on the festival, is invalid, even if it matches all of the other halakhic criteria.  However, Beth Shammai agrees that any sukkah that was made thirty days before the festival is valid, since we can assume that he made it knowing that he might use it on Sukkot.  The only debate is over a sukkah that was made more than thirty days before Sukkot without the intention of using it on Sukkot.  

