Sukkah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction 
In this mishnah the sages and Rabbi Eliezer debate how many and which meals a person must eat in the sukkah during the festival.

Mishnah Six
Rabbi Eliezer says: a man is obligated to eat fourteen meals in the sukkah, one on each day and one on each night. 
But the sages say: there is no fixed number, except on the first night of the festival alone.  
Furthermore Rabbi Eliezer said: if one did not eat in the sukkah on the first night of the festival, he may make up for it on the last night of the festival.  
But the sages say: there is no compensation for this, and of this was it said: “That which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is lacking cannot be counted” (Ecclesiastes 1:15). 

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Eliezer says that a person must eat fourteen meals in the sukkah, two each day, one during the day and one at night.  In other words, eating in the sukkah is a positive commandment on each and every day.  Just as one normally eats two meals a day, so too one is commanded to eat two meals a day in the sukkah. The sages disagree and hold that one is only obligated to eat in the sukkah on the first night of sukkot.  On all other days, he may skip meals.  Of course, if he wants to eat a meal he must do so in the sukkah.  This is similar to the obligation to eat matzah.  A person must eat matzah on the first night of Pesah.  However, on every subsequent day one need not eat matzah, there is only a prohibition from eating bread.
Section two:  Rabbi Eliezer holds that one who did not eat in the sukkah on the first night may make up the missed meal by eating a festive meal on the last night of the festival, on the eve of Shmini Atzeret, the eighth day.  Although this festive meal is not eaten in the sukkah, it still counts as a replacement for the meal he missed on the first day.  In the Talmud, they question Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion.  Didn’t he say that one has to eat in the sukkah two meals every day?  If so, why does only the first meal need to be made up?  The answer seems to be that Rabbi Eliezer agrees with the other sages that the first meal is the most important one, even though the others are obligatory as well. 
There is also a question as to how one can make up a meal that was supposed to have been eaten in the sukkah, by eating a meal outside of the sukkah, where one eats on Shemini Atzeret. The answer to this seems to be that when it comes to Sukkot, Rabbi Eliezer counts the evening as following the day. Thus what we would call the first meal of Shemini Atzeret is really to Rabbi Eliezer the last meal of Sukkot.  
The sages respond to Rabbi Eliezer that a missed meal cannot be made up. They quote an often cited verse from Ecclesiastes which shows, according to its midrashic meaning, that some commandments, when not fulfilled in their proper time, cannot be made up.   
    

