Sukkah, Chapter One, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that if there is a three handbreadth horizontal gap between the skhakh and the walls the sukkah is invalid.  Today we learn that this is only true if there is a gap. If there is material in this gap separating the wall from the skhakh and the material is not valid for skhakh, then the sukkah is invalid only if the invalid skhakh is greater than four cubits.

Mishnah Ten
If [the roof of] a house is opened, and he placed skhakh over it, if there is a distance of four cubits from the wall to the covering, it is invalid. 
Similarly in the case of a courtyard which is surrounded by columns.  
A large sukkah which was surrounded with material which is invalid for skhakh, if there is a space of four cubits beneath it, it is invalid.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case a person opened a hole in the roof of his house and covered the hole with valid skhakh.  This is a valid sukkah as long as the hole is less than four cubits from the walls.  This space between the walls and skhakh is not open, but rather has a regular roof (plaster and wood).  The roof is considered as if it is part of the walls, at least for a distance of four cubits.  As an aside, I have heard of people who actually do this.  They have a retractable roof, less than four cubits from the walls and they open it up on Sukkot and have a sukkah in their house!
Section two:  The mishnah notes another possible circumstance in which this halakhah is applicable. A courtyard is surrounded by a section of columns and covered with a roof.  In such a case, the open space is slightly removed from the walls.  If he covers the open space with valid skhakh and the walls are no more than four cubits from the skhakh, then the sukkah is valid.
Section three:  This final case is pretty much the same halakhic situation as that in the first two.  Again, a person has a sukkah in which there is some distance from the skhakh in the middle to the walls on the side.  If he fills in this gap with material that is invalid for a sukkah (perhaps he does not have enough kosher material which he can use) than the sukkah is valid.  Obviously, in all three cases in the mishnah, when he goes to sit or dwell in the sukkah, he must sit underneath valid skhakh.     
