Sukkah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This mishnah teaches how the special mitzvah of the aravah (the willow) was performed in the Temple.  This ritual is not mentioned at all in the Torah and according to the majority opinion in the Talmud it is either an ancient halakhah, a prophetic enactment or a custom.  However, others derive the mitzvah of the aravah from the Torah by using a midrash.  
It seems likely that the Sadducees, a group that rivaled the Pharisees while the Temple stood, did not believe that this was indeed a mitzvah.  There is a story in the Talmud that one time the Baytusim (the name of a sect possibly synonymous with the Sadducees) covered the aravot with a heap of rocks to prevent the mitzvah from being performed.  The fact that other sects of Jews opposed this mitzvah explains why it was performed with so many verbal demonstrative acts (recitations and shofar blasts). This was a way to demonstrate that this mitzvah should be performed and a way to convince others to do so. 
After the destruction of the Temple, the custom developed to circle around the synagogue one time each day of the week while holding the lulav and seven times on Hoshanah Rabbah, the last day of Sukkot.

Mishnah Five 
The mitzvah of the aravah—how was it [performed]?
There was a place below Jerusalem called Moza.  They went down there and gathered tall branches of aravot and then they came and stood them up at the sides of the altar, and their tops were bent over the altar. They then sounded a teki’ah [long blast], a teru’ah [staccato blast] and again a teki’ah.  
Every day they went round the altar once, saying, “O Lord, save us, O Lord, make us prosper” (Psalms 118: 25). 
Rabbi Judah says: “Ani vaho, save us.” 
On that day they went round the altar seven times. 
When they departed, what did they say? “O altar, beauty is to you! O altar, beauty is to you!” 
Rabbi Eliezer said: [they would say,] “To the Lord and to you, O altar, to the Lord and to you, O altar.”

Explanation
Section one:  Most of this ritual is self-explanatory.   The aravot would need to be about 11 cubits high (more than five meters) so that their tops would go over the altar which was ten meters high.  The shofar blasts were meant to give the ritual great publicity and great authority. They were also a sign of rejoicing.
Section two:  While circling the altar the people would recite Psalms 118:25, which is a plea to God to save us and bring us prosperity. Since Sukkot is the holiday on which we pray for the beginning of the rainy season, it is likely that the prosperity which they were praying for was rain.
Section three: According to Albeck, Rabbi Judah pronounced the beginning of this verse differently.  Whereas we pronounce it “ana adonay”, he would pronounce it “ani vaho.”  However, the meaning of “ani vaho” is not clear.  Others read “ani vehu” which would mean “I and God”, meant to express the idea that God also participates in the sorrows and sufferings of His people Israel.  
Section four:  On the seventh day they would circle the altar seven times.  This is the origins of “Hoshanah Rabbah”, the last day of Sukkot on which we circle the Torah, which is placed in the middle of the synagogue, seven times.  
Section five:  The end of this seven day ritual was also accompanied by recitations, again meant to emphasize the importance of the aravah ritual and our sadness that the joyous occasion is completed.  The people are actually paying homage, in a sense, to the altar. Through the altar the people of Israel receive atonement and hence it is desirable for us to praise it.  We should note that we often think of Judaism as an anti-iconic religion—God is transcendent, has no body or image, and we therefore deemphasize religious artifacts and emphasize intentions, emotions and our intellect.  While this is not the space to enter into a thorough examination of these issues, it does seem to me that this is largely a Maimonidean concept of Judaism.  In our mishnah we see that most rabbis had no problem directly speaking to the altar itself.  Rabbi Eliezer adds that the praise should not go only to the altar, but to God as well.        

