Sukkah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
According to some sages, three of the species (all except the etrog) must be bound together.  Our mishnah debates whether the cord used to bind the three together must be from the same species as one of the three species. The problem with it being from another type of tree is that when he picks up the lulav, he will be carrying five species—the four mandated ones and the one from which he made his cord. This might be a violation of the prohibition of adding on to the Torah’s commandments.  The Torah says four species—it would be prohibited to add a fifth.

Mishnah Eight
They may not bind the lulav except with [strands of] its own species, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Meir says: it may be bound even with a cord.   
Rabbi Meir said: it happened that the men of Jerusalem used to bind their lulavs with strands of gold. 
They answered him: but they bound it with [strands of] its own species underneath [the strands of gold].

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Judah holds that the lulav must be bound together.  The consequence of this rule is that the binding is an integral part of the lulav—without it one cannot perform the mitzvah. Since the binding is integral to the lulav, it must be made from one of the four species.  Assumedly, this would be from a string made from a palm tree.
Section two: In contrast, Rabbi Meir holds that the lulav need not be bound together.  Since the binding is unnecessary, it is not part of the lulav.  Therefore, it can come from any species.
Section three: Rabbi Meir defends his opinion by relating a story in which the people of Jerusalem bound their lulavs with strands of gold.  This proves that the binding need not be from the same type of material as the four species.  The other sages admit that those lulavs were bound with gold, but they claim that underneath the gold there was a layer of binding that was made of one of the four species.  Since this was the layer that affected the binding, only it must be from one of the four species. An alternative explanation is that “underneath” means at the bottom of the lulav. The lulav needs to be bound only at the bottom and the men of Jerusalem bound their lulavs with gold only at the top.     

