Sukkah, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah teaches a few general rules regarding what can be used as skhakh, the covering on top of the sukkah.

Mishnah Four
If he trained a vine or a gourd or ivy over [the sukkah] and put skhakh on top of it, it is not valid.   
But if the skhakh is more than them, or if he cut them, it is valid. 
This is the general rule: whatever is susceptible to [ritual] impurity and does not grow from the ground may not be used for skhakh, but whatever is not susceptible to [ritual] impurity and does grow from ground soil may be used for skhakh.

Explanation
Section one:  In this section we learn several important rules governing skhakh.  The first is that the skhakh must be detached from the ground.  If one takes living vines and trains them on top of his sukkah, the sukkah is invalid.  This is true even if he put some valid skhakh on top of the vines that were still attached to the ground. The sukkah becomes valid only if he puts more valid skhakh than the invalid attached vines, or if he cuts down the vines.  This is an important point. The only thing that makes the vines invalid is that they are still attached to the ground.
Section two:  There are two general rules presented here. The first is that the skhakh has to be something that cannot receive ritual impurity. This means that clothing, chairs, tables, dishes, sheets, etc. cannot be used as skhakh.  Basically, this includes most things that have been “made” or “fashioned” by human hands.  Branches of trees cannot become impure and hence can be used for skhakh.  Secondly, it has to be something that originally grew from the ground.  This rules out metal, stone, clay, plastic etc.  
Interestingly, these two rules, and that in the previous section, are in a sense foils for one another. The skhakh must be dead, but it must be something that was once alive.  Something has to have been done to it by human hands—it has to be cut from the ground, but not too much can be done with it—humans can’t turn it into useful instruments.  The skkakh is then “liminal”—it mediates between the natural world and the humanly created world.  So too it is above us, mediating between God and humanity.  

