Sukkah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Thirteen

Introduction
Today we don’t take the lulav on Shabbat.  However, in the time of the Mishnah if the first day of the festival fell on Shabbat, they would take the lulav, because as we learned in mishnah twelve, the taking of the lulav on the first day of Sukkot is mandatory even outside of the Temple.  Our mishnah teaches how they avoided the problem of carrying the lulav to the synagogue on Shabbat, which is clearly a transgression.

Mishnah Thirteen 
If the first day of the festival falls on Shabbat, all the people bring their lulavim to the synagogue [on Friday]. 
The next day they arise early [and come to the synagogue] and each one recognizes his own [lulav] and takes it, since the sages said “one cannot fulfill his obligation on the first day of the festival with his friend’s lulav.” 
But on the other days of the festival one may fulfill his obligation with the lulav of his fellow. 

Explanation
Section one:  In order to avoid the problem of carrying on Shabbat, the people would bring their lulavim to the synagogue on Friday and leave them there for the next day.
Section two:  The only problem with this is that a person needs to use his own lulav on the first day of the festival, because the Torah says “and you shall take for yourselves on the first day”—understood to mean that the lulav must belong to the person taking it.  If all of the lulavim were heaped together in the synagogue a person might not know which lulav is his own.  Therefore the mishnah says that everyone must be able to recognize his own lulav.  
Section three: The verse which implies that the lulav must belong to the person taking it refers only to the first day of the festival. After this day a person may fulfill his obligation with someone else’s lulav.  The result is that if Shabbat falls on another day of the festival, not on the first day, they need not recognize which lulav belongs to them. They therefore would bring their lulav to the synagogue on Friday but they wouldn't have to worry about recognizing their own lulav.   

