General Issues

1. I used the Albeck edition of the Mishnah to check  the hebrew. I am not sure if that is the edition you are using and how many of the difference i found were just variants and how many were actually mistakes. 

2. Punctuation at the end of each mishnah in hebrew  is currently inconsistent. Chapters 1 and 5 have periods, Chapters 2 and 3 have sof pasuks and Chapter 4 has both. 
	They can all be turned into periods. 

3. Periods and Commas inside/outside quotation marks is currently inconsistent. American conventions would put all periods and commas inside the quote marks, while the British conventions would generally have them outside the quotation marks unless the punctuation is part of the quote (generally only when quoting a full sentence). For the most part you seem to be putting periods within the quotes and commas outside the quotes. I have never heard of that punctuation convention but even if that is the system you are going for there are a few mistakes. I generally prefer the look of the American system but that is just my opinion.
	If you have the energy to turn everything into American system, great. 

4. Line breaks in the hebrew text sometimes matches the line breaks of the english and sometimes the hebrew is all in one large block. This should also be made consistent.
	Okay. 

5. Contractions: for the most part you avoid contractions but sometimes you use them. They may be stylistically appropriate some of the times they are used but I am pointing them all out in case you want to change them.
	Don't worry about this. 

Individual Pages
	I am going to erase the corrections I don't think need to be made. Anything I leave can be corrected.  BTW, these page numbers are not the same as those in the copy from which I'm working. 

pg 5
Explanation: 1st line: there shouldn't be a space between “cubit” and the “s” following.

pg 6
Section two: 3rd line: “If the sukkah was than” should read “If the sukkah was less than” 

pg 9
Hebrew text: 1st line: "הקיסום" should be " הקיסוס"

pg 10
7th line: “skkakh” should be “skhakh”

pg 12
Hebrew last line: Need a period at the end.

pg 13
Hebrew first line: tsere should be under the zayin in "מעזיבה" instead of a chirek

pg 14
Explanation Section one third line: “great” should be “greater” 

pg 16
Section four last line: I think that “could  count” needs to be changed to “could not count” for this sentence to make sense.

pg 18
5th line:for clarity I think something should be added after “than the sukkah is valid.” to make it clear that it must be less than 4 cubits.
	Fix the line to read: then the sukkah is valid, as long as this material is less than four cubits. 

pg 20
Header: Needs to say Mishnah Eleven in hebrew and English, not Mishnah Ten 
Section two 3rd line: the period after “vessels.” should remain in the quotes. 

pg 22
Hebrew text: currently it is all one big block (and for the rest of the chapter) should the breaks follow the english breaks?
	Yes, please adjust. 

pg 23
Section three  3rd line: There appear to be some words missing in the line “In tractate berakhot 2:7 that Rabban Gamaliel...”
	Should read: tractate Berakhot 2:7 it is told that Rabban Gamaliel

pg 24
This page also starts the use of sof pasuks to end each mishnah in Hebrew.	
	Change all sof pasuks to periods. 

pg 27
4th line: you write “in yesterday’s mishnah” Should this be changed to “the last mishnah” or “the previous mihnah”? 
	Yes. 
section two 2nd line: “such a thing” is unclear: sukkah on a camel or in a tree?
	Change "such a thing" to "such things"
Section four: Section title needs to be bold

pg 30
English translation last line: need a period at the end of the line
Explanation section one 3rd line:”...law.” keep period within quote for AC, in BC period would probably  go outside.

pg 31
English translation: there is text missing at the end of the translation.
	Please add "and that which is lacking cannot be counted." 
Explanation Section one 6th line: “sukkot” should be “Sukkot”


pg 33
Translation: Again the end of the translation was cut off. 
	Should read: If this is your custom, then you have never in your whole life fulfilled the mitzvah of sukkah. 

pg 35
Translation: period needed on last line.
Explanation: The section title needs to be formatted properly

pg 36
Hebrew: Several differences with Albeck
	I'm not sure what these are (can't read your sheet) but change to fit Albeck. 
Translation line one: need a space between his and permanent.

pg 40
Hebrew: 2 differences with albeck, see page.
	Same as above. 
Background 18th line: after “mehudar” the comma is outside the quotes. 

pg 41
Section five first line: when citing Josephus, should read “Book 4, Chapter 8, Paragraph 2” like when you cite Josephus on pg. 74

pg 42
Translation last line: “But many not” should be “But he may not”
Section three 3rd line: “While hiking last week...” should this be edited as it wasn’t last week for the book?
	Change to "recently, while hiking." 
last line: “considered as” might be clearer as “considered to be”
last line: period is currently inside the quotes for “vessel.” keep for AC change for BC

pg 43: 
Hebrew first line: There is a period after the second word that doesn’t seem to belong.
Translation 5th-6th lines: “or one grown in a rain-watered soil...” should be “or one grown in rain-watered soil...”
Explanation section three 4th line. Keep comma where it is for BC put inside quotes for AC

pg 44
Hebrew: there is a hyphenated word break between lines 2 and 3, and a word missing at the end of the mishnah.
	Please add word to match Albeck. 
Explanation section two 3rd line: last sentence a little unclear. we are talking about the tips of the hadas right?
	Change lulav to hadas. 

pg 45
Hebrew: words missing from end of mishnah
	Please fix to match Albeck. 

pg 46
Section six: section number needs to be bold

pg 47
Hebrew: Words missing from end
	Again, this is real important. 
Translation:  words missing from end
This mishnah was butchered. Please fix both Hebrew and English. The English file is in the dropbox, and there it is correct. The last line read: And Rabbi Judah declares it invalid.

Background line 1: remove “says”
line 6: comma currently within quotes, keep for AC put outside for BC

pg 48
word missing end of second line אחד
Translation:missing the end of translation, Rabbi Yose etc...
Again, butchered, please add the Hebrew word and to the English add: Rabbi Yose says, even one that can only be held with his two hands.


pg 49
To the end of the English you have to add: underneath [the strands of gold].

pg 51
Hebrew: several differences with albeck. see page.
	Please adjust to match Albeck. 

pg 52
Section two: need to be bold

p 53

p 54
Hebrew 1st  line: change לפשט to לפשוט
Translation: missing text at the end
Again, I sent the full translations. These must have been cut off. Should read: " since one is not permitted to purchase it in the sabbatical year.  

pg 56
Hebrew text: two minor differences with Albeck, check page
Translation 5th line: should this line end with a period or a comma? currently a comma
	Change to period. 

pg 59
Background 1st line: change “yesterday’s mishnah” to previous or last...
	Okay, make this change. 

pg 60:
Hebrew 2nd line: the first ayin in לנענע should have a chatef patach instead of a sheva
Explanation Section three 1st line: It looks like there needs to be one more space between the colon and “Once a child...”
	Okay, make these changes. 

pg 62
Translation: Need section 4
Add: The flute is for five or six [days].

Explanation Section three: section title needs to be bold

pg 65
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck see page
Background 3rd line: Change “today’s mishnah” to “this mishnah” or similar
	Make both changes.

pg 67
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck see page
Hebrew last line: needs end punctuation

pg 68
Section five: needs to be bold

pg 69
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck see page
Translation: missing text at the end
	Add: "and that day was called “[the day of] the beating of the palm branches.”
Section two: last 2 lines: “one takes” and “he takes” should be consistent. Choose one or the other.
	Make them both "he takes." 


pg 73
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck and several formatting issues. see page

pg 74
14th line: need to be consistent in numbering. either 1) and 2) or first and secondly
	Change "secondly" to 2) 

pg 76
Translation: text missing
	Add: wine or water which has become uncovered is invalid for the altar.
Section two 2nd line: “we met yesterday” change to “from the last mishnah”.

pg 78
Translation: missing text at end
	Add: seen rejoicing in his life.

pg 79
Hebrew:slight differnece with Albeck and format issue, see page
Section two 2nd line: “tomorrow’s mishnah” change to “the next mishnah” 

pg 80
Missing translation, Background and Explanation!
	It's all there, unless I'm missing something. 

pg 81
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck see page

pg 82
Section four 1st line: looks like an extra space is needed between the colon and “When they get...”

pg 84
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck see page
Translation missing!
Don't know what happened but here it is:
	Mishnah Five 
	•	They never have less than twenty-one blasts in the Temple, and never more than forty-eight. 
	•	Every day there were twenty-one blasts in the Temple, three at the opening of the gates,   nine at the morning tamid sacrifice, and nine at the evening tamid sacrifice. 
	•	At the musafim (additional sacrifices) they would add another nine.
	•	And on the eve of Shabbat they would add another six, three as a sign to the people to stop working and three to mark a distinction between the holy and the profane.  
	•	On the eve of Shabbat in the intermediate days of the [Sukkoth] festival, there were [therefore] forty-eight blasts:  three at the opening of the gates, three at the upper gate,   three at the lower gate, three at the water-drawing, three at the altar, nine at the daily morning sacrifice, nine at the daily evening sacrifice, nine at the additional sacrifices, three as a sign to the people to cease from work, and three to mark a distinction between the holy and the profane.  


pg 86
Between translation and background: the 3 boxes between sections is currently placed over text

pg 87
All section titles need to be bold


pg 88
Hebrew: several differences with Albeck see page
Background 1st line: Change “In yesterday’s mishnah” to “in the previous mishnah” or similar

pg 89
section titles need to be bold

pg 90
Translation 7th line: last word should be south not watch.
Background: need to change “yesterday’s mishnah”
Section one 1st line: change “yesterday” to the "In the previous mishnah"

