Nedarim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah illustrates the principle taught by Rabbi Akiva at the end of yesterday’s mishnah, that a vow that has been partly released is entirely released.

Mishnah Seven
How is this so?
If one says, “Konam that which I benefit from any of you,” if one [of those subject to the vow] was [subsequently] released, they are all released. 
[If he said, “Konam] that which I benefit from this one or this one”:
if the first was released, all are released;
if the last one was released, he is released, but the rest are forbidden. 
if the middle person was released, those [mentioned] after him are [also] released, but those [mentioned] before him are forbidden.  
[If one says,] “Korban that which I benefit from this one, and from this one Korban,” they each require a separate release.  

Explanation
Section one:  If the one who vows groups a bunch of people collectively into his prohibitive vow, and then the vow is released for one of them, the vow is completely released.  The vow could be released for one of them if for instance one of the group was his father and they asked the one who vowed, “Had you known that one of the group was your father, would you have vowed?”  If he expresses regret, he is allowed to receive benefit not only from his father but from anyone else in the group as well.  
Section two:  In this case, he states the word “Konam” and then lists each individual person.  If the vow to the first one was released, then they are all released.  This is because the word “Konam” was attached to him, and it is as if the one who vowed made the entire vow dependent upon him.  If the last one was released, then only he is released but the others are still prohibited.  If the middle person was released, any one whose name follows him are also released, but those whose name preceded his are still forbidden.  The reason that the general rule does not apply in this case is that since he mentioned each name specifically, it is as if they are separate vows.  However, since the word “Konam” was only mentioned once, if one of the earlier people mentioned was released, anyone mentioned afterward will also always be released.
Section three:  In this section, the one vowing uses the word “Korban” (=Konam) with reference to each person. These are entirely separate vows, even though he only said one time “that which I benefit”.  Therefore, they each require a separate release and even if one is released the others are still prohibited, both those before and those after.  
