Nedarim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
We learned above in mishnah 3:2 that if someone makes a vow based on a mistaken premise, he is not obligated to keep his vow, and he does not even need a sage to release the vow.  Our mishnah discusses situations in which a person makes a vow that was not originally based on a mistaken premise, but the premise upon which the vow was based changes later.  Rabbi Meir says that these are not really considered “new facts” (see previous mishnah) and therefore, the vow may be released using them as grounds.  The sages disagree.

Mishnah Three
Rabbi Meir says: Some things are similar to a new fact, and yet are not [treated] as new; but the Sages do not agree with him.
How so?  
If one says, “Konam that I do not marry so and so, because her father is wicked,” and [then] they say to him “He is dead,” or, “He has repented,”; 
“Konam is this house which I will not enter, because it contains a wild dog,” or, “because there is a snake in it,” and [then] they say to him, “The dog is dead,” or, “The serpent has been killed,” behold these are like new facts, yet actually not [treated] as new facts. But the sages do not agree with him.

Explanation
In both cases the person vowing states why he has made his vow and the premise was correct at the time of the vow.  For instance, when he vowed not to marry the woman her father was wicked and alive. However, he subsequently died and therefore the reason for the vow ceased to exist.  In the other case, when he vowed not to enter the house, the wild dog or snake was still alive and only died later.  According to Rabbi Meir this is more similar to a vow based on a mistaken premise than to a new fact.  Although the person did not say specifically, “Konam that I do not marry so and so as long as her wicked father is alive”, this was his intent. Therefore, although he is not automatically released from his vow (as he would have been if the premise had been mistaken) a sage may use this as a basis to release the vow.  
The Sages disagree and say that this too is a situation of a “new fact”, and as they said in the previous mishnah, so too here, a “new fact” cannot be used as the basis for the release of a vow.   
