Nedarim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
If a person makes a vow and then regrets his vow and wishes to be released from its prohibition, he may approach a Sage who has the power to release the vow.  The Sage asks him questions and shows how the vow may have been mistaken and thereby annuls the vow.  He also may go to a court of laypersons who also have the power to release vows.  Our chapter deals with under what circumstances and how a Sage releases vows.  The word for releasing vows in Hebrew is “patach”, to open.  I have chosen to translate this as “release”, which in Hebrew would be “matir”, as in to permit.  

Mishnah One
Rabbi Eliezer says: They release a vow [by reference] to the honor of his father and mother but the Sages forbid.  
Rabbi Zadok said: Instead of releasing through the honor of his father and mother, they should release [by reference] to the honor of God.  If so, there would be no vows!  
But the Sages admit to Rabbi Eliezer that in a matter concerning himself and his father and mother one may release a vow [by reference] to the honor of his father and mother.

Explanation
Section one:  When one comes in front of a Sage to have his vows released, the Sage may ask him, “Had you known that by making such a vow you bring shame to your father and mother, would you have made such a vow?”  If he shows regret, then the vow may be released.  The Sages rule that such a technique is not valid, for he may lie in order not to let it be known that he would have taken such a vow in any case.
Section two:  Rabbi Zadok also disagrees with Rabbi Eliezer.  Were Sages allowed to use this technique to release vows, they might as well say, “Had you known that by making such a vow God considers you to be a disgrace, would you have made such a vow?”  If such a technique were valid, there would be no more vows, because everyone could have them easily released.
Section three:  The Sages agree though, that if the vow directly involved his father or mother, the Sage may make reference to their honor in order to release the vow.  This might happen, if for instance, he vowed that his father or mother should not benefit from his property.  
