Nedarim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah returns to the central theme of the chapter, the release of vows.  In the first mishnah we learned that vows cannot be released by reference to God, but that they may be released by reference to parents.  Our mishnah discusses releasing the vow by reference to his own or to his children’s honor.

Mishnah Nine 
They release one’s vows [by reference] to his own honor and the honor of his children. 
They say to him, “Had you known that tomorrow they will say of you, ‘It is the regular habit of so-and-so to divorce his wife’; and concerning your daughters they will say, ‘They are the daughters of a divorced woman. What fault did he find in their mother to divorce her?’  
If he replies, “Had I known that it is so, I would not have vowed,” he is released from his vow.

Explanation
The specific instance in this mishnah is one in which a man made a vow to divorce his wife.  He then comes to the sage asking to be released from the vow. The sage says to him that after he divorces his wife, people will say things about him and his children behind his back. Of him they will say that he is a man who divorces frequently.  Of his children they will say that they are the children of a divorced, and hence less than respectable woman.  Their father would not have divorced her had he not found something wrong with her.  If he expresses regret the sage may use this regret as grounds for releasing the vow.  
We should note that the attitude towards divorce expressed in this mishnah is probably not shared by most people today, nor was it shared by all in the time of the mishnah.  According to some rabbis (and according to some early Christians), divorce was only permissible if the woman was adulterous.  There were no other grounds for divorce.  Most rabbis, including Beth Hillel and later Rabbi Akiva, were more lenient and allowed divorce more easily.  For the former position, the children and indeed former husband of the divorced woman, were shamed.  For Beth Hillel and Rabbi Akiva this was less so.  Indeed, in American society, which was and still is to a certain extent dominated by Christian values, divorce is still considered by some to be a stain on one’s moral record.  It is really only in the last few decades that attitudes toward divorce have changed.  In Jewish law, while people may have looked askance at the children of divorced women, they were never really at a legal disadvantage.  
