Arakhin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a case where the owner of the field is slightly outbid by another. The complicating factor is that the owner has to add an extra fifth, thereby increasing the profit gained by the Temple. Sometimes, a lower bid by the owner is actually better for the Temple than a higher bid by others. 
The added fifth in rabbinic law is calculated by being a fifth of the final amount. Thus an added fifth of twenty is five, because 1/5 of 25 is five. If I remember my algebra the equation for this would be: x=(y+x)/5, where x is the added fifth and y is the original bid. This is called in rabbinic terminology, an “outside fifth.”

Mishnah Three
If one said “I will acquire it for twenty-one selas,” then the owners must pay twenty-six. 
[If one said] “Twenty-two,” the owners must pay twenty-seven. 
“Twenty-three,” the owners must pay twenty-eight. 
“Twenty-four,” the owners must pay twenty-nine. 
“Twenty-five,” the owners must pay thirty, 
For they need not add one fifth to what the other bids more. 
If one said: “I will acquire it for twenty-six,” if the owners want to pay thirty-one and an extra denar, the owner comes first. And if not, we say to the other: “It has become yours.”

Explanation
Section one: In all of these cases the owner bid twenty. If the other person bid 21, then the owner’s bid of 20 will end up more profitable for the Temple, because it is actually 25. He must pay 26 because we can’t allow the principal that he pays to be less than that of the other bidder. So of the 26 he pays, 21 is considered principal and 5 is the extra fifth. Note that the owner is forced to pay the extra sela, even though his original bid would have caused him to pay only 25. The same is true in cases where others bid 22-25—the owners add the fifth to their bid, taking them to 25, and then they add the number that by which the other’s bid was greater than theirs.
The final line of this section explains that the owners don’t have to pay an added fifth for the extra amount that they pay to surpass the other’s bid. In other words, their principal, upon which they pay the added fifth, remains 20. This is because the other bid did not surpass their bid and the added fifth.
Section two: In this case, the other bid was higher than the owner’s bid and the added fifth taken together. In order to beat the other bid the owner will need to pay thirty-one selas and one denar. This consists of the original twenty five of their own bid (20 +5). Then they need to pay an extra six selas to add up to the twenty-six the other guy bid. For the extra sela which they were outbid they need to pay an added fifth, because in this case the extra amount bid was higher than his bid. This added fifth is one denar, because a sela is four denars. So it turns out that the owner pays 31 selas and one denar. 
In this case the owner has the option to not pay the higher amount and allow the field to go to the other bidder.  



