Arakhin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Today’s mishnah, the final mishnah of chapter four, explains the sections of mishnah one that have not yet been explained. 

Mishnah Four
“And the age is according to the subject of the vow:” 
How so? If a child evaluates an old man, he must pay the value of an old man. 
And if an old man evaluates a child he must pay the value of a child. 
The evaluation is according to the subject of the evaluation. 
How so? If a man evaluated a woman, he must pay the value of a woman. 
And if a woman evaluated a man, she must pay the value of a man. 
“And the evaluations [shall be paid according to the rate prescribed] at the time of the evaluation.” 
How so? If he evaluated one who was less than five years of age, and he became [meantime] older than five years of age, or if [he evaluated one] who was less than twenty years of age and he became twenty years old, he must pay [only] in accord with the age at the time of the valuation.
The thirtieth day is considered to be under this age. 
The fifth year or twentieth year is considered to be under this age. 
For it says: “And if he is from sixty years old and upward” (Leviticus 27:7), thus we can learn thus with regard to all others from what is said about sixty years: just as the sixtieth year is considered to be under this age, so also the fifth and twentieth years are under this age.
Is that so! Just because [the Torah] accounts the sixtieth year to be under this age, thereby being more stringent, shall we make the fifth or the twentieth year be considered under this age, in order to be lenient? 
Scripture says, “Years,” “years” as a gezerah shavah: just as with the sixtieth year the word “years” means that it is considered under this age, so the word “years” with the fifth and with the twentieth year are considered under this age, whether this results in being lenient or being stringent. 
Rabbi Elazar says: [this rule holds good] until they are a month and a day beyond the year.

Explanation
Section one: The amount owed is reckoned according to the person whose value was vowed, and not according to the age of the vower.
Section two: Similarly, the gender is determined by the one whose value is being vowed and not the gender of the vower. 
Section three: The value of a person is determined partly by age (and partly by gender). When we determine his age we determine it according to his/her age at the time the vow was made, and not at the time that the vow is paid off. 
Section four: The rest of the mishnah states that the day that someone reaches a certain age, thirty days, five years, twenty years or sixty years, is not yet counted with the older age. Thus a kid who just turns thirty days does not yet have any value (value begins at thirty days). A kid who just turned five, still counts as a kid between the age of thirty days and five years.
Section five: The mishnah proves that the day of the birthday counts with the lower age by quoting the verse concerning the sixty year old.  Since the Torah says that he is above sixty years, the implication is that one who is exactly sixty years still pays the higher amount of a person from 20-60.
Section six: The mishnah now critiques its own midrash. Treating a sixty year old as still belonging to the younger category creates a stringency—his value is 50 and not 15. But treating a 5 year old or a 20 year in the younger category creates a leniency since the younger ages have lower values. The mishnah says that just because we treat a sixty year old as being in the younger category does not mean that we would necessarily treat 5 and 20 year olds as being in the younger category. 
Section seven: The mishnah now brings another midrash to defend the halakhah that we always treat a person on the day of the birthday as if he still belongs to the previous age category. This is done with a technique called a “gezerah shavah”. What this technique consists of is taking a law from one situation and applying it to another because the Torah uses the same word in both situations. In our case the word is “years” and it is used in connection to one who turns 60 and one who turns 5 and 20. Since it is used in both connections, the same halakhah applies to both.
Section eight: Rabbi Elazar extends the halakhah even further. A person doesn’t enter the new category until he is one month and one day into that category. For instance, one who is 60 doesn’t go down in value to 15 shekels until he is 60, one month and one day. 

