Arakhin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today’s mishnah continues to deal with cases where a person dedicates the value or worth of a body part. 

Mishnah Two
[If one said] “The worth of my hand is upon me,” they estimate his worth with his hand and [what it would be] without his hand. 
In this respect vows of worth are more stringent than vows of value.  
There is an aspect of vows of value that is more stringent than vows of worth. 
How so? If one said: “My value is upon me” and then he dies, his heirs must pay it. 
[But if he said:] “My worth is upon me,” and then he dies, his heirs need not pay anything because dead persons have no worth. 
[If he said,] “The value of my hand or foot is upon me,” he has said nothing, 
[But if he said,] “The value of my head is upon me,” he must pay his whole value.
This is the general rule: Anything upon which his life depends, he must pay his full value.

Explanation
Section one: In yesterday’s mishnah the vower dedicated the weight of his hand. In this section, he dedicates the “worth of his hand.” This is evaluated the same way that worth is always estimated—by examining how much a person would be worth on the slave market. In this case, they first estimate his worth when complete (with his hand), and then how much he would be worth without his hand. 
Section two: Later in this mishnah we will learn that if one says, “The value of my hand is upon me,” he is not liable to pay anything. Therefore, in this aspect, vows of “worth” are more stringent than vows of “value” for when one vows the worth of his hand, he must pay its worth.
Section three: As is typical of the mishnah, once we note that vows of worth are in one way more stringent than vows of value, the mishnah now notes that sometimes the opposite is true.
Section four: If one vows his value and then dies, the heirs must pay his value. This is because his value is set by the Torah and is not dependent upon an evaluation. However, if he vows his worth and then dies before they can estimate his worth, his heir need not pay anything because a dead person has no worth. Note that the obligation to pay is only incurred when the estimate is made, and since he has no worth when the estimate is made, the heirs owe nothing. 
Section five: If one vows the value of his foot or hand he is not liable to pay anything because the foot and the hand are not synonymous with his life. Since one can only vow the “value” of his life, in this case he has not vowed anything. In contrast, if one vows the value of his head, he has dedicated his full value because one can’t live without a head. He will now have to pay his full value, dependent upon his gender and age. The general rule that ends this mishnah explains just that—if one vows the value of an organ that one can’t live without, he is liable to pay his entire value. 
