Arakhin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah and the remainder of the chapter deal with Leviticus 25:29-35, the verses that talk about a person selling a home within a walled city. The seller has one year to redeem his home, and if he does not redeem it, it becomes the property of the purchaser. 

Mishnah Three 
If one sold a house among the houses of a walled city, he may redeem it at once and at any time during twelve months.  
This is a kind of interest, yet it is not interest.  
If the seller died, his son may redeem it. 
If the purchaser died, it may be redeemed from his son. 
One counts the year only from the time that he sold it, as it is said, “Before a full year has elapsed” (Leviticus 25:30).  
When it says a “a full” [year] the extra month is included.  
Rabbi says: he is allowed a year and its extra month. 

Explanation
Section one: When it comes to redeeming a house sold in a walled city, the seller may redeem it immediately. There is no waiting period as there is for inherited fields. 
Section two: Selling a house in order to redeem it looks like interest, which is prohibited, but it is not interest. If Reuven sells his house to Shimon and it stays with Shimon for a period of months and then Reuven buys it back, it looks like Shimon has loaned Reuven the money in return for use of the house. If this was actually a case of lending money, the deal would have been prohibited. It is allowed because this is actually a sale and not a loan. 
Section three: If the seller dies, his son has the right to redeem the house. Similarly, if the purchaser dies, the seller may redeem it from his son. 
Section four: The year in which he has to redeem it is reckoned according to the date that the original owner sold the field. This is true even if his son is redeeming it, after he inherited the right to do so from his father. No matter the case, the field can be redeemed for only one year from the point of the original sale.
Section five: During a leap year, the seller has an extra month to redeem his field.
Rabbi holds that a person is allowed a full lunar year, plus the extra eleven days separating a lunar year from a solar year. This is true regardless of whether the year was a leap year or not. One always gets a solar year in which to redeem the house. 
This is interesting because we are used to saying that the Jewish calendar is based on the moon. While this is true with regard to the months, it seems to be less true with regard to the year. When it comes to the year, we have a mix between a lunar calendar and a solar calendar. 


