Introduction to Tractate Tamid

Tractate Tamid describes how the sacrificial service was performed in the Temple in the morning, up until the sacrifice of the morning Tamid (daily offering). There are almost no disputes in the entire tractate, the only dispute being found in 5:2. 
The Tamid offering is described in Numbers 28:3-8:

1 The Lord spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Command the Israelite people and say to them: Be punctilious in presenting to Me at stated times the offerings of food due Me, as offerings by fire of pleasing odor to Me. 
3 Say to them: These are the offerings by fire that you are to present to the Lord: 
As a regular burnt offering every day, two yearling lambs without blemish. 4 You shall offer one lamb in the morning, and the other lamb you shall offer at twilight. 5 And as a meal offering, there shall be a tenth of an ephah of choice flour with a quarter of a hin of beaten oil mixed in 6 —the regular burnt offering instituted at Mount Sinai—an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the Lord. 
7 The libation with it shall be a quarter of a hin for each lamb, to be poured in the sacred precinct as an offering of fermented drink to the Lord. 8 The other lamb you shall offer at twilight, preparing the same meal offering and libation as in the morning—an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the Lord.

There is also a daily incense offering. This is described in Exodus 30:7-8:

7 On it Aaron shall burn aromatic incense: he shall burn it every morning when he tends the lamps, 8 and Aaron shall burn it at twilight when he lights the lamps — a regular incense offering before the Lord throughout the ages. 

Many scholars believe that Tamid is one of the earliest tractates of the Mishnah. They believe that it was composed shortly after the destruction of the Temple. While there is some Babylonian Talmud on the tractate, there is not much. This may be, in my opinion, a result of the fact that there are virtually no disputes in the tractate, which also may be a result of the tractate having been composed at a very early period. In other words, the tractate was composed early, later sages did not discuss it very much, so we don’t find them debating about it, and this lack of interest by early sages in the subject, also caused later sages to not engage much in learning this tractate. 
Despite all of this, it is certainly one of the tractates of the Mishnah, so we will certainly learn it! Good luck and I hope you all enjoy tractate Tamid.



