Tamid, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Today’s mishnah lists the psalms that were chanted by the Levites each day in the Temple. Today we still recite these Psalms in the synagogue, and before we say them we say, “This is the Psalm that they used to say in the Temple.”
The mishnah concludes with a sort of prayer/midrash on the last Psalm.  

Mishnah Four 
The following are the psalms that were chanted in the Temple. 
On the first day they used to say, “The earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof, the world and they that dwell therein” (Psalms 24).   
On the second day they used to say: “Great is the Lord and highly to be praised, in the city of our God. His holy mountain” (Psalms 48).   
On the third day they used to say: “God stands in the congregation of God, in the midst of the judges he judges” (Psalms 82).   
On the fourth day they used to say: “O Lord, God to whom vengeance belongs. God to whom vengeance belongs, shine forth” (Psalms 94).   
On the fifth day they used to say: “Sing aloud unto God our strength, shout unto the God of Jacob” (Psalms 91).   
On the sixth day they used to say: “The lord reigns, he is clothed in majesty, the Lord is clothed, He has girded himself with strength” (Psalms 93).   
On Shabbat they used to say: “A psalm, a song for the Sabbath day” (Psalms 92).  A psalm, a song for the time to come, for the day that will be all Shabbat and rest for everlasting life.

Congratulations!  We have finished Tractate Tamid!
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Tamid may have been one of the more unusual tractates that we have ever learned. Instead of disputes between sages, heaps of logic and laws, we get an intricate description of the Temple service. Indeed, although the language is clearly rabbinic Hebrew, its descriptive style is more characteristic of the Bible than of rabbinic literature. It is likely that these descriptions, or at least parts thereof, come from Temple times. They were preserved because the rabbis fervently hoped that the Temple would be rebuilt during their own lifetimes. While we may or may not share in this wish, I think we can all appreciate the respect in which they held this ceremony. Despite the fact that it was performed each and every day, twice every day, they don’t seem to have lost their sense of wonder at the intimate connection that they received with God through the sacrificial process. 
I hope you have enjoyed Tamid. Tomorrow we begin Tractate Middot (the last tractate in Seder Kodashim!). 


