Tamid, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
With this mishnah, the sacrifice of the tamid comes to its thunderous conclusion. 
Mishnah Three 
If the high priest wished to burn the offerings [himself], he would go up the ascent with the deputy high priest at his right.
When he reached the middle of the ascent the deputy took hold of his right hand and helped him up. 
The first [of the other priests] then handed to him the head and the foot and he laid his hands on them and threw them [onto the altar]. 
The second then handed to the first the two fore legs. And he handed them to the high priest who laid his hands on them and threw them [onto the altar]. 
The second then went away. 
In the same way all the other limbs were handed to him and he laid his hands on them and threw them [on to the altar fire]. 
If he wanted, he could lay his hands and let others throw [them] on the fire. 
He then went around the altar. From where did he begin? From the southeastern corner; from there he went to the northeastern, then to the northwestern and then to the southwestern. 
They there handed him the wine for libation. 
The deputy high priest stood on the corner/horn of the altar with the flags in his hand, and two priests on the table of the fats with two trumpets in their hands. 
They blew a teki'ah, a teru'ah and a teki'ah. 
They then went and stood by Ben Arza, one on his right hand and one on his left. 
When he bent down to make the libation the deputy high priest waved the flags and Ben Arza struck the cymbals and the Levites sang the psalm. 
When they came to a pause they blew a teki'ah, and the public bowed down. 
At every pause there was a teki'ah and at every teki'ah a bowing down. 
This was the order of the regular daily sacrifice for the service of our Lord. 
May it be His will that it be rebuilt speedily in our days, Amen.

Explanation
Section one: The high priest always had the right to put the pieces of the tamid onto the altar himself. If he didn’t want to, he could have the others do so (see section seven). 
Sections 3-6: Each of the priests would hand the part to the high priest, and he would lay his hands upon them. The second priest would hand up to the first, and then go. Similarly the third priest would hand to the first, etc. Thus all nine priests (see 4:3) would hand the pieces of the sacrifice which they held up to the high priest. 
Section eight: The high priest would then make his way all the way around the altar to offer the wine libation. If this was done by a regular priest, he would simply go from the southeastern corner to the southwestern corner.
Sections 9-end: These sections refer to the wine libation, done after the tamid was on the altar. The “table of fats” is the marble table that stood on the western side of the ramp. They would place the limbs on this table. See Shekalim 6:4.
Ben Arza is the nickname of the priest in charge of the cymbals (see Shekalim 5:1). 
After each set of trumpet blasts, the public standing in the Temple would bow down. 
The mishnah concludes with a prayer for the Temple to be speedily rebuilt. 
