Tamid, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today’s mishnah discusses the blessings and verses that the priests would recite in the Chamber of Hewn Stone before the tamid sacrifice was placed on the altar.
Historically, this mishnah is of great importance. Scholars have often asked if Jewish prayer as we know it today existed during the time of the Temple. Today’s mishnah mentions prayers that later became part of the Amidah and Shacharit service. The Mishnah was not composed until about 200 C.E., so it is debatable as to how accurately it describes history. Nevertheless, the fact that the prayers mentioned here are not exactly the same as those that exist in a later period, lends credence to the possibility that this mishnah provides some of the earliest evidence as to the existence of Jewish prayer. 
 

Mishnah One
The superintendent said to them: Bless one blessing!  And they blessed.
They then read the Ten Commandments, the Shema, the “And it will be if you hearken” (the second paragraph of Shema) and Vayomer (the third paragraph of Shema), and they blessed the people with three blessings: Emet veYatziv, and Avodah, and the priestly benediction.   
On Shabbat they added a blessing to be said by the watch which was leaving.

Explanation
Section one: The superintendent is the priest who had run the lottery (see 3:1-3). He first instructs them to recite one blessing. The mishnah seems to assume that one learning the mishnah would know what blessing was referred to. The Talmud explains the blessing to be “Ahavah Rabbah” the blessing that we recite before reading the Shema in the morning. Today we recite two blessings before Shema (“yotzer hameorot” is the other). It seems that during Temple times, only one was recited. 
Section two: The next recitation was the Ten Commandments. According to the Yerushalmi, this is part of the “Shema”.  These did not become part of the liturgy outside of the Temple because of the “murmurings of the sectarians.” According to the Talmud, the rabbis feared that Jews would say that only the Ten Commandments were given by God, and that the rest came from Moses and is not divine or binding. In order to prevent this impression, this section was removed from the prayer service.
The Shema is the same three paragraphs that are still recited today.  
The three blessings are still recited today, although they are placed differently within the service. Today, the Emet VeYatziv is the first blessing recited after the Shema, so its place has not changed since Temple times. It ends with “who redeems Israel.”  The “avodah”, which means “worship,” is now recited towards the end of the Amidah. It begins with the word “Retzeh”.  The “priestly benediction,” “May God bless you and protect you….” is recited today as part of the last paragraph of the Amidah. All three of these prayers contain words of blessing for Israel, which seems to be appropriate for this point of the service. 
Section three:  On Shabbat, the new priestly watch would take over for the outgoing watch after the musaf (additional) sacrifice was offered. To celebrate this occasion, they would offer a prayer for the outgoing watch (meaning for themselves!). 

