Tamid, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
The priests now make their way into the Sanctuary.

Mishnah One
They began to ascend the steps of the Sanctuary.   
Those who had won the right to clear the ashes from the inner altar and from the candlestick went in front.   
The one who won the right to clear the inner altar went in and took the teni and bowed down and went out again. 
The one who had been chosen to clear the candlestick went in, and if he found the two eastern lights still burning he cleared out the eastern one and left the western one burning, since from it he lit the candlestick for the evening. 
If he found that this one had gone out, he cleared the ash away and lit it from the altar of burnt-offering. 
He then took the kuz from the second step and bowed down and went out.

Explanation
Section one: The two priests, one who had won the right to offer the incense and the other who had won the right to bring the coals from the outer altar to the inner altar, begin to make their way up the twelve steps that lie in front of the Sanctuary. 
Section two: The two priests, one who had won the right to clear the ashes off the inner altar and the other who had won the right to clear the candlestick, went before them. We should note that the Mishnah described these two jobs in 3:9. Our mishnah takes place after they have already done the work referred to there.
Section three: The teni is the basket that the priest left inside the Sanctuary after clearing the altar. He now goes in takes the teni, bows down and then goes out again.
Section four: This section is largely a repeat of mishnah 3:9. The two eastern lights are the first that he encounters when he enters. If both are still burning, then he cleans out the first one, which is called “the eastern one” but he leaves the “western one,” the second of these two lights, still lit. This is the light that he will use to light the other branches in the night.
Section five: If he finds that both are out, then he lights the menorah with fire taken from the outer altar. 
Section six: He then takes the kuz (another vessel) from the second step where he left it (3:9), bows down and then goes out. These two priests will now put the ashes from the inner altar and the menorah near the ramp, as we learned at the very end of 1:4. 

