Mishnah. The one who had been chosen for the incense to ok the dish from the middle of the spoon and gave it   to his friend or his relative. If some of it was spilt into the spoon, he would put it into his hands. They used to instruct him   saying, be careful not to begin immediately in front of you or else you may burn yourself.   He then commenced to scatter the incense and [after finishing] went out. The one who burnt the incense did not do so until the superintendent said to him, burn the incense. If it was the high priest who burnt, he would say to him, sir,   pray burn the incense. The people   left and he burnt the cense and prostrated himself and went out.

   	c h a p t e r   v i i

   	mishnah .
When the high priest went in  to prostrate himself,  three priests supported him, one by his right and one by his left and one by the precious stones.  When the superintendent heard the sound of the footsteps of the high priest as he was about to issue [from the hekal], he raised the curtain for him. He went in, prostrated himself and went out, and then his brother priests went in and prostrated themselves and went out.

   	mishnah . They  went and stood on the steps of the porch. The first set  stood at the south side of their brother priests holding five vessels; one held the teni, a second the kuz, a third the firepan, a fourth the dish, and the fifth the spoon and its covering. They blessed the people with a single benediction;  in the country they recited it as three blessings,  in the sanctuary as one.  In the temple they pronounced the divine name as it is written,  but in the country by its substitute.   In the country the priests raised their hands as high as their shoulders, but in the temple right above their heads, all except the high priest, who did not raise his hands above the plate.   R. Judah says that the high priest also raised his hands above the plate, since it says, and aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them.  

   	mishnah . When the high priest desired to burn the offerings,   he used to go up the ascent with the deputy high prlest   at his right hand, and when he reached the middle of the ascent the deputy took hold of his right hand and helped him up. The first [of the officiating priests] then handed to him the head and the foot of the sacrifice and he laid his hands on them   and threw them [on the altar fire]. The second then handed to the first the two fore legs. And he handed them to the high priest who laid his hands on them and threw them [on to the altar]. The second then slipped away. In the same way all the other limbs were handed to him and he laid hands on them and threw them [on to the altar fire]. If he preferred, he could lay on hands and let others throw on the fire. When he came to go round the altar   from where did he commence? From the south-eastern corner; from there he went to the north-eastern, then to the north-western and then to the south-western. They there handed to him wine for libation. The deputy high priest stood on the horn of the altar   with the flags in his hand, and two priests on the table of the fat   with two trumpets in their hands. They blew a teki'ah, a teru'ah and a teki'ah,   and then went and stood by ben arza,   one on his right hand and one on his left. When he bent down to make the llbation the deputy high priest waved the flags and ben arza struck the cymbals and the levltes chanted the psalm. When they came to a pause   a teri'ah was blown, and the public prostrated themselves; at every pause there was a teki'ah and at every teki'ah a prostratlon. This was the order of the regular daily sacrifice for the service of the house of our god. May it be god's will that it be built speedily in our days, amen.
	mishnah . The following are the psalms that were chanted in the temple. On the first day they used to say, the earth is the lord's and the fulness thereof, the world and they that dwell thereln.   On the second day they used to say, great is the lord and highly to be praised, in the city of our god. His holy mountaln.   On the third day they used to say, god standeth in the congregation of god, in the midst of the judges he judgeth.   On the fourth day they used to say, o lord, thou god to whom vengeance belongeth, thou god to whom vengeance belongeth, shine forth.   On the fifth day they used to say, sing aloud unto god our strength, shout unto the god of jacob.   On the sixth day they used to say, the lord reigneth, he is clothed in majesty, the lord is clothed, he hath girded himself with strength.   On sabbath they used to say, a psalm, a song for the sabbath day:   a psalm, a song for the time to come, for the day that will be all sabbath and rest for everlasting life.

