Shekalim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with meat found in various places and how a person should treat that meat—do we assume that it comes from a sacrifice?  Is it kosher?

Mishnah Three
Meat which was found in the Temple courtyard: 
Limbs: [they must be treated as belonging to] whole burnt-offerings; 
Pieces: [they must be treated as belonging to] sin-offerings.   
[Meat which was found] in Jerusalem, [must be treated as belonging to] wellbeing-offerings.   
In both cases it must be left to become disqualified and must then go out to the place of burning. 
[Meat which was] found within the borders [of Israel but outside of Jerusalem]:
Limbs: [they must be treated as] carrion; 
Pieces:  they are permitted.   
But [if found] during the time of a festival, when meat is abundant, it is permitted [to eat it] even when cut up in limbs.

Explanation
Section one: Burnt-offerings are cut up into limbs before they are brought up to the altar. Therefore, if one finds whole limbs in the Temple courtyard, one must assume that they belong to burnt-offerings.  Sin-offerings are eaten by the priests and therefore they are cut up into pieces.  If one finds a piece of meat in the Temple courtyard, he therefore must assume that it is a sin-offering.
Section two:  Wellbeing offerings can be eaten anywhere in Jerusalem.  Therefore, if meat is found outside of the Temple but within Jerusalem, it must be treated as if it was a wellbeing offering.
Section three:  In all of the cases in the above two sections, the meat cannot be eaten lest it is impure or “remnant”—sacrificial meat which should have already been eaten.  It also cannot be burned lest it be fully pure and not remnant and it is prohibited to burn sacrificial meat which can be eaten.  What they must do is wait until the meat becomes disqualified from being eaten, one day and night for a sin-offering and two days and one nigh for a wellbeing offering. Then it may be burned outside of the Temple where they burn disqualified meat.
Section four:  If it is found outside of Jerusalem, then it is not assumed to be sacrificial meat.  If it is in limbs, meaning not cut into proper pieces, then it must be assumed that the animal was not slaughtered properly and that the owner intended to cast the meat to the dogs.  This meat cannot be eaten.  If it is cut into pieces than we can assume that the meat is kosher, because people don’t bother cutting the meat into proper pieces if it cannot be eaten.  However, in the time of the festival when many people eat meat and meat is in abundance even found limbs may be eaten.  They may have come from a kosher animal and someone may have had just so much meat that they didn’t bother to cut it properly.  

