Shekalim, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah explains the difference between shekels and a sin-offering such that Bet Hillel holds that the surplus of coins set aside for a sin-offering are sacred whereas the surplus of coins set aside for a shekel are not.

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Shimon says: what is the difference between shekels and a sin-offering?   Shekels have a fixed value, but a sin-offering has no fixed value.   
Rabbi Judah says: shekels also have no fixed value. For when the Israelites came up out of the diaspora they used to pay the shekel in darics, then they paid the shekel in selas, then they paid it in tibs, and finally they wanted to pay it in dinars.   
But Rabbi Shimon said: nevertheless they are all of the same value for everyone, whereas [in the case of] a sin-offering one man may bring it of the value of one sela, another may bring it of the value of two selas, and another in the value of three selas.

Explanation
Section one:  Shekels have a fixed value.  Hence one who says, “These coins are for my shekel” intends to make sacred only the value of a shekel.  On the other hand, a sin-offering has no fixed value and therefore, one who says, “These coins are for a sin-offering” may have intended for all of the coins to be sacred, even the surplus.  
Section two:  Rabbi Judah says that the shekel also doesn’t have a fixed value.  When the people of Israel first returned from the Babylonian exile they brought coins called “darics” (see above, mishnah one).  A daric is a Persian coin worth four shekels.  They then began to bring selas, which are worth two shekels.  They then began to bring tibs, which are worth a shekel, which is equivalent to the half-shekel of the Torah.  Finally, the people wanted to pay in dinars.  According to the Talmud, the rabbis did not let them pay in dinars because this is less than the mandated half-shekel of the Torah.  It seems like we have in this mishnah a record of different coins that were in use in different periods.  According to one commentary, in each period they would give half of the coin that was commonly used.  In any case, since the value of the shekel changed over time, Rabbi Judah says that the shekel too has no fixed value.
Section three:  Rabbi Shimon responds that when he said that the shekel has a fixed value he meant that at any given time everyone brings the same value, and not that that value could not change over time.  If people were bringing darics, everyone brought the same daric.  In contrast, people can bring animals worth different amounts as sin-offerings.  This explains Bet Hillel in the previous mishnah.     

