Shekalim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The first half of our mishnah explains what one who volunteers to bring wood, frankincense or gold, three of the chests mentioned in yesterday’s mishnah (sections 5-7), must bring.  
The second half of the mishnah deals with the eighth section of yesterday’s mishnah, which mentions the six boxes upon which was inscribed “for freewill offerings.”

Mishnah Six
One who says: “Behold, I am obligated to bring wood”, he may not bring less than two logs.
[If he says: “Behold, I am obligated to bring] frankincense”, he may not bring less than a handful of it. 
[If he says: “Behold, I am obligated to bring] gold”, he may not bring less than a gold denar.
“On six [was inscribed] “for freewill-offerings”:  
What was done with the freewill-offerings? 
They would buy with them burnt-offerings, the flesh [of which] was for the name [of God] and the hides for the priests. 
The following is the midrash which was expounded by Yehoyada the high priest: “It is a guilt-offering; it is a guilt offering, it goes to the Lord” (Leviticus 5:19).  
This is the general rule: anything which is brought because of a sin or because of guilt, they should purchase with it burnt offerings, the flesh [of which] was for the name [of God] and the hides for the priests.
Thus the two verses are fulfilled: a guilt offering for the Lord and a guilt offering for the priests, and it says:  “Money brought as a guilt offering or as a sin offering was not deposited in the House of the Lord; it went to the priests” (II Kings 12:17).

Explanation 
Section one:  This section spells out how much wood, frankincense or gold one must bring if one makes a vow to bring one of these items without specifying how much he will bring.  If he specifies how much he will bring, then he brings that amount.
Section two:  As we learned yesterday, on six of the chests was inscribed “freewill offerings.”  The mishnah now teaches that this money was used to buy burnt offerings. The flesh of the offering would be completely burnt on the altar but the hides would go to the priests.           
Section three: In this section we read a midrash which explains how we derive the halakhah in the previous section, that the priests receive the hides and the flesh is totally burnt.  This is justified through a midrashic reading of Leviticus 5:19, which I have translated to facilitate its midrashic understanding.  This verse seems to state that a guilt offering goes to God like a burnt offering, whereas we know from other places that the guilt offering goes to the priests. Yehoyada solves this riddle by stating that any surplus from money dedicated to purchasing a sin or guilt offering is used to buy burnt offerings, the flesh goes to the altar and the hides go to the priest.  This is the now the interpretation of the verse in II Kings 12 which contains an extended explanation of how Yehoyada would collect money for the Temple.  Verse 17 states that “Money brought as a guilt offering or as a sin offering was not deposited in the House of the Lord; it went to the priests.”  This cannot be explained to simply mean that money set aside to purchase guilt or sin offerings went directly to the priests, since they had to buy the sacrifices. Rather the explanation is that if money was left over after the requisite sacrifices were purchased, they would buy with it burnt-offerings as voluntary offerings, and they would keep the hides for themselves.      
