Shekalim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with the extra incense.  Every day there were two incense offerings, one in the morning and one in the evening (Exodus 30:7-8).  The incense for 365 days and for three extra incense offerings on Yom Kippur was prepared ahead of time.  The lunar year is only 354 years, so the extra incense was to be saved up for the leap year, when they would add a month.  The problem is that from the first of Nisan the incense had to be offered using the new shekels.  Our mishnah describes a way in which they could save the incense for the following year and yet still pay for it with new shekels.
 
Mishnah Five
What was done with the surplus of the incense?   
They would separate from it the wages of the craftsmen, and they would exchange it for the wages of the craftsmen, and they would give it to the craftsmen as their wages, and then they would buy it back again out of a new appropriation.   
If the new month had arrived in time they would bring it with the new appropriation, but if not, they from the old one.

Explanation
Section one:  This is how they would turn the incense for the previous year into incense for the following year.  First they would separate an amount of incense that would be used to pay the wages of those who make the incense.  Then they would redeem that incense with money set aside to pay those craftsmen.  The money then would become sacred and the incense would be non-sacred.  They then would give the non-sacred incense to the craftsmen as their wages and then they would buy back the incense with new shekels.  The craftsmen would have their wages, and the incense was bought with new shekels.  They could have done all this in a much simpler way—they could simply sell the old incense and then buy it back with new money.  However, the rabbis thought that the arrangement of using it for the craftsmen’s wages was more appropriate for sacred money. 
Section two:  If the first of Nisan came on time, meaning that Adar had only twenty-nine days, then they would immediately begin to use the new appropriation to buy the incense and all of the public sacrifices.  However, if Nisan did not come on time, meaning Adar had thirty days, they would bring it from the incense bought with the old shekels.  



