Shekalim, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah returns to dealing with the half-shekel.

Mishnah Three
On the fifteenth of [Adar] they would set up tables [of money changers] in the provinces.   
On the twenty-fifth they set them up in the Temple. 
When [the tables] were set up in the Temple, they began to exact pledges [from those who had not paid].   
From whom did they exact pledges? From Levites and Israelites, converts and freed slaves, but not women or slaves or minors.   
Any minor on whose behalf his father has begun to pay the shekel, may not discontinue it again. 
But they did not exact pledges from the priests, because of the ways of peace.

Explanation
Section one:  The half-shekel had to be given in Israeli currency.  In order to help people exchange their currency they would set up money changer tables in the provinces to change money.  The money changers could also exchange large currency for smaller coins.
Section two:  As the first of Nisan approached, the time when they would begin to use the shekalim collected from the previous year, they would stop having money changers throughout the land and limit their presence to the Temple.  
Section three:  At this point, they would begin to take pledges from people who had not yet paid.  A “pledge” means that they would take something away from the person and only return it when the half-shekel had been paid.
Section four:  Pledges were not taken from everyone, but rather only from free adult Jewish men (excluding priests, as we shall see below), those who are obligated to give the half-shekel.  They didn’t take pledges from women, slaves or minors because women, slaves and minors are exempt from the half-shekel.  Women are exempt because Exodus 30:12 states, “each man (ish) shall pay a ransom for himself”—the word “man” is understood as exempting women.  Slaves are usually in the same category as women so they too are exempt.  Exodus 30 explicitly excludes minors under the age of 20 (Ex. 30:14).  
Section five:  Sometimes fathers would begin to donate the half-shekel on behalf of their sons, even though they were not obligated to do so.  The mishnah teaches that if they had begun to give the half-shekel, in subsequent years they must continue to do so.
Section six:  The only category of free adult male from whom they did not exact a pledge is the priest.  They didn’t do so in order to avoid fights.  Albeck explains that the priests thought that they were exempt from the half-shekel.  Although they are indeed obligated, the court seems not to have wanted to get into a fight with them over the subject.  Tomorrow’s mishnah will deal with the priests obligation to pay the shekel. 
We might note that if many of the priests were Sadducees and the Sadducees seem to have rejected the whole practice of giving the yearly half-shekel, then we have here evidence of the Pharisees not wanting to provoke a fight with the Sadducees.
  

