Shekalim, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah contains several laws about the journey that the shekalim will make from the provinces from where they are collected to the Temple in Jerusalem.

Mishnah One
They may change shekels into darics because of the load of the journey.  
Just as there were shofar-shaped chests in the Temple so there were shofar-shaped chests in the provinces.  
The townspeople who had sent their shekels and they were stolen or lost:
If the appropriation had already been made [the messengers] swear an oath to the treasurers; 
But if the appropriation had not yet been made they swear to the townspeople, and the townspeople must pay [new] shekels in the place of the [lost] shekels. 
[If the lost shekels] were found, or if the thieves restored them, then both [the first shekels and their substitutes] are [sacred] shekels and they cannot be credited [to the account] of the coming year.

Explanation
Section one:  If people don’t want to shlepp their individual shekels all the way to the Temple, they may pool them together and turn them into larger coins called “darics.”  “Darics” are mentioned in Ezra 8:27 and I Chronicles 1:29.
Section two: When the shekels were brought to their deposit points, they were put into chests that were shaped like a shofar, wide at the bottom and thin at the top.  This was to prevent people from being able to pull coins out (like mailboxes, for those of you who remember when we used to send real letters).  Just as they had these types of chests in the Temple, they also had them outside the Temple in the provinces.  This made collection much easier.
Section three:  The mishnah now discusses a scenario in which people’s shekels get lost on their way to the Temple.  Three times a year the Temple treasurers would count up the shekels that had already been collected and they would start spending them on buying sacrifices (see below 3:1).  When reckoning the shekels, they would also count shekels which they knew were on their way from the provinces (called creative accounting).  So if the messenger loses the shekels after this appropriation has already been made, the townspeople who sent their money get credit.  The messenger then must make an oath to the treasurers that he did not steal the money himself.  However, if the money is lost or stolen before the appropriation is made then the townspeople do not get credit and they must send new shekels.   In this case, the messenger swears to them that he did not steal the money himself.  If the coins are found or if the thieves are found and return the stolen coins, both the new coins and the original coins go to the Temple.  The townspeople who twice had to send shekels do not get credit for the following year.   
  

