Betzah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This long mishnah deals with three categories of acts that are prohibited by the rabbis on Shabbat and on Yom Tov. They are all considered to be prohibited “derabbanan”, by the rabbis and not by the Torah.  The three categories are:
Shevut—mandated rest on Shabbat.  These are activities that are prohibited because they are generally not in the spirit of the day or because by doing one of them one might come to transgress a biblical prohibition.
Reshut—optional activities. These have some aspect of mitzvah in them but can be done on other days. Therefore one doesn’t do them on Yom Tov or Shabbat.
Mitzvah—these are commandments that can be performed on other days and therefore shouldn’t be done on Shabbat.  
The main point of the mishnah is that the only actions which are allowed on Yom Tov but prohibited on Shabbat those done while preparing food.  All of the other Shabbat prohibitions still hold true.
 
Mishnah Two 
Every [act] for which one is liable on Shabbat because of mandated rest [shevut], [or] because it is only optional [reshut], [or] even though it is a religious act [mitzvah], he is also liable on Yom Tov. 
For the following acts he is liable because of shevut:
One may not climb a tree, 
And one may not ride on an animal.
And one may not swim in water.
And one may not clap hands, nor slap [thighs], nor dance. 
For the following acts he is liable because they are only optional: 
One may not judge;
And one may not betroth a wife, nor perform halizah, nor perform yibbum [consumate a levirate marriage].   
And for the following acts one is liable even though it is a religious act [mitzvah]:  
One may not dedicate [anything to the Temple], nor vow a personal valuation, nor make a vow of herem, nor set aside terumah or tithes. 
All these things they [the rabbis said that they are forbidden] on Yom Tov, how much more so [are they forbidden] on Shabbat. 
There is no difference between Yom Tov and Shabbat except for the preparation of food alone.

Explanation
Section one: Climbing a tree is forbidden lest one breaks a branch, which is forbidden to do on Shabbat.   Riding an animal is considered prohibited lest one while riding break a branch to use as a switch in guiding an animal.  It seems that a deeper reason for why the rabbis prohibited this was that they did not believe that riding an animal was in the spirit of Shabbat.  Swimming was prohibited lest while swimming one makes a raft on which to float. Finally, certain types of clapping, slapping of thighs and dancing were prohibited on Shabbat lest one begin to make music and then come to make a musical instrument.  We should note that some of these activities are no longer generally prohibited because the likelihood that by doing one of them one will come to transgress a more serious commandment is minimal.  In my mind the most important thing to remember is that while one follows the minutiae of Shabbat, one should also be mindful of the spirit of Shabbat. Even things that are permitted should not always be done.   
Section two:  This section contains activities that have some aspect of “commandment” to them but can be done on other days. Judging, betrothing and other legal aspects of arranging various types of marriages can be done any day of the week, therefore one should not do them on Shabbat.  In my opinion, this is again because these activities are not in the “spirit of Shabbat.”  They might detract from the special sanctity of Shabbat, a day set aside.  A more technical reason why these things are prohibited is that by doing one of them one might come to write.  
Section three:  These acts are actually mitzvot, but still one may not perform them on Shabbat or Yom Tov because they can all be done with as much ease on other days.  The Rambam explains that donating something to the Temple is similar to engaging in business and hence one does not do so on Shabbat.  One does not separate tithes or terumah on Yom Tov or Shabbat because by doing so one “fixes” something to make it usable.  Also, this could have just as easily been done the day before.  
Section four:  In conclusion the mishnah notes that when discussing the laws of Yom Tov the rabbis prohibited these activities, but they are nevertheless even more prohibited on Shabbat.  The mishnah reminds us that the only type of activity which is permitted on Yom Tov but not on Shabbat is something done while preparing food.  

