Betzah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
The first part of the first mishnah of Betzah is about its namesake, an egg born on Yom Tov. The second part is associated with the first part because both contain debates between Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel, and in both Bet Hillel rules strictly. 

Mishnah One
An egg laid on Yom Tov: 
Bet Shammai say: it may be eaten [on the same day];
But Bet Hillel say: it may not be eaten [until the day is over]. 
Bet Shammai say: [the quantity of] leaven is of the size of an olive and leavened bread is of the size of a date; 
But Bet Hillel say: both are of the size of an olive.

Explanation
Section one:  According to Bet Shammai, just as it is permitted to slaughter a chicken on Yom Tov, it is also permitted to eat an egg that is laid on Yom Tov.  In other words, the chicken and everything in it is permitted on Yom Tov.  In contrast, Bet Hillel hold that while the chicken itself is permitted, the egg that is laid is prohibited.  The egg is what is called “nolad”—it is born, or new, something that was not there when Yom Tov began and hence was not set aside for use at the beginning of Yom Tov. This prohibition is similar to muktzeh—the idea that something that was not set aside before Yom Tov to be used on Yom Tov may not be used on Yom Tov.
Section two:  Exodus 13:7 says, “No leavened bread shall be seen with you and no leaven shall be found in all your territory.”  The verse mentions two things:  the leavening agent (starter dough) and the leavened bread, both of which are prohibited.  According to Bet Shammai the point of the verse is to teach that the two prohibitions are different.  Leaven is prohibited at the size of an olive, whereas leavened bread is prohibited at a larger amount, the size of a date.  Beth Hillel hold that in both cases an olive’s worth is prohibited.  Note that smaller amounts are not permitted either.  A smaller amount is still forbidden but one who consumes a smaller amount has not transgressed the Biblical prohibition of leaven or leavened bread on Passover.
  

