Betzah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
The first section of the mishnah teaches that while a live coal is considered as having substance, a flame does not have any substance.
The second half of the mishnah deals with the restrictions on the carrying of water drawn from a well.

Mishnah Five
A live coal is [restricted to the same limits] as its owner, but a flame can be taken anywhere.  
In respect of a live coal of sanctified property [one who makes use of it] is considered as having trespassed, but as for a flame [of sanctified property], one may not derive benefit from it, but [one who does] has not trespassed.   
If one carries out a live coal into the public domain [on Shabbat] he is liable, but [if he carries out] a flame he is exempt.
[The water from]: 
A private well is [restricted to the same limits] as its owner, 
And [the water from a well] belonging to the inhabitants of that town is [restricted to the same limits] as the people of that town;
And [the water from a well] belonging to those who came up from Babylonia is [restricted to the same limits] as he who draws [the water].

Explanation
Section one:  A live coal, one that is burning, is considered to be an object of substance and therefore it is limited to going where its owner can go.  In contrast, a flame has no substance and therefore is not limited in where it can go.  What this means is that a person could take a lamp and light it from somewhat else’s lamp and then not be limited by the other person’s eruv.  The flame that he “takes” from another person has no substance so it is not like borrowing something from another person.
Section two:  One who makes non-holy use out of something dedicated to the Temple has “trespassed (me’ilah).”  He must make financial restitution and bring an asham, a guilt offering.  One who makes non-holy use out of a live coal has trespassed because a live coal has substance.  In contrast, one who makes non-holy use out of a flame has not trespassed.  Nevertheless, it is still forbidden to do so. The prohibition is “derabbanan”—it is forbidden lest he trespass something with substance.  
Section three:  Carrying a live coal into the public domain on Shabbat counts as carrying, and hence he has transgressed.  However, carrying a flame does not count as carrying and hence he has not transgressed.  If you ask, how can you carry a flame?  (Ouch!)  The answer is that one could blow a flame from the private domain out into the public domain and that would count as carrying because it moved as a result of his force.
Section four: There are three types of wells referred to here. The first is that of a private person. The water in that well can go on Yom Tov wherever he can go. The second is that of a public well. This water belongs to everyone in the city and therefore it can only go where everyone can go.  This means that unless everyone who set up an eruv put it on the same side of the city, the water wouldn’t be able to leave the city. The third type of well is one of the public wells dug for the benefit of the people coming back from Babylonia after the exile.  These wells can be used by any traveler.  They can go anywhere that the person who fills them up can go. The difference between these wells and those shared by the people of a city is that the latter type is jointly owned by the people of the town whereas the former are not owned by anyone.  

