Betzah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The first topic of this mishnah is chopping wood to make firewood on Yom Tov. The second topic is opening up a sealed storage room to take out produce. Both of these topics touch at least indirectly upon the subject of muktzeh.

Mishnah Three
One may not chop up wood, neither from beams nor from a beam which was broken on Yom Tov.
And one may not chop with an axe or with a saw or with a sickle but only with a [butcher's] chopper.
A [closed] room full of produce which was burst open [on Yom Tov] he may take [produce] out through the breach.  
Rabbi Meir says: he may make a hole at the outset and bring out [the produce].

Explanation
Section one:  This first section is concerned with chopping wood from a beam that was not designated for use as firewood before Yom Tov began.  One may not chop up a beam that was meant to be used in building because it is muktzeh—before Yom Tov there was no intention to use it for fire.  Even if the beam breaks on Yom Tov and is now only good for lighting fires, he can’t chop it up into firewood because when Yom Tov began it was muktzeh.  Only if it was broken before Yom Tov can he chop it up.
Section two:  This section refers to wood that one is allowed to chop up on Yom Tov.  Even though it is permitted to do so, one shouldn’t do so in a normal fashion because this looks too much like “business as usual.”  One shouldn’t use the normal instruments but rather a butcher’s knife, one usually used for cutting bones and meat.  This requirement will probably make people prefer to chop up their wood before Yom Tov begins—chopping wood with a butcher’s knife won’t make the butcher very happy and it’s not a good idea to tick off people who own big knives.
Section three:  This section refers to a storage room that has been closed off by a row of bricks that have not been cemented together.  According to the first opinion, if some of the bricks should fall away he may go into the room through the opening and take out the produce and use it on Yom Tov.  Since there was no cement sealing the bricks together, the produce is not considered muktzeh.  However, according to this opinion, he may not himself remove the bricks because this is too close to “tearing down” a building, a prohibited labor on Shabbat and Yom Tov.  Concerning this last ruling, Rabbi Meir disagrees.  Since the bricks were not cemented together, he may even take them down and create a new opening on Yom Tov.
 
