Betzah, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction
In this mishnah Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel debate whether one may carry to a priest hallah and priestly gifts on Yom Tov.  Hallah is dough which one must separate from the dough that one kneads to bake bread (Numbers 15:17-21).  Priestly gifts refers to the parts of a sacrificial animal which must be given to the priest (Deuteronomy 18:3).  

Mishnah Six
Bet Shammai says: one may not take hallah or priestly gifts to a priest on Yom Tov, whether they were separated on the day before or on that day. 
But Bet Hillel permits it. 
Bet Shammai said them: An analogy [supports our view]: hallah and priestly gifts go to the priest and terumah is [likewise] goes to the priest; just as one may not take [to the priest] terumah so one may not take [to him] priestly gifts. 
Bet Hillel said to them: No! If you say in the case of terumah which he has not the right to separate, will you say [the same] with respect to priestly gifts which he is permitted to separate?

Explanation
Section one:  In this first section we learn that Bet Shammai prohibits carrying the hallah and priestly gifts to the priest, whether they were separated on that day or earlier, whereas Bet Hillel permits this.  The reasons for this debate come in the following mishnah.
Section two:  We now learn Bet Shammai’s reasoning.  They compare hallah and priestly gifts to terumah, the portion of one’s produce that one separates and gives to the priest.  Terumah may not be separated on Yom Tov because it can be separated from one’s produce on the day before.  Since one is not allowed to separate terumah on Yom Tov it is also forbidden to carry it to the priest.  Bet Shammai reasons that the same holds true for the other things which one gives to a priest—they too cannot be carried to the priest on Yom Tov.  
Bet Hillel critiques this analogy.  One cannot carry terumah to a priest precisely because one cannot separate it on Yom Tov.  However, one may separate hallah and priestly gifts on Yom Tov and therefore one is allowed to carry them to the priest as well.  The reason that one may separate hallah and priestly gifts on Yom Tov is that one can slaughter an animal and knead dough on Yom Tov, and when one does so the gifts and hallah must be separated.  

