Middot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
From east to west was a hundred cubits:
The wall of the porch five cubits, the porch itself eleven, the wall of the Hekhal six cubits and its interior forty, a cubit for the space between, and twenty cubits for the Holy of Holies, the wall of the Hekhal six cubits, the cell six cubits and the wall of the cell five. 
From north to south was seventy cubits:
The wall of the mesibbah five cubits, the mesibbah itself three, the wall of the cell five and the cell itself six, the wall of the Hekhal six cubits and its interior twenty, then the wall of the Hekhal again six and the cell six and its wall five, then the place of the water descent three cubits and its wall five cubits. 
The Porch extended beyond this fifteen cubits on the north and fifteen cubits on the south, and this space was called the House of the slaughter-knives where they used to store the knives.   
The Hekhal was narrow behind and broad in front, resembling a lion, as it says,  "Ah, Ariel, Ariel, the city where David encamped" (Isaiah 29:1): Just as a lion is narrow behind and broad in front, so the Hekhal was narrow behind and broad in front.  

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah now proceeds to delineate the structures, walls, etc. that took up the length and breadth of the Hekhal.
The Hekhal was one hundred cubits from its eastern side to its western side.
The thickness of the front wall of the Porch was five cubits. The area of the Porch was eleven cubits, and the wall separating the Porch from the Hekhal was six more. This brings us to 22. The interior of the Hekhal was 40 (total = 62). There was a one cubit space between the Hekhal and the Holy of Holies. In the First Temple there was an actual wall in this space, but in the Second Temple there were two curtains a cubit apart from one another. The interior of the Holy of Holies was 20 cubits (total = 83). The western wall of the Hekhal was six more cubits. The width of the middle cells on the western side was six cubits, and the western wall of the cell was another five, bringing us to the grand total of 100 cubits. 
Section two: From north to south the entire expanse was seventy cubits. The thickness of the walls of the mesibbah was 5 cubits (concerning the mesibbah see mishnah five). The width of the mesibbah itself was three cubits. Inside the mesibbah was the cell, whose wall was five. The middle level cell itself was six cubits wide (total = 19). The wall separating the cell from the Hekhal was another six, and the width of the Hekhal was twenty (total=45). The opposite wall was also six and the cell on the south side was another six, and its wall was another five (total = 62). There was a space of three cubits between the wall of the cell and the outer wall in order to let water flow down from the roof. This was another three cubits and then another five cubits of wall, bringing us to a total of 70 cubits. It might be interesting to note that of the seventy cubits, 32 of them were taken up by wall. The walls were plentiful and very thick.  
Section three: The Porch, the structure that lay in front of the Hekhal, was fifteen cubits longer from north to south then the Hekhal on each side. This would mean that the back wall to the Porch, which serves as the front wall of the Hekhal, would have been 100 cubits, whereas the rest of the Hekhal was seventy cubits from north to south.
This extra space was where the slaughterer's knives were stored. Perhaps we could surmise that they stored the knives here in order to keep them from being parallel to the altar or Holy of Holies, such that an instrument of violence, while necessary for the daily operation of the Temple, was at least not stored in a space parallel to the life-giving altar.  
Section four: The final section of the mishnah and our chapter likens the entire structure of the Porch, Hekhal and Holy of Holies to a lion. It was broad in front (100 cubits) and a bit narrower in the back (70 cubits). The imagery is based on the verse which refers to Jerusalem as "Ariel" which means "lion of God."  
 
