Middot, Chapter One, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the locking of the Temple gates at night.

Mishnah Nine
There was a place there [in the fire chamber] one cubit square on which was a slab of marble. 
In this was fixed a ring and a chain on which the keys were hung. 
When closing time came, the priest would raise the slab by the ring and take the keys from the chain. 
Then the priest would lock up within while the Levite was sleeping outside.   
When he had finished locking up, he would replace the keys on the chain and the slab in its place and put his garment on it and sleep there. 
If one of them had a seminal emission, he would go out by the winding stair which went under the Birah, and which was lighted with lamps on both sides, until he reached the bathing place. 
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: he descended by the winding stair which went under the Hel and he went out by the Taddi gate.

Explanation
Section four: There are two explanations for “the Levite was sleeping outside.” Either it means that the Levites sat outside the courtyard and guarded from the outside. Or this refers to the locking of the fire chamber. In the fire chamber the priests were inside and the Levites outside.
Section six: Tamid 1:1 also discusses what would happen if a priest had an emission in the middle of the night and needed to purify himself. According to Deuteronomy 23:11 such a person must leave the “camp”, which the rabbis interpret to be parallel to the Temple. The priest would exit the Temple by using a set of underground stairs. It was forbidden for him to walk through the courtyard, or even on the Temple mount because he was impure. These stairs were lit so that he could see his way. He would then come to the ritual bath. 
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says that when he was coming out of the ritual bath, he would not go back to the fire chamber. Rather he would go under the Hel and end up on the Temple Mount near the Taddi gate. Note that Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob does not disagree with the halakhah in our mishnah but rather with the halakhah in Tamid 1:1, according to which the priest the priest would return to the fire chamber. 
  
