Middot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six 
The Hekhal was a hundred cubits by a hundred with a height of a hundred. 
The foundation was six cubits, then it rose forty, then a cubit for the ornamentation, two cubits for the guttering, a cubit for the ceiling and a cubit for the plastering. 
The height of the upper chamber was forty cubits, there was a cubit for its ornamentation, two cubits for the guttering, a cubit for the ceiling, a cubit for the plastering, three cubits for the parapet and a cubit for the spikes.   
Rabbi Judah says the spikes were not included in the measurement, but the parapet was four cubits.

Explanation
Section one: The Hekhal as referred to in this mishnah includes the dimensions of the Porch, the Hekhal and the Holy of Holies put together.  It was a 100 cubit cube.
Section two: The mishnah now explains the elements that lead to a height of 100 cubits (note: this is a very tall structure).
The closed foundation of the entire structure was 6 cubits high. We can also see this by the need for 12 stairs to lead up from the courtyard to the floor of the Porch. Each stair was 1/2 cubit high, making a total of 6 cubits.
The empty space inside the Hekhal was 40 cubits high. Before the ceiling there was a cubit of ornamentation on the walls. Then there were two cubits of guttering to catch water that might leak in from the roof. The ceiling (the boards) and the plastering were each a cubit. This would bring us to a total of 51 cubits.
Section three: The upper chamber was also forty cubits high, then another cubit for ornamentation, two for guttering, and one each for the ceiling and its plastering. This brings us to 96 total cubits. There was a parapet (a railing) on top of the upper chamber and there were one cubit spikes coming out of the parapet. This would chase away birds which would have nested on the tops of the walls. [Funny, but we too put spikes on top of our walls to keep away the bird].
Section four: Rabbi Judah disagrees with two minor details of the above description. He claims that the spikes were not counted in the total, and that the number 100 was reached by the parapet being four not three cubits high. 

