Middot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the stones used for the altar. Deuteronomy 27:5-6 states: “You should build an altar to the Lord your God, an altar of stones. Do not wield an iron tool over them; you must build the altar of the Lord your God of unhewn stones.” These two verses and their fulfillment are the main topic of this mishnah.  

Mishnah Four
The stones both of the ascent and of the altar were taken from the valley of Bet Kerem.
They dug into virgin soil and brought from there whole stones on which no iron had been lifted, since iron disqualifies by mere touch, though a flaw made by anything could disqualify. 
If one of them received a flaw, it was disqualified, but the rest were not. 
They were whitewashed twice a year, once at Pesah and once at Hag, and the Sanctuary was whitewashed once a year, at Pesah. 
Rabbi says: they were whitewashed every Friday with a cloth on account of the blood stains. 
The plaster was not laid on with an iron trowel, for fear that it might touch and disqualify. 
Since iron was created to shorten man's days and the altar was created to prolong man's days, and it is not right therefore that that which shortens should be lifted against that which prolongs.

Explanation
Section one: Bet Kerem is close to Jerusalem (today it is a neighborhood in Jerusalem).
Section two: The quarrying would begin in soil that had not been used. They would extract whole stones without using any iron tools. 
Any stone which had been touched by an iron tool is disqualified. If it was flawed by a different type of tool it is also disqualified, but other types of metal do not disqualify by mere touch.
If one of the stones that were already in use received a flaw, it is disqualified but the other stones are still valid. They will have to replace the flawed stone.
Section three: The stones of the altar were whitewashed with plaster twice a year, once on Pesah (their Pesah cleaning) and once on Sukkot. 
The mishnah seems to say that they whitewashed the Sanctuary with plaster once a year. However, this cannot be the intention of the mishnah because the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies were both covered with gold. Therefore, Albeck explains that this refers to the porch (the Ulam) that comes before the Sanctuary. Another explanation is that the word “Sanctuary” here actually refers to the whole Temple, including the courtyards. 
Rabbi [Judah Hanasi] holds that they would clean the altar once a week because of the blood stains. But they would only do so with a simple cloth. 
Section four: When they put on the plaster, they did not use an iron trowel for fear that would disqualify the stones.
Section five:  This section explains why iron disqualifies the stones of the altar. It is a nice midrash—the material that is used to destroy life should be kept away from the altar, whose ultimate purpose is to provide and lengthen life.   

