

   	 

   	
   	 

   	mishnah  . From north to south was a hundred and thirty-five cubits. The ascent and the altar took up sixty-two;  from the altar to the rings was eight cubits. The rings took up twenty-four cubits. From the rings to the tables was four cubits, from the tables to the dwarf pillars four, and from the dwarf pillars to the wall of the azarah eight cubits, and the remainder  was between the ascent and the wall  and the space occupied by the pillars. 

   	mishnah  . There were six chambers in the azarah, three on the north and three on the south. On the north were the salt chamber, the parwah  chamber and the washers chamber. In the salt chamber they used to keep the salt for the offerings. In the parwah chamber they used to salt the skins of the animal-offerings. On its roof was the bath used by the high priest on the day of atonement.  In the washers’ chamber they used to wash the entrails of the sacrificial animals, and from it a winding ascent went up to the roof of the parwah chamber.

   	mishnah  . On the south were the wood chamber, the chamber of the captivity and the chamber of hewn stones. With regard to the wood chamber, r. Eliezer b. Jacob says: i forget what it was used for. Abba saul says:   the chamber of the high priest   was behind two of them, and one roof covered all three. In the chamber of the captivity there was a fixed cistern   with a wheel over it, and from there water was provided for all the azarah. In the chamber of hewn stone   the great sanhedrin of israel used to sit and judge [among other things the applicants, for priesthood. A priest in whom was found a disqualification   used to put on black under garments and wrap himself in black and clear away. One in whom no disqualification was found used to put on white under garments and wrap himself in white and go in and minister along with his brother priests. They used to make a feast because no blemish had been found in the seed of aaron the priest, and they used to say thus: blessed is the omnipresent,   blessed is he, because no blemish has been found in the seed of aaron. Blessed is he who chose aaron and his sons to stand to minister before the lord in the holy of holies.

