Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnayoth Ten and Eleven

Introduction
The first half of mishnah ten deals with a person who strikes a bargain with another person that each will help the other to do some field work.  As we will see such an arrangement can be potentially usurious.  In the second half of the mishnah Rabban Gamaliel gives a general definition of two different types of usury and Rabbi Shimon discusses verbal usury. 
Mishnah eleven completes our discussion about usury by stating that all who are involved in an usurious contract violate the Torah and discussing which specific commandments they violate.

Mishnah Ten
One may say to his fellow, “Help me weed and I will help you weed” or “Help me hoe and I will help you hoe.”
But one may not say, “Help me weed and I will help you hoe”, or “Help me hoe and I will help you weed”.  
All days of the dry season are accounted alike, and all days of the rainy season are accounted alike.
One may not say to another, “Help me plow in the dry season and I will help you plow in the rainy season.”
Rabban Gamaliel says: “There is interest that is paid in advance and interest that is paid afterward.  
How is this so?
If a one intended to borrow from another and made him a present and said, “This is so that you will lend to me”, this is interest that is paid in advance.
If one borrowed from another and repaid it to him, and then sent a present and said, “This is for your money of which you have not had use while it was with me”, this is interest that is paid afterward.
Rabbi Shimon says: “There is interest paid in words:  one may not say to his creditor, “Know that such and such a person has come form such and such a place.”  

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
Section one:  Reuven is allowed to make an arrangement with Shimon that one day he will work for Shimon and the other day Shimon will work for him, as long as both are doing the same work.  If, however, Reuven helps weed and Shimon helps hoe or vice versa, and one of the labors is more difficult than the other, the bargain is forbidden because of usury.  The problem is that the one who does the work for his friend second may do a more difficult type of labor in return for having his work done first.  This is a form of usury, since one person will get back more in return for waiting to be paid for his work.
Section two:  Just as two different types of labor may not be exchanged for one another, so too the same labor may not be exchanged for the same labor if they are done during different seasons.  Since working in one season may be harder than working in another, if the one who does the work for his friend second does the work in a harder season he is in essence repaying the loan of his friend’s work with interest.
Section three:  Rabban Gamaliel explains that it is forbidden to pay interest either before or after the loan is executed.  Therefore, a person cannot give another person a present in order that that person would loan him money, since this is prepaid interest.  Neither can a person give another a present for having loaned him money, since this is interest paid afterwards.  
Section four:  According to Rabbi Shimon, interest need not only be a gift of things, money or work from the borrower to the creditor.  Interest may even be verbally given to the creditor.  If the debtor passes needed information to the creditor in return for the loan, this is interest through words alone.  [In our days this might be akin to giving a stock tip to someone in return for a loan.]

Mishnah Eleven
These are the one who transgress a negative commandment:  the lender, the borrower, the guarantor, and the witnesses.
And the Sages say, “The scribe also.”
They transgress the commandment, (1) “You will not give him your money upon interest” (Leviticus 25:37), and (2  “You shall not take usury from him” (Leviticus 25:36) and (3) “You shall not be to him as a creditor” (Exodus 22:24), and (4) “Nor shall you place upon him usury” (ibid.) and (5) “You shall put a stumbling block before the blind, and you will fear your God, I am the Lord” (Leviticus 19:14).

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
Section one:  When a loan with interest is executed it is not only the lender and borrower who violate a negative commandment but everyone involved in the loan.  According the Sages, even the scribe transgresses a negative commandment if he draws up a document which contains in it a usurious loan. 
Section two:  The mishnah now lists the specific transgressions that a person commits when a loan with interest is executed.  Since there are several verses in the Torah that forbid lending in interest the Rabbis understood that each verse added another commandment.  One loan with interest can therefore cause a person to violate several commandments.
In the Talmud it is explained that the lender violates all of these commandments, the borrower violates the first two and number five.  The witnesses violate number four and according to the sages the scribe violates number four as well.    

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten, section three:  Why does Rabban Gamaliel use the example of a present given as interest as opposed to money?  Is he trying to teach some additional information?
Mishnah eleven, section one:  Why does the mishnah expand the list of those who transgress when a usurious loan is committed from the lender and borrower to all parties involved?  What is this meant to teach us?  

