Bava Metzia Chapter One Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
The third and fourth mishnah of our chapter deal with ownership disputes in which two people lay claim to a found object.    

Mishnah Three
If a man was riding on a beast and saw lost property and said to his fellow, “Give it to me”, and the other took it and said, “I have acquired it”, he (the other) has acquired it.
But if after he gave it to him he said, “I acquired it first”, he has said nothing.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
In the first section of the mishnah a person saw an object while riding on an animal and told his friend to pick it up for him.  When his friend picked it up he claimed it for himself.  According to the mishnah the person who picked it up can claim title to the object.  If, however, the person picked it up and then gave it to his fellow, he cannot subsequently claim title.  The person’s claim to ownership must come at the same time that he actually has possession of the object and not after he has already given it to someone else.

Mishnah Four
If a man saw lost property and fell upon it and someone else came along and seized it, he that seized it acquired it.
If a man saw people running [in his field] after lost property [such as] a deer with a broken leg, or pigeons that couldn’t fly, and he said, “My field acquires [them] for me”, he has acquired them.
But if the deer was running normally or the pigeons flying, and he said, “My field acquires [them] for me”, he has said nothing.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  If a person saw a lost object and fell upon it in an attempt to take the object, and someone else came along and took it before the other person got to it, the person that took it gets to keep it.  In the previous mishnah we learned that merely a person’s saying that he wished to take the object does not cause it to belong to him.  In our mishnah we learn that even physically making a move to get it is also insufficient.  The lost object is not his until he actually takes possession.
Section two:  In this section we learn that under certain circumstances a person’s field can acquire something for him.  In such a case the animal is acquired not by physical possession by the claimant but by the animal being on his field.  If the person sees people running after a lost object in his field and that lost object cannot move off his field he can acquire it by saying that his field acquires it.  If, however, the animal can run or fly and therefore is not “stuck” on the person’s field, the field cannot acquire the animal.   In other words in order for the field to acquire the animal on behalf of its owner three conditions must be fulfilled:  1)  other people have not claimed it (in the mishnah others are running after it but have not reached it; 2)  the animal is physically unable to leave the field;  3)  the owner of the field makes a claim of acquisition over the animal.
 
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  According to the mishnah by merely telling the other person to pick it up for him the person riding on the animal does not acquire the object.  Why not?
Mishnah four:  If my animal runs onto another person’s field and the other person claims that his field acquires the animal for him, does the animal now belong to him?  How can you figure out the answer to this question from the mishnah?
