Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The second chapter of Bava Metziah deals exclusively with returning lost objects.  According to Exodus 23:4 and Deuteronomy 22:1-4, a person has an obligation to return lost objects to their owner.  The mishnah is concerned with which objects are included in this obligation and with the question of the owner claiming his object by identifying it.

Mishnah One
Which found objects belong to the finder and which ones must be proclaimed [in the lost and found]?
These found objects belong to the finder:  if a man found scattered fruit, scattered money, small sheaves in the public domain, cakes of figs, bakers’ loaves, strings of fish, pieces of meat, wool shearings [as they come] from the country of origin, stalks of flax and strips of purple wool, according to Rabbi Meir.  
Rabbi Judah says:  “Anything which has in it something unusual, must be proclaimed.  How is this so?  If he found a fig cake with a potsherd in it or a loaf with coins in it [he must proclaim them].”
Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:  “New merchandise need not be proclaimed.”

Explanation—Mishnah One
Since the Torah states that a person must return lost objects, it is necessary to decide which lost objects must be returned.  A society could not operate if every lost object had to be returned.  Imagine if every time you found a pen, or a coin or some other small not valuable item, you had to spend time trying to find the owners.  Furthermore, there are some lost items which could not be identified by their owner as belonging to them, such as money or mass produced merchandise.   If a person should lose one of these types of things, meaning either something that cannot be identified as his or something of little value, he does not expect to ever have it returned.  Such a situation is called in Hebrew “yeush” despair, and the legal consequence is that the finder may keep the lost object.
Section one lists objects that are either not identifiable as belonging to a specific person, or of little value.  We will learn the opposites of these items, meaning things that are of value and identifiable in the following mishnah.  Therefore we will explain them more fully later on.
According to Rabbi Judah, if there was a unidentifiable object which had something unusual about it, he must proclaim it.  (We will learn the process of proclaiming a lost object later in the chapter.)  For instance, a normal loaf of bread could not be identified as belonging to a certain person, and therefore the finder may keep it.  If, however, there was money in the bread, the owner could identify it, and therefore the finder must proclaim it.
According to Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar, mass produced merchandise need not be proclaimed.  This would be something akin to tupperware in our day.  Certainly before the item has been used its owner would not be able to give any special identification marks.  Therefore the finder may keep it.

Mishnah Two
And these must be proclaimed:  if a man found fruit in a vessel, or an empty vessel; or money in a bag, or an empty bag; piles of fruit or piles of money; three coins one on top of the other; small sheaves in the private domain; home-made loaves of bread; wool shearings as they come from the craftsman’s shop; jugs of wine or jugs of oil, these must be proclaimed.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Since this list is the opposite of the list mishnah one, it will help to line them both up in a table. 

Found objects which need not be proclaimed.
Found objects which must be proclaimed.
scattered fruit, 

scattered money, 

small sheaves in the public domain, 
cakes of figs, 
bakers’ loaves, 
strings of fish, pieces of meat, 
wool shearings [as they come] from the country of origin, 
stalks of flax and strips of purple woolfruit in a vessel, or an empty vessel; 
or money in a bag, or an empty bag; piles of fruit or piles of money; three coins one on top of the other; 
small sheaves in the private domain; 

home-made loaves of bread;
 
wool shearings as they come from the craftsman’s shop; 

jugs of wine or jugs of oil

1+2)  Scattered fruit and money cannot be identified by the owner.  However, if the fruit or money is in a container or piled up, the owner may be able to identify the container or the size and place of the pile and therefore the finder must proclaim.
Small sheaves in the public domain cannot be identified by where they were found, because people may have moved them.  However, in the private domain they can be identified by the place where they were found.
Bakers loaves are of standard size and shape and therefore cannot be identified.  Home-made loaves will all look different and therefore the owner could identify them.
Wool which has not been processed, nor imported will all look the same and therefore could not be identified.  However, if it has been processed by a craftsman, it would be identifiable and therefore must be proclaimed.

Questions for Further Thought:
Try to translate some of the categories of the mishnah into modern day items.  For instance, if one found a wallet, must he proclaim it?  What about a book?  A grocery bag full of groceries?  A computer? 
