Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five and the beginning of mishnah six continue to deal with business arrangements that are forbidden because they are usurious.  The remainder of mishnah six deals with lending with interest to gentiles.  

Mishnah Five
One may evaluate cows and donkeys and anything that works and eats [and give them to one’s fellow to raise] in order to share the profit.
Where the custom is to share the offspring immediately at birth, they do so; and where the custom is to first rear them [and then give them over to the owner], they do so.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “One may evaluate a calf with its mother, and a foal with its mother [and give them to one’s fellow to raise in order to share the profit.]
A tenant may offer increased rent in exchange for a loan to improve his field, without fearing that this is usury.


Explanation—Mishnah Five
Section one:  In the previous mishnah we learned that it is forbidden to give a person animals to raise in order to share the profit and losses.  Since in the end the person receiving the animals will repay the value of the animals plus half the value of the increase, this is considered interest.  However, we learned that if the person receives a wage for raising the animals then this arrangement is permitted, for it is not a loan but rather a work arrangement.  In other words the half of the profit goes to the owner in return for the wages and not in return for the loan.  Our mishnah teaches that if the animal can do work or produce profit, such as cows or donkeys, then the work that the animal does is considered the wages that the person raising them receives.  In this case the business arrangement is permitted.
Section two:  In section one the mishnah taught that if the animal can work or otherwise produce profit, such as a milking cow or a donkey which can carry a load, it is permitted for one to give it to another person in order to share the profits and losses.  If there are young born to the animal while this arrangement is in effect there is a potential problem.  The young animals cannot work or produce and therefore there may be a potential problem of interest.  The mishnah states, however, that the turning over of the animals immediately to the owner in order to avoid interest, is only necessary if that is the custom.  If it is not the custom to turn over the young animals until they mature, there is still no problem of interest.  Since the mothers will continue to produce the person raising them is still receiving a wage and not, therefore, in danger of paying interest to the owner.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel states that even from the outset young animals may be given to be raised with mature animals.  Although the young animals do not produce any profit, since the mature animals do produce profit the person raising them does receive a wage and there is no problem of interest.
Section three:  If Reuven owns a field and Shimon rents the field in order to pay a fixed yearly sum to Reuven, Shimon may ask Reuven to loan him money in order for Shimon to repay Reuven with a higher yearly sum.  The extra amount added to the sum is not considered to be interest on the loan but rather an increase in rent in return for Shimon’s working a more valuable field.  Since rent is permitted this business arrangement is not usurious.

Mishnah Six
One may not accept a flock from an Israelite on “iron terms” [that the one who tends the flock shares the profits from the flock and accepts full responsibility for their value].
But one may accept a flock from a gentile on “iron terms” and money may be borrowed from them and one may lend them money.
The same is true with a resident alien.
An Israelite may lend the money of a gentile with the knowledge [and consent] of the gentile but not with the knowledge of an Israelite.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  A person may not give his flock to another person on condition that the receiver accept full responsibility and that the two will share in the profits.  Since the person giving the flock is guaranteed to receive back his flock and will also receive half of the profit this is a form of usury.
Section two:  According to Deuteronomy 23:20-21 a Jew (Israelite) may lend and borrow with interest from a gentile but not from another Jew.  In order to understand this difference between gentiles and Jews we must understand that lending and borrowing with interest is not an immoral act.  It is actually fair and logical that the one who gives his money to others should receive a wage in return, just as one who gives his horse to others receives a wage in return.  The reason that the Torah forbids lending with interest to other Jews is that this is a form of charity.  A loan without interest is in actuality one of the highest forms of charity, and has been a practice of Jews throughout the ages.  According to Jewish law charity begins within one’s own community.  While it might be an ideal that one should be charitable to the whole world, it is impossible to obligate one community to support all communities.  A Jewish community is legally obligated to support the Jews within the community.  This obligation is not extended outside the community.  Since lending is not immoral it is permitted to do so with non-Jews.  
At the end of the mishnah we learn that if Reuven had borrowed money from a non-Jew he may loan that money to Shimon if the non-Jew consents.  He may not however lend the money to Shimon without the non-Jew’s consent since this would be a loan from one Jew to another. 



