
Mishnah Twelve
If a man makes personal use of a deposit:  
Bet Shammai holds that he is at a disadvantage whether the value rises or falls.
Bet Hillel says:  [He must restore the deposit] at its value at the time at which he put it to use.
Rabbi Akiva says: [He must restore the deposit] at its value at the time at which it is claimed.
One who expresses his intention to use a deposit [for personal use]:  
Bet Shammai says he is liable [for any subsequent damage to the deposit, as if he had already made use of it].
Bet Hillel says:  He is not liable until he actually uses it, as it says (Exodus 22:7):  “If he had not put his hand onto his neighbor’s property”.  
How is this so?
If he tilted the jug and took a quarter-log of wine and the jug was then broken, he only pays the quarter-log.
If he lifted it and then took a quarter-log and the jug was then broken, he pays for the whole jug. 

Explanation
Section one:  A guardian who uses a deposit for his own personal use without having permission to do so is liable to pay back the entire deposit if the deposit should be broken or otherwise lost.  The question asked is, at what value is he obligated to do so.  For instance if someone left a gold watch worth $500 with him.  If he uses the watch and it then breaks or is stolen, he must pay back a watch.  However, what would be the law if the price of gold went down and the watch was only worth $400 or vice versa and the price was worth $600.  According to Bet Shammai the guardian always pays the higher amount, whether that amount was the initial value or current value.  According to Bet Hillel the guardian must pay according to the value of the object when the guardian first used it, whether or not that is the higher amount or not.  According to Rabbi Akiva, he must always pay the value at the time of the claim, again whether or not that is the higher amount.
Section two:  According to Bet Shammai, the guardian is liable for the object even if he doesn’t actually use the deposit but lets it be known that he is thinking about using it.  From that moment on the deposit has become available to him and he is therefore liable to repay it if it should be lost (and even if he is not negligent).  According to Bet Hillel he is only liable if he actually takes the object.  How this happens is explained in the end of the mishnah.  Tilting a jug but leaving it on the ground is not legally considered “taking possession” of the object in order to be fully obligated for it.  In such a case he is only liable for what he took.  Only if he actually picks it up and uses it will he be subsequently liable if it breaks and therefore liable for the whole jug.
  
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eleven, section three:  Explain the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah.  Why does Rabbi Meir think that a shopkeeper is like a householder and Rabbi Judah think he is like a money-changer?
Mishnah twelve, section one:  Explain the reasoning behind Bet Shammai, Bet Hillel and Rabbi Akiva’s statements.  How do they each differ from one another?

