Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, 
Mishnayoth Seven, Eight and Nine

Introduction
The final three mishnayoth of chapter eight continue to deal with the laws of renting houses.
Mishnah seven deals with what “extras” are included in the standard rental of a house.  
Mishnah eight deals with a person who rents a house for a year and the year ends up being a leap year, which in the Hebrew calendar has an extra month.
Mishnah nine deals with the obligation of the landlord to provide his tenant with a new house should the old one fall.  

Mishnah Seven
If one rented a house to his fellow, he is obligated to provide it with a door, a bolt a lock and anything which is the work of a craftsman.  
However, that which is not the work of a craftsman, the tenant must make himself.  
The manure [which collects in the courtyard] belongs to the owner of the house, and the tenant can only claim the refuse from the oven and the stove.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  When a landlord rents a house to someone he is obligated to provide the house with a door, a bolt and a lock and any other type of accoutrement which is customarily part of the house and is the work of a craftsman.  An example might be the beams to support the walls or the handles to open the windows.  The assumption is that since these are customarily part of the house and the tenant could not make them by himself, the owner is obligated to do so.  An example in our day might be a toilet or a sink.  One who rents a house certainly expects it to have a toilet and a sink, and if it did not he could probably obligate the landlord to build one.  
Anything which is not the work of a craftsman, must be provided by the tenant himself.  Examples of these might be a ladder to reach the second story or a railing around the roof.  Since these are simple to make, the expectation is that the tenant will make them himself.       
Section two:  In the time of the mishnah the courtyard was shared by several householders and it was used for many purposes, such as cooking, laundry, etc. There was a custom that on market days, those who came to town from the neighboring villages would bring their animals into other people’s courtyards and buy food and drink there, as if the courtyard was a temporary inn.  Since we can assume that the animal owner himself would not bother to carry the animal’s manure back to his village, the issue of the ownership over the manure left by these animals needs to be clarified.  According to the mishnah it belongs to the owner of the house and not to his tenant.  Although the tenant provided the food and drink for the animal, the manure does not become his.  The only waste-product that the tenant does get to keep are the ashes from the stove and oven.  
Note: manure was used to fertilize the fields.  Ashes were also used to fertilize the fields as well as other uses, including medicinal.

Mishnah Eight
If one rented a house to his fellow by the year and the year was made a leap year, the extra month goes to the tenant.
If he rented it by the month and the year was made a leap year, the extra month goes to the owner.  
It once happened in Tzippori that a person leased a bath-house from his fellow at “twelve golden dinars a year, one dinar per month”, and [when the year became a leap year] the case came before Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel and Rabbi Yose, and they said:  “Let them share the extra month.”

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
In the time of the mishnah there was no fixed calendar as we have in our day.  Rather each year they would decide whether to make a leap year of 13 months or not.  The Hebrew months are lunar months, of either 28 or 29 days, making a total of 354 days per year.  Since this is 11 days short or a regular solar year, the Hebrew year must receive an additional month about once every three years.  
If one leased a house by a yearly wage and the year became a leap year, the tenant benefits by receiving an extra month for free.  Since the terms of the contract were for a year, the tenant receives a year, whether it is a leap year or not.  If, however, he leased the house by the month, and the year became a leap year, he must pay for the extra month.
In the story (1c), the rental agreement for the bath-house contained ambiguous language, stating both the yearly rate and the monthly rate.  Since it was unclear whether the owner had rented the house on a yearly or monthly rate, they split the cost of the extra month.

Mishnah Nine
If one rented a house to his fellow and it fell down, the owner must build him a new house.
If it was small he may not make it larger, and if it was large he may not make it smaller. 
If it was one house, he may not make it two; if it was two houses he may not make it one.
He may not reduce or increase the number of windows, unless it is with both of their consent.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
If one rented a house to another person and the house fell down he must build him a new house that is basically the same as the previously rented house.  He may neither add nor detract from the size of the house.  The renter may have specifically rented a small house and may not want a larger house.  If he rented a house with one room (1b) he may not split the house into two rooms or build a one room house if the former was two rooms.  Nor may he increase or decrease the number of windows.  Since in all of these cases a person might prefer the other option, the owner is obligated to build the same type of house that was previously rented.
If, however, the tenant agrees to a change and the owner agrees as well, they may of course make any change they wish.  
