Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The first mishnah of chapter eight deals with a specific law which is applicable only to borrowers:  if the owners were rented or borrowed with their animals, for instance a donkey driver with his donkey, then the borrowers or renters are not obligated if the animal should die.
Mishnah two deals with a person who rents an animal for half a day and borrows it for the other half.

Mishnah One
If one borrowed a cow together with the service of its owner, or hired its owner together with the cow, or if he borrowed the service of the owner or hired him, and afterward borrowed the cow, and the cowed died he is not liable, for it is written, “If its owner was with it no restitution need be made” (Exodus 22:14).  
But if he first borrowed the cow and afterward borrowed or hired the service of its owner, and the cow died, he is liable, for it is written, “Its owner not being with it, he must make restitution” (Exodus 22:13).

Explanation—Mishnah One
The Torah clearly states that if the owner of the animal was with the animal when it was borrowed and then it died or was injured the borrower is not obligated to make restitution.  The assumption is that the owners should have taken care of the animal and therefore even though the borrower would normally be liable for the animal dying or being injured in this case he is not.  
Our mishnah clarifies two issues.  First of all, it states that the services of the owner need not have been borrowed but may have been hired as well.  As long as the cow is borrowed these laws will be applicable.  Second, the services of the owner must have been borrowed or hired before the borrowing of the cow.  The Rabbis interpret the Torah’s words “with it” or “not being with it” to mean that the owner was in service to the borrower at the time of the borrowing and not afterwards.  If the borrower hired or borrowed the services of the owner after having borrowed the cow he will be liable if the cow dies, even if at that time the owner was with the cow.

Mishnah Two
If one borrowed a cow, and borrowed it for half a day and hired it for half a day; or borrowed it for one day and hired it for the next; or if he borrowed one cow, and hired another and the cow died—
if he that lent the cow says: “It was the borrowed cow that died”, [or] “On the day when it was borrowed it died”, [or] “During the time when it was borrowed it died” and the other one says: “I don’t know”, 
he is liable.
If the hirer says, “It is the hired one that died”, [or] “On the day when it was hired it died”, and the other says, “I do not know”, 
he is not liable.
If the one says, “It was borrowed”, and the other says, “It was hired”, 
the hirer must take an oath that it was the hired one that died.
If the one says, “I do not know”, and the other says, “I do not know”,
they share in the loss.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
There are three possible scenarios mentioned in this mishnah 1)  Shimon borrows from Reuven a cow for half a day and rents the same cow for the other half of the day; 2)  Shimon borrows the cow for one day and hires it on the next day; 3)  Shimon borrows from Reuven one cow and rents a different cow.  If the cow should die a natural death it will be in Shimon’s best interest that the cow died while it was being hired, since a hirer does not pay in cases of natural death.  It will be in Reuven’s best interest if the cow died while being borrowed since borrowers do pay in cases of natural death.  Our mishnah delineates the possible claims of Reuven and Shimon and the law in each case.
Case a:  If Reuven, who lent the cow, claims that he is certain that the cow died while being rented or that the rented cow died and Shimon claims that he doesn’t know, Shimon is liable.  This goes according to the general principle that one who claims that he is certain has a stronger claim then one who claims he is not certain (see Steinsaltz reference guide, page 172.
Case b:  Similarly, if Shimon claims that he is sure that the cow died while being borrowed or that the borrowed cow died and Reuven claims that he does not know, Shimon is exempt.  Since Shimon is certain that the borrowed cow died and Reuven doesn’t know, Shimon’s claim is stronger.
Case c:  If they disagree and each claims that he is certain, Shimon takes an oath that it died while it was being hired and he is exempt from making restitution.  This is based on the principle that the burden of proof is upon the plaintiff.  Since in this case Reuven is the plaintiff and he cannot prove his claim, Shimon is exempt.
Case d:  If both claim that they are uncertain then they split the loss of the cow.  In this case Shimon will pay Reuven half the value of the cow.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  Why might the Rabbis have interpreted the verses in Exodus 22:13-14 in this way and not in a more literal manner?  
