Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
In mishnayoth one and two we learned which lost objects a person may keep and which he must declare as lost.  In mishnah three we learn a third category:  objects that seem to be lost but may not be touched.  There are some things that may not have been lost but rather put in their current place by their owner so that the she could return and get them later.  One who sees such things should not touch them lest the owners later have difficulty finding the object.
Mishnah four deals with lost items found in different places inside stores.

Mishnah Three
If a man found pigeons tied together behind a fence or a hedge or on footpaths in the fields, he may not touch them.
If he found an object in the dungheap and it was covered up he may not touch it, but if it was exposed he should take it and proclaim.
If he found it in a pile of stones or in an old wall it belongs to him.
If he found it in a new wall and it was on the outside [of the wall] it belongs to him.
If it was on the inner side it belongs to the householder.
But if the house had been hired to others, even if a man found something within the house, it belongs to him.

Explanation 
Section one: If a person finds pigeons tied together in a place where they may have been left on purpose by their owner, he must leave them there. Perhaps the owner had brought his pigeons with him to the field in order to slaughter them and eat them later for his dinner.  (Remember they had no refrigeration, so one would not want to slaughter something in order to eat it later).  Rather then carry them around with him in the field he tied them up so that they would not fly away, and he put them behind a fence.  If the person were to find them and take them in order to proclaim them as a lost item the owner would have to go looking for them.  Therefore the mishnah says they shouldn’t be touched.
Section two:  If a person finds an object hidden in a dungheap, he may assume that someone put it there to hide it and will come back for it later.  In such a case he should not take it.  If, however, it is exposed then thieves might come along and take it.  In such a case the finder should take it and proclaim it as a lost item.  
Section three:  If one finds something in an old wall or under a pile of stones, and it is apparent that it has been there for quite a while, then he may keep it.  It can be assumed that the owners forgot about it (yeush, despair) and therefore the item is legally ownerless.  If, however, he were to find something in a new wall, he cannot make such a blanket assumption.  If the item is on the outer part of the new wall, he may keep it, since anyone from the public domain may have put it there.  (We are assuming that the object does not have a sign by which the person who lost it could identify it.)  If it was on the inner part of the wall it belongs to the householder.  Finally, if the house owner were using his house as an inn and place where many people passed through, then a found item there belongs to the finder.  Although the item was in another person’s house, since the house was occupied by many people we cannot make an assumption as to who owned the item.

Mishnah Four
If he found [something] in a shop, it belongs to him.
But if he found it between the counter and the shopkeeper it belongs to the shopkeeper.  
If he found it in front of the money-changer it belongs to him.
But if between the stool and the money-changer it belongs to the money-changer.
If a man bought fruit from his fellow or if his fellow sent him fruit and he found coins therein, they belong to him.
But if they were tied up he must take them and proclaim them.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  If a person finds something in a shop, for example a cheap pair of sunglasses, and it is not an item sold in the shop, he may keep it.  (Again, we can assume that this was an object without an identifying mark and therefore it could not be proclaimed.)  Even though the item was found on the shopkeeper’s property, since many people come in and out of the store it could have belonged to any of them.  If, however, the object was found behind the counter, the assumption is that the shopkeeper himself lost it.  Therefore it belongs to him.  
Section two:  The rule here is the same as the rule in the previous section.  If the item was found in a place where many people mill about, then it belongs to the finder.  If it is found in a place generally occupied only by the money-changer, then it belongs to the money-changer.
Section three:  If a person receives a bundle of fruit and there were a few coins scattered amongst the fruit he may keep the coins.  If, however, there was a bag of coins, he must proclaim the bag, as we learned in mishnah two.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  What do you think he should do if he were to find pigeons tied up but not behind a fence, for instance in a public place?  Should he leave them there?  Should he pick them up and proclaim them?  Or do they belong to the finder?
Mishnah four, section three:  Why don’t we assume that the scattered coins belong to the person who gave him the fruit?  In other words, why is he not obligated to return the coins to the person who gave him the fruit?

