Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnayoth Eleven and Twelve

Introduction
Mishnah eleven and the beginning of mishnah twelve deal with a seller’s mixing produce that comes from different fields or wine from different winepresses.  The potential problem is that the seller might mix good produce with bad produce in order to hide the bad produce and thereby make it easier to sell.  The remainder of mishnah twelve deals with other competitive and deceptive business practices.

Mishnah Eleven
Produce may not be mixed together with other produce, even new produce with new produce, and needless to say new with old.
In truth they permitted sharp wine to be mixed with weak wine, since this improves [the taste].
Wine lees may not be mixed with wine, but [the seller] may give [the buyer] the lees that come from the same wine.
One whose wine has been mixed with water may not sell it in a store unless he informs [the buyer] and not to a merchant even if he has informed him, since [the merchant would buy it] only to deceive with it.
In a place where they are accustomed to put water in wine, they may do so.

Explanation
One is not allowed to mix produce that comes from one field with produce that comes from another field, lest one field makes better produce than the other field. In other words, a buyer has a right to know from which field his produce is coming.  New produce, probably grain that has not fully dried out, is not as valuable as old produce.  Nevertheless it is forbidden to mix the produce even if both sets of produce are new.  Needless to say it is forbidden to mix new produce with the old.  In modern times this is akin to selling a bushel of fruit where the good fruit is on top and the bad fruit is hidden on the bottom.
Sharp wine may be mixed with weak wine since the mixture will improve the taste of both wines.  
A seller may not artificially add lees to a jug of wine, thereby seeming to increase the amount of wine he is selling.  On the other hand, he may sell a jug of wine with the lees that come from that wine itself.  In other words, although he may not add lees to wine, he need not remove the already existing lees before he sells it.  A buyer of wine should expect to receive a normal amount of lees.
One who has diluted his wine, probably to make it more drinkable, cannot sell it in a store unless he informs the purchasers that they are buying already diluted wine.  He may not sell the wine to a merchant even if he informs the merchant, lest the merchant sell the wine to others without informing them that the wine is already diluted.
