Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with a lender who uses an agent to deliver the object to be borrowed to the borrower. 
Mishnah four deals with disputes in sales where it is either unknown whether the cow being sold gave birth before it was sold (in which case the calf belongs to the seller) or after it was sold (in which case the calf belongs to the buyer).  Similarly this mishnah deals with a dispute between a buyer and a seller over which field or slave was sold, the larger or the smaller one.

Mishnah Three
If one borrowed a cow and the owner sent it by the hand of his son or his slave or his agent, or by the hand of the borrower’s son or slave or agent and it died [on the way], the borrower is not liable.
But if the borrower said, “Send it to me by the hand of my son or my slave or my agent, or by the hand of your son or your slave or your agent”, 
or if the lender said, “I am sending it to you by the hand of my son or my slave or my agent”, or “by the hand of your son or your slave or your agent”, and the borrower said, “Send it”, and he sent it and it died [on the way], the borrower is liable.
So, too, when the cow is returned.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
The issue in this mishnah is the liability of the borrower during the time when the borrowed animal is being delivered from the lender to the borrower. If the lender sent it with a third party, be it his own son, slave or agent or even the borrower’s son, slave or agent, without being asked to do so by the borrower then the borrower is not liable for the animal until it reaches him.  The borrower can say to the lender that he did not agree to accept liability until the animal reached his hand.  
If, however, the borrower requested that the lender send the object with someone else or the lender told him that he was going to do so and the borrower agreed, then the borrower is liable for the object as soon as the animal leaves the hand of the lender.  Since the borrower agreed that the animal could be delivered by a third party, it is as if he has accepted responsibility immediately.
All that was stated in the previous part of the mishnah is also true at the time when the animal is being returned.  If the borrower sends the animal back through a third party without being asked he is responsible for the animal until it reaches the lender.  If, however, the lender told him to return it through a third party or the borrower told him that he was returning it through a third party and the lender agreed, from the moment it leaves his hands the borrower is no longer liable for the animal.

Mishnah Four
If one swapped a cow for a donkey, and it gave birth,
So too if one sold his slave and she gave birth,
[And] one (the seller) says, “It was born before I sold her”, and the other (the buyer) says, “It was born after I bought her”, they shall divide [the value of what was born].
If one had two slaves, one large and the other small, or two fields, one large and the other small,[And he sold one of them], 
If the buyer says, “I bought the large one” and the other says, “I don’t know”, the buyer can rightly claim the large one.
If the seller said, “I sold the small one” and the buyer said, “I do not know”, he may only take the small one.
If one said, “It was the large one” and the other said, “It was the small one”, the seller must take an oath that it was the small one that he sold [and the buyer can only take the small one].
If one said, “I do not know”, and the other said, “I do not know”, they shall divide the value [of both slaves or fields].

Explanation—Mishnah Four
The principles learned in this mishnah are strikingly similar to those learned in mishnah two of this chapter, so it may help to look at the explanation to that mishnah as well.  Basically, the mishnah teaches that when two people are both certain about a claim (and there is no corroborating evidence) they split the disputed amount.  The caveat to this rule is that if there is a previous assumption of possession favoring one of the parties, the other party must prove his claim in order to win the dispute.  If one party claims that he is certain and the other party that he is unsure, the one who claims certainty wins the dispute.  If both are uncertain they also split the disputed amount.  We will now go through the examples in this mishnah.
Section one:  If this scenario a person exchanged a donkey for a cow and the cow gave birth but it is unknown when it gave birth.  The one who acquired the cow will claim that the cow gave birth after the swap and therefore the calf belongs to him, and the one who gave his cow will claim that the birth was prior to the swap and therefore the young cow belongs to him.  In this case, since there is no previous assumption of ownership over the young cow, the two parties split its value.  The same principle is true if the seller sold a female slave and the dispute is over when she gave birth, before or after the sale.
Section two:  In this scenario a person sold one of two slaves or fields to his friend, and the two parties are disputing whether it the larger or smaller slave or field was sold.  There are four possibilities for the two claims.  1)  If they buyer claims that he is certain that he bought the large one and the seller is uncertain which he sold, the buyer gets the large one.  2)  If the seller claims that he is certain that he sold the small one and the buyer is uncertain, the buyer receives only the small one.  3)  If they are both certain then the seller must take an oath that he sold the small one and the buyer only receives the small one.  4)  If both are uncertain they split the value of both of the fields or both of the slaves. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  Why does the mishnah need to state that the same law is true whether or not the deliverer is the lender’s son, slave or agent or the borrower’s son, slave or agent?  If the mishnah had not stated all of the possibilities what might you have thought?
Mishnah four:  In section one and section 2iii, both parties claim certainty.  Nevertheless in section one they split the value and in section 2iii, the seller takes an oath and the buyer gets only the smaller field or slave.  Why is the law in these two sections different?  What is essentially different about the two situations?
