Bava Metziah Chapter Six Mishnayoth Four and Five

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today continue to discuss the main topic of the chapter:  breaches of contract.
Mishnah four deals with one who hires a cow to plow on a certain type of terrain and then uses the cow for a different terrain and the plow attached to the cow breaks.  Alternatively he hires the cow to thresh a certain type of produce and then he uses it to thresh a different type of produce and the cow slips and is injured.
Mishnah five deals with one who hires a donkey to carry a load of a certain weight or volume and then adds on to that weight or volume, thereby causing the donkey and be injured.

Mishnah Four
If one hired a cow to plow in the hill country and he plowed in the valley, if the plowshare was broken he is exempt.
[If one hired a cow to plow] in the valley and he plowed in the hill country, if the plowshare was broken he is liable.
[If one hired it] to thresh beans and he threshed grain [and the cow slipped and was injured], he is exempt.  
[If one hired it] to thresh grain and he threshed beans [and the cow slipped and was injured], he is liable.  

Explanation—Mishnah Four
The general principle behind this mishnah (and the other mishnayoth of the chapter) is that if one hires an animal to do work in which it is unlikely to sustain a certain type of injury and he then uses the animal for a work in which he would be more likely to sustain that injury and the animal is injured he is obligated.  If however he uses the animal for work in which the animal would be less likely to be injured and the animal is injured he is exempt from paying damages.
Section one:  The land in a valley is softer and less likely to break the plowshare than  the land in the hill country.  Therefore if he hires the cow and its plowshare to work in the rocky hill country and he uses it in the softer valley and the plowshare still breaks he is exempt.  The assumption is that if it broke in the valley all the more so it would have broken in the hill country.  If, however, he hired it to plow in the valley and he plowed with it in the hill country and the plowshare broke he is liable.  The assumption is that if he had taken it to the valley, as he was supposed to, it would not have broken.
Section two:  An animal is more likely to slip and be damaged while threshing beans than while threshing grain. Therefore if he was supposed to thresh beans and he threshed grain and the animal slipped he is exempt.  However, if he was supposed to thresh grain and he threshed beans he is liable, since he made the animal do a more difficult work than he had hired it for.

Mishnah Five
If one hired a donkey to carry wheat and he used it to carry [a like weight] of barley, he is liable [if the donkey was injured].
[If he hired it to carry] grain and he used it to carry [a like weight of] chopped straw he is liable, since the greater bulk is more difficult to carry.
[If he hired it to carry] a letech of wheat and it carried a letech of barley he is not liable.
But if he increased the weight, he is liable.
What increase in weight renders him liable?
Symmachos says in the name of Rabbi Meir:  “One seah for a camel and three kavs for a donkey.”

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Section one:  In the scenario mentioned in this section, although the person did not add weight to the load being carried by the donkey, he did add bulk.  In such a manner he made the work more difficult and is therefore liable if the donkey was injured.  In the examples given barley is bulkier than wheat and straw is bulkier than produce.  
Section two:  If he hired the donkey to carry a letech of wheat, which is a unit of volume, and he carried a letech of barley he is exempt if the donkey was injured.  Although he changed the terms of the contract since he in essence lightened the load (barley is lighter than wheat) he is exempt.  If, on the other hand, he actually increased the weight he will certainly be liable.  The end of the mishnah then proceeds to ask how much weight increase will cause him to be liable.  According to Symmachus (the name of a Sage) in the name of Rabbi Meir one seah per camel, which is 1/15 of a letech or three kavs (1/2 seah) for a donkey.  Less than this and the hirer is not liable.  

Questions for Further Thought:
In mishnah three we learned that a hirer who does not abide by the terms of the contract is automatically liable for any damage.  However, in mishnayoth four and five there are circumstances where he is not automatically liable even though he did not abide by the terms of the contract.  How are these mishnayoth different from the previous one?
