Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Thirteen

Introduction
The final mishnah of chapter nine discusses the laws concerning a creditor’s taking of a pledge from a borrower. A pledge is an object probably worth about the value of the loan.  The borrower actually gives the pledge to the lender before receiving the loan.  It is to be distinguished from collateral which does not go to the lender unless the borrower defaults on his loan.
There are three passages in Deuteronomy 24 concerning “pledges”.  Verse 6 states:  “Do not take a mill or an upper millstone as a pledge, for that would be taking someone’s life as a pledge”.  In other words, since these two objects are necessary to produce food, a lender is prohibited from taking them.  Verses 10-13 state two laws regarding pledges:  1) when one takes a pledge he must not enter the borrower’s house; 2)  if the lender is poor the borrower may not keep his pledge overnight.  The assumption here is that the pledge was a cloak in which the poor person will need to sleep.  Verse 17 states, “Do not take the a widow’s garment as a pledge”.

Mishnah Thirteen
If one lent one’s fellow, he may exact a pledge from him only with the permission of a court, and he may not enter his house to take the pledge, as it is states, “You shall stand outside” (Deut. 24:11).    
If the borrower had two utensils, he may take one but must give back the other.
And he must give back the pillow at night and the plow during the day.
And if the creditor dies he need not return the pledge to his heirs.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “Even to the debtor himself he need only return the pledge within thirty days [of the loan], and after thirty days he may sell it with the consent of the court.
A pledge may not be taken from a widow, whether she be rich or poor, as it states, “Do not take the a widow’s garment as a pledge” (Deut. 24:17).  
If one takes a millstone as a pledge he violates a negative commandment and he is also in violation of both parts [of the millstone], as it states, “Do not take a mill or an upper millstone as a pledge” (Deut. 24:6).
And they didn’t say just an upper millstone or a mill but anything that is necessary for food, as it states, “for that would be taking someone’s life as a pledge” (ibid.).

Explanation—Mishnah Thirteen
Section one:  The Torah states that when a creditor takes a pledge from a poor person he should not enter his house to collect the pledge.  Entering his house would humiliate the borrower.  The mishnah expands this prohibition to include any borrower, and not just one who is known to be poor.  Furthermore, the mishnah demands that the pledge be taken with the consent of the court, probably to prevent creditors from unfairly seizing the property of their debtors.
Section two:  The Torah states that a creditor may not keep overnight something that the borrower will need during the night, for instance a cloak in which he sleeps.  The mishnah states that if the borrower had two such cloaks, and both were taken as a pledge, the creditor need only return one.  The Torah discusses only a cloak which is essential to the borrower at night; one that is not essential may indeed be kept overnight.  The mishnah adds that a creditor must return during the day items which are essential during the day, such as a plow.  According to the mishnah the example in the Torah is just an example, one that sets up a paradigm demanding that the creditor only keep a pledge at a time when the pledge is not needed by the borrower.  The Torah’s law is not limited just to the case of a cloak.
Section three:  If the borrower should die the creditor need not return the pledge to his heirs.  The Torah’s concern is for the humiliation of the borrower.  Once he is dead, this concern no longer exists.  If the heirs wish to recover the pledge they will need to repay the loan.  Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says that a creditor may keep a pledge not just when the borrower dies but even after thirty days have expired since the time of the loan.  At this point the creditor may sell the pledge to recover the debt.
Section four:  The Torah states that one may not take a pledge from a widow.  The mishnah states that this is true whether the widow is rich or poor.
Section five:  The Torah states that one may not take a mill or an upper millstone as a pledge from a poor person.  These two pieces of equipment are together used to grind wheat and without them the poor person could not make bread to eat.  According to the mishnah the creditor who takes both of them is in violation of not one but two negative commandments, one for each piece.  Furthermore, the mishnah again expands on the examples specifically mentioned in the Torah.  The Torah mentions only the mill and upper millstone for they are a person’s “life”.  Picking up on the last phrase of the verse the mishnah states that anything that helps to make food and is therefore a person’s “life” may not be taken as a pledge.

Questions for Further Thought:
Section four:  The mishnah explains that it is forbidden to take a pledge from even a rich widow, and states that this is explicit in the Torah.  Is it possible to explain verse 17 in Deut. 24 in another way, in other words that the prohibition is limited to poor widows?  If so, why do you think the mishnah chose this explanation?
The Rabbis twice expand on the specific examples mentioned in the Torah.  What is their motivation in doing so?


