Bava Metziah Chapter Six Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The sixth and most of the seventh chapters of Bava Metziah deal with various employment laws.  The two mishnayoth which will we learn today discuss the consequences of employers or employees reneging.

Mishnah One
If one hired craftsmen and they deceived each other, they have no legally valid complain against each other, but only cause for complaint.
If one hired a donkey-driver or a wagon-driver to bring litter-bearers or pipers for a bride or for the dead, or laborers to take his flax out of the steep, or any matter that would be lost if delayed, and they retracted, if it was a place where there were no others [who could be hired for the same wage] he may hire others at their (the original workers) expense or he may deceive them.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  If an employer hired people to come work for him and then either side deceived the other side, for instance if the employer paid a lower wage than is generally acceptable or the employee claimed a higher wage than acceptable or one of the sides reneged on the deal, neither side can make a legal claim against the other side.  All they can do is file a legal complaint which might damage the other side’s reputation but will not be sufficient to force the other side to make monetary compensation.  Note that this is all in a case where there was no legally valid contract before the work began.  If there had been then each side would be obligated to fulfill their obligations.  Furthermore this mishnah deals with a case where the reneging occurs before the work begins.  The following mishnah will deal with a case where one side reneges after the work has begun.
Section two:  In this situation the employer had hired workers to do a type of work that if not done immediately would be lost, such as carrying a bride to her wedding or carrying the dead to the graveyard or playing the flute at either a wedding or funeral, or removing flax from the steep which if not done immediately would ruin the flax.  If in such a case the workers reneged on their deal by not showing up the employee has two options.  The first option is to hire other workers at a higher rate and collect the extra money he had to pay from the original workers.  In other words if the first workers charged 5 dollars per hour and the workers found at the last minute charge 10 dollars per hour, he can collect the extra five dollars per hour from the original workers.  However, he may only do so if there are no other workers available for the same original rate.  The second option is to deceive the original workers by telling them that they will get a higher wage and then not giving it to them in the end.  Although deception is generally illegal, since the workers themselves put the employer into this situation, he is allowed to deceive them.

Mishnah Two
If one hired craftsmen and they retracted, they are at a disadvantage. 
If the householder (the employer) retracted he is at a disadvantage.
Whosoever changes [the conditions of a contract] is at a disadvantage.
And anyone who retracts is at a disadvantage.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  If one hired craftsmen and they retracted in the middle of fulfilling their contract, for instance painting a house, they are at a disadvantage.  In such a case the householder who wants to have the rest of his house painted will need to hire more workers.  If the second set of workers are more expensive than the first set the householder is allowed to reduce the wages paid to the first set of workers in order to compensate for paying more to the second set.  If the second set are cheaper the first set of workers cannot ask for more money for doing the first half of the work, even though in the end the householder will pay a smaller total amount for the work.  In this way the first workers who reneged in the middle of a deal can lose money but not gain.  
Section two:  If, however, the employer changed his mind in the middle of the painting of the house, he is at a disadvantage.  If the price of workers has gone up, he still must pay the first set of workers the full wage for the work they had done. If the price of workers has gone down he must pay the first workers the full total wage, minus what he has had to pay to the second workers.  In such a way the employer will lose money, if the price of workers has gone up, but he will not gain, even if the price of workers has gone down.
Section three:  If a person hires someone to do a certain piece of work in a certain way, for instance to color his wool red, and the employee did it in a different way, for instance he colored it green, the employee is at a disadvantage.  If the cost of the dye was higher than the improvement in the price of the wool, from non-dyed wool to green wool, then the employer pays him the lower amount, that is the amount of improvement.  If the amount that the wool was improved was higher than the cost of the dye than the employer only pays for the cost of the dye.  (See Bava Kamma 9:4).
Section four:  This section summarizes what was in the first section of the mishnah.

Questions for Further Thought:
Do these laws seem to favor the employer or the employee?  From these mishnayoth what rights does it seem that each side has? 
According to mishnah two does an employee have a right to stop working in the middle of a job?  Compare this with contract law in modern times.  How are they similar and how are they different?
