Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
Most of the ninth chapter deals with arrangements between a field owner and his sharecropper, i.e. one who works the field and in return provides the owner with a fixed amount of produce (either through a percentage of the crops or a fixed amount).  The first mishnah deals with some of the sharecroppers rights and obligations with regards to the field.  The second mishnah deals with a field that has either a spring or a tree in it and the spring dries up or the tree is cut down.

Mishnah One
If one leased a field from his fellow and the custom of the place was to cut the crops, he must cut them; 
If the custom was to uproot them, he must uproot them; 
If the custom was to plough after reaping, he must plough.
Everything should follow local custom.
Just as they share the grain, so too they share the chopped straw and the stubble.
Just as they share the wine, so too they share the [dead] branches and the reeds [used to prop the vines].
And both parties must [at the outset] provide [their share of] the reeds.

Explanation
Section one:  A sharecropper must reap the field which he received from the owner in the manner that is normal for that type of crop in that area.  If the custom was to cut the crops with a scythe then he must use the scythe.  If the custom was to uproot the stalks then he must uproot them.  Similarly, if the custom was to plough after reaping in order to uproot the weeds, then he must do so.  If the custom was not to plough, the owner may not force him to do so.  In summary, the owner of the field can force the sharecropper to treat the field in a “customary” manner, and the sharecropper need not perform “uncustomary” practices which the owner might demand.
Section two:  A sharecropper gives the owner of the field a percentage of the produce that is harvested, for instance grain.  Our mishnah teaches that he must also give the owner the same percentage of by-products.  If the field is of grain, he must give the owner the same percentage of straw and stubble, which are the by-products of the grain stalks.  If he harvests grapes to make wine, he must give the same percentage of the vine’s branches (which people would use to start fires) and reeds.  The reeds referred to are those used to prop up the grape vines.  The mishnah then adds that when a new vineyard is being started, the owner of the field and the sharecropper split the costs of the reeds needed to prop up the vines.


