Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishnayoth
Eleven and Twelve

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of chapter three continue to deal with the laws of things left in another person’s guard.  Mishnah eleven deals with coins left for another person to guard.  Mishnah twelve deals with a guardian who uses something deposited with him, even though he does not have permission to do so.

Mishnah Eleven
If a man left coins with a money-changer:
If they were tied up [in a bag], he may not use them.
Therefore, if they were lost, he is not responsible.
If they were loose, he may use they were.
Therefore, they were was lost, he is responsible.
[If a man left coins] with a householder,
Whether they were loose or tied up, he may not use them.
Therefore, if they were lost he his not responsible.
A shopkeeper is like a householder, according to Rabbi Meir.
Rabbi Judah says a shopkeeper is like a money-changer.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
This mishnah deals with two laws, one being directly related to the other.  The first law is the legality of a guardian using coins deposited with him.  The second is his responsibility if the coins were lost or stolen (in a case where the loss was not due to his negligence).  The rule is that if the guardian has the right to use the coins than he is responsible if they are lost (even if he was not negligible with them).
Section one:  If a person leaves coins with a money-changer and the coins are tied up, assumedly the person does not want the money-changer to use the coins.  Therefore he may not use them and is not responsible if they were lost.  If, however, the coins were not tied up, the money-changer may use them.  The fact that the owner left the coins with a money-changer who frequently needs coinage, means that the owner gave them to him assuming that the money-changer would use them.  Since he may use the coins, he is responsible for their loss.
Section two:  A regular householder does not use coins nearly as much as a money-changer and therefore when the owner gives them to him he assumes that the householder will not use them.  Therefore he cannot use them, even if they were loose.  He is also not obligated if they are lost.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Meir the laws regarding a shopkeeper are like those regarding a householder and according to Rabbi Judah they are like those regarding a money-changer.

Mishnah Twelve
If a man makes personal use of a deposit:  
Bet Shammai holds that he is at a disadvantage whether the value rises or falls.
Bet Hillel says:  [He must restore the deposit] at its value at the time at which he put it to use.
Rabbi Akiva says: [He must restore the deposit] at its value at the time at which it is claimed.
One who expresses his intention to use a deposit [for personal use]:  
Bet Shammai says he is liable [for any subsequent damage to the deposit, as if he had already made use of it].
Bet Hillel says:  He is not liable until he actually uses it, as it says (Exodus 22:7):  “If he had not put his hand onto his neighbor’s property”.  
How is this so?
If he tilted the jug and took a quarter-log of wine and the jug was then broken, he only pays the quarter-log.
If he lifted it and then took a quarter-log and the jug was then broken, he pays for the whole jug. 

Explanation—Mishnah Twelve
Section one:  A guardian who uses a deposit for his own personal use without having permission to do so is liable to pay back the entire deposit if the deposit should be broken or otherwise lost.  The question asked is, at what value is he obligated to do so.  For instance if someone left a gold watch worth $500 with him.  If he uses the watch and it then breaks or is stolen, he must pay back a watch.  However, what would be the law if the price of gold went down and the watch was only worth $400 or vice versa and the price was worth $600.  According to Bet Shammai the guardian always pays the higher amount, whether that amount was the initial value or current value.  According to Bet Hillel the guardian must pay according to the value of the object when the guardian first used it, whether or not that is the higher amount or not.  According to Rabbi Akiva, he must always pay the value at the time of the claim, again whether or not that is the higher amount.
Section two:  According to Bet Shammai, the guardian is liable for the object even if he doesn’t actually use the deposit but lets it be known that he is thinking about using it.  From that moment on the deposit has become available to him and he is therefore liable to repay it if it should be lost (and even if he is not negligent).  According to Bet Hillel he is only liable if he actually takes the object.  How this happens is explained in the end of the mishnah.  Tilting a jug but leaving it on the ground is not legally considered “taking possession” of the object in order to be fully obligated for it.  In such a case he is only liable for what he took.  Only if he actually picks it up and uses it will he be subsequently liable if it breaks and therefore liable for the whole jug.
  
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eleven, section three:  Explain the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah.  Why does Rabbi Meir think that a shopkeeper is like a householder and Rabbi Judah think he is like a money-changer?
Mishnah twelve, section one:  Explain the reasoning behind Bet Shammai, Bet Hillel and Rabbi Akiva’s statements.  How do they each differ from one another?

