Bava Metziah, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Eight and Nine

Introduction
The first line of mishnah eight introduces the laws concerning of guardians, which will continue to be the topic throughout the remainder of the chapter and the beginning of chapter eight.  Some of these laws were discussed in chapter three of Bava Metziah. 

Mishnah Eight
Those that guard [gathered] produce may eat from it because that is the custom of the land and not because that is the law of the Torah.
There are four kinds of guardians:  an unpaid guardian, a borrower, a paid guardian and a hirer.  
An unpaid guardian may take an oath [that he had not been neglectful] in every case [of loss or damage and be free of liability].  
A borrower must make restitution in every case.
A paid guardian or a hirer may take an oath if the beast was injured, or taken captive or dead, but he must make restitution if it was lost or stolen.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  A guardian is not considered by the law of the Torah to be the type of worker who may eat from the produce with which he is working.  Therefore, according to the law in the Torah a guardian may not eat of this produce.  However, since local custom permits him to do so, he is allowed.  Note, in this mishnah we see two important sources of Jewish law, the Torah and local custom.
Section two:  This section lists the four types of guardians in Jewish law.  The general principle is that the more benefit a guardian receives and the less benefit he gives to the owner of the object, the more liable he will be if the object is ruined.  Therefore a borrower, who does not pay and gets use of the object pays in any case that the object is ruined.  On the other hand, an unpaid guardian only gives benefit to the owner and receives no benefit in return.  Therefore in all cases in which something occurs to the object that he is guarding he may take an oath that he was not neglectful and be exempt from liability.  Paid guardians and hirers are in-between cases.  The hirer gets use of the object but he pays for such use.  The paid guardian is not allowed to use the object but he gets paid for watching it.  Therefore both of these guardians are sometimes allowed to take an oath and thereby be exempt from liability and sometimes they are liable to pay the owner. If the animal was lost or stolen and is no longer in front of us, they must pay the owner the value of the animal.  If, however, it died a natural death, was taken captive or injured then they may take an oath and exempt themselves from liability.

Mishnah Nine
If one wolf [attacked the flock that he was watching] it does not count as an unavoidable accident [for which no blame is placed on the guardian].  
Two wolves do count as an unavoidable accident.
Rabbi Judah says:  “In a time where wolves are commonly attacking the settlements, even one wolf is considered to be an unavoidable accident.”
Two dogs do not count as an unavoidable accident.
Yadua the Babylonian said in the name of Rabbi Meir says:  “If [two dogs came] from one direction they do not count as an unavoidable accident, but if [they came] from two directions they count as an unavoidable accident.  
A bandit counts as an unavoidable accident.
A lion or a bear or a leopard or a panther or a serpent counts as an unavoidable accident.
When [is this so]?
When they come of themselves.  But if he took the flock to a place of wild animals or bandits they do not count as an unavoidable accident.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
In the previous mishnah we learned that one who hirers an animal or one who is being paid to watch it is not liable if it was injured, taken captive or died a natural death.  In our mishnah we learn that the hirer or paid guardian are not liable in any case where something happened to the animal that was beyond his control. This is called “ones” in Hebrew, and it means an unavoidable accident.  This mishnah deals with attacks by wild animals on a flock that are out of the hirer or paid guardian’s control to stop. 
Section one:  An attack made by one wolf is not considered to be an unavoidable accident for the shepherd should have been able to fend him off.  A shepherd could not, however, fend off two wolves and therefore an attack made by two wolves is considered unavoidable.  Rabbi Judah adds that if even one wolf attacked at a time when wolves were commonly attacking, the shepherd would not be able to fend it off and it would be therefore be considered an unavoidable accident.
Section two:  Dogs are less dangerous than wolves and therefore even two dogs are not considered to be an unavoidable accident.  Yadua (the name of a Sage) the Babylonian in the name of Rabbi Meir qualifies this law to a situation where both dogs attacked from the same direction.  If they attacked from different directions it is considered to be an unavoidable accident.
Section three:  An attack by bandits is considered to be an unavoidable accident.  When the previous mishnah stated that a hirer and an unpaid guardian are liable if the object was stolen the meaning is that they are liable if it was stolen by thievery.  If the animal was stolen by an armed robber that is similar to the case where it was taken captive and they are not liable.
Section four:  An attack by any of the predatory wild animals listed here is considered to constitute an unavoidable accident.  
Section five:  The mishnah clarifies that an unavoidable accident is only when the animal or bandit attacked the flock when the flock was grazing in a safe area.  If, however, the paid guardian or hirer took the flock to an area known to be unsafe and then the flock was attacked, they are liable.  Since they were the ones who brought the animal to danger, they are liable. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eight:  What is the difference between something being Torah law or the custom of the land?
