Bava Metzia Chapter One Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with the issue of ownership over lost objects found by a man’s children or wife.
Mishnah six (and the remainder of the chapter) deals with returning lost documents to their owners.

Mishnah Five
That which is found by a man’s minor son or daughter, and that which is found by his Canaanite slave or female slave, and that which is found by his wife belongs to him.
That which is found by his son or daughter that are of age, and that which is found by his Hebrew slave or female slave, and that which is found by his wife whom he has divorced, even though he has not yet paid her ketubah, belongs to them.

Explanation
Section one:  A father (assumed in the Mishnah to be the head of the household) who is financially supporting his children can claim ownership over any financial benefit they might bring him including, as we learn here, found objects.  In other words in return for his financial support, they must give him any of their earnings.  A Canaanite (i.e. non-Jewish) slave or female slave is totally owned by their owner.  They do not have the ability to own possessions and therefore anything they find belongs to their master.  Finally, a married woman who is receiving financial support from her husband, gives him in return any of her earnings, including found objects.  Note, that the relationship between a father and his children and a husband and his wife is one in which the latter are guaranteed support, even if they earn nothing.  In such a familial structure allowing the child or wife to keep found objects while still receiving financial support from their father/husband may cause him to resent them, ultimately to their detriment.
Section two:  On the other hand, a father’s financial control over his children does not extend to his adult children who are not supported by him.  What they find belongs to them.  Also, a Hebrew slave is treated in the Mishnah to be more similar to a hired worker who can own his own possession.  Anything the slave finds therefore, belongs to him/her.  Finally, a divorced woman does not owe her husband any financial gains she accrues after the divorce.  This is true even if he has not paid her ketubah, meaning the divorce settlement.  In such a case he is still obligated to provide her with food, clothing and shelter.  Nevertheless, since he divorced her, he does not receive any object she might find.
