Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with a situation where one sold olive trees to another person to cut them down as firewood, but he did not sell the land.  The issue is to whom do the olives belong:  to the one who owns the trees or to the one who owns the land.
Mishnah six begins to discuss the laws of renting, a topic which will be discussed from now until the end of the tractate.  The first topic of discussion is the renting of houses and specifically the laws of eviction.

Mishnah Five
If one sold his olive trees as firewood and they bore fruit that gave less than a quarter-log of oil per seah, this belongs to the [new] owner of the olive trees.
If they bore fruit that gave a quarter-log of oil [or more] per seah, and the one said, “It was my trees that produced it”, and the other said, “It was my land that produced it”, let them share the produce.
If a flood washed away a man’s olive trees and set them in the midst of his fellow’s field [where they bore fruit], and the one said, “It was my trees that produced it”, and the other said, “It was my land that produced it”, let them share the produce.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
The scenario in section one of our mishnah is that Reuven sold his olive trees to Shimon but did not sell him the land.  The intent was for Shimon to cut down the trees and use them as firewood.  However, before Shimon did so the olive trees bore some olives with which it was possible to make olive oil.  If the olive oil was of a poor quality, in other words it came from olives that produced less than a quarter-log of oil per seah, then the owner of the trees can keep the oil.  Since there is not much oil and it is of a low quality, we can safely assume that Reuven does not care about it and therefore Shimon may keep it.  However, if the trees produce a better quality and higher quantity of olive oil there may be a dispute.  Reuven may justly claim that the olives grew from his ground and Shimon may justly claim that they grew from his tree.  In such a case they split the value of the olive oil.
The scenario in section two is different from that in section one but it has the same law.  In this case Reuven’s trees were washed up in a flood and landed on Shimon’s property where they took root and bore fruit.  Again, Reuven claims that his trees bore the fruit and Shimon that his land bore the fruit. Again, they split the value of the oil.

Mishnah Six
If one leased a house to his fellow in the rainy season, he cannot make him leave it [during the time] from Sukkot to Pesach.
In the summer, [he must give him] thirty days [warning].  
And in large cities, whether it is during the rainy season or the summer [he must give] twelve months [warning].
[If one leased] a shop [to his fellow], whether in large cities or small towns, [he must give] twelve months [warning]. 
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “If it is a shop occupied by bakers or dyers [he must give] three years [warning].

Explanation—Mishnah Six
This mishnah deals with how much warning a landlord must give his tenant before evicting him.  
Section one:  If he rented him a house in the winter, he cannot evict him from Sukkot (approximately October) till Pesach (approximately April).  In Israel, where the Mishnah was composed, this is the rainy season.  Since it would be difficult for the tenant to find a new house in the rainy season, and difficult for him to move while it is wet outside, he may not be evicted during this entire period.
If it was during the summer and the house was rented in a small town, he need give him only 30 days warning before evicting him.  If, however, he was in a large city he must give him 12 months warning.  The assumption is that it will be more difficult to find new housing in a larger city where more people live.
Section two:  If he rented him a store he must always give him twelve months, even during the summer in a small town (where if he had rented him a house he need only give thirty days warning). The reason is that a storekeeper needs time to collect his debts from his customers.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel points out that bakers and dyers will need three years warning.  A likely reason for the need for such a long warning is that it is very difficult for a baker or dyer to move his equipment and find new accommodations.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  What is the similarity between the cases in sections one and two?  What are the differences?  
Mishnah six:  After whose interests is this mishnah concerned?  The landlord or his tenant?
