Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishnayoth Two and Three

Introduction
Mishnah two deals with the liability of a person who rents a cow and then subsequently loans the cow to someone else and the cow dies. 
Mishnah three deals with a person who admits to having stolen or otherwise received money from one of two people but does not know from which one.

Mishnah Two
If a man rented a cow from his fellow and lent it to another, and it died a natural death, the hirer must swear that it died a natural death and the borrower must repay [its value] to the renter.
Rabbi Yose said: “How can this one make business out of his friend’s cow?  Rather [the value of the cow] returns to the owner.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
As we learned in the introduction to mishnah one, a renter is not liable to pay back the owner if the rented animal dies a natural death.  In such a case he is allowed to take an oath and be exempt.  The borrower, on the other hand, is liable to pay back the value of the borrowed animal even if it dies a natural death.  In our mishnah a renter loaned the rented cow to a third party and then the cow died.  The renter may take an oath that the cow died a natural death and he is exempt.  The borrower, however, is liable to pay the value of the cow.  Since he borrowed from the renter he must repay the renter.  
Rabbi Yose claims that such a law allows the renter to make unfair profit from the cow that belongs to someone else.  In his opinion the value of the cow should be paid from the borrower directly to the original owner.  In other words, although the renter can exempt himself from paying by taking an oath, he does not thereby earn the rights to future benefits accrued from the animal.

Mishnah Three
If a man said to two others, “I have robbed one of you 100 zuz and I do not know which of you it is”, or “The father of one of you left me 100 zuz and I do not know whose father it was”, he must give each of them 100 zuz, since he himself admitted liability.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
In this mishnah the person speaking knows that he owes one of two people 100 zuz (a coin), either because he robbed one of them or because one of their father’s deposited 100 zuz with him.  According to the mishnah he must give each of them 100 zuz, since he admitted his liability.  If he had not done so, he would not have been obligated to pay either of them until one could conclusively prove that he had stolen from him or that his father had deposited from him.  However, if he wants to fulfill his full moral obligation he needs to pay them both 100 zuz.   

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah two:  How is the scenario in this mishnah similar to the scenario in the previous mishnah?

