Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
In Leviticus 25:14 it states (JPS translation):  “When you sell property to your neighbor, or buy any from your neighbor, you shall not wrong one another.”  From here the Rabbis learned that a person is not allowed to overcharge for certain items that had a known value.  When an overcharge does occur there are three possible consequences:  1)  the sale is nullified; 2) the amount paid over the value must be returned to the buyer; 3)  the sale is valid and no amount is returned.  The remainder of the chapter will deal with these laws.

Mishnah Three
Fraud is an overcharge of 4 pieces of silver out of 24 pieces of silver, which make up a sela, one-sixth of the purchase price.
Until what time may [he that is defrauded] retract [the sale]?
Until he [has time] to show [his purchase] to a merchant or to his kinsman.
Rabbi Tarfon gave instruction in Lud:  “Fraud is an overcharge of 8 pieces of silver to the seller, a third of the purchase price”, and the merchants of Lod celebrated.
He said to them:  “He may retract any time within a whole day.”
They said to him:  “Leave us as we were, Rabbi Tarfon”, and they reverted to the teaching of the Sages.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
According to the anonymous opinion in section one a sale that is one-sixth more than the true value of an item is considered fraud.  If a person bought something for one-sixth more than it was worth he could demand a retraction of the sale.  According to the first opinion he may retract the sale as long as it would take to show the object to merchant or to a kinsman, in other words someone else who could give a more objective evaluation of the object.  After this amount of time has passed the sale can no longer be retracted.
In section two we learn of Rabbi Tarfon’s opinion that he gave at an actual event that occurred in Lod (a city in Israel, near where Ben Gurion airport is currently located).  Rabbi Tarfon taught in Lod that fraud is one-third of the purchase price (as opposed to the Sages who held that it was one-sixth).  This teaching caused the merchants to be happy for they could now overcharge more on their merchandise without being worried about retractions on the part of the buyer.  To temper their celebration, Rabbi Tarfon told them that he was allowing a longer time for retractions, even an entire day.  At this point the merchants of Lod said they preferred the words of the Sages taught anonymously in section one, who gave a smaller margin for fraud but a shorter time for the buyer to retract.

Mishnah Four
Both the buyer and the seller are subject to the law of fraud.
Just as the ordinary person is subject to the law of fraud so too is the merchant.  
Rabbi Judah said:  “The law of fraud does not apply to the merchant.”
He who has been subjected to [fraud] has the upper hand: if he wants he may say to him, “Give me back my money or give me back the amount you defrauded me.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  Either the buyer or the seller may claim that they were defrauded.  The buyer may claim that the seller overcharged and the seller may claim that the buyer underpaid.  
Section two:  According to the first opinion, the laws of fraud apply to everyone.  According to Rabbi Judah the law of fraud does not apply to a merchant.  Since a merchant should know the value of the products which he sells, he is not allowed to later claim that the buyer underpaid.
Section three:  The person who has been defrauded, either the seller if the buyer underpaid, or the buyer if the seller overcharged, can decide between one of two options.  The first option is to annul the sale.  The second option is to return the amount of the fraud to the one defrauded.  In other, words if the buyer underpaid he would pay the remaining amount to the seller.  If the seller overcharged he would return the amount of the overcharge to the buyer.  In this case the sale would remain valid.
  
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  Why would the merchants prefer a lower margin for fraud (1/6) and a shorter time for retraction as opposed to the opposite?
Mishnah four, section two:  Why, according to the first opinion, does the law of fraud apply even to the merchant?
