
Mishnah Four
If he found [something] in a shop, it belongs to him.
But if he found it between the counter and the shopkeeper it belongs to the shopkeeper.  
If he found it in front of the money-changer it belongs to him.
But if between the stool and the money-changer it belongs to the money-changer.
If a man bought fruit from his fellow or if his fellow sent him fruit and he found coins therein, they belong to him.
But if they were tied up he must take them and proclaim them.

Explanation
Section one:  If a person finds something in a shop, for example a cheap pair of sunglasses, and it is not an item sold in the shop, he may keep it.  (Again, we can assume that this was an object without an identifying mark and therefore it could not be proclaimed.)  Even though the item was found on the shopkeeper’s property, since many people come in and out of the store it could have belonged to any of them.  If, however, the object was found behind the counter, the assumption is that the shopkeeper himself lost it.  Therefore it belongs to him.  
Section two:  The rule here is the same as the rule in the previous section.  If the item was found in a place where many people mill about, then it belongs to the finder.  If it is found in a place generally occupied only by the money-changer, then it belongs to the money-changer.
Section three:  If a person receives a bundle of fruit and there were a few coins scattered amongst the fruit he may keep the coins.  If, however, there was a bag of coins, he must proclaim the bag, as we learned in mishnah two.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  What do you think he should do if he were to find pigeons tied up but not behind a fence, for instance in a public place?  Should he leave them there?  Should he pick them up and proclaim them?  Or do they belong to the finder?
Mishnah four, section three:  Why don’t we assume that the scattered coins belong to the person who gave him the fruit?  In other words, why is he not obligated to return the coins to the person who gave him the fruit?

