Bava Metziah Chapter Six Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The sixth and most of the seventh chapters of Bava Metziah deal with various employment laws.  The two mishnayoth which will we learn today discuss the consequences of employers or employees reneging.

Mishnah One
If one hired craftsmen and they deceived each other, they have no legally valid complain against each other, but only cause for complaint.
If one hired a donkey-driver or a wagon-driver to bring litter-bearers or pipers for a bride or for the dead, or laborers to take his flax out of the steep, or any matter that would be lost if delayed, and they retracted, if it was a place where there were no others [who could be hired for the same wage] he may hire others at their (the original workers) expense or he may deceive them.

Explanation
Section one:  If an employer hired people to come work for him and then either side deceived the other side, for instance if the employer paid a lower wage than is generally acceptable or the employee claimed a higher wage than acceptable or one of the sides reneged on the deal, neither side can make a legal claim against the other side.  All they can do is file a legal complaint which might damage the other side’s reputation but will not be sufficient to force the other side to make monetary compensation.  Note that this is all in a case where there was no legally valid contract before the work began.  If there had been then each side would be obligated to fulfill their obligations.  Furthermore this mishnah deals with a case where the reneging occurs before the work begins.  The following mishnah will deal with a case where one side reneges after the work has begun.
Section two:  In this situation the employer had hired workers to do a type of work that if not done immediately would be lost, such as carrying a bride to her wedding or carrying the dead to the graveyard or playing the flute at either a wedding or funeral, or removing flax from the steep which if not done immediately would ruin the flax.  If in such a case the workers reneged on their deal by not showing up the employee has two options.  The first option is to hire other workers at a higher rate and collect the extra money he had to pay from the original workers.  In other words if the first workers charged 5 dollars per hour and the workers found at the last minute charge 10 dollars per hour, he can collect the extra five dollars per hour from the original workers.  However, he may only do so if there are no other workers available for the same original rate.  The second option is to deceive the original workers by telling them that they will get a higher wage and then not giving it to them in the end.  Although deception is generally illegal, since the workers themselves put the employer into this situation, he is allowed to deceive them.
