Mishnah Eleven
If a man found his own lost property and his father’s, his own takes priority.
If his own and that of his teacher, his own takes priority.
If he found his father’s and his teacher’s, his teacher’s takes priority—for his father brought him into this world, but his teacher who taught him wisdom brings him into the world to come.
If his father was a Sage, his father’s takes priority.
If his father and teacher each were carrying a load, he must first relieve his teacher and afterward relieve his father.
If his father and teacher were each taken captive, he must first ransom his teacher and afterward his father.
But if his father was a Sage, he must first ransom his father and afterward his teacher.

Explanation
In the beginning of this mishnah we learn that one’s own financial loss takes priority even over that of a father or a teacher (of Torah).  The Torah expects people to help others but it also understands that people have a natural desire to help themselves.  
The remainder of the mishnah deals with conflicts between helping his father and helping his teacher.  In all of them we learn that his teacher (one who teaches him Torah) takes priority.  Through this mishnah we can see how much the Rabbis valued learning and Torah study.  His father brings him into this world and for that the Torah commands that he respect and fear his father.  However, the teacher brings him into the world to come, and this is a greater responsibility even then being a father.  Therefore the teacher receives even more respect than the father.  However, if his father is a Sage, meaning learned in Torah, he deserves greater respect from his son than does another teacher/Sage, and he therefore takes priority.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten, section two:  Why shouldn’t a Kohen enter a cemetery and become unclean in order to take care of the lost object?  Does this mishnah mean that ritual cleanliness is more important than returning lost objects or is there another explanation? 
Mishnah ten, section four: What would be the result if the person was obligated to help unload an ass even if too great a load had been placed upon it?
Mishnah eleven:  Why do you think that his own lost object always takes priority?  Is this not selfishness?
