Bava Metziah Chapter Six Mishnayoth Six, Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnah six deals with the legal liability of craftsmen: as paid or unpaid guardians.  It also contains several other laws with regards to paid and unpaid guardians.  
Mishnah seven deals with the liability of a lender vis a vis the pledge he took to guarantee his loan.  
Mishnah eight deals with the liability of carriers who trip and break a jar that they had been carrying from place to place.

Mishnah Six
All craftsmen are accounted paid guardians.
But all that have said, “Take what is yours and give me the money”, are accounted unpaid guardians.
If one man said to another, “Guard that for me and I will guard this for you”, he is accounted a paid guardian.
If one said, “Guard this for me”, and the other said “Put it down in front of me”, he is accounted an unpaid guardian.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
A paid guardian has a greater liability over objects that he is guarding than an unpaid guardian.  A paid guardian is liable if the object is lost or stolen but not liable if the object dies (if it is an animal) is broken or taken captive.
Section one:  Craftsmen who take objects into their possession to work on them, such as cloth to make into clothing or leather to make into shoes, have the status of paid guardians.  If the object is lost or stolen they are liable to make compensation to the owner.  If, however, the craftsmen told the owner to come and collect his item and pay the money, the craftsmen now have the status of an unpaid guardian.
Section two:  If two people exchange objects for guarding they are both considered to be paid guardians.  Although they are not paying each other for guarding the object, they are each in essence paying the other person by watching his object.  Therefore they are each considered to be paid guardians.
Section three:  If someone asks another person to watch his object and the person responds by saying “Put it down in front of me” the guardian has the status of an unpaid guardian.   Although he didn’t specifically say that he would guard the object, telling the other person to put the object down is sufficient to cause him to be a guardian.

Mishnah Seven
If one gave a loan and took a pledge he is accounted a paid guardian.
Rabbi Judah says:  “If he lent him money he is accounted an unpaid guardian; if he lent him produce he is accounted a paid guardian.”
Abba Shaul, “One may hire out a poor man’s pledge and thereby reduce the debt, for in such a way he is like one who returns lost property.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  If one gave a loan to another person and took from that person a pledge to guarantee the loan, the lender is considered to be a paid guardian vis a vis the pledge.  Since by keeping the pledge he is getting in return a guarantee on his loan he has the added liability of being a paid guardian.  Rabbi Judah refines this law.  According to Rabbi Judah one who loans money is accounted an unpaid guardian over a pledge.  Since Jews cannot lend other Jews with interest, lending money is a total favor to the borrower.  Therefore, in compensation, the lender has less liability over the pledge.  However, one who lends produce actually benefits by lending it, since the produce may have gone bad while in his possession.  Since he receives benefit he is a paid guardian over the pledge.  
Section two:  Abba Shaul states that if a lender takes a pledge from a poor person he should rent out the pledge and keep the money in order to gradually reduce the amount of the pledge.  In this way he is able to return the pledge to the poor person without the poor person actually having to pay back his loan.

Mishnah Eight
If one moved a jar from place to place and broke it, whether he is a paid guardian or an unpaid guardian, he may take an oath [that he did not break it through neglect and be exempt from liability].
Rabbi Eliezer says:  “[I too have heard that] in either case he may take an oath, but I wonder whether in either case the oath is valid.”

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
The subject of our mishnah is one who breaks a jar while moving it from place to place, evidently by tripping while carrying it.  According to the opinion in the first clause of the mishnah the one carrying the object is exempt from paying and need only take an oath that he did not break it through neglect.  According to this opinion tripping is not necessarily a neglectful act.  
Rabbi Eliezer agrees that the accepted law is as was stated in the first clause but he questions the logic of that law.  According to Rabbi Eliezer tripping is indeed a neglectful act, and therefore one who tripped should not be able to take an oath that he was not neglectful.  
Note that with regards to this law it does not matter whether the carrier was a paid or unpaid guardian.  If tripping is neglectful then both are liable and if tripping is not neglectful then neither are liable.  
 
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah six:  Why does a craftsman have the status of an unpaid guardian after he says, “Take what is yours and give me the money”?
Mishnah eight:  Why does Rabbi Eliezer say that he has heard that either may take an oath but then doubt whether such an oath is acceptable? What does this statement teach us about Rabbi Eliezer’s general approach to tradition versus logic?
