Bava Metziah Chapter One Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnayoth seven and eight continue to deal with returning lost documents, a topic which was also discussed in the previous mishnah.

Mishnah Seven
If a man found bills of divorce, or writs of emancipation or wills, or deeds of gifts, or receipts, he should not return them, for I might say, “they were written out, and the writer might have changed his mind and decided not to give them.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
In this short mishnah are listed types of documents where one person gives something to another person, whether it be a divorce given to a wife by her husband, freedom to a slave from his master, inheritance to an inheritor, a present, or a receipt.  These documents would normally be kept by the recipient.  If one of these was found one might have expected to return it to the recipient, i.e. the wife, slave, etc.  However, the mishnah states that they should not be returned.  Since it is possible that the writer wrote the document and subsequently changed his mind and did not give the document, we cannot be sure that the recipient lost it.

Mishnah Eight
If a man found letters of evaluation, or letters of sustenance, or documents of halitzah or refusal, or documents of arbitration or any document drawn out by the court he should return them.
If he found documents in a satchel or bag, or a bundle of documents he should return them.
How many count as a bundle of documents?
Three tied up together.
Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  [If one found three documents in which] one borrowed from three others, they should be returned to the borrower.
But if [one found three documents in which] one loaned to three, they should be returned to the lender.
If a man found a document among his documents and he does not know what is its nature, it must be left until Elijah comes.
If there were postscripts amongst them, he should do what is stated in the postscript.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  The documents listed in this section are all executed by a court.  In such a case we need not fear that the court wrote the document and then did not fulfill what was stated in it, as we feared with regards to the documents mentioned in the previous mishnah.  Therefore they can be returned to those named in the documents.  A “letter of evaluation” is an evaluation of a person’s property should it need to be sold to pay off his debts.  A “letter of sustenance” is permission given to a wife to sell her husband’s property should he not properly provide her with food (or other financial obligations).  “Documents of halitzah” are documents that testify to a man’s having declared that he will not perform the levirate marriage (see Deuteronomy 25:5-10).  “Documents of refusal” are documents that testify that a woman whose mother or brother (but not father) arranged her marriage when she was a minor refused the marriage when she became an adult.  In such a case the woman does not need a regular divorce document, a get.  “Documents of arbitration” are documents that state the litigants choices for judges.
Section two:  If a person finds documents in an identifiable bag he should return them to the person who can identify the bag.  In the upcoming chapter we will learn about identifying lost objects.
Section three:  A set of three documents found together and all containing one name, was in all likelihood lost by that named person.  Therefore if three documents state that one person borrowed from three others, it is reasonable that they belonged to the borrower.  If the three documents all contain the name of the same creditor who loaned to three different debtors, it is reasonable that the documents belonged to the creditor.
Section four:  If a person finds a document amongst his documents that contains the name of a creditor and a debtor, but he doesn’t know who gave him the document, and therefore he doesn’t know if it was paid off, he should hold the document until Elijah comes.  In other words he shouldn’t get rid of the document but neither is he permitted to give it to either the creditor or the debtor.
Section five:  If he finds amongst his documents torn or unreadable documents which have with them postscripts which state what needs to be done with the document, he should do what is in the postscript, even though the document itself is torn or unreadable.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven:  If the giver of one of the documents mentioned in this mishnah told the finder that he had indeed given the document to the recipient, would the finder then return it to the recipient?  How is this different from the case in the previous mishnah?
Mishnah eight, section two:  Why in this case is the finder supposed to return the lost documents?  Why don’t we worry that they were lost by the writer who changed his mind after writing them and before giving them?
