Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnayoth seven and eight deal with the reductions in the quantity of certain deposited products (produce, wine, olive oil etc.) that a guardian is permitted to make when he returns the products to their owner.  

Mishnah Seven
When a man leaves produce for his fellow, [and his fellow returns it to the owner] he may exact reductions [due to natural depletion of the produce].
For wheat and rice, nine half kabs to the kor.
For barley and durra nine kabs to the kor.
For spelt and linseed three seahs to the kor.
All is in proportion to the quantity and according to the time [it is left].
Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri said:  “But what do the mice care about [the quantity]?  Won’t they eat [the same amount] whether there is a lot or a little?
Rather, he may exact a reduction from only one kor.
Rabbi Judah says:  “If the quantity was great he may not exact any reduction, since the produce increases in bulk.”  

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
In our mishnah Reuven left his produce with Shimon and is now coming back to reclaim it.  Shimon need not return exactly that amount that Reuven left but is legally permitted to reduce some of the quantity, on the assumption that mice would have eaten some of the produce.  The mishnah then proceeds to list how much can be reduced for different types of produce. 
According to the anonymous opinion in section two the amounts listed in section one can be reduced for each kor (a measure of volume) for each year that the produce was left with Reuven.  Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri raises a difficulty on this opinion.  He points out that the mice will eat the same amount whether there is a lot or a little.  In other words if there are 10 kor or 1 kor the mice will still eat only nine half kabs of wheat or rice.  Therefore, according to Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri no matter how many kabs of produce there are, Shimon may only reduce from one of them.
Rabbi Judah states that if the amount of produce was large than Shimon may not reduce at all.  According to Rabbi Judah, large amounts are measured in heaping imprecise measurements.  Therefore the extra that was heaped on top of a strict measurement is enough to compensate for the loss to the mice.

Mishnah Eight
With wine he may exact [a reduction] of one-sixth.
Rabbi Judah says:  “One-fifth.”
He may exact of him three logs in every one hundred logs of oil—one log and a half for sediment and one log and a half for absorption.
If the oil was refined he may not exact for sediment.
If the jars were old he may not exact for absorption.
Rabbi Judah says:  “Also if a man sells to his fellow through the year, the buyer must undertake to accept a reduction of one and a half logs because of sediment.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
With wine and oil there are no reductions for mice, as there were with produce, but there are reductions due to sediment and absorption in the sides of the clay vessels which were used at the time.  With wine the guardian may exact a reduction of one-sixth or one-fifth according to Rabbi Judah.
With regards to oil it depends on the type of jar and the type of oil.  Regular oil is reduced 1½  per cent due to sediment, but refined oil does not produce any sediment and therefore reductions may not be exacted.  Regulars jars absorb 1½ per cent but old jars, whose sides are more hardened and have already absorbed oil, do not absorb any oil.  Therefore if the jars were old the guardian may not exact a reduction for absorption.
Rabbi Judah adds that not only may a guardian exact a reduction of 1½ per cent the oil returned to the owner, but so too may a person who sells refined oil.  In other words if Reuven tells Shimon that he is selling him 100 logs of oil and then gives him refined oil, he only need give him 98 ½ logs since 1½ logs of regular oil would be worthless sediment anyway. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven, section two:  Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri’s statement (section 2a) seems to be very logical.  What might be the logic behind those who disagree with him (section 2)?
Mishnah eight, section three:  If the seller told the buyer that he was selling him refined oil, would he be allowed to still make a reduction for sediment?
