Bava Metziah, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Four and Five

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today continue to discuss a worker’s right to eat from the produce with which he is working.

Mishnah Four
If one was working with figs he may not eat grapes, and if among grapes he may not eat figs.
But he may refrain [from eating] until he reaches the best produce and then eat.
In no case have they said [that he may eat] save during the time of his work.
But because of the principle of restoring lost property to its owner they have said, “Field laborers may eat as they go from one furrow to another or as they return from the winepress.  And a donkey [may eat] while it is unloading.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  As we learned in the previous mishnah, according to the Rabbinic interpretation of the Torah a fieldworker is allowed to eat from the food in the field while he is working in the field.  Our mishnah teaches that a worker may eat only of the food with which he is working.  They may not eat of other foods even if they belong to the same owner.  However, the worker may save his appetite and eat from the best fruit which he will work with in the end.  In other words the worker may eat of any of the fruit with which he is working but he may not eat from anything with which he is not working.
Section two:  The basic law is that a worker may only eat while he is working.  However, this situation presents a potential problem to both the worker and the employer. The worker would probably prefer to eat when he is completed with his work and the employer, who probably is paying per hour, would prefer the worker not stop working to eat.  Therefore, the Rabbis stated that workers may wait to eat until they have completed their work and are going from one place of work to the other.

Mishnah Five
A laborer may eat cucumbers even to a denar’s worth, and dates even to a denar’s worth.
Rabbi Elazar ben Hisma says:  “A laborer may not eat more than the value of his wages.
But the Sages permit it, but they teach a man not to be gluttonous as to close the door against himself.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
According to the anonymous opinion in section one of the mishnah, a laborer may eat as much food as he wants.  Rabbi Elazar ben Hisma disagrees and states that by law a laborer may not eat more than he earns.  The Sages, who are the same Rabbis who held the opinion in the first clause, permit a laborer to eat more than he earns.  However, they state that for the laborer’s own good we teach him not to eat too much for if he does he will not be rehired.  In other words while it may be legal for him to eat gluttonously, it will damage his reputation and in the future prevent him from being able to earn an income.


Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four, section two:  According to the mishnah is a worker allowed to eat while he is working or must he wait until he completes the job? 

