Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine
 Mishnayoth Eleven and Twelve

Introduction
Deuteronomy 24:14-15 and Leviticus 19:13, both command that a worker’s wages must be paid on the same day, before the sun sets.  These verses deal directly with one who works during the day, presumably on a daily wage.  Mishnah eleven deals with workers who work at night, and with workers who work on hourly, weekly, monthly or yearly wages.  Mishnah twelve deals with other laws concerning the commandment not to delay a worker’s wages and its applicability.  

Mishnah Eleven
One that is hired during the day collects his wages all during [the ensuing] night.
One that is hired during the night collects his wages all during [the ensuing] day.
One that is hired by the hour collects his wages all during [the ensuing] day or [the ensuing] night.
If one was hired by the week, or by the month, or by the year, or by the week of years, if his time of hire expired during the day, he collects his wages all during [the ensuing] day.
If his time of hire expired during the night, he collects his wages all during [the ensuing] day and night.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
The general rule of our mishnah is that an employer may pay his employee within one time period of either day or night from the time of the completion of the work.  He may not withhold the wages any longer.  If the work was done during the day the employer may pay his employee at any time during the ensuing night.  If he were to wait until the following morning he would be violating the commandment not to delay payment.  If the work was done during the night he has until the end of the ensuing day to pay the employee.
If the employee was hired on an hourly basis the same rule still basically applies:  the employer has one time period from the time of the completion of the work to pay the employee, whether that time period is the day or the night.
Similarly, if the employee is hired on a long term basis, for instance a week, a month, a year or even seven years, and it was agreed that the salary would be paid only upon completion of the work, the employer basically has one time period after the completion to pay his employee.  The one exception is if the work is completed at night.  According to section three of our mishnah, in such a case he has two time periods:  the entire day and the entire night.  This clause seems to differ with the rule in section two and indeed the Babylonian Talmud states that the two clauses contain two distinct opinions stemming from two different sources.

Mishnah Twelve
The laws “You must pay him his wages on the same day” (Deut. 24:15) and “The wages of a laborer shall not remain with you until the morning” (Lev. 19:13) apply both to the hire of a man or of a beast or of utensils.  
When is this so?
When the employee has laid claim to it, but if he had not laid claim to it the employer does not commit a transgression.
If he gave him a draft on a shopkeeper or moneychanger [the employer] does not commit a transgression [even though the employee has not yet collected].
If an employee [claimed his wages] within the set time he may take an oath and take his wages.
[But] if the set time had passed he may not take an oath and take his wages.  
If witnesses testified that he had claimed his wages at the set time [and was not paid], he may take an oath and receive his wages.
The law “You must pay him his wages on the same day”  applies also to the resident alien, but not the law, “The wages of a laborer shall not remain with you until the morning”.

Explanation—Mishnah Twelve
Section one:  The Torah specifically states that an employer is not allowed to withhold the wages of a laborer overnight.  The mishnah expands upon this prohibition and includes the wages owed for renting animals and renting utensils (which might include plows, mills and other farm equipment). 
Section two:  An employer only transgresses these two commandments if the employee has made a claim for his wages.  Although the employer is certainly obligated to pay his employee in any circumstance, he does not violate these two negative commandments until the employee makes his claim.
Section three:  In the time of the mishnah people used shopkeepers or money- changers as small, personal banks to hold their money and pay off their debts.  If the employer gave the employee an I.O.U. with which he could collect from the shopkeeper or the moneychanger, he is no longer be in violation of the two negative commandments in section one.  Although the employee may not yet have collected, the employer has fulfilled his role by giving them a document with which they will be able to collect later.
Section four:  In many instances the Mishnah will mandate an oath to ensure that someone is not making a false claim.  The assumption is that people would not make false oaths and therefore the person who takes the oath is believed, even though he has no evidence. Oaths are usually sufficient to exempt a person from paying when another person makes a claim against him, so long as there are no witnesses to support the claim of the plaintiff.  In other words, the defendant and not the plaintiff is given the opportunity to swear an oath in lieu of evidence or testimony.   However, in our mishnah the plaintiff, i.e. the employee seeking his wages, may take an oath that he has not yet received his wages and he may collect from the employer.  This is true as long as he demands his wages during the time period mandated in mishnah eleven.  If, however, this time period has elapsed, he may no longer take his wages through an oath.  In such a case he is not believed to say that he didn’t yet receive his wages, since normally they would have already been paid.  If, however, he had witnesses who state that he made a claim at the proper time, he may swear and take his wages.
Section five: Deuteronomy 24:14 specifically states:  “You shall not abuse a needy and destitute laborer, whether a fellow countrymen or a stranger (ger) who is in your land within your gates.”  Picking up on the word “stranger” the mishnah states that one who withholds the wages of a stranger violates the commandment in Deuteronomy.  However, Leviticus 19:13, the other verse which prohibits delaying wages overnight, begins by stating, “You shall not defraud your fellow”.  “Your fellow” implies your fellow countrymen, and therefore one who withholds the wages of a stranger does not violate the commandment in Leviticus.
