Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with the amount that may be missing in the weight of a coin before the use of the coin constitutes fraud.
Mishnah six deals with how long a seller has to return a coin to the purchaser if the coin is missing weight.

Mishnah Five
How much may be missing from a sela and still not fall within the rule of fraud?
Rabbi Meir says:  “Four issars, one issar per dinar.”
Rabbi Judah says:  “Four pondions, one pondion per dinar.”
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Eight pondions, two pondions per dinar.”

Explanation—Mishnah Five
In order to understand this mishnah we need to understand the coinage mentioned in it.  One sela = four dinars = 48 pondions = 96 issars
Rabbi Meir holds that if the weight of a sela is missing the weight of four issars then its use is considered to be fraud.  This is a ratio of 1/24.  Rabbi Judah holds that a ratio of 1/12 constitutes fraud and Rabbi Shimon that a ratio of 1/6 constitutes fraud, which is the same as regular fraud as we learned in the previous mishnayoth.

Mishnah Six
Until when may he [that is defrauded] return the coin?
In large towns until he has had time to show it to a money-changer.
In villages until the Sabbath eve.
If he [that had given the coin] recognized it, even after twelve months he should accept it [in return], but [if he does not accept it the one who received it] only has a cause for complaint [against him].
And it is permitted to use it for redeeming the Second Tithe without concern, for [he who would not receive it] is but only a cheapskate.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
If a person should receive a fraudulent coin (one that weighs less than it is supposed to), he may demand that the person who gave him the coin replace it with a better coin.  However, there is a time limit for making such a demand.  In large towns where money-changers who could check the coin would be found, he only has as much time as it would take to bring it to a money-changer.  In small towns he has until the eve of the Sabbath, since it can be assumed that most people from small towns will visit the market and see money-changers before the Sabbath.
If the person who gave him the coin recognized the coin he should exchange it even after the time mentioned above has long lapsed.  However, if he refuses to exchange the coin the person who received it has no legal claim against him.  The most he has is the right to make a formal complaint, which may damage the reputation of the person who gave the coin but will not legally compel him to exchange the coin.
Finally the mishnah teaches that one may redeem his Second Tithe with this coin, since anyone who would not accept the coin is only being cheap.  The Second Tithe was the second ten percent of a person’s produce.  It had to be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.  Since it was difficult to carry all of the produce itself to Jerusalem a person was allowed to redeem the produce with money, and then bring the money to Jerusalem to use it to buy food.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  If the normal ratio of fraud is 1/6 why would Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah hold a stricter standard with regards to the weight of coins?
