Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Mishnah seven deals with two subjects:  1)  Under what circumstances should the person return the lost object to the claimant?  2)  What should the finder do with the object if no one claims it?

Mishnah Seven
If he (the claimant) named what was lost but could not describe its distinctive marks, he should not give it back to him.
And it should not be give to a [known] deceiver, even if he describes its distinctive marks, as it is said [in the verse, Deut. 22:2]:  “Until your fellow claims it”, [which is to say] until you inquire about your fellow, if he is a deceiver or not.
Whatsoever works and eats, let it work and eat [while in the finder’s care].
But whatsoever does not work and eat should be sold, as it is said [in the verse, Deut. 22:2]:  “And you shall return it to him”, See how you can return it to him.
What shall be with the money [from the sale]?
Rabbi Tarfon says:  “He may use it, therefore if it is lost he is responsible for it.”
Rabbi Akiva says:  “He may not use it, therefore if it is lost he is not responsible for it.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  If the person who claims the item is not able to state its distinctive marks, the finder should not return the item to him, lest the item really belong to someone else.  If the claimant has a reputation for being a deceiver, then even if he states the distinctive marks, the item shouldn’t be given to him.  This is learned through a pun on a word in Deut. 22:2.  The verse states that the item should remain with the finder until the person who lost it claims it.  The Hebrew word for claim, doresh, can also mean to interrogate.  The Mishnah then switches the order of the verse.  Instead of the person who lost the item claiming it from the finder, the finder interrogates the person who lost the item, to find out whether he is known to be a deceiver.
Section two:  There are two possibilities for dealing with an unclaimed item.  If it is something that can be used and the worth of its use will compensate for its upkeep, then it may be used.  For instance, a lost cow may be milked to pay for its food.  After all, it is unfair to the finder that he should have to pay for the upkeep without receiving compensation.  Such a system would indeed discourage people from protecting other people’s lost items.  
If the lost item could not work to pay for its feed than it should be sold.  The mishnah learns this from the verse which demands that he return the item to the person who lost it.  If the item did not earn money and just decreased in value, the finder would not be doing any favors to the loser by holding on to it.  For instance if one were to find an expensive cake, that had identifying marks on it.  Obviously one couldn’t  save the cake for a long period of time or it would eventually be worthless.  Therefore, it is in the best interest of the loser for the finder to sell and then return the value.  
According to Rabbi Tarfon, the money from this sale may be used by the finder, and therefore if it is lost or stolen he is responsible to restore it.  Since he gets the benefit of its use, he has extra responsibility over the item.  According to Rabbi Akiva, the money may not be used.  Since he doesn’t get the benefit of the use of the money, he is not responsible if it is lost.

Questions for Further Thought:
How could a person who is known to be a deceiver get back a lost object?    
