Bava Metziah Chapter Seven Mishnayoth Two and Three

Introduction
In Deuteronomy 23:25-26 we learn that a person who is in another’s field or vineyard has a right to eat directly from the fruit of the field.  However, he may not harvest the grapes or grain and put them in his basket in order to bring them back into his home.  According to the Rabbis these verses deal with workers doing work in the field and not with normal people passing through another’s fields.  A person just passing through another’s field does not have a right to eat anything from the field for that would be considered stealing.
Mishnayoth 2-8 deal with these verses and clarify in what situations a worker may eat and in what situations he may not.  

Mishnah Two
These may eat [of the fruits among which they work] by the law of the Torah:  
one who works on that which is still connected to the ground [may eat of it] when the work is finished [at the time of harvest];
and one who works on that which is already detached from the ground [may eat of it] before the work is completely finished.
This applies only to that which grows from the ground.
These are they that may not eat;
one that works on what is still growing while the work is still unfinished;
and one that works on what is already detached from the ground after the work is finished,
and [one may not eat] of what does not grow from the soil.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah discusses when may a worker eat directly from the foodstuff with which he is laboring and when he may not.  Note, this mishnah does not directly discuss an employer’s obligation to feed his employee which was a topic discussed in the previous mishnah.  
One who is working with food that has not yet been harvested may eat of it at the time when it is harvested.  However, he may not eat of the food while it is still attached to the ground.  
One who works with produce that has already been harvested may eat of the produce until it has become completely processed, i.e. grapes turned into wine, olives into oil or grain into flour.  After that point he may no longer eat of the produce.  
Finally, a person who works with food that does not grow from the land, such as meat or dairy products may not eat directly from them.  
All of these laws are learned exegetically from the verses in Deuteronomy mentioned above.  Since the verses deal with fields and not with other types of food, the Rabbis deduced that a worker who worked with someone else’s meat or dairy products was never allowed to eat from them.  Furthermore Deuteronomy 25:4 states, “Do not muzzle an ox while he is threshing.”  The Rabbis compared an ox to other workers and decided that while one was not allowed to prevent an ox from eating while working, under certain conditions one was allowed to prevent a working person from eating from that with which he is working.

Mishnah Three
If one was working with his hands but not with his feet, with his feet but not with his hands, or even with his shoulders only, he still may eat.
Rabbi Yose bar Rabbi Judah says, “Only if he works with both his hands and his feet.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
According to the Talmud, the two opinions in this mishnah are based upon differing interpretations of Biblical verses. Rabbi Yose bar Rabbi Judah’s is based on the verse in Deuteronomy 25:4, “Do not muzzle and ox while he is threshing”.  According to his interpretation of this verse just as an ox works with both its hands and his feet and therefore may eat from that with which it is working, so too a worker must work with both his hands and his feet.  The anonymous opinion in section one is based upon the verse in Deuteronomy 23:25.  There it states “When you come into your neighbor’s field…”.  Since the verse does not specify that he was working with both hands and feet it implies that all workers may eat from the field. 

Questions for Further Thought:
The issue of a person eating from things that belong to his employer is still an issue in modern society.  How do our customs or laws compare to those in the time of the Talmud?  Keep this question in mind as we learn the next several mishnayoth as well.
