Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with a sharecropper whose crops are not ruined but nevertheless produce an extremely low yield.  The question is asked must the sharecropper harvest the crop even though the effort will not be worth the yield.  
Mishnah six deals with a sharecropper’s liability to uphold his share in the rental agreement when his crops are ruined by either locusts or strong winds.  

Mishnah Five
If one leased a field from his fellow and it was not fruitful, if there was enough produce to make a heap, he must still tend to it.
Rabbi Judah says:  “What type of measure is a ‘heap’?  Rather, [he must tend to it] only if it yields as much grain as was sown there.”

Explanation
In mishnah three we discussed a sharecropper who decided not to care for the field at all.  In mishnah five we learn of a sharecropper who did plant the field with grain as he was supposed to, but the crops did not produce enough of a yield for it to be worthwhile for him to harvest them.  The question is asked must the sharecropper nevertheless toil to give back to the owner of the field something, even if it is a small amount, or is he allowed to not harvest the field.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, as long as there is enough produce in the field to make a heap of grain he must harvest it.  Even though for the sharecropper this will not be worthwhile for his labor is worth more than the value of crops harvested, he must nevertheless do so, so that he can give the owner his percentage.  Rabbi Judah states that a “heap” is not a fixed enough measure, since it is not relative to the amount planted.  In other words, a large field that produces a heap is not to be treated the same as a small field which produces a heap.  Instead, according to Rabbi Judah, as long as there is enough produce in the field to replicate the grain that was sown there, the sharecropper must harvest it.  In other words the needed yield is relative to the amount sown.


