Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five is actually a midrash, an exegetical explanation, of Deuteronomy 22:3.  The midrash tells us general rules with regards to which items must be returned to the one who lost them.
Mishnah six discusses how long a lost item must be proclaimed.
As we go through the second chapter of Bava Metzia you will notice that the subjects dealt with are in the order in which they occur when someone finds a lost object.  First we learn which items must be proclaimed and which items belong to the finder.  Then we learn the process of proclamation.  Finally, we will learn what a person must do with the object if no one claims it.  

Mishnah Five
A garment was also included amongst all these things (which one must proclaim, listed in Deut. 22:3).  
Why was it mentioned separately?
To compare [other things] to it:  to teach you just as a garment is distinct in that it has special marks and it has those who claim it, so too everything that has special marks and those who claim it must be proclaimed.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Deuteronomy 22:1-2 begin with a general command to return lost items. The specific item mentioned is an ox or a sheep.  Verse 3 continues (JPS translation):  “You shall do the same with his ass; you shall do the same with his garment; and so too shall you do with anything that your fellow loses and you find; you must not remain indifferent.”  If we read the verse carefully, we will notice that it is superfluous.  First the Torah mentions a lost ass and garment and then everything else.  The question which our mishnah asks is why should garment be mentioned separately.  The answer is that a garment is paradigmatic for which types of items must be proclaimed.  First of all a garment has distinctive marks on it by which its owner could identify it.  This is still generally true today but would have been especially true in Mishnaic times when everything was sewn by hand.  Second of all, a garment has people who would claim it.  It is a valuable enough item that someone who lost it will almost always want it back.  Any item which does not fit these two categories, distinctive and of a certain, minimal value, need not be returned.

Mishnah Six
For how long must a man proclaim [what he has found]?
Until all of his neighbors know of it, according to Rabbi Meir.
Rabbi Judah says:  “At the three Pilgrimage Festivals and for seven days after the lest festival, to allow him three days to go back to his house, three days to return and one day on which to proclaim his loss.”

Explanation—Mishnah Six
According to Rabbi Meir a person must proclaim the lost objects until all of his neighbors know.  Rabbi Judah’s suggestion reflects a law that would have been most applicable when the Temple in Jerusalem stood.  When the Temple stood people would come to Jerusalem to proclaim and claim there lost items, no matter where they were lost.  It was assumed that a person would come on at least one of the three Pilgrimage Festivals, Sukkot, Pesach and Shavuoth.  Therefore the item should be proclaimed for these three festivals.  In addition, there were seven days added after the end of the last festival to give the person a chance to go home, check to see if he had lost the object and then to return to Jerusalem to claim the lost item.      

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  According to the criteria listed in the mishnah what types of items in our society would need to be proclaimed and which would not?
Mishnah six:  How do people proclaim lost items in our society?  How does that differ from the way they would do it in Mishnaic times?

