Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnayoth Two and Three

Introduction
Mishnayoth two and three continue to discuss things that are forbidden since they are forms of usury.

Mishnah Two
One who lends money to his fellow may not dwell in his courtyard for free or rent it from him at a reduced rate, since that counts as usury.
One may increase rent-charge [not paid in advance] but not purchase price [not paid in advance].
How so?
If his fellow rented him his courtyard, and said to him, “If you pay me now the cost is 10 selas per year, but if you pay me on a monthly basis, the rent is one sela per month”, this is permitted.
However, if he sold him his field, and said to him, “If you pay me now it is yours for 1,000 zuz, but if you pay me at the time of threshing it will be 1,200 zuz”, it is forbidden.  

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  A person who has received a loan from another may not give the other person anything in return for the loan (except of course returning the lent money itself).  Usually interest is defined as extra money returned to the creditor in return for the loan.  However, as our mishnah points out, interest can come in other forms of benefit as well, such as free or reduced rent.  A borrower, therefore, may not allow his creditor to rent a house for free or for a reduced rate.
Section two:  A renter may increase the rent-charge in return for not receiving the rent up front but a seller may not increase the price of a sale in return for a delayed payment.  The mishnah now explains this principle.  With regards to rent, the owner of the courtyard may say to the person renting the courtyard that he can either pay in advance 10 selas for the entire year or a monthly rate of one sela (12 selas per year) collected at the end of each month.  This is not considered interest in return for delaying the payment.  Since rent is reckoned on a monthly basis to be paid at the end of each month, each month of rental is considered individually, which is a permitted rental arrangement.  When the owner said that he would rent it for 10 selas for the whole year he was only offering a discount which is permitted. 
However, a person cannot sell an item and state one price for paying immediately and a larger price for receiving the money later.  This is considered interest.  For instance if Reuven sells a field worth 1,000 and tells Shimon that if he pays later he must pay 1,200, it will turn out that Reuven has lent Shimon a field worth 1,000 in return for 1,200.  This is usury.

Mishnah Three
If a man sold a field, and the buyer gave him part of the price and he said to the buyer, “Pay me the rest of the price whenever you wish and then take what is yours”, this is forbidden.
If a man lent another money on the security of his field and said to him, “If you do not pay me within three years it will be mine”, then it becomes his.  
This is what Boethus the son of Zunin used to do with the consent of the Sages.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  The scenario described in this case is forbidden because the seller gets the use and benefit from the field in return for allowing a delayed payment from the buyer.  In other words the buyer in essence loans the seller the field in return for waiting until he can gather the remainder of the money to complete the sale.  This is usury. 
Section two:  A person may loan another person money and use the other person’s field as collateral.  Even though this may look as if the borrower is selling him his field in return for the loan, the Sages did not consider this to be usury.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three, section one:  Would it be forbidden for Reuven to sell a field to Shimon and for Reuven to continue to use the field until Shimon brought him the money?
