Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five and the beginning of mishnah six continue to deal with business arrangements that are forbidden because they are usurious.  The remainder of mishnah six deals with lending with interest to gentiles.  

Mishnah Five
One may evaluate cows and donkeys and anything that works and eats [and give them to one’s fellow to raise] in order to share the profit.
Where the custom is to share the offspring immediately at birth, they do so; and where the custom is to first rear them [and then give them over to the owner], they do so.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “One may evaluate a calf with its mother, and a foal with its mother [and give them to one’s fellow to raise in order to share the profit.]
A tenant may offer increased rent in exchange for a loan to improve his field, without fearing that this is usury.


Explanation
Section one:  In the previous mishnah we learned that it is forbidden to give a person animals to raise in order to share the profit and losses.  Since in the end the person receiving the animals will repay the value of the animals plus half the value of the increase, this is considered interest.  However, we learned that if the person receives a wage for raising the animals then this arrangement is permitted, for it is not a loan but rather a work arrangement.  In other words the half of the profit goes to the owner in return for the wages and not in return for the loan.  Our mishnah teaches that if the animal can do work or produce profit, such as cows or donkeys, then the work that the animal does is considered the wages that the person raising them receives.  In this case the business arrangement is permitted.
Section two:  In section one the mishnah taught that if the animal can work or otherwise produce profit, such as a milking cow or a donkey which can carry a load, it is permitted for one to give it to another person in order to share the profits and losses.  If there are young born to the animal while this arrangement is in effect there is a potential problem.  The young animals cannot work or produce and therefore there may be a potential problem of interest.  The mishnah states, however, that the turning over of the animals immediately to the owner in order to avoid interest, is only necessary if that is the custom.  If it is not the custom to turn over the young animals until they mature, there is still no problem of interest.  Since the mothers will continue to produce the person raising them is still receiving a wage and not, therefore, in danger of paying interest to the owner.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel states that even from the outset young animals may be given to be raised with mature animals.  Although the young animals do not produce any profit, since the mature animals do produce profit the person raising them does receive a wage and there is no problem of interest.
Section three:  If Reuven owns a field and Shimon rents the field in order to pay a fixed yearly sum to Reuven, Shimon may ask Reuven to loan him money in order for Shimon to repay Reuven with a higher yearly sum.  The extra amount added to the sum is not considered to be interest on the loan but rather an increase in rent in return for Shimon’s working a more valuable field.  Since rent is permitted this business arrangement is not usurious.
