
Mishnah Eight
There are five cases in which one must add a fifth:
One who eats terumah, or the terumah taken from the tithe, or the terumah from a tithe taken from doubtfully tithed produce, or dough offering, or first fruits, must add a fifth [to the value of the principle when he makes restitution].
One that redeems [the fruit of] a fourth year plant, or his second tithe, must add a fifth.
One that redeems that which he dedicated [to the Temple] must add a fifth.
One that derives a perutah’s worth of benefit from that which belongs to the sanctuary must add a fifth [when he makes restitution].
One who steals that which is worth a perutah from his fellow must add a fifth [when he makes restitution].

Explanation
This mishnah lists five cases in which a person must add a fifth of the value of something.  [Note that the mishnah lists five fifths.  This is clearly an aid to memory and not just a coincidence]. 
Section one:  This is a list of agricultural offerings which must be given to the Priest.  One who eats one of these things accidentally must restore the value of what was eaten plus a fifth.  For further explanation of what these offerings are look at the Steinsaltz reference guide. 
Section two:  The fruit of a new plant is forbidden for the first three years. During the fourth year the fruit must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.  So, too, the second tithe must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.  If a person wishes to avoid carrying such a heavy load of produce all the way to Jerusalem he may “redeem” his produce and bring the money to Jerusalem.  [Afterwards he will be able to eat the produce outside of Jerusalem].  If he redeems the produce he must redeem it at a fifth more than its value. 
Section three:  If someone dedicates something to the Temple and the object which he dedicates cannot be sacrificed at the Temple, such as a piece of land, he can “redeem” the object with money and donate the money to the Temple.  If he redeems the dedicated object he must add a fifth of its value.
Section four:  Someone who benefits from that which belongs to the Temple has committed sacrilege.  When he makes restitution for that which he has taken, for instance if he illegally ate a sacrifice, he must add a fifth of the value of that which he consumed.
Section five:  If a person steals from his fellow and then swears that he did not do so, and subsequently is caught or wishes to repent, he must restore not only the value of that which he stole, but an added fifth as well.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eight:  Is there another possibility for counting the five “fifths” in mishnah eight?  