Bava Metziah, Chapter One, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The first two mishnayoth of Bava Metzia deal with cases where two people both claim ownership over an object which they are jointly holding.

Mishnah One
If two people are grasping a cloak:  One says, “I found it” and the other says, “I found it”, or one says “It’s all mine”, and the other says, “It’s all mine”, they each swear that they don’t own more than half of the cloak and they split the cloak.
(If) one says, “It’s all mine” and the other says, “It’s half mine”, the one who says, “It’s all mine” swears that he doesn’t own less than ¾ and the one who says “It’s half mine” swears that he doesn’t own less than ¼, and the former takes ¾ and the latter takes ¼.

Explanation—Mishnah One
This Mishnah describes the common situation in which two people claim ownership of an article and neither can prove that it belongs to him.  If they were to bring witnesses the judges would rule according to their testimony.  In the absence of witnesses the judges must rule based on other assumptions.  The means of ensuring that the person was telling the truth was in many cases, including this one, an oath.  One should note that oaths were taken extremely seriously by Jews in ancient times and the assumption is that one would not swear falsely.  Therefore taking an oath is a strong deterrent to lying.

Mishnah Two
If two men were riding on an animal, or one was riding and the other was leading the animal, and one of them said, “The animal is all mine”, and the other said “It is all mine.”, they each swear that they don’t own less than half of the animal and they split it.  
If after the case is settled, they both admit to the others claim, or if there are witnesses they can split the animal without an oath.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah is similar to the previous mishnah and just deals with a different disputed object.  In the second clause the mishnah states that if they agree to the other party’s claim or if there are witnesses that the animal is owned by both parties, they split the animal without an oath.  The function of the oath is to ensure that the person is telling the truth.  When there is no dispute, or when there are witnesses who testify, there is no need for an oath.  Since it is preferable to avoid oaths altogether the two may split the animal without an oath.

Questions for Further Thought: 
Mishnah one:  When a person claims that the entire cloak is his, why does he swear that he doesn’t own less than half?  What would happen if each person swore that it was all his?
Mishnah one:  Why in the second clause does the person who swore that it was all his receive ¾ whereas in the first clause he receives only ½?
Mishnah two: After having learned the first mishnah, why do we need the second mishnah?  You may want to consider the difference between objects, which we learned about in the first mishnah, and animals, which we learn about here.
 

