Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishnayoth Eight and Nine

Introduction
Mishnah eight deals with a finder must care for the lost object while it is in his possession.
Mishnah nine deals with the definition of lost objects which the finder must return.  The mishnah also deals with the finder’s rights to claim lost wages while taking care of the lost object.

Mishnah Eight
If he found scrolls he must read them once every thirty days, and if he does not know how to read he should unroll them.
But he may not learn from them something he has not yet learned, nor may another read with him.
If he found clothing he must shake it out once every thirty days, and spread it out for [the clothing’s] own good, but not for his own honor.
[If he found] silver or copper vessels he must use them for their own good but not so as to wear them out.  
[If he found] vessels of gold or glass he may not touch them until Elijah comes.
If he found a sack or a large basket or anything that is not generally carried about, he may not carry it.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
This mishnah is concerned with the proper care given to lost objects.  The finder has a responsibility to return the object to its owner in as best condition as possible.  Therefore our mishnah tells us which things must be done with certain objects for their upkeep. In addition the mishnah lists certain things that shouldn’t be done lest the lost object is damaged.  
Section one:  Scrolls (made of parchment) must be unrolled once every thirty days in order to air them out and prevent them from becoming brittle.  If he wishes to read from it while he unrolls it he may.  He may not however learn with another person lest they both pull the scroll and tear it.  Nor may he learn something new which would require more intense and longer reading and a greater likelihood of damage to the scroll.
Section two:  Clothing must be shaken out once every thirty days.  He may spread it out in his house but he should not do so to improve the way his home looks (for his honor) but only to air out the garment.
Section three:  Silver and copper vessels should be used occasionally to prevent rust.  They may not however be used in a way that would wear them out.  Glass and gold vessels, which are the most expensive and fragile, may not be used at all.
Section four:  Finally, containers that are not generally carried need not be carried in order to air them out.  The implication is that things that are generally carried about should be aired out.

Mishnah Nine
What counts as lost property?
If he found an ass or a cow grazing on the path, this does not count as lost property. 
But if he found an ass with its trappings turned over, or a cow running in the vineyards, this is lost property.
If he returned it and it escaped again, and he returned it and it escaped again, even four or five times, he is obligated to return it [yet again], since it is stated (Deut. 22:1):  “You shall surely return it to your brother”.
If [the finder] lost time at work that was worth a sela (an amount of money), he may not say to the owner, “Give me a sela”.  Rather the owner need only pay him the wages of an unemployed laborer.  
If there was a court of law in the that place the finder may stipulate before them [for damages for time lost].  
If there was no court of law, before whom can he stipulate?
His comes first.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Section one:  An animal that is merely grazing without its owners nearby is not considered a lost animal.  However, if its trappings, meaning the load that it was carrying or the saddle on its back, were overturned or somehow misplaced, chances are that it is a lost object.  So too, if the cow was running in an inappropriate place, such as the vineyard, it is in all likelihood a lost cow.
Section two:  A person is obligated to return his fellow’s lost object no matter how many times it runs away.  This is learned from the verse in Deuteronomy.  In the Hebrew verse there is a repetition of the word which means to return.  Grammatically this is normal Biblical Hebrew.  However, the Rabbis assumed that such repetitions contained additional legal information.  In this case they learn that no matter how many times the animal may have been lost and found, one is still obligated to return it.
Section three:   A person who has already found and returned another person’s lost object cannot claim all of the wages which he lost while busying himself with the lost object.  Since the owner of the animal may not have wanted someone to return his animal if he would have to pay such a large sum of money, he is not obligated to pay.  All that the finder can claim is the minimal wage that an unemployed laborer would accept to have some work to do for the day.  However, if before he begins to deal with the lost animal the finder makes a stipulation in front of a court that if he should lose time at work while returning the animal that he would recover the loss, then the owner must pay him.  (Ostensibly if the loss of work was greater than the worth of the animal the court would not have agreed to such a condition.)  If there is no court in front of which to make such a stipulation, his own work takes precedent over the loss of others.
 
Questions for Further Thought:
How does the subject of mishnah eight differ from the subject at the end of mishnah seven?
Mishnah nine, section one:  Why might one consider an animal grazing on a path to be a lost animal?  In other words, why might this law not be obvious?
Mishnah nine, section four:  Why does his own work take precedence over the lost objects of others?  Is this law just encouraging selfishness?
