Bava Metziah Chapter Six Mishnayoth Six, Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnah six deals with the legal liability of craftsmen: as paid or unpaid guardians.  It also contains several other laws with regards to paid and unpaid guardians.  
Mishnah seven deals with the liability of a lender vis a vis the pledge he took to guarantee his loan.  
Mishnah eight deals with the liability of carriers who trip and break a jar that they had been carrying from place to place.

Mishnah Six
All craftsmen are accounted paid guardians.
But all that have said, “Take what is yours and give me the money”, are accounted unpaid guardians.
If one man said to another, “Guard that for me and I will guard this for you”, he is accounted a paid guardian.
If one said, “Guard this for me”, and the other said “Put it down in front of me”, he is accounted an unpaid guardian.

Explanation
A paid guardian has a greater liability over objects that he is guarding than an unpaid guardian.  A paid guardian is liable if the object is lost or stolen but not liable if the object dies (if it is an animal) is broken or taken captive.
Section one:  Craftsmen who take objects into their possession to work on them, such as cloth to make into clothing or leather to make into shoes, have the status of paid guardians.  If the object is lost or stolen they are liable to make compensation to the owner.  If, however, the craftsmen told the owner to come and collect his item and pay the money, the craftsmen now have the status of an unpaid guardian.
Section two:  If two people exchange objects for guarding they are both considered to be paid guardians.  Although they are not paying each other for guarding the object, they are each in essence paying the other person by watching his object.  Therefore they are each considered to be paid guardians.
Section three:  If someone asks another person to watch his object and the person responds by saying “Put it down in front of me” the guardian has the status of an unpaid guardian.   Although he didn’t specifically say that he would guard the object, telling the other person to put the object down is sufficient to cause him to be a guardian.
