
Mishnah Six
If a man found debt documents he should not return them [to the creditor] if they recorded a lien on the [debtor’s] property, since the court would exact repayment from the property.
But if they did not record a lien on the [debtor’s] property he may return them, since the court would not exact payment from the property, according to Rabbi Meir.
But the Sages say:  “In either case he should not return them, since [in either case] the court would exact payment from the property.”

Explanation
Generally, when a debtor pays back his debt he would take the document and tear it up, so that the creditor could not collect it again.  If one found a debt document, one could therefore assume that it came from the creditor.  However, according to our mishnah in most circumstances one should not return it to the creditor.  Our mishnah is concerned concerned that the debtor and creditor colluded to defraud a third party.  We will explain. If the debtor had written a lien on his property in the document the creditor could take from this property if the debtor defaulted.  For example let us say that Reuven loaned Shimon 1000 dollars and Shimon put a lien over all his property.  After the loan Shimon sold his property to Levi and then Shimon lost all of his money (probably in high tech stocks!).  Reuven can now collect his debt from the property sold to Levi.  Our mishnah is concerned that Reuven might make a deal with Shimon for Shimon to pay back, let’s say 500 dollars, and then to deny that he paid back anything and then Reuven would collect Shimon’s sold property from Levi.  Lest such collusion had been committed one should not return debt documents that have written in them liens.  According to Rabbi Meir, if no lien was written in the document there is nothing to fear and one may return it to the creditor.  According to the Sages all loans done through documents imply a lien on the debtor’s property, whether or not this is written specifically in the document.  Therefore no debt documents may be returned to the creditor.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  Why doesn’t the mishnah say that as long as the husband has not given his divorcee her ketubah and is therefore supporting her, he would receive any object which she found?  What might be a problem caused by such a law? 
Mishnah six:  According to Rabbi Meir, if one finds a debt document in which there is no lien, he may return it to the creditor.  Why is he allowed to do so, and why would you think he should not?
