Bava Metziah, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Six and Seven

Introduction
Mishnah six deals with a person’s legal right to strike a deal with the employer on behalf of the other members of his household.  
Mishnah seven deals with workers hired to work with food which they may not eat since it has not had the proper agricultural offerings taken out of it.

Mishnah Six
One may exact terms for himself and for his son or daughter that are of age, and for his slave or female slave that are of age, and for his wife, since these have understanding.
But he may not exact terms for his son and daughter that are not of age, or for his slave or female slave that are not of age, or for his cattle, since these have no understanding.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
This mishnah deals with a man who is working in someone else’s field along with his family.  The man has a right to make a contract with his employer that instead of taking food directly from the field the employer will pay them extra money with which they can buy their own food.  This was probably a customary practice in their time.  A man has a right to make this contract on behalf of his wife, his adult children and his adult male and female slaves.  The reason is that these people have understanding and will be able to refrain from eating directly from the field.  Therefore the man’s contract with the employer is legally binding on them as well and they may no longer eat directly from the field.  
However, a man may not exact terms for the minors in his family, be they children or slaves.  Since these people have no legal understanding, meaning they cannot be held legally liable for their actions, the father may not make a contract to prevent them from eating from the field.

Mishnah Seven
If one hired laborers to work among his fourth-year plantings, they not eat from them.
If he had not told them [that they were fourth-year plantings] he must first redeem the fruit and then allow them to eat.
If his fig-cakes broke up or his jars burst open, they may not eat from them.  
If he had not told them [that they were liable to be tithed] he must first separate the tithes and then allow them to eat.  

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  In this scenario workers are hired to work with produce from plants that are in their fourth year.  Such fruit may not be eaten in any place but Jerusalem.  (During the first three years of a plant’s life its fruit may not be eaten at all.  This law is called “orlah”.)  If the owner wished to, he could redeem the fruit of his fourth year plants with money and bring the money to Jerusalem and spend it there.  If the workers were told beforehand that they would be working with fourth-year plantings, then they may not eat from them.  Since they agreed to work with that which they could not eat, the employer is not obligated to make the food able to them. However, if the employer had not informed them that they would be working with food from which they may not eat, he is obligated to redeem the fruit and then let them eat.
Section two:  One is not obligated to separate the tithe (which will go to the Levi) from produce until the work on the produce has been completed.  In other words, fruit in the fields that has not yet been made ready for sale need not be tithed before eating, whereas fruit in the market must be tithed before it is eaten.  In our mishnah the laborer was hired to work with produce upon which the work has already been completed.  He therefore may not eat of the produce until the appropriate tithes have been taken.  In this case the worker was hired to work with food after the work had been completed and yet something went wrong with the packaging.  As we learned in section one, if the employer had informed the worker that he would be working with produce from which he could not eat then they may not eat from the produce.  If, however, he had not informed them, then he must separate the tithes and allow them to eat from the produce.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah six:  What does this mishnah tell us about the structure of the Jewish family at the time of the Mishnah?
Mishnah seven:  What general principle can you extract from this mishnah?
