Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnayoth Eleven and Twelve

Introduction
Mishnah eleven and the beginning of mishnah twelve deal with a seller’s mixing produce that comes from different fields or wine from different winepresses.  The potential problem is that the seller might mix good produce with bad produce in order to hide the bad produce and thereby make it easier to sell.  The remainder of mishnah twelve deals with other competitive and deceptive business practices.

Mishnah Eleven
Produce may not be mixed together with other produce, even new produce with new produce, and needless to say new with old.
In truth they permitted sharp wine to be mixed with weak wine, since this improves [the taste].
Wine lees may not be mixed with wine, but [the seller] may give [the buyer] the lees that come from the same wine.
One whose wine has been mixed with water may not sell it in a store unless he informs [the buyer] and not to a merchant even if he has informed him, since [the merchant would buy it] only to deceive with it.
In a place where they are accustomed to put water in wine, they may do so.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
One is not allowed to mix produce that comes from one field with produce that comes from another field, lest one field makes better produce than the other field. In other words, a buyer has a right to know from which field his produce is coming.  New produce, probably grain that has not fully dried out, is not as valuable as old produce.  Nevertheless it is forbidden to mix the produce even if both sets of produce are new.  Needless to say it is forbidden to mix new produce with the old.  In modern times this is akin to selling a bushel of fruit where the good fruit is on top and the bad fruit is hidden on the bottom.
Sharp wine may be mixed with weak wine since the mixture will improve the taste of both wines.  
A seller may not artificially add lees to a jug of wine, thereby seeming to increase the amount of wine he is selling.  On the other hand, he may sell a jug of wine with the lees that come from that wine itself.  In other words, although he may not add lees to wine, he need not remove the already existing lees before he sells it.  A buyer of wine should expect to receive a normal amount of lees.
One who has diluted his wine, probably to make it more drinkable, cannot sell it in a store unless he informs the purchasers that they are buying already diluted wine.  He may not sell the wine to a merchant even if he informs the merchant, lest the merchant sell the wine to others without informing them that the wine is already diluted.

Mishnah Twelve
A merchant may buy from five threshing floors and put the produce into a storage chamber, or from five wine-presses and put into one jug, as long as he doesn’t intend to mix them [for purposes of fraud].
Rabbi Judah says:  “A storekeeper should not distribute parched corn or nuts to children, for that accustoms them to come [only] to him.”
But the Sages permit.
And he may not lower the price.
But the Sages says:  “Let him be remembered for good [if he lowers the price].”
He may not sift crushed beans, according to Abba Shaul.
But the Sages permit.
But they agree that he should not sift them [only] at the entry of the storage chamber, since he would be a deceiver of the eye.
He should not beautify what he sells, whether humans, cattle or utensils.

Explanation—Mishnah Twelve
Section one:  This section is a continuation of the previous mishnah.  There we learned that a person may not mix produce that comes from different fields.  Here we learn that someone who purchases from different fields may place the produce or wine in the same storage chambers, as long as he doesn’t intend to mix good and bad produce.  
Section two:  Rabbi Judah states that certain competitive business practices are forbidden.  A shopkeeper may not give parched corn or nuts to children (they didn’t have candy back then) since that will make the kids want to come back and bring their parents along with them, thereby damaging the competing businesses.  (I’m sure parents can identify with this mishnah.  How many times have you been at the checkout counter of the store and your kids begs you to buy him/her the toy or candy blatantly displayed out front?).  Rabbi Judah also forbids a seller to lower a price in order to compete with his fellow sellers. Both of these practices were permitted by the Sages.
Abba Shaul forbids a seller to sift the crushed beans and thereby remove the waste.  This would raise the price and again probably cause competition with the other sellers.  Again, the Sages permit.  They do, however, forbid a seller to sift the crushed beans that are on the outside of a container.  The buyer would see sifted crushed beans and think the entire container is sifted.  This is indeed a deceptive business practice, and not merely competitive.  Similarly, it is forbidden to artificially improve something’s appearance in order to sell it.  The modern example would be to put wall paper over walls of a house in order to hide the fact that they are in truth rotting away. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eleven:  One is not allowed to sell diluted wine to a merchant even though there is nothing to prevent the merchant from diluting the wine after he has sold it.  Why is this so? 
Mishnah twelve:  What types of business practices are forbidden to the Sages and what types are permitted? 
