Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine, Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnayoth seven and eight continue to deal with laws concerning sharecroppers.  Mishnah seven teaches that the sharecropper is obligated to pay back the owner with the produce grown in the rented field (and not produce grown somewhere else) and that the owner is obligated to accept this produce as payment (and not demand other produce).
Mishnah eight teaches that a sharecropper who rents a field in order to sow it with a certain type of produce may usually not sow it with a different kind of seed.

Mishnah Seven
If one leased a field from his fellow in return for ten kors of wheat a year and it produced bad wheat, he may pay him out of this crop.
If [it produced] good wheat he may not say, “I will buy other wheat from the market”, rather he must pay him from the crop of that field.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Both clauses in this mishnah essentially teach the same law:  a person renting a field in return for a fixed amount of wheat must repay the owner with the wheat that comes from the rented field itself and not with produce coming from another field.  This law can work to the advantage of either the renter or the owner.  If the produce was of a poor quality the owner of the field will lose out for he cannot demand that the renter pay him back with better wheat.  If the wheat was better than average wheat the renter loses out for he may not sell that wheat and buy lesser quality wheat to repay the owner.  In other words the rental agreement legally binds the owner to accept the wheat from that field and legally binds the renter to pay back with the wheat from that field.

Mishnah Eight
If one leased a field from his fellow with the condition that he sow barley, he may not sow wheat;
[But if he leased the field with the condition that he sow] wheat, he may sow barley.
Rabban Gamaliel forbids this.
If one leased a field from his fellow with the condition that he sow grain, he may not sow beans;
[But if he leased the field with the condition that he sow] beans, he may sow grain.
Rabban Gamaliel forbids this.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Both sections of this mishnah in essence teach the same law, so we will explain them together.  If one leased a field with the stipulation that he sow a certain type of produce he may not sow something else that is more damaging to the soil of that field.  He may, however, sow something that is less damaging to the soil.  For instance, if he promised to sow barley he may not sow wheat since wheat is more damaging; but if he promised to sow wheat he may sow barley, since barley is less damaging.  Similarly, if he promised to sow grain he may not sow beans which are more damaging; but if he promised to sow beans he may sow wheat which is less damaging.  This is the anonymous opinion expressed in the first two clauses of each section.  Rabban Gamaliel disagrees and states that one may not change the condition under any circumstance, even if the new seed will be less damaging to the field.  Although there may not be exist a specific reason why in certain cases one should not change the conditions of the agreement, one is in general forbidden to do so.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven:  Why does the mishnah teach both clauses?  What might you have thought had the mishnah taught only the first clause and not the second? What might you have thought had the mishnah taught only the second clause and not the first?
Mishnah eight:  What do you think Rabban Gamaliel would say if the renter asked the owner’s permission to change the type of seed?  Would he still forbid?
