Bava Metziah, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The first mishnah of chapter eight deals with a specific law which is applicable only to borrowers:  if the owners were rented or borrowed with their animals, for instance a donkey driver with his donkey, then the borrowers or renters are not obligated if the animal should die.
Mishnah two deals with a person who rents an animal for half a day and borrows it for the other half.

Mishnah One
If one borrowed a cow together with the service of its owner, or hired its owner together with the cow, or if he borrowed the service of the owner or hired him, and afterward borrowed the cow, and the cowed died he is not liable, for it is written, “If its owner was with it no restitution need be made” (Exodus 22:14).  
But if he first borrowed the cow and afterward borrowed or hired the service of its owner, and the cow died, he is liable, for it is written, “Its owner not being with it, he must make restitution” (Exodus 22:13).

Explanation
The Torah clearly states that if the owner of the animal was with the animal when it was borrowed and then it died or was injured the borrower is not obligated to make restitution.  The assumption is that the owners should have taken care of the animal and therefore even though the borrower would normally be liable for the animal dying or being injured in this case he is not.  
Our mishnah clarifies two issues.  First of all, it states that the services of the owner need not have been borrowed but may have been hired as well.  As long as the cow is borrowed these laws will be applicable.  Second, the services of the owner must have been borrowed or hired before the borrowing of the cow.  The Rabbis interpret the Torah’s words “with it” or “not being with it” to mean that the owner was in service to the borrower at the time of the borrowing and not afterwards.  If the borrower hired or borrowed the services of the owner after having borrowed the cow he will be liable if the cow dies, even if at that time the owner was with the cow.
