Mishnah Eleven
If one makes a stipulation contrary to that which is written in the Torah he stipulation is void.  
Any stipulation that mentions first the action is void.
Any stipulation that can in the end be fulfilled and was laid down as a condition from the beginning, such a condition is valid.

Explanation
Section one:  In the previous mishnah we learned that guardians may make stipulations to exempt themselves from varying degrees of liability.  However, in this mishnah we learn that stipulations made that are contrary to the Torah are null and void.  Apparently there is a contradiction between the two mishnayoth, with mishnah ten allowing stipulations contrary to that which is in the Torah and mishnah eleven disallowing them.  One possibility to reconcile the two is that monetary stipulations, such as those mentioned in mishnah ten are valid and non-monetary stipulations are not valid.  A non-monetary stipulation would be, for example, if a man married a woman on condition that she would not need a get (a divorce document) to divorce him.  This is certainly an invalid stipulation.
Section two:  There are strict rules regarding the way in which stipulations must be stated.  This mishnah teaches that the stipulation must be mentioned before the action.  For instance if one says:  “Behold you are betrothed to me on condition that my father will agree” the woman is married even if the father does not agree.  If he wishes the stipulation to be valid he must mention the stipulation first by saying, “If my father agrees then you are betrothed to me”.  
Section three:  Finally we learn that for a stipulation to be valid it must be possible to fulfill it.  For instance if one said, “If you fly to the sky then you are betrothed to me” the stipulation is invalid and she is betrothed immediately.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten, section two:  Why would an owner agree to a guardian lowering his level of liability?
Mishnah eleven, section three:  Why do you think that for a stipulation to be valid it must be possible for one to perform it?  Why would someone state an impossible stipulation?