Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishnayoth 
Four, Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnayoth four and five are very similar and we will therefore explain them together.  They both deal with two people who deposited something with a third person and subsequently one of them makes a false claim as to what he deposited.
Mishnah six deals with a person whose friend deposited his produce with him and then his friend doesn’t return for an extended period.

Mishnah Four
Two men deposited money with a third, the one 100 zuz and the other 200 zuz.
[Afterward] one claimed that he deposited 200 and the other claimed that he deposited 200.
He gives this one 100 zuz and this one 100 zuz and the rest remains until Elijah comes.
Rabbi Yose says:  “If so, what does the deceiver lose?  Rather the whole is left until Elijah comes.”

Mishnah Five
So too, [two men deposited] vessels with a third, one worth 100 zuz and the other worth 1000 zuz.
[Afterward] one claimed that the valuable one was his and the other claimed that the valuable one was his.
He gives the less valuable one to one of them and from the value of the more valuable one he gives the value of the lesser one to the other person, and the rest remains until Elijah comes.
Rabbi Yose says:  “If so, what does the deceiver lose?  Rather the whole is left until Elijah comes.”

Explanation—Mishnayoth Five and Six
In the scenarios in both of these mishnayoth two people deposit something with a third, one a larger deposit than the other.  When they return to claim their deposit both claim to have deposited the larger amount of money (mishnah four or the more valuable vessel (mishnah five).  Evidently the person who received the deposit does not remember who left which deposit.  According to the first opinion each person should receive the value of the smaller deposit.  If it was money than each person receives 100 zuz.  If it was vessels one receives the less valuable vessel and the other vessel is sold and the value of the less valuable vessel is given to the other.  The remainder of the money from the sale of the more expensive vessel stays with the third party until Elijah comes to clarify the matter.
Rabbi Yose points out that such a system does not punish a person for lying and claiming the larger deposit.  Indeed, it may actually encourage him to do so.  Therefore Rabbi Yose claims that all of the money should remain with the third party until Elijah comes.  This way by lying the deceiver is penalized by not receiving even the smaller deposit.  Hopefully, this will encourage him to tell the truth and thereby at least receive the smaller deposit. [This story reminds me of the famous story of King Solomon and the two mothers who dispute over whose son was the one that died during the night.  See I Kings 3:16-28].

Mishnah Six
If a man deposited produce with his fellow, even if it should perish he may not touch it.  
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “He may sell it before a court of law, since he is like someone who returns a lost object to its owners.”

Explanation—Mishnah Six
In the scenario in our mishnah Reuven leaves his produce with Shimon to watch until he comes back.  When Reuven doesn’t return for an extended period Shimon is left with a dilemma.  On the one hand, a person guarding someone else’s possessions generally may not use the possessions.  However, if he does nothing with the produce the produce will rot.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, Shimon should just leave the produce even at the risk of it perishing.  The reason is that Reuven may want his produce back, since that was the produce he worked so hard to grow.  If you have your own backyard garden you know that this is often true.  Even if the fruit objectively is not better than the fruit in the store, to the person who grew it, it will taste better.  
According to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel, better for Shimon to sell the produce and hold the money for the owner.  This sale must be done in front of a court of law in order to prevent the person watching from selling the produce at too low of a price.

Questions for Further Thought:
How is Rabbi Yose’s opinion in these two mishnayoth similar to his opinion in mishnah two of this chapter?
If mishnayoth four and five basically say the same thing why do you think the mishnah needed to teach both of them?  

