Bava Metziah, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Ten and Eleven

Introduction
The beginning of mishnah ten continues to discuss the definition of an unavoidable accident for which a hirer or an unpaid guardian are not liable.  The second half of mishnah ten deals with a guardian who makes a stipulation to lower his level of liability.
Mishnah eleven deals with some general laws of stipulations.

Mishnah Ten
If a beast died a natural death this counts as an unavoidable accident [for which a hirer or paid guardian is not liable].  
But if he tortured it and it died it does not count as an unavoidable accident [and the hirer and paid guardian would be liable].
If it was led up to the top of a crag and it fell down and died, this does not count as an unavoidable accident.
An unpaid guardian may make a stipulation that he will be exempt from taking an oath, and a borrower [may make a stipulation that he will be exempt] from making restitution, and a paid guardian and a hirer [may make a stipulation that they will be exempt] from taking an oath or from making restitution. 

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
Section one:  As we learned in mishnah seven, a paid guardian and a hirer are not liable if the animal which they are guarding or using dies a natural death.  As our mishnah explains, a natural death is considered an unavoidable accident.  However, if the hirer or unpaid guardian tortured the animal and it died, or if he led it up to a dangerous crag and it fell it does not count as an unavoidable accident and the hirer or unpaid guardian would be liable to make restitution.  
Section two:  The principle learned in this section is that all types of guardians may make stipulations with the owner of the object to lower their level of liability.  An unpaid guardian is normally allowed to take an oath that he was not negligent and thereby exempt himself from liability.  He may make a stipulation before agreeing to watch the object that if something happens to the object he will be exempt without an oath.  Similarly a borrower is liable to make restitution in all cases where something happens to the object.  He may make a stipulation before borrowing the object that if something happens he will be exempt.  Finally, a hirer and an unpaid guardian are sometimes able to exempt themselves by taking an oath and sometimes they must make restitution.  They may also make stipulations that if liable for an oath they would be exempt without the oath and if liable to make restitution they would be exempt.  Obviously, in all of these cases the owner would need to agree to the stipulation before he gives them the object.  If he did not wish to agree to the stipulation he would simply not give them the object.

Mishnah Eleven
If one makes a stipulation contrary to that which is written in the Torah he stipulation is void.  
Any stipulation that mentions first the action is void.
Any stipulation that can in the end be fulfilled and was laid down as a condition from the beginning, such a condition is valid.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
Section one:  In the previous mishnah we learned that guardians may make stipulations to exempt themselves from varying degrees of liability.  However, in this mishnah we learn that stipulations made that are contrary to the Torah are null and void.  Apparently there is a contradiction between the two mishnayoth, with mishnah ten allowing stipulations contrary to that which is in the Torah and mishnah eleven disallowing them.  One possibility to reconcile the two is that monetary stipulations, such as those mentioned in mishnah ten are valid and non-monetary stipulations are not valid.  A non-monetary stipulation would be, for example, if a man married a woman on condition that she would not need a get (a divorce document) to divorce him.  This is certainly an invalid stipulation.
Section two:  There are strict rules regarding the way in which stipulations must be stated.  This mishnah teaches that the stipulation must be mentioned before the action.  For instance if one says:  “Behold you are betrothed to me on condition that my father will agree” the woman is married even if the father does not agree.  If he wishes the stipulation to be valid he must mention the stipulation first by saying, “If my father agrees then you are betrothed to me”.  
Section three:  Finally we learn that for a stipulation to be valid it must be possible to fulfill it.  For instance if one said, “If you fly to the sky then you are betrothed to me” the stipulation is invalid and she is betrothed immediately.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten, section two:  Why would an owner agree to a guardian lowering his level of liability?
Mishnah eleven, section three:  Why do you think that for a stipulation to be valid it must be possible for one to perform it?  Why would someone state an impossible stipulation?

