Bava Metziah, Chapter Ten, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
Chapter ten of Bava Metziah deals with laws concerning neighbors, a subject that the mishnah will continue to discuss in the first two chapters of Bava Batra (proving that originally these two tractates were part of one larger tractate which included Bava Kamma as well.  This tractate was called “Nezikin”).
Our two mishnayoth deal with two people who jointly own a house, one owning the second story and one owning the first.

Mishnah One
If a house (the first story) and an upper room (the second story) belonging to two persons (each owning one) fell down, the two share in the wood and the stones and the earth.
And they consider which stones were the more likely to have been broken.
If one of them recognizes that some of the stones were his, he may take them and they count as part of his share.

Explanation—Mishnah One
In order to understand the importance of this mishnah we must remember that in the time of the mishnah building materials, especially stone and wood, would have been scarce and therefore expensive, especially in the Land of Israel.  When a building collapsed the broken materials would have been reused, either to rebuild the house or for other purposes.  Our mishnah discusses to whom do these materials belong, in the case where the upper story was owned by one person and the bottom story by another.  In general the two persons split the material under the assumption that half was used for the construction of the top story and half for the bottom.  
Beyond knowing that the two partners split the material, it is also necessary to decide which partner takes which stones.  After all, in some cases some of the stones may be more valuable than others, such as broken stones versus whole one.  To that end the mishnah makes two suggestions.  1)  They try to determine which part of the house broke, and therefore who gets the broken stones.  For instance if the house broke at its foundations the owner of the bottom floor gets the broken stones.  If it broke from above, the owner of the top floor takes the broken stones.  2)  If one of the partners recognizes his stones, he takes those stones and the other takes other stones.  The mishnah further clarifies that these recognized stones count as part of the share of the one who recognizes them.

Mishnah Two
If there was a house (the first story) and an upper room (the second story) belonging to two people, and the [floor of the] upper room broke and the owner of the house (the bottom story) did not want to fix it, the owner of the upper room may come down and dwell below, until the owner [of the bottom story] fixes [the floor of the] upper room.
Rabbi Yose says:  “He that dwells below should provide the beams and he that dwells above the plastering.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
As in the previous mishnah, in mishnah two one person owns the bottom story and another owns the top story.  However, here, instead of the whole building collapsing as occurred in mishnah one, the ceiling of the bottom story, which also serves as the floor of the top story collapses.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah the owner of the bottom story is obligated to fix the ceiling/floor and until he does so the owner of the top story may occupy the bottom story.  Rabbi Yose disagrees and states that the two partners must share in the building of the ceiling/floor.  The owner of the bottom story provides the wooden beams and the owner of the top provides the plaster.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  Why would you think that the stones which one of the owners recognizes does not count as part of his share?  In other words, why might the last statement of the mishnah not be obvious?
Mishnah two:  What is the basis of Rabbi Yose’s disagreement with the first opinion?  Why doesn’t Rabbi Yose think that the owner of the bottom floor should be responsible for providing the entire ceiling/floor?
