Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnayoth seven and eight are not directly connected to the subject matter of the chapter.  Rather they both contain lists of laws that revolve around certain amounts of money.  Mishnah seven lists minimum amounts of money that are needed to enact certain laws.  Mishnah eight lists “fifths”, places in Jewish law where a person must pay an added fifth of something.  
Remember, the Mishnah is oral law.  Lists such as these were probably easy to remember.

Mishnah Seven
Fraud is four pieces of silver.
A claim is [a minimum] of two pieces of silver.
An admission is [a minimum] of that which is worth a perutah.
There are five [rules involving] that which is worth a perutah:
An admission is [a minimum] of that which is worth a perutah.
A woman can be betrothed with that which is worth a perutah.
Someone who benefits a perutah’s worth from that which belongs to the sanctuary has committed sacrilege.
One who finds that which is worth a perutah must proclaim it [as a lost object].
One who steals that which is worth a perutah from his fellow and swears [falsely] to him [that he did not steal it], must go after him [to return it] even as far as Medea.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Section one:  As we learned in mishnah three of this chapter, fraud is considered to be an overcharge or an undercharge of 1/6 of a sale.  Four pieces of silver are 1/6 of a sela which consists of 24 pieces of silver.  If the sale was over or under by four pieces of silver per sela, the sale is potentially fraudulent.
Section two:  If Reuven claims in court that Shimon owes him a certain amount of money and Shimon admits that he owes part of the amount but not the full amount, the court can make Shimon swear that he does not owe the full amount.  In order for the court to make Shimon swear he must deny owing an amount not less than two pieces of silver (the claim, section one) and admit to owing an amount not less than a perutah, the smallest coin that exists (the admission, section two).
Section three:  The mishnah lists five laws for which a perutah is the required amount.  1)  The admission mentioned in the previous section of the mishnah.  2)  A woman can be betrothed by the man giving her something which must be worth at least a perutah (see Kiddushin 1:1).  Today this is usually done by giving a ring.  3)  If a person benefits from something that belongs to the Temple he has committed sacrilege and he will have to bring a sacrifice to atone for his sin.  He is only obligated for this sacrifice if this benefit was worth a perutah.  4)  If a person finds something worth a perutah and it is one of the things which must be proclaimed as lost, he must proclaim it.  If, however, it is worth less than a perutah he need not proclaim it.  5)  If a person steals from his fellow and then falsely swears to him that he did not steal, in order to make atonement he must return the object to its owner no matter how far away the owner may be (See Bava Kamma 9:5).  If, however, the stolen item was worth less than a perutah he need not do so. 

Mishnah Eight
There are five cases in which one must add a fifth:
One who eats terumah, or the terumah taken from the tithe, or the terumah from a tithe taken from doubtfully tithed produce, or dough offering, or first fruits, must add a fifth [to the value of the principle when he makes restitution].
One that redeems [the fruit of] a fourth year plant, or his second tithe, must add a fifth.
One that redeems that which he dedicated [to the Temple] must add a fifth.
One that derives a perutah’s worth of benefit from that which belongs to the sanctuary must add a fifth [when he makes restitution].
One who steals that which is worth a perutah from his fellow must add a fifth [when he makes restitution].

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
This mishnah lists five cases in which a person must add a fifth of the value of something.  [Note that the mishnah lists five fifths.  This is clearly an aid to memory and not just a coincidence]. 
Section one:  This is a list of agricultural offerings which must be given to the Priest.  One who eats one of these things accidentally must restore the value of what was eaten plus a fifth.  For further explanation of what these offerings are look at the Steinsaltz reference guide. 
Section two:  The fruit of a new plant is forbidden for the first three years. During the fourth year the fruit must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.  So, too, the second tithe must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.  If a person wishes to avoid carrying such a heavy load of produce all the way to Jerusalem he may “redeem” his produce and bring the money to Jerusalem.  [Afterwards he will be able to eat the produce outside of Jerusalem].  If he redeems the produce he must redeem it at a fifth more than its value. 
Section three:  If someone dedicates something to the Temple and the object which he dedicates cannot be sacrificed at the Temple, such as a piece of land, he can “redeem” the object with money and donate the money to the Temple.  If he redeems the dedicated object he must add a fifth of its value.
Section four:  Someone who benefits from that which belongs to the Temple has committed sacrilege.  When he makes restitution for that which he has taken, for instance if he illegally ate a sacrifice, he must add a fifth of the value of that which he consumed.
Section five:  If a person steals from his fellow and then swears that he did not do so, and subsequently is caught or wishes to repent, he must restore not only the value of that which he stole, but an added fifth as well.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eight:  Is there another possibility for counting the five “fifths” in mishnah eight?  

