Bava Metziah Chapter Three Mishnayoth Nine and Ten

Introduction
Mishnayoth nine and ten deal with a guardian’s permission to use an object which he is watching and the subsequent liability for the object should it be damaged after he used it.

Mishnah Nine
If a man left a jar with his fellow [to guard] and the owner did not assign it a special place [to be kept] and [the guardian] moved it and it broke:
If it was broken while he was handling it: 
If for his own sake he is liable.
If for the sake of the jar, he is not liable.
But if it was broken after he had put it in place, whether he moved it for his own sake or for the sake of the jar, he is exempt.
If the owner had assigned it a special place, and the guardian moved it and it broke:
Whether or not it broke while he was handling it or after he had put it in its place;
If for his own sake he is liable,
if for the sake of the jar, he is not liable.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
If a man left a jar with his fellow for safekeeping but did not specify the place for the jar to be kept, his fellow is allowed to move it, but only for the sake of the jar.  For instance if his fellow did not tell him where to leave the jar, and he put it in the garage and then decided that the jar would be safer in the cellar he is allowed to move the jar to the cellar.  In this case if the jar should break either while moving it or after having moved it and put it in a new place he will not be liable.  However, if he moved the jar since he needed the space in the garage he takes a risk by moving it to the cellar.  In this case if the jar breaks while moving it, he will be liable.  However, since the owner did not specify where he wants the jar, once the jar is in its new place in the cellar, the guardian is no longer liable if the jar breaks.
If the owners did specify a place for the jar then he is not allowed to move it except for the sake of the jar.  If he moved it for his own sake he will be liable, even after he put it down.  
The following chart may help understand this mishnah.
  

Moved for sake of jar
Moved for sake of guardian
Owners specified place
Not obligated
Obligated
Owners did not specify place
Not obligated
Obligated if broken while handling
Not obligated if broken after being put down

Mishnah Ten 
If a man left money in his fellow’s keeping and his fellow bound it up and hung it over his back, or delivered it to his son or his daughter who were minors, or locked it up improperly, he is liable since he did not guard in the way of guardians.
If he guarded it in the way of guardians he is exempt.

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
This mishnah teaches how a person should guard another person’s given to him for safekeeping.  He should not tie it up and put it in a bundle behind him lest a thief come and take it.  He should not give it to minor children nor lock it up improperly.  All of these are not the way that guardians watch other people’s objects.  If he should act in such a manner and the money were to be lost he would be liable.  If, however, he guarded it properly and something happened to the money, he would be exempt.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten:  Why does the mishnah need to teach the idea of “the way of guardians”?  Why not just state that the guardian is either liable or not liable? What additional information might we glean from these words?
