Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine, Mishnayoth Nine and Ten

Introduction
Mishnah nine states some legal differences with regards to the rights of a sharecropper who receives a field for less than seven years versus one who receives the field for more than seven years.
Mishnah ten deals with the issue of including the sabbatical year in the rental agreement.

Mishnah Nine
If one leased a field from his fellow for but a few years he may not sow flax and he has no right to cut beams from the sycamore tree.
If he leased it for seven years he may sow flax the first year and he has a right to cut beams from the sycamore tree.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
When one rents a field he is expected to return the field and everything in it to its owner in a state similar to that that in which he received it.  If he were to sow the field with flax which damages the soil and then return the field, the field would still bear the damage of the flax.  Therefore, if he wishes to plant flax he must plant it at least seven years before the end of the rental agreement.  If he rents the field, therefore, for seven years, he may plant flax during the first year.  Similarly, he must return the trees that were on the field in the same condition in which he received them.  If he were to cut down the thick branches of the sycamore, they would take a long time to grow back.  Therefore, he may only cut down these types of branches if there are seven years left before the end of the rental agreement.

Mishnah Ten
If one leased a field from his fellow for “a week of years” (seven years) for 700 zuz, the Seventh Year is included in the number.
If he leased it for “seven years” for 700 zuz, the Seventh Year is not included in the number.

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
During the Seventh Year Jews living in the Land of Israel are not allowed to work their fields (See Exodus 23:10-11, Leviticus 25:1-7).  If a Jew rented a piece of land in the Land of Israel he would not, therefore, be able to work it or derive benefit from it during the Seventh Year.  Our mishnah states that the inclusion of the Seventh Year as one of the years in the rental agreement depends on the language of the agreement.  If he used inclusive language, stating “a week of years” then the Seventh Year is included.  If however, he merely stated “seven years” then he receives seven years in which he would be allowed to plant and harvest.  In such a case he would actually keep the land through the eighth year.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Nine:  If one were to rent a field for ten years when could he sow flax and cut down branches of the sycamore tree?
Mishnah Ten:  What would happen if someone rented a piece of land on the fifth year of a Sabbatical cycle and the agreement was for four years?  Would the Seventh (Sabbatical) Year count as one of the years or not?  
