Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnayoth Nine and Ten

Introduction
Mishnah nine lists things to which the laws of fraud by overcharging do not apply. Mishnah ten deals with defrauding by spoken words.  This mishnah has nothing to do with the laws of sales but rather deals with things a person should not say to another person.

Mishnah Nine
These are the things to which the laws of fraud through overcharging do not apply:
The sale of slaves, debt documents, land and what belongs to the Temple.
They are not subject to twofold restitution, nor fourfold or fivefold restitution.
An unpaid guardian does not take an oath [on their account, that he did not damage them] nor does a paid guardian make compensation [if they are lost on his watch].
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Holy Things for which he is responsible, are subject to the laws of fraud through overcharging, and Holy Things for which he is not responsible are not subject to the laws of fraud through overcharging.”
Rabbi Judah says: “Also one who sells a Torah scroll, and an animal or a pearl—they are not subject to the laws of fraud through overcharging.”
They (the Sages) said to him:  “They only said these.” 

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Section one:  The laws of fraud through overcharging are learned from Leviticus 25:14, “When you sell something to your neighbor or buy from the hand of your neighbor, you shall not wrong one another.”  According to the Rabbinic interpretation of this verse, the “wrong” is fraud through overcharging.  From the words “from the hand” the Rabbis learn that in order for a sale to be subject to the laws of fraud through overcharging it must be something passed from hand to hand.  This excludes land and slaves (whose laws are always similar to the laws regarding land) which cannot be passed from hand to hand.  The word “something” excludes documents which have no value of themselves.  The word “neighbor” excludes property which belongs to the Temple.  
Section two:  The things listed in section one are also exempt from other laws.  A thief who steals any of these things and is caught does not have to pay the fine of twofold, fourfold or fivefold restitution (see Bava Kamma 7:1).  If an unpaid guardian was guarding these items and they were lost, he need not take an oath to the owner that he was not careless in his watch.  If a paid guardian was watching them and they were lost he need not make restitution.  (For the laws of guardians see Bava Metziah 7:8).  
Section three:  If a person makes a statement saying that he will dedicate a certain animal, for instance a sheep, to the Temple, he must dedicate a sheep.  If he sets aside a sheep to bring to the Temple and it is lost, he will have to bring another sheep in its place.  This is an example of a Holy Thing for which he is responsible.  If, however, he states “This sheep is dedicated to the Temple” then he is responsible for bringing this specific sheep.  If the sheep should die he need not bring another in its place. This is a Holy Thing for which he is not responsible.  According to Rabbi Shimon, the first category is subject to the laws of fraud through overcharging.  Since the owners are responsible for the animal, it is as if the animal is their property, and thereby liable to the laws of fraud.  On the other hand, Holy Things for which he is not responsible are not subject to the laws of fraud, since they cannot be construed at all as the property of the owner.
Section four:  Rabbi Judah adds three more things that are not subject to the laws of fraud.  According to the explanation of Rabbi Shimon found in the Talmud the laws of fraud through overcharging do not apply to the selling of a Torah scroll, since a set value cannot be placed on a Torah scroll by which to establish when there has been overcharging.  An animal or pearl’s value is subject to the needs of the buyer and therefore it is impossible to establish a set value for these as well.  The Sages disagree with Rabbi Judah.  According to them the only things which are not subject to the laws of fraud are those listed in section one.

Mishnah Ten
Just as the laws of fraud apply to buying and selling, so to do they apply to the spoken word.
One may not say, “How much is this object?, if he does not wish to buy it.
If one had repented, another should not say to him, “Remember your earlier deeds”.
If one descended from converts, another should not say to him, “Remember the deeds of your ancestors”.
For it is said (Exodus 22:21), “And a stranger you shall not wrong or oppress.”

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
Just as a person can wrong another person by cheating him on a sale, so too can a person wrong another person through words.  One may not ask someone how much something costs he doesn’t intend to buy it.  This would raise false hopes for the seller.  One may not remind a person who had repented of his former deeds.  Nor may one remind a convert that his ancestors were idol worshippers.  These laws are learned from a midrash on the verse in Exodus 22:21.  The verse uses the word “ger” which in Biblical Hebrew means stranger but in Rabbinic Hebrew means convert.  The word for “wrong” in this verse is the same word used in Leviticus 25:14 (see above) from where we learned the laws of fraud.  The Rabbis extended the “wrong” mentioned in the verse to include even wrong done through words alone.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah nine, section four:  If according to Rabbi Judah the laws of fraud through overcharging do not apply to the sale of land, slaves, animals or pearls, to what types of sales do these laws apply?  
Mishnah ten:  What are some common modern examples of wronging done through words?  How are they similar to those examples listed in the mishnah?
