Bava Metziah, Chapter Nine, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with a sharecropper who receives a field and subsequently decides that he doesn’t want to work the field.  Mishnah four deals with a sharecropper who doesn’t want to weed the field.

Mishnah Three
If one leased a field from his fellow and he let it lie fallow, they assess how much it was likely to have yielded and he must pay the owner accordingly, since he wrote [in the leasing agreement]:  “If I suffer the land to lie fallow and do not till it, I will pay thee at the rate of its highest yield.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah contains in it a clause that was considered to be standard in sharecropping agreements written in the time of the mishnah.  The sharecropper would write to the landowner that if he did not work the land and instead allowed it to lie fallow, the sharecropper would be penalized by having to pay the owner as if the land had produced at the rate of its highest yield.  This agreement was meant to allay the fears of the landowner that he would rent the field to the sharecropper and the sharecropper would subsequently decide that it was not worthwhile to work the field for whatever reason.  After having written this clause a sharecropper would be forced to work the land or suffer a severe economic loss.  
Note that this clause was only necessary in agreements where the sharecropper had agreed to pay a percentage of the crops.  If he had agreed on a fixed amount he would be obligated for that amount even if he did not work the land.

Mishnah Four
If one leased a field from his fellow and he did not want to weed it, and he said to the owner, “What do you care, as long as I pay you the agreed rental?”, they do not listen to him, for the owner can say to him, “Tomorrow you will leave the field and it won’t bring forth anything but weeds.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
According to our mishnah a sharecropper is responsible to weed the field that he is working.  Even if he were to say to the owner that he will still give him the full amount of the rental agreement, the owner can force the sharecropper to weed, since not weeding will cause future damage to the field.  It is in the owner’s best interests that should the sharecropper leave he could rent the field to others.  

Questions for Further Thought:
What do these two mishnayoth have in common with regards to the responsibilities of a sharecropper?
