Bava Metziah, Chapter Ten, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three continues to deal with a situation in which one person owns the bottom story of a house and another owns the top story, and the house collapses.  In the scenario in this mishnah the owner of the bottom story refuses to rebuild his share, thereby preventing the owner of the top story from rebuilding his share.
Mishnah four deals with a case similar to that in mishnah three, except instead of a house here one person owns an underground olive press and another person owns a garden planted above the olive press, and the olive press collapses.  

Mishnah Three
If a house (the bottom story) and an upper room belonging to two persons (each owning one) fell down, and the owner of the upper room told the owner of the house (the bottom story) to rebuild it, and he did not want to rebuild it, the owner of the upper room may rebuild the house below and live in it until the other repays him what he has spent.
Rabbi Judah says:  “He would then [after being reimbursed] have been dwelling on his fellow’s property and he should [therefore] pay him rent.  Rather the owner of the upper room should rebuild both the house below and the upper room and put a roof on the upper room, and live in the house below until the other repays him what he has spent.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
In the scenario in our mishnah after the entire house fell, the owner of the upper room wants to rebuild it so that he can return to live there, but the owner of the bottom story refuses to rebuild his share, thereby preventing the former from rebuilding his share.  According to the opinion in section one, the owner of the upper room may rebuild the bottom story and live in it until its proper owner repays him for his expenses.  Once the bottom story is rebuilt the owner of the upper room will be able to rebuild his share and live there.
According to Rabbi Judah, in this scenario it would turn out that the owner of the upper room had lived on the property of the owner of the bottom story without paying him rent.  After all, at this point the upper room no longer existed and its owner therefore could not have lived there.  Although the owner of the lower story should have rebuilt the house, he was not obligated to rebuild it and let the owner of the lower story live there for free.
Rather the owner of the upper room should rebuild the entire house, including the upper room, but live in the bottom story until it owner repays him for his costs.  In this way the owner of the lower story could not claim from him rent, since while he was living there he had the upper room at his disposal. 

Mishnah Four
So, too, if an olive press was built in a rock and another had a garden on top of it, and [the olive press] was in part broken down, the owner of the garden may come down and sow below until the other rebuilds the ceiling of his olive press.
If a wall or a tree fell into the public domain and caused damage, the owner is not liable to make restitution.  
If a set time had been given to him to cut down the tree or pull down the wall, and they fell down within the time, he is not liable.
If after that time, he is liable.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  This scenario is similar to the scenario in the previous mishnah, but instead of a house with an upper room, this mishnah deals with an olive press that has a garden growing on top of it.  Should the roof of the olive press collapse, the owner of the garden is permitted to plant below until the owner of the olive press rebuilds the ceiling.  
Note how valuable space was in the Land of Israel.  People would use any possible land to garden, even land which had on olive press beneath it.  Much of the land of Israel is not arable, particularly the mountainous regions and the desert.  This is still true in Israel today.
Section two:  This section of the mishnah does not deal with shared property as in the previous portions of the chapter but rather with a property owner’s responsibilities and liabilities with regards to the public domain.  According to the mishnah if a person’s wall or tree fell into the public domain and thereby caused damage he is not liable.  This is a case where he had no way of knowing that his tree or wall would fall, and therefore he cannot be held accountable.  If, however, he had been given a warning by the court and told to either remove his tree or wall, or make them safer, and the time for doing so had elapsed, he will be subsequently liable for any damage done by the tree in the public domain.  
 
Questions for Further Thought: 
Mishnah three:  Why doesn’t the author of the anonymous opinion in section one agree with Rabbi Judah, that if the owner of the upper story lived in the bottom story without rebuilding the upper story he would owe rent?  What is the basis for their difference of opinion?
Mishnah four, section one:  What is the difference between the scenario in this section and that in the previous mishnah?    
