Bava Metziah Chapter Four Mishnah One and Two

Introduction
The first two mishnayoth of chapter four deal with what constitutes the finalizing of a transaction of movable property (movable property includes things and animals and does not include land).  The importance of this halacha is that when the transaction is final neither side may retract the sale.  For instance if an animal is sold and then dies before the seller can bring it to the buyer it is important to know if the sale was final.  If the sale was final then the buyer’s animal died. If it was not final than the seller’s animal died.  The general rule that is important to note in the outset is that the transfer of money does not cause the acquisition to be final.  In other words if Reuven gave Shimon 100 zuz for his cow the cow does not belong to Reuven until he takes possession of it (this can be done in various ways).  

Mishnah One
Gold acquires silver, but silver does not acquire gold.
Copper acquires silver, but silver does not acquire copper.
Bad coins acquire good coins but good coins do not acquire bad coins.
An unminted coin acquires a minted coin, but a minted coin does not acquire an unminted coin.
Movable property acquires coined money, but coined money does not acquire movable property.
This is the general rule:  movable property acquires other movable property.

Explanation—Mishnah One
As explained in the introduction, money does not acquire movable property, but the transfer of movable property does obligate the buyer to give the money.  Our mishnah defines what money is in relation to movable property.  To understand this mishnah one must keep in mind that in those times coins were based on their weight in silver and the authority of the government who had minted the coin.  Most coins were made of silver but there were gold and copper coins as well.  Silver coins were more easily accepted in the marketplace than gold or copper coins.  Section one teaches that gold is “movable property” in relation to silver which is “money”.  Therefore if the owner of the silver takes the gold from its owner he is obligated to give him the silver, even if he were to change his mind.  If, however, the owner of the silver gave the silver to the owner of the gold, the sale is not final and the owner of the gold may still retract the exchange. 
The remainder of the mishnah similarly defines property vis a vis money.  Copper is “property” compared to silver.  Bad, worn out and unminted coins do not fall into the category of “money” but are rather closer on the spectrum to being “movable property”.  Finally, if two pieces of movable property are being exchanged, the acceptance of one creates an obligation for the other to be given as well.  
Examples relevant to this mishnah will be given in the next mishnah.  

Mishnah Two
How is this so?
If [the buyer] drew the produce away from [the seller] but did not give over the money, he cannot retract.
If [the buyer] gave the money but did not draw the produce away from [the seller], he can retract.
But they said:  “He that exacted punishment from the generation of the flood and the generation of the dispersion (at the time of the Tower of Babel) will exact punishment from one who does not keep by his word.
Rabbi Shimon says:  “He that has the money has the upper hand.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
The examples given in section one demonstrate the rules learned in the previous mishnah.  For instance if Reuven is selling produce to Shimon and Reuven takes the produce into his possession but Shimon does not pay the money, neither of them can retract.  Even if for example the price should go way down, Reuven still owes Shimon the money that was agreed upon at the time of the sale.  If, however, Reuven paid Shimon and Shimon did not give him the produce, either can retract the sale. If, for instance, the price of the produce should go up, Shimon can renegotiate the sale.  However, the mishnah adds that although reneging is legal, God will eventually punish those who do not keep their word.  
Rabbi Shimon disagrees with part of the opinion in section one. According to Rabbi Shimon the one who holds the money, i.e. the seller, can change his mind until the  buyer draws the produce to him.  The buyer may not, however, change his mind once he has paid the money.  According to the previous opinion (section one) if the produce had not been given over to the buyer, either the buyer or seller could change their mind.  

Questions for Further Thought:
If the Rabbis thought that God will punish those who do not stand by their word, why didn’t they say that if one had already paid the money he cannot retract the sale?  
What might be a possible connection between those of the generations of the Flood and the Dispersion and those who don’t keep their word?

  
