Bava Metziah Chapter Two Mishnayoth Ten and Eleven

Introduction
Mishnah ten deals with three subjects.  1)  Further defining what is a lost object.  2)  Potential conflicts between the commandment of returning lost objects and other commandments.  3)  The commandment mentioned in Exodus 23:5 to help a person whose ass has fallen under its burden.  The verse states:  “When you see the ass of your enemy lying under its load and you would refrain from raising it, you must surely raise it with him.”  A similar commandment appears in Deuteronomy 22:4.
Mishnah eleven deals with conflicts between helping return his father’s lost object, his teacher’s lost object and his own lost object.

Mishnah Ten
If he found an [animal] in a stable, he is not responsible for it [even though the stable door was loose and unguarded.
But if he found it in the public domain he is responsible for it.
If it was in a cemetery he need not contract uncleanness because of it.
If his father said to him, “Contract uncleanness”, or if he said to him, “Do not return it”, he may not listen to him.
If he unloaded [the ass fallen under its load] and reloaded it and again unloaded it and reloaded it, even four or five times he is still obligated, for it is written, “You must surely raise it with him”.  
If the owner went and sat down and said, “Since the commandment is upon you, if you wish to unload, unload”, he is not obligated, for it is written “with him”.
But if the owner was aged or sick, he is obligated.
It is a commandment from the Torah to unload but not to reload.
Rabbi Shimon says, “To reload as well.”
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says, “If the beast was carrying more than its proper load he is not obligated [to help unload it], for it is written, “under its load”, [which is to say] a load which it is able to endure.

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
Section one:  If he finds the animal in an improperly closed and unguarded stable he is not obligated to treat the animal as lost.  Only if it was roaming in the public domain is he obligated to help return it to its owner.
Section two:  This section deals with conflicting commandments.  If a Kohen  (priest) sees a lost object in the cemetery into which he is forbidden to enter since he would thereby contract ritual uncleanness, he is not obligated to take care of the object.  If his father tells him to break a commandment, either the commandment that a Kohen may not enter a cemetery or the commandment that one must return lost objects, he should not listen to his father.  Even though there is a commandment to respect one’s parents, respect does not include transgressing another commandment.  [Note, this is an extremely important principle with many implications in our lives.]
Section three:  The Torah states that a person must help raise another person’s fallen ass.  Even if he has to do so several times, he is still obligated.  This is learned from the Torah’s repetition of the Hebrew word “raise”.  From the fact that it was used twice the Rabbis conclude that the commandment applies even if it must repeatedly be performed.  (For a similar teaching see mishnah nine).  The owner of the animal must help the other person raise the animal and cannot sit idly and watch.  This is learned from the word “with him” at the end of the verse.  Only a sick or old person who could not help is exempt from doing so.
Section four:  The Rabbis disagreed with regards to the extent of the help that needs to be given to the person who’s ass has fallen.  Some said that he must only raise the animal and some said that he must help reload as well.  Rabbi Yose the Galilean adds that he need not help an owner who put too large of a load on the animal.  The owner should have been more careful and does not deserve to be helped for his own negligent act.

Mishnah Eleven
If a man found his own lost property and his father’s, his own takes priority.
If his own and that of his teacher, his own takes priority.
If he found his father’s and his teacher’s, his teacher’s takes priority—for his father brought him into this world, but his teacher who taught him wisdom brings him into the world to come.
If his father was a Sage, his father’s takes priority.
If his father and teacher each were carrying a load, he must first relieve his teacher and afterward relieve his father.
If his father and teacher were each taken captive, he must first ransom his teacher and afterward his father.
But if his father was a Sage, he must first ransom his father and afterward his teacher.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
In the beginning of this mishnah we learn that one’s own financial loss takes priority even over that of a father or a teacher (of Torah).  The Torah expects people to help others but it also understands that people have a natural desire to help themselves.  
The remainder of the mishnah deals with conflicts between helping his father and helping his teacher.  In all of them we learn that his teacher (one who teaches him Torah) takes priority.  Through this mishnah we can see how much the Rabbis valued learning and Torah study.  His father brings him into this world and for that the Torah commands that he respect and fear his father.  However, the teacher brings him into the world to come, and this is a greater responsibility even then being a father.  Therefore the teacher receives even more respect than the father.  However, if his father is a Sage, meaning learned in Torah, he deserves greater respect from his son than does another teacher/Sage, and he therefore takes priority.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten, section two:  Why shouldn’t a Kohen enter a cemetery and become unclean in order to take care of the lost object?  Does this mishnah mean that ritual cleanliness is more important than returning lost objects or is there another explanation? 
Mishnah ten, section four: What would be the result if the person was obligated to help unload an ass even if too great a load had been placed upon it?
Mishnah eleven:  Why do you think that his own lost object always takes priority?  Is this not selfishness?
