Bava Metziah Chapter Five Mishnayoth Eight and Nine

Introduction
Mishnayoth eight and nine deal with a person who lends produce in order to receive produce in return.  As we have learned previously, if after the loan the value of the type of produce rises, for instance at the time of the loan wheat was 1 dollar a pound and afterwards it was 2 dollars a pound, the borrower will end up returning more value to the lender, which is a form of interest.

Mishnah Eight
[A landowner] may lend his tenants wheat to be repaid in wheat, if it is for planting but not if it is for food.
For Rabban Gamaliel used to lend his tenants wheat to be repaid in wheat when it was for planting.
And if he lent it when the price was high and it afterward fell, or when it was low and it afterward rose, he used to take wheat back at the lower rate, not because such was the rule but because he wanted to be strict upon himself.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
A person may not lend another person a seah of wheat on the condition that the other person pay back a seah of wheat.  The reason is that if the wheat rises in price after the loan the lender will receive in return more than he gave, and that is considered to be a form of interest.  Rather he would have to state an amount, such as 100 dollars worth of wheat and when he gets the loan back he will receive 100 dollars worth of wheat at whatever the rate is at the time of repayment.  
Our mishnah teaches that although one cannot loan wheat in order to be repaid in wheat when the wheat was intended for eating, one may do so when it is for planting and there is no concern that this be considered interest.  The simplest way of understanding this is that it is as if the owner is giving him a better field to work, which he is allowed to do.
The second half of the mishnah teaches a stringency that Rabban Gamaliel took upon himself. Although it is permitted to lend wheat for wheat if the wheat is for planting, Rabban Gamaliel would always collect upon the lower rate.  In this way there was no potential that he would receive back a higher value than he gave in the beginning and thereby loan with interest.

Mishnah Nine
One should not say to his fellow, “Lend me a kor of wheat and I will repay you at the threshing time”, but he may say, “Lend it to me until my son comes”, or “until I find my key”.
But Hillel used to forbid this.
Moreover Hillel used to say, “A woman may not lend a loaf of bread to her neighbor unless she determines its value in money, lest wheat should rise in price and they are found to be engaging in usury.”

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Section one:  As we learned in the previous mishnah one cannot lend wheat and ask to receive the same amount of wheat in the future lest the wheat rise in price.  If, however, the borrower has other wheat at the time he borrows from the other person, then it is permitted.  The reason that this is permitted is that the borrower could have repaid the wheat immediately after receiving the loan before the price might potentially rise.  The mishnah states that the borrower may say “loan me some wheat and I will repay you wheat as soon as my son comes to open my storehouse or I find the key to my storehouse”, where assumedly the borrower has wheat.
Section two:  Hillel was stricter in this matter and forbid this type of loan even if the borrower has wheat in his possession.  Hillel forbid even a casual loan of a loaf of bread from one woman to her neighbor unless she set a price in money.  Again, Hillel is concerned that the price of wheat would rise and she would receive interest in return for giving her bread to her friend. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Why would the mishnah teach a stringency that Rabban Gamaliel accepted upon himself if it is not obligatory upon others?
What is the difference between Rabban Gamaliel and Hillel?   
