mishnah  . If a man has seen one issue of the flux,  beth shammai say: he is to be compared to [a woman] who awaits day against day;  but beth hillel say: he is to be compared to one who has suffered [nocturnal] pollution.  Should he see an issue [one day]. And on the second it stopped, and on the third day he saw two [issues], or one [issue] that was as copious as two,  beth shammai say: he is a real zab;  but beth hillel say: he defiles those objects on which he sits or lies, and must also obtain immersion in running water, but he is exempt from the offering.  R. Eleazar b. Judah said: beth shammai concur that in such a case he cannot be deemed a real zab;  where they do dispute is in the case of one who had suffered two [issues], or one [issue] that was as copious as two [on one day], and stopped on the second day, and on the third day he saw another [issue]. In such a case beth shammai say: he is a real zab;  but beth hillel say: he only defiles those objects on which he sits or lies, and must obtain immersion in running water, but is exempt from the offering.   
mishnah  . If one suffers an issue of semen on the third day of counting after his flux,   beth shammai say: it renders void the two clean days that have preceded;   but beth hillel say: it renders void only that day.   R. Ishmael says: if he suffered it on the second day,   it renders void the preceding day;   but r. Akiba says: it matters not whether he suffered it on the second or third day   — [in either case] beth shammai say, it renders void the two preceding days, and beth hillel say, it renders void only that day itself. But they   concur that if he suffered it on the fourth day [of counting] it renders void only that day [of the counting],   provided it was a discharge of semen; but if it had been an issue of flux, then even if this had occurred on the seventh day, it renders void all the days that had preceded.    
mishnah  . If he saw one issue on one day and two on the next day, or two on one day and one on the morrow, or three on three [consecutive] days, or three nights, he is deemed a real zab.    
mishnah  . If he saw one [issue] and a pause took place of sufficient duration to allow an immersion and a drying,   and after that he saw two issues, or one as copious as two,   or if he saw two [issues] or one as copious as two, and an interval took place of sufficient duration to allow an immersion and a drying, and after that he again saw an issue, he is a real zab.  
mishnah  . If he saw one issue which was as copious as three, lasting as long [as it takes to go] from gad-yawan   to siloah,   in which time one can bathe and dry twice,   he becomes a real zab. If he saw one issue which was as copious as two, he defiles [objects] on which he lies or sits and must obtain immersion in running water, but is exempt from bringing a sacrifice. R. Jose said: they have not spoken of one issue as copious unless there was sufficient therein to make up three.    
mishnah  . If he beheld one issue at day-time and another at twilight, or one at twilight and the other on the morrow, then if it were known   that part of the issue   occurred at day-time and part thereof on the morrow,   his status is certain in respect of a sacrifice and uncleanness;   but if it is in doubt whether part [of the issue] occurred during the day and part there of [on what is] the day following,   he is in a status of certainty in respect of defilement,   but in one of doubt in respect of a sacrifice.   If he had seen issues on two separate days at twilight,   his status is in doubt both in respect of defilement   and in respect of a sacrifice.   If [he had seen only] one issue at twilight, there is a doubt [also] in respect of [his] defilement.    
mishnah  . All persons  become unclean through a flux, also proselytes and slaves whether freed or not, a deaf-mute, an imbecile or minor, a eunuch whether [he had been emasculated] by man, or was a eunuch from [the time of seeing] the sun.  Upon one whose sex was unknown, or upon a hermaphrodite,  the stringencies appertaining to both man and woman are imposed: they defile through blood like a woman, and through flux  like a man. Their uncleanness, however, still remains in doubt.   
mishnah  . Along [the following] seven lines is a zab examined as long as he had not entered the bounds of zibah:  [enquiries] as to [what was] his food,  drink,  as [to what] he had borne, whether he had jumped, whether he had been ill, what he had seen,  or [whether he had] obscene reflections. [it differed little] whether he had reflected [obscenely] prior to seeing [a woman], or whether he had seen [a woman] prior to his [obscene] reflections.   R. Judah adds: even if he had watched beasts, wild animals or birds having intercourse with each other, and even when he had seen a woman's dyed garments. R. Akiba added: even if he had eaten any kind of food, be it good or bad, or had drunk any kind of liquid.   Whereupon they exclaimed to him: [‘according to your view] there will be no zabim in the world henceforth!’   his retort to them was: you are not held responsible for the existence of zabim!’   as soon, however, as it had entered the bounds of zibah,   no further examination took place.   [his flux] resulting   from an accident, or that was at all doubtful,   or an issue of semen, these are unclean,   since there is whereon to rely.   If he beheld a first [issue] he is examined; on the second [issue] he is examined,   but on the third [issue] no examination takes place.   R. Eliezer says: also on the third [issue] he is examined to ascertain his liability to a sacrifice.  
mishnah  . If one suffered [a discharge of] semen he does not convey uncleanness by reason of a flux   for twenty-four hours.   R. Jose says: [only] that day. If a gentile experienced a discharge of semen, and he became a proselyte, he becomes immediately unclean by reason of a flux.   If [a woman] had [an issue] of blood,   or had experienced difficulty [in childbirth],   [the time prescribed] is twenty-four hours.   If one smites his servant, the ‘day or two’   is twenty-four hours. If a dog ate a corpse's flesh, the three days [during which it continues within] in a natural state are of twenty-four hours.    
mishnah  . A zab   defiles those objects on which he lies   by five ways, with the result that they [in turn] defile men and garments.   [these are:] by standing, sitting, lying, lounging or leaning. What he lies upon defiles man by seven ways, so that he [in turn] defiles garments.   [these are:] by standing, sitting, lying, lounging, or leaning upon it, or by touching or carrying it.    
mishnah  . If a zab and one that was clean sat together in a boat, or on a raft, or rode together on a beast, they,  though their garments had not actually touched,  suffer midras  uncleanness. If they sat together on a plank, a bench or a bedframe,  or on a beam, when these were not fixed tightly,  [or] if they had both climbed a tree of inferior strength,  or [were swaying] on a branch of inferior strength  of a firm tree; or if they were both [climbing] on an egyptian ladder,  not secured by a nail,  or if they sat together on a bridge, rafter or door, not secured by clay, they   are unclean. According to r. Judah they are clean.  
mishnah  . If they were both   closing or opening [a door], [he that was clean and his garments become unclean]. But the sages say: [uncleanness is not conveyed]   unless one was shutting and the other opening [it].   If one was lifting the other out of a pit [un cleanness is conveyed]. But r. Judah said, only if he that was clean was pulling out him that was unclean.   If they were twisting ropes together [uncleanness is conveyed]. But the sages say, unless the one pulled one way and the other pulled the other way. If they were both weaving together, whether they were standing or sitting, or grinding wheat, [uncleanness is conveyed]. R. Simeon declares [the clean man] in every case undefiled, except where they [both] were grinding with a hand-mill. If they [both] were unloading or loading an ass, they   are unclean if the load was heavy, but clean if the load was light. In both cases,   however, they are clean for members of the synagogue,   but are unclean for heave-offering.    
mishnah  . If the zab and the clean person sat together in a large boat (what is a large boat? R. Judah said: one that does not sway with a man's weight), or if they sat on a plank, bench, bed-frame, or beam when these were firmly secured;   or if they both climbed a strong tree, a firm branch, or a tyrian   ladder, or an egyptian ladder fixed by a nail; or if they sat on a bridge, rafter or door, when these were fastened with clay, if only at one end, they remain clean. If the clean man struck the unclean, he still remains clean;   but if the unclean struck him that was clean, he becomes defiled; for [in that case] if he that was clean drew back, the unclean would have fallen.    
mishnah  . R. Joshua said: if a menstruant  sat in one bed with one that was clean, [even] the cap on her  head suffers midras uncleanness; and if she sat in a boat, the vessels on the top of the mast [also] contract midras uncleanness.  If she took a tub full of clothes and their weight was heavy, they become unclean,  but if their weight was light, they remain clean. If a zab knocked against a balcony and thereby caused a loaf of terumah to fall down, it remains clean.   
mishnah  . If he knocked against a joist, a rafter-frame, water-spout, or shelf, though fixed with ropes,  or if [he knocked against] an oven, or a flour container,  or the lower mill-stone, or the jack  of a hand-mill, or the se'ah measure  of an olive-grinder, [the loaf remains clean].   R. Jose adds: also [if he knocks] against the beam of the bath-keeper.   It remains clean.  
mishnah  . If he knocked against a door, doorbolt,   lock, oar,   mill-stone frame,   or against a weak tree, or weak branch of a strong tree, or against an egyptian ladder unsecured by nails, or against a bridge, beam or door, not made secure with clay, they become unclean.   [if he knocked] against a chest,   box or cupboard, they become unclean. R. Nehemiah and r. Simeon, however, pronounce them clean in such cases.    
mishnah  . A zab who lay lengthwise across five benches, or five money-bags, [makes them] unclean,   but [if he lay across] their breadth, they are clean.   If he slept [on them],   and it was feared lest he had turned himself about   on them, they are unclean. If he was lying on six seats, with two hands on two [seats]. Two feet on another two, his head on one, with his body on another one, only that one on which his body lay   is rendered unclean. If [a zab] stood on two seats, r. Simeon says: if these were distant one from the other, they remain clean.    
mishnah  . If there were piled ten cloaks one on top of the other and he sat on the uppermost one, all are unclean.   If the zab was in one scale of the balance and in the other scale opposite there were objects fit to sit or lie upon, and the zab overweighed, they are clean;   but if they overweighed, they are unclean. R. Simeon says:   if there was but one [place]   it becomes unclean;   but if there were many   they remain clean, since none of them had borne the greater part [of the zab's weight].    
mishnah  . If a zab [sat] in one scale of the balance, whilst food and liquids were in the other scale, [the latter become] unclean;   in the case of a corpse,   however, everything   remains clean,   save a man.   This is [an example of] the greater stringency applying to a zab than to a corpse; and there is also another instance of greater stringency in the case of a zab than a corpse.   For whereas the zab defiles all objects on which he sits or lies upon, so that these likewise convey uncleanness to men and garments,   and convey, moreover. To what is above him a middaf uncleanness,   so that these in turn defile food and liquids. In the case of a corpse no such uncleanness takes place.   Greater stringency is also found in the case of a corpse, since it can convey uncleanness by overshadowing,   and imposes seven days’ defilement, whereas in the case of a zab no such uncleanness is conveyed.  
mishnah  . If he sat on a bed and there were four cloaks under the four legs of the bed, all become unclean, since the bed cannot stand on three legs;   but r. Simeon declares them clean.   If he rode on a beast   and there were four cloaks under the legs of the beast, they are clean, since the beast can stand upon three legs.   If there was one cloak under its two forelegs or its two hindlegs, or under a foreleg and a hindleg, it becomes unclean.   R. Jose says: a horse conveys uncleanness through its hindlegs. But an ass through its forelegs, since a horse leans upon its hindlegs and an ass upon its forelegs. If he   sat on a beam of an olive-press, the vessels in the olive-press   are unclean; but if he sat on a fuller's press, the garments beneath it are clean;   r. Nehemiah, however, declares them unclean.    
mishnah  . He who touches a zab, or whom a zab touches, who moves  or whom a zab moves, defiles food and liquids and vessels that are rinsed  by touch, but not by carriage.  This was the general principle which r. Joshua formulated: all those that defile garments  while still in contact [with their source of uncleanness] also defile foods and liquids so as to become [unclean] in the first grade, and the hands  so that they become [unclean] in the second grade; but they do not defile men or earthenware vessels. Once, however, they have been separated from their source of uncleanness they defile liquids so as to become [unclean] in the first grade,  and food and the hands so that they become [unclean] in the second grade,  but they do not defile garments.  
mishnah  . Yet another general principle did they formulate: all that is carried above a zab becomes defiled,  but all those things above which he is carried are clean;  excluding such objects on which he can sit or lie upon,   and a man. How so? If a zab had his finger   beneath a layer of stones and one that was clean was above,   he conveys uncleanness at two [removes]. And renders unfit [terumah] at one [further remove]. If he separated [from the source of uncleanness].   He still defiles with first-grade uncleanness and renders [terumah] unfit at yet one [further remove]. If the unclean was above, and the clean person below,   he conveys uncleanness at two [removes],   and renders [terumah] unfit at yet one [further remove]. If he separated [from the source of uncleanness], he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at yet one [more remove]. If foods or liquids, or objects on which he could sit or lie upon or other articles   were above,   they defile at the two removes,   and render [terumah] unfit at one [further remove]. If they had become separated [from the source of uncleanness], they defile at one [remove] and render [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. All objects fit to sit or lie upon that were below   defile at two [removes], and render [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. Foods and liquids and other articles   that are below, remain clean.    
mishnah  . Since it was said   that whatsoever carries or is carried by objects on which one sits or lies upon remain clean, excluding the case of a man;   whatsoever carries or is carried by carrion is clean,   save him that moves it.   R. Eliezer adds: also he that carries it.   He who carries or is carried upon a corpse remains clean, save when overshadowing takes place,   or a man when he moves it.    
mishnah  . If part of an unclean person   rests upon a clean person, or part of a clean person rests upon an unclean person, or if the connectives   of an unclean person rest upon a clean person, or the connectives of a clean person upon one unclean, he   becomes unclean. R. Simeon says: if part of an unclean person is upon a clean person, he is unclean;   but if part of a clean person is upon one that is unclean, he is clean.  
mishnah  . If an unclean person   rests upon part of an object fit to lie upon, or a clean person   rests upon part of an object fit to lie upon,   it becomes unclean.   If part of an unclean person rests on an object fit to lie upon, or part of a clean person rests upon such an object,   it remains clean.   Thus we find that uncleanness is contracted and conveyed by the lesser part thereof.   Similarly,   if a loaf of terumah was placed upon an object fit to lie upon [that was unclean]. And there was a layer of paper between, whether it   was above or below, it remains clean. Similarly, in the case of a stone smitten with leprosy   it   remains clean;   but r. Simeon pronounced such a case unclean.    
mishnah  . He who touches a zab, or a zabah, a menstruant, or a woman after childbirth, or a leper, or any object on which these had been sitting or lying, conveys uncleanness at two [removes]. And renders [terumah] unfit at one [further remove].   If he had become separated,   he still conveys uncleanness at one [remove], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [further remove]. This is the case whether he had touched, or had moved, or had carried, or was carried.    
mishnah  . If one touches the flux of a zab, his spittle, semen or urine, or the blood of a menstruant, he conveys uncleanness at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]; but if he became separated,   he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. This is the case whether he had touched or moved it.   R. Eliezer said: also if he had lifted it.    
mishnah  . If he carried that which was ridden upon,   or if he was carried thereon, or had moved it, he defiles at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]; but if he became separated [from the uncleanness], he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. If he carries carrion, or the water of the sin-offering of which there was sufficient for a sprinkling,   he defiles at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]; but if he became separated,   he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].  
mishnah  . He who ate of the carrion of a clean bird, and it still is in his gullet,   he defiles at two [removes], and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove]. If he put his head within the air-space of an oven,   both he and the oven are clean;   but if he vomited or swallowed it, he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].   But as long as it is still in his mouth, that is prior to swallowing it, he remains clean.    
mishnah   . He who touches a dead reptile, or semen, or him that has suffered corpse uncleanness, or a leper during his days of counting,   or water of sin-offering of insufficient quantity with which to perform the sprinkling,   or carrion, or an object ridden upon,   defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].   This is the general principle: all who touch any object regarded by the torah as a ‘father of uncleanness’   defile at one [remove] and render [terumah] unfit at one [more remove], with the exclusion [of the corpse] of a man.   If he   had become separated,   he defiles at one [remove] and renders [terumah] unfit at one [more remove].  
mishnah   . He who has suffered a [nocturnal] pollution is like one who has touched a dead reptile,   and he that has had connection with a menstruant is like one who has suffered corpse uncleanness.   He who has had connection with a menstruant, however, has the more stringent imposition in that he conveys minor grades of uncleanness to what he lies or sits upon, so as to make foods and liquids unclean.    
mishnah   . The following render terumah unfit:   one who eats foods of first or second grade uncleanness, and who drinks unclean liquids,   and the one who has immersed his head and the greater part of him in water which had been drawn,   and a clean person upon whose head and greater part of him there fell three logs of drawn water,   and a scroll [of scriptures],   and [unwashed] hands,   and one that has had immersion that same day,   and foods and vessels which have become defiled by liquids.   Mishna - mas. Tevul yom chapter    
mishnah  . If one  had collected dough-offering  [portions] with the intention of segregating them afterwards again, but in the meantime they had become stuck together,  beth shammai say: they serve as connectives  in the case of a tebul yom. But beth hillel say: they do not serve as connectives. Pieces of dough  that had become stuck together, or loaves  that had become joined, or a batter-cake that had been baked on top of another batter-cake before it could form a crust in the oven, or if there was froth  on the water that was bubbling, or the first scum  that rises when boiling groats of beans, or the scum of new wine (r. Judah says: also that of rice) beth shammai say: all serve as connectives in the case of the tebul yom. But beth hillel say: they do not serve as connectives.  They  concur, however, [that they serve as connectives] if they come into contact with other kinds of uncleanness, whether they be of minor   or major grades.    
mishnah  . If one had collected pieces of dough-offering not with the intention of segregating them afterwards, or a batter-cake that had been baked on another after a crust had formed in the oven,   or a froth had appeared in the water prior to its bubbling up, or the second scum that appeared in the boiling of groats of beans, or the scum of old wine, or that of oil of all kinds,   or of lentils (r. Judah says: also that of beans   ) — all these are rendered unclean   when touched by a tebul yom. And needless to say, [this is the case if touched] by other sources of uncleanness.  
mishnah  . The knob   on the back of the loaf, or the small globule of salt,   or the burnt crust less than a finger's breadth — r. Jose says: whatsoever is eaten with the loaf becomes unclean [when touched by the tebul yom].   And needless to say, this is so [when touched] by other unclean things.  
mishnah  . A pebble in a loaf or a large globule of salt, or a lupine,   or a burnt crust larger than a finger's breadth,   [do not serve as connectives]. But r. Jose says: [only] whatsoever that is not eaten with the loaf remains clean even when touched by a father of uncleanness’;   and need less to say [is this so when touched] by a tebul yom.  
mishnah  . Unshelled   barley or spelt, root of crowfoot,   asafoetida,   silrhium   (r. Judah says: black beans)   remain clean   even [when coming into contact] with a ‘father of uncleanness’, let alone [if touched] by a tebul yom. So r. Meir: but the sages say: they are clean if touched by a tebul yom, but unclean [when touched] by other sources of defilement. In the case of shelled barley or spelt, or wheat either with the husk on or without it, or black cummin, or sesame or pepper (r. Judah says: also white beans), they become unclean even when touched by a tebul yom,   let alone [when they have come into contact] with other sources of uncleanness.  
mishnah  . Liquids that issue  from a tebul yom are like those  which he has touched: neither of them has power to defile.  With regard to all others that are unclean, be they of minor  or major  [degree]. The liquids issuing from them are like those they touch; both are considered of first grade uncleanness.  The sole exception being such liquid that is in itself a ‘father of uncleanness .   
mishnah  . If a pot was full of liquid and a tebul yom touched it, the liquid becomes unfit if it is terumah, but the pot is clean.  But if the liquid is common food [hullin] then all remains clean.  If his hands were soiled, all becomes unclean.   Here greater stringency is applied to soiled hands than to a tebul yom; but greater stringency is applied to a tebul yom than to soiled hands, since any doubt respecting the tebul yom renders terumah unfit, but any doubt concerning [soiled] hands is deemed clean.    
mishnah  . If the porridge was of terumah and the garlic or oil [it contained] was of hullin, and a tebul yom touched part of them, then the whole becomes unfit;   but if the porridge was of hullin and the garlic or oil it contained was of terumah, and a tebul yom touched part of them, he renders unfit only the part he has touched.   If the greater part was garlic then they go after the majority.   When is it so?   Said r. Judah: when it   formed one cohesive mass in the pot, but if it was scattered small in the mortar, then it is clean, since it is his wish that it should be so scattered.   [similarly] with all other mashed foods which were mashed with liquids;   those, however, which are usually mashed   with liquids and yet were mashed without liquids, though   they formed one cohesive mass in the pot, are regarded as a cake of preserved figs.    
mishnah  . If the porridge and batter-cake   were of hullin and the oil of terumah was floating above them, and a tebul yom touched the oil, he renders unfit only the oil. If, however, he stirred it altogether, all the places whither the oil goes become unfit.    
mishnah  . If a film of jelly   had formed over the flesh of hallowed things, and a tebul yom had touched the jelly, the slices [of flesh] are clean;   but if he touched one of the slices, that slice and all [the jelly] that comes up with it   form a connective the one with the other. R. Johanan b. Nuri says: the two of them serve as connectives to each other.   Similarly, with [cooked] beans that have formed a layer over pieces of bread.   Beans cooked in a pot, as long as they are still separate, do not serve as connectives; but when they become a solid pulp,   they do act as connectives. If they formed several solid pulps,   they are to be counted.   If oil floats on wine and a tebul yom touched the oil, only the oil is rendered unfit; but r. Johanan b. Nuri says: each serves as a connective with the other.    
mishnah  . If a jar   had sunk into a cistern containing wine,   and a tebul yom touched it, and [he touched it] within the rim,   it serves as a connective;   but if outside the rim,   it does not act as a connective. R. Johanan b. Nuri, however, says: even though [the level of wine in the cistern] is the height of a man   [above the sunken jar], and he touched [the wine] directly above the mouth of the jar, it serves as a connective.  
mishnah  . If a jar   had a hole either at its neck,   bottom or sides, and a tebul yom touched it [at the hole], it becomes unclean.   R. Judah says: only if the hole is at its neck or bottom it becomes unclean; but if on its sides, on this side or on that, it remains clean.   If one poured [liquid] from one vessel into another, and a tebul yom touched the stream, and there was something within the vessel, then [whatsoever he touches] is neutralized in a hundred and one.    
mishnah  . If a bubble   of a jug was pierced with holes on its inner side and on its outer side, whether above or below,   [and the holes are] opposite one another, it becomes unclean [if touched] by a ‘father of uncleanness’;   and it [likewise] becomes unclean if it is in a tent wherein lies a corpse.   If the inner hole is below and the outer above, it becomes unclean [if touched] by a ‘father of uncleanness’, and it becomes unclean in a tent wherein there is a corpse; if the inner hole is above and the outer below, it remains clean if touched by a ‘father of uncleanness’,   but it becomes unclean in a tent wherein there is a corpse.    
mishnah  . All [stalks that serve as] handles to produces, which count as connectives when touched by a ‘father of uncleanness’, also count as connectives when touched by a tebul yom. If a foodstuff was severed yet a small part was still attached, r. Meir says: if one takes hold of the larger part and the smaller part is pulled away with it, then the latter is regarded as the former.  R. Judah. However, says: if one takes hold of the smaller part find the greater is also pulled away with it, then the latter is like the former. R. Nehemiah says: [this refers only] to the case of the clean portion,  but the sages say: [it refers only] to the unclean portion.  In the case of all other produces,  those usually held by the leaf should be taken by the leaf, and those usually held by the stalk should be taken by the stalk.   
mishnah  . If a beaten egg was on top of vegetables of terumah,  and a tebul yom touches the egg, then he renders unfit only that stalk [of the vege tables] that is opposite the part [of the egg] he touched.  R. Jose, however, says: it affects the whole of the upper layer;  and if it was arranged like a cap  it does not serve as a connective.  
mishnah  . The streak of an egg   that had become congealed on the side of a pan that had been touched by a tebul yom within the rim [of the pan]. Serves as a connective;   but if outside the rim, it does not serve as a connective. R. Jose maintains that only the streak and the part that can be peeled away with it [serves as a connective].   The same applies to beans that had formed a layer of jelly on the rim of the pot.    
mishnah  . Dough   that had been mixed [with dough of terumah]. Or that had been leavened with yeast of terumah, is not rendered unfit by [the touch of] a tebul yom;   r. Jose and r. Simeon, however, pronounce it unfit. Dough   that had become susceptible [to uncleanness] by a liquid,   and it was kneaded with produce juice,   and later touched by a tebul yom, r. Eleazar b. Judah of barthotha says in the name of r. Joshua: it becomes totally unfit.   R. Akiba, however, says in his name: he renders unfit only the part that he touched.    
mishnah  . If vegetables of hullin were cooked with oil of terumah and a tebul yom touched it, r. Eleazar b. Judah of barthotha says in the name of r. Joshua: it becomes totally unfit.   R. Akiba, however, says in his name: he renders unfit only the part that he touched.    
mishnah  . If a clean person chewed food and it fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, it   is not rendered susceptible to uncleanness.   If he ate crushed olives or moist dates with the intention of sucking the stone thereof, and it fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, [the latter] becomes susceptible to uncleanness.   . If, however, he ate dried olives, or dried figs without the intention of sucking the stone thereof, and they fell on his garments and on a loaf of terumah, the latter is not rendered susceptible to uncleanness.   This is the case irrespective of the fact whether it was a clean man or a tebul yom [who was eating]. R. Meir says: in either case it becomes susceptible to uncleanness in the case of a tebul yom, since liquids issuing from unclean persons render anything susceptible regardless of the acceptability of their presence or not. But the sages say: a tebul yom is not regarded as an unclean person.    
mishnah  . If food that was tithe-offering had been rendered susceptible by a liquid, and a tebul yom or unwashed hands  touched it, terumah of tithe  may still be set apart from it in purity, since it only suffered third grade uncleanness, and third grade uncleanness counts as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . A woman that had immersed herself the same day may knead dough, cut off the dough-offering,  and set it apart, but must place it on an inverted basket of twigs,  or on a tray  , and then bring it near  and declare it by its name.  For it  suffered only third grade uncleanness,  and third grade uncleanness is deemed as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . In a trough which had been immersed that very day, one may knead dough and cut off the portion for hallah and bring it near and even pro nounce it by name [as hallah];   for it   suffers only third grade uncleanness and a third grade counts as clean in hullin.  
mishnah  . If a flagon that had been immersed the same day and had been filled out of a cask containing tithes from which the heave-offering   had not yet been taken, and one said, let this be heave-offering of tithe after nightfall,   it becomes heave-offering of tithe. But if he said: let this be the food for the [sabbath] ‘erub,   his remarks are not valid at all.   If the cask was broken,   the contents of the flagon still remain tithe from which heave-offering had not yet been taken;   if the flagon is broken,   then what is in the cask still remains tithe from which heave-offering had not yet been taken.    
mishnah  . Formerly they used to say: one may redeem   for the produce of an am ha-arez.   Later they reconsidered and said: also for money of his.   Formerly they used to say: if a man is led out in chains   and commands: write a bill of divorce for my wife’, it had to be written and delivered;   but after consideration they added the case of a man undertaking a sea voyage, or setting out with a caravan.   R. Simeon of shezur added the case of one who was at the point of death.    
mishnah  . Ashkelon levers   that had become broken, only their hooks still remaining, are susceptible to uncleanness.   A pitch-fork, winnowing-fan, rake   [so-too, a hair comb]. Which had lost one of its teeth, and another of metal was constructed for it, are all susceptible to uncleanness.   Concerning all these,   r. Joshua said: this is a new thing which the scribes have made and i have nothing to reply.    
mishnah  . If one was taking terumah   from a cistern and said: ‘let this be terumah provided it comes up safely’, [it is implied that he meant] safely from being broken or spilled,   but not from contracting uncleanness;   but r. Simeon declares: also from uncleanness.   If it were broken,   it does not render [the contents of the cistern] subject to the restrictions of terumah. How far away   can it be broken and still not make it subject to terumah restrictions? Only so far that if it rolls back, it can reach the cistern.   R. Jose adds: even if one had the intention of making such a stipulation, but did not do so, and it got broken, it does not nevertheless make it subject to terumah restrictions, for this is a stipulation laid down by the beth din.    
mishnah  . [a minimum of] a quarter [of a log]  of water must be poured  over the hands  [to be sufficient] for one [person] and is even [sufficient] for two;  a minimum of half  a log must be poured over the hands [to be sufficient] for three or four persons;  one log or more [is sufficient] for five, ten, or one hundred persons.  R. Jose says: but provided only there is not less than a quarter of a log left for the last person among them. More [water] may be added to the second water,  but more may not be added to the first water.   
mishnah  . Water may be poured over the hands out of any kind of vessel, even out of vessels made of animal ordure,   out of vessels made of stone   or out of vessels made of clay.   Water may not be poured from the sides of [broken] vessels   or from the bottom of a ladle   or from the bung of a barrel.   Nor may anyone pour [water] over the hands of his fellow out of his cupped hands because one may not draw, nor sanctify,   nor sprinkle   the water of purification,   nor pour water over the hands except in a vessel. And only vessels closely covered with a lid protect [their contents from uncleanness]   and   only vessels protect [their contents from uncleanness] from earthenware vessels.    
mishnah  . If water has become so unfit   that it cannot be drunk by cattle, if it was in a vessel it is invalid,   but if it was in the ground   it is valid. If there fell into it ink, resin,   or vitriol   and its colour changed, it is invalid.   If a person did any work with it   or soaked his bread therein, it is invalid.   Simeon of teman says: even if he intended to soak his bread in one water and it fell in another water [do you still consider the other water to be invalid? In such a case i consider that the other water] is valid.    
mishnah  . If he cleansed vessels therein or scrubbed   measures therein, [the water] is invalid; if he rinsed therein vessels which had already been rinsed or new vessels, it is valid. R. Jose declares it to be invalid if they were new vessels.    
mishnah  . Water in which the baker dips gelusk   n   is invalid;   but if he [merely] moistened his hands therein   it is valid. All are fit to pour water over the hands, even a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor. A person may place the barrel between his knees and pour out the water   or he may turn the barrel on its side and pour it out.   An ape   may pour water over the hands. R. Jose declares these [latter] two cases invalid.    
mishnah  . If a person pours  water over one of his hands with a single rinsing his hand becomes clean.  If over both his hands with a single rinsing, r. Meir declares them to be unclean until he pours a minimum of a quarter of a log of water over them.  If a loaf of terumah  fell on the water the loaf is clean.  R. Jose declares it to be unclean.   
mishnah  . If he poured the first water  over his hands [whilst standing] in one place, and the second water over his hands [whilst standing] in another place, and a loaf of terumah fell on the first water,  the loaf becomes unclean. But if it fell on the second water it remains clean.  If he poured the first and the second water [whilst standing] in one place, and a loaf of terumah fell thereon, the loaf becomes unclean.   If he poured the first water over his hands and a splinter or a piece of gravel is found on his hands, they remain unclean,   because the latter water only makes the first water on the hands clean. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel. Says: if any water-creature [falls on the hands whilst they are being cleaned] they nevertheless become clean.    
mishnah  . Hands become unclean and are made clean as far as the wrist. How so? If he poured the first water over the hands as far as the wrist and poured the second water over the hands beyond the wrist and the latter flowed back to the hands, the hands nevertheless become clean.   If he poured the first and the second water over the hands beyond the wrist and they flowed back to the hands, the hands remain unclean.   If he poured the first water over one of his hands and then changed his mind and poured the second water over both his hands, they remain unclean.   If he poured the first water over both his hands and then changed his mind and poured the second water over one of his hands, his one hand becomes clean. If he poured water over one of his hands and rubbed it on the other hand it remains unclean.   If he rubbed it on his head or on the wall   it becomes clean. Water may be poured over the hands of four or five persons, each hand being by the side of the other, or being one above the other, provided that the hands are held loosely so that the water flows between them.  
mishnah  . If there was a doubt whether any work has been done with the water or not,   or whether the water contains the requisite quantity or not, or whether it is unclean   or clean, then where there is such a doubt the water is considered to be clean. Because they   have said in a case of doubt concerning hands as to whether they have become unclean or have conveyed uncleanness or have become clean, they are considered to be clean. R. Jose says: in a case [of doubt as to] whether they have become clean they are considered to be unclean. How so? If his hands were clean and there were two unclean loaves before him and there was a doubt whether he touched them or not;   or if his hands were unclean and there were two clean loaves   before him and there was a doubt whether he touched them or not; or if one of his hands was unclean and the other clean and there were two clean loaves   before him and he touched one of them and there was a doubt whether he touched it with the unclean hand or with the clean hand; or if his hands were clean and there were two loaves before him one of which was unclean and the other clean and he touched one of them and there was a doubt whether he touched the unclean one or the clean one; or if one of his hands was unclean and the other clean and there were two loaves before him one of which was unclean and the other clean, and he touched both of them, and there is a doubt whether the unclean hand touched the unclean loaf or whether the clean hand touched the clean loaf or whether the clean hand touched the unclean loaf or whether the unclean hand touched the clean loaf, the hands remain in the same state as they were before and the loaves remain in the same state as they were before.  
mishnah  . If a person puts his hands inside a house smitten with leprosy,  his hands become unclean in the first degree.  [these are] the words of r. Akiba. But the sages say: his hands become unclean in the second degree. Whoever conveys uncleanness to the garments at the time when he touches [the uncleanness]  conveys a first degree of uncleanness to the hands.  [these] are the words of r. Akiba. But the sages say: in such a case he conveys a second degree of uncleanness. They said to r. Akiba: where do we find anywhere that the hands become unclean in the first degree? He said to them: but how is it possible for them to become unclean in the first degree without his whole body becoming unclean,  save only in these cases?  Foodstuffs and vessels which have been rendered unclean by liquids convey a second degree of uncleanness to the hands. [these are] the words of r. Joshua. But the sages say: that which has been rendered unclean by a father of uncleanness conveys uncleanness to the hands, but that which has been rendered unclean by an offspring of uncleanness  does not convey unclean ness to the hands. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: a practical instance occurred when a certain woman came before my father and said to him, my hands protruded into the air-space inside an earthenware vessel.  He said to her: my daughter, what was the cause of its uncleanness?  But i did not hear what she said to him. The sages said: the matter is clear. That which has been rendered unclean by a ‘father of uncleanness’ conveys uncleanness to the hands, but if by an offspring of uncleanness’ it does not convey uncleanness to the hands.  
mishnah  . Everything which renders terumah unfit   conveys a second degree of uncleanness to the hands.   One [unwashed] hand can convey uncleanness to the other hand. [these   are] the words of r. Joshua.   But the sages say: that which is in the second degree of uncleanness cannot convey a second degree of uncleanness. He said to them: but do not the holy scriptures which are in the second degree of uncleanness   render unclean the hands?   They said to him: the laws of the torah may not be argued from the laws of the scribes, nor may the laws of the scribes be argued from the laws of the torah, nor may the laws of the scribes be argued from [other] laws of the scribes.    
mishnah  . The straps of the tefillin   [when connected] with the tefillin render unclean the hands.   R. Simeon says: the straps of the tefillin do not render unclean the hands.  
mishnah  . The margin on a scroll   which is above   or below or at the beginning   or at the end renders unclean the hands. R. Judah says: the margin at the end does not render unclean [the hands] until a handle is fastened to it.    
mishnah  . A scroll   on which the writing has become erased and eighty-five letters remain thereon, as many as are in the section beginning, ‘and it came to pass when the ark set forward’,etc.   Renders unclean the hands. A single sheet   on which there are written eighty-five letters, as many as are in the section beginning, ‘and it came to pass when the ark set forward’, renders unclean the hands. All the holy writings   render unclean the hands. The song of songs and ecclesiastes render unclean the hands.   R. Judah says: the song of songs renders unclean the hands, but there is a dispute about ecclesiastes.   R. Jose says: ecclesiastes does not render unclean the hands, but there is a dispute about the song of songs. R. Simeon says: [the ruling about] ecclesiastes is one of the leniencies of beth shammai and one of the stringencies of beth hillel.   R. Simeon b. Azzai said: i received a tradition from the seventy-two   elders on the day when they appointed r. Eleazar b. Azariah head of the academy   that the song of songs and ecclesiastes render unclean the hands. R. Akiba said: far be it! No man in israel disputed about the song of songs [by saying] that it does not render unclean the hands. For the whole world is not as worthy as the day on which the song of songs was given to israel; for all the writings are holy but the song of songs is the holy of holies. So that if they had a dispute, they had a dispute only about ecclesiastes. A. Johanan b. Joshua the son of the father-in-law of r. Akiba said: in accordance with the words of ben azzai so they disputed,   and so they reached a decision.    
mishnah  . On that day  the votes were counted and they decided that a footbath holding from two logs to nine kabs  which was cracked could contract midras  uncleanness. Because r. Akiba said a footbath [must be considered] according to its designation.   
mishnah  . On that day they said: all animal sacrifices  which have been sacrificed under the name of some other offering  are [nevertheless] valid,  but they are not accounted to their owners as a fulfilment of their obligations,  with the exception of the paschal-offering  and the sin-offering.  [this applies to] the paschal-offering in its due time   and to the sin-offering at any time. R. Eliezer says: [with the exception] also of the guilt-offering.   [so that this applies to] the paschal-offering in its due time and to the sin- and guilt-offerings at any time. R. Simeon b. Azzai said: i received a tradition from the seventy-two elders on the day when they appointed r. Eleazar b. Azariah head of the college that all animal sacrifices which are eaten and which have not been sacrificed under their own name are nevertheless valid, but they are not accounted to their owners as a fulfilment of their obligations, with the exception of the paschal-offering and the sin-offering. Ben azzai only added [to these exceptions] the burnt-offering, but the sages did not agree with him.  
mishnah  . On that day they said: what is the law applying to ammon and moab in the seventh year?   R. Tarfon decreed tithe for the poor;   and r. Eleazar b. Azariah decreed second tithe.   R. Ishmael said: eleazar b. ‘azariah, the onus is upon you to produce your proof because you are expressing the stricter view;   for the onus is upon the person who expresses a stricter view to produce the proof. R. Eleazar b. Azariah said to him: ishmael, my brother, i have not deviated from the sequence of years,   tarfon, my brother, has deviated therefrom and the onus is upon him to produce the proof. R. Tarfon answered: egypt is outside the land of israel, ammon and moab are outside the land of israel: just as egypt must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year,   so must ammon and moab give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah answered: babylon is outside the land of israel, ammon and moab are outside the land of israel: just as babylon must give second tithe in the seventh year,   so must ammon and moab give second tithe in the seventh year. R. Tarfon said: on egypt which is near, they imposed tithe for the poor so that the poor of israel might be supported thereby during the seventh year; so on ammon and moab which are near, we should impose tithe for the poor so that the poor of israel may be supported thereby during the seventh year. R. Eleazar b. ‘azariah said to him: behold, thou art like a person who would benefit them with gain, yet thou art really as one who causes souls to perish. Wouldst thou rob the heavens so that dew or rain should not descend?   As it is said, will a man rob god? Yet ye rob me. But ye say wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and heave-offerings.   R. Joshua said: behold, i shall be as one who replies on behalf of tarfon, my brother, but not in accordance with the subject matter of his arguments. The law regarding egypt is a new act and the law regarding babylon is an old act, and the law which is being argued before us is a new act. A new act should be argued from [another] new act, but a new act should not be argued from an old act. The law regarding egypt is the act of the elders and the law regarding babylon is the act of the prophets, and the law which is being argued before us   is the act of the elders. Let one act of the elders be argued from [another] act of the elders, but let not an act of the elders be argued from an act of the prophets. The votes were counted and they decided that ammon and moab should give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. And when r. Jose b. Durmaskith   visited r. Eliezer   in lydda he said to him: what new thing did you have in the house of study to-day? He said to him: their votes were counted and they decided that ammon and moab must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year. R. Eliezer wept and said: the counsel of the lord is with them that fear him: and his covenant, to make them know it.   Go and tell them: do not have any apprehension on account of your voting. I received a tradition from r. Johanan b. Zakkai who heard it from his teacher, and his teacher from his teacher, and so back to an halachah given to moses from sinai,   that ammon and moab must give tithe for the poor in the seventh year.  
mishnah  . On that day judah, an ammonite proselyte, came and stood before them in the house of study. He said to them: have i the right to enter into the assembly?   Rabban gamaliel said to him: thou art forbidden. R. Joshua said to him: thou art permitted. Rabban gamaliel said to him: the scriptural verse says, an ammonite or a moabite shall not enter into the assembly of the lord: even to the tenth generation, etc.   R. Joshua said to him: but are the ammonites and moabites still in their own territory? Sennacherib, the king of assyria, has long since come up and mingled all the nations, as it is said: in that i have removed the bounds of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures, and have brought down as one mighty the inhabitants.   Rabban gamaliel said to him: the scriptural verse says, but afterward i will bring back the captivity of the children of ammon,   so that they have already returned. R. Joshua said to him: the scriptural verse says, i will turn the captivity of my people israel and judah.   Yet they have not already returned. So they permitted him to enter the assembly.  
mishnah  . The aramaic sections in ezra and daniel render unclean the hands.   If an aramaic section was written   in hebrew, or a hebrew section was written   in aramaic, or hebrew script,   it   does not render unclean the hands. It never renders unclean the hands until it is written in the assyrian script,   on hide, and in ink.  
mishnah  . The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, because you say that the holy scriptures render unclean the hands,   but the books of hamiram   do not convey uncleanness to the hands. R. Johanan b. Zakkai said: have we nothing against the pharisees excepting this?   Behold they say that the bones of an ass are clean, yet the bones of johanan   the high priest are unclean.   They said to him: proportionate to the love for them, so is their uncleanness, so that nobody should make spoons out of the bones of his father or mother. He said to them: so also the holy scriptures; proportionate to the love for them, so is their uncleanness. The books of hamiram which are not precious do not convey uncleanness to the hands.    
mishnah  . The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, that you declare an uninterrupted flow of a liquid to be clean.   The pharisees say: [do] we complain against you, o ye sadducees, that you declare a stream of water which flows from the burial-ground to be clean?   The sadducees say: we complain against you, o ye pharisees, in that you say, my ox or ass which has done injury is liable,   yet my manservant or maidservant who has done injury is not liable’.   Now if in the case of my ox or my ass’ for which i am not responsible if they do not fulfil religious duties,   yet i am responsible for their damage, in the case of my manservant or maidservant for whom i am responsible to see that they fulfil religious duties,   how much more so that i should be responsible for their damage? They said to them: no, if you argue about my ox or my ass’ which have no understanding, can you deduce anything therefrom concerning my manservant or maidservant who have understanding? So that if i were to anger either of them they would go and burn another person's stack and i should be liable to make restitution?    
mishnah  . A galilean sadducee   said: i complain against you, o ye pharisees, that you write the name of the ruler and the name of moses together on a bill of divorcement.   The pharisees said: [do] we complain against you, o galilean sadducee, that you write the name of the ruler together with the divine name on a single page? And furthermore that you write the name of the ruler above and the divine name below? As it is said, and pharoah said, who is the lord that i should hearken unto his voice to let israel go?   But when he was smitten what did he say? The lord is righteous.         
