Toharot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with six cases where a person touched something of doubtful impurity and then touched terumah. In these six cases the terumah must be burned, as if we were certain that the terumah had been defiled. Note that this is the mishnah's way of saying that something is to be treated as if it was certainly defiled, for one would not burn terumah unless he had no other choice. It is prohibited to burn terumah unless one is certain that it is impure. 

Mishnah Five
On account of six doubtful cases of uncleanness terumah is burned:   
On account of the doubt of a bet ha-peras [grave area],   
On account of earth about which there is doubt whether it came from the land of the gentiles,   
On account of a doubt about the garments of an ‘am ha-arez;
On account of a doubt about found vessels found by chance;
On account of found spit,   
On account of a doubt about human urine that was near the urine of a beast.   
On account of a certainty of having touched these which causes the doubtful uncleanness, terumah is burned. 
Rabbi Yose says: also on account of their doubtful contact in a private domain;   
But the sages say: in a private domain the terumah is only held in suspense and in a public domain it is deemed clean.

Explanation
Section one:
1. A bet ha-peras is a place where there used to be a grave but was plowed over. The ground defiles because it might have bones in it.
2. The rabbis say that land from outside the land of Israel is impure (see Ohalot 2:3). The origin of the dirt referred to here is unclear.
3. The garments of an am haaretz, one who is not observant of the strictures of the purity laws, defile. These clothes may have come from such a person. 
4. Vessels that were simply found might be impure. Therefore, they have to be treated as such.
5. Spit that is simply found (yuck) might have come from a zav or from a niddah, and the spit of both such people defiles (we will learn more about this in the future).
6. Human urine defiles if it comes from an impure person. Albeck explains that in mishnaic times they would use urine as a cleaning agent. They would usually gather human urine and animal urine separately. The person in this section therefore knows that the urine he touched is human urine. What he does not know is if this human urine was impure.
Section two: In all of these cases the person knows that he had contact with one of these things, he just doesn't know whether they were unclean. If he didn't know whether he had even touched them, then he is pure.
Section three: Section one referred to things found in the public domain. Doubtful impurity is more likely to be deemed impure in the private domain. Rabbi Yose says if this occurred in the private domain then even if he is not sure if he had contact with the item he is impure. The sages are more lenient. In the private domain if he is not sure if he had contact with it, the terumah is "held in suspense." This means that it is not treated as pure, but neither is it burned. However, in the public domain the person is impure only if he is certain that he had contact with the item. 

