Taanit
תענית
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Taanit
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Sara Daniel's translation
-Jeremiah: The Fate of a Prophet by Binyanim Lau

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b

...R. Nachman said to R. Yitzchak, What is the meaning of the verse, And it came to pass when Samuel was old. Did Samuel become old? He lived only for fifty-two years. As it was said, If a man dies at age 52 he is said to have died at the age reached by Shmuel, the Ramati? [R. Yitzchak] said,  R. Yochanan said, Old age jumped upon him, as it is written, I regret that I made Shaul King. [Shmuel] said, Lord of the World, You have equated me with Moshe and Aharon, as it is said  Moshe and Aharon are among God’s priests, and Shmuel among those who call in God’s name. Just as with Moshe and Aharon, their handiwork was not canceled in their time, so too let my handiwork not be canceled in my lifetime. God said, How shall I act? Should Shaul die? Shmuel will not allow it. Should Shmuel die young? People will cast aspersions on him. Should neither Shmuel nor Shaul die? The time has come for David to reign and one kingship may not encroach on another even by a hair's breadth. God said: I will cause old age to jump on [Shmuel].

Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b




Rabbi Chama the son of Chanina said,
"The day of rain is as great as the day of the creation of heaven and earth, as it says, 'Heavens, drop down from above, and let the sky pour forth righteousness; let the earth open and flower salvation, and righteousness will grow along with it- I am G-d, I have created it.'
'I have created them,' it did not say, but rather, 'I have created it [indicating that rain and the  whole world are a singular creation].'" 
Rav Oshaiah said, 
"The day of rain is so great that even salvation increases and grows on it (the day), as it says, 'Let the earth open and flower salvation.'"







Rav Chisda said,
"The rains do not stop, except for when there is a nullification of priestly gifts and tithes, as it says, 'Aridity, and also heat, steal from the days of snow.'"
What does this mean?
It was taught in the academy in Rabbi Yishmael,
"Because of the things that I commanded you in the days of the sun, which you did not do, the days of snow in the rainy season will be stolen from you."
Rav Shimon the son of Pazi said,
"The rains do not stop, except because of the tellers of slander, as it says, 'The north wind births rain, and angry faces (birth) private language.'"
Rav Sela said, "Rav Himnuna said:
'The rains do not stop, except for when there is arrogance, as it says, 'And the showers have been stopped, and the latter rains did not take place, for you had the forehead of a harlot {and refused to be ashamed}.'"
Rav Sela also said, "Rav Himnuna said, 
'Every man who is arrogant, in time will be caught up in sin, as it says (of the arrogant): 'And you had the forehead of a harlot.'"
Rav Nachman said,
"It is known that he (the arrogant one) is already caught up in sin, as it says, 'You had [the forehead of a harlot],' and not 'You will have.'"
Rabba the son of Rav Huna said,
"Every person who is arrogant may be called an evildoer, as it says, 'The arrogant man [can be called] an evildoer in his face.'"
Rav Nachman the son of Yitzchak said,
"You are allowed to hate him [the arrogant one], as it says, 'and the arrogant of face shall change.' Do not read 'shall change (Yeshuneh),' but 'shall be hated (Yisanei).'"
Rav Katina said,
"The rain does not stop, except for when there is a nullification of Torah [study], as it says, 'with laziness shall the beams be injured" . Because of the laziness in Israel, that they didn't study Torah, the enemies of the Holy One, Blessed be He (euphemism for Israel), were injured, and there is such term as injury except for poverty, as it says, 'if he be poorer than his worth,' and there is no such term as beams except for the Holy One, Blessed be He, as it says, 'he who chills with water his higher dwelling.'"
Rav Yosef quoted from the following, "'And now they shall see no clear light in the heavens, but a spirit shall pass and purify them,' and there is no such term as light except for Torah, as it says, 'For a candle is the commandment, and the Torah is a light.'
"Clear in the Heavens:" it was taught at the school of Rabbi Yishmael,
Even in the time that the sky is made clear to bring dew and rain, a spirit passesand purifies them.
Rav Ami said,
"The rain does not stop, except for when there is the sin of robbery, like it says, 'Because of palms, light was covered,' which means that because of the sin of palms, the light was covered. There is no such term as palms except for armed robbery/violence, as it says, 'And from the violence in their palms'. There is no light, except for rain, as it says, 'a cloud will scatter its light.
How do we fix [the problem of insufficient rain and robbery]? Increase in prayer,
As it says, 'And he commanded about her regarding a touch' and their is no touching except for prayer, as it says, 'And you, do not pray on behalf of this people, and do not come into contact with me."
Rav Ami also said, 
"What does it mean, 'If the iron be blunt, then it is not damaged on the surface?' If you have seen a sky as blunt as iron, [shut up] from giving dew and rain, it is because of the deeds of the generation, that they secretly damage [society], as it says, 'it is not damaged on the surface.'
"How do they fix it? They should increase in mercy, as is says (in the continuation of the last verse), 'Then one should increase strength, and the direction of wisdom is profitable'. If they had acted in a proper manner originally [then they would not need mercy]."
Reish Lakish said,
"If you have seen a student... {continued next daf}

Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a





... ...
















































Our Rabbis have taught: ...
A person should always be soft like a reed and not hard like a cedar. 
It once happened that R. Eleazar the son of R. Simeon was coming from Migdal Gedor, from the house of his teacher, and he was riding his donkey by the river and he felt a great happiness and very proud of himself because he had studied a lot of Torah


Daf 20b

A particularly ugly man happened upon him 
and said to him, 
Peace be upon you, Rebbi, 
and he [R. Eleazar) did not respond. 
He said to him, 
Good for nothing! How ugly this man is! 
Are all the people of your city as ugly as you are? 
The man said: 
I do not know, but go and tell the artisan who made me, how ugly is the vessel which you have made. 
When he [R. Eleazar] acknowledged, in his gut, that he had done wrong he got down from his donkey and prostrated himself before the man and said to him, 
I submit myself to you; forgive me. 
He said to him: 
I will not forgive you until you go to the artisan that created me and tell him: how ugly is the vessel that you created. 
He [R. Eleazar] walked behind him until he reached his city. 
When his fellow citizens came out to meet him greeting him with the words, 
‘Peace be upon you rabbi and teacher,’ 
the man asked them, 
‘Who are you calling rebbi, rebbi’? 
They replied, ...
‘The man who is walking behind you.’ 
He said to them: 
‘If this man is a rabbi, may there not be any more like him in Israel’! 
They asked him: 
‘Why’? 
He replied: 
‘He did such and such to me.' 
They said to him: 
‘Nevertheless, forgive him, for he is a man of great Torah learning.’ 
The man replied: 
‘For your sakes I will forgive him, 
but only if he does not make a habit of acting this way.’ 
Immediately, R. Eleazar son of R. Simeon entered [the Beit Midrash] and expounded, 
A man should always be gentle as the reed and not hard like a cedar. And for this reason the reed merited that of it should be made a quill for the writing of the Torah scroll, phylacteries and mezuzot.



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b

R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said in the name of R. Yohanan: Why was Josiah punished? Because he should have consulted with Jeremiah but he did not. What was Josiah's proof text? "And no sword shall pass through your land" [Lev. 26:6]. What does the word "sword" mean? If you interpret it as a non-peaceful sword, Scripture has already stated, "I shall restore peace upon the land." Rather, it means even a peaceful sword. But he did not know that his generation had found little favor in God's eyes. As Josiah was dying, Jeremiah noticed that his lips were moving. Jeremiah said: Perhaps, God forbid, he is saying something unworthy out of pain. He crouched down and heard him justifying the judgement that had been passed on him. Josiah was saying: "The Lord is righteous, for I rebelled against His word [Lamentations 1:18]. At that moment, Jeremiah lamented him saying: "The air we breathe, the anointed one of God, was trapped in their pits" [Lam. 4:20].











Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b

