The SCHIFF LIBRARY of JEWISH CLASSICS

This Series of JEWISH CLASSICS was made possible through a fund given to the Jewish Publication Society of America by Jacob H. Schiff, and it is named in his honor, the Schiff Library of JEWISH CLASSICS.

SEFER HA-‘IKKARIM

BOOK OF PRINCIPLES

BY

JOSEPH ALBO

CRITICALLY EDITED ON THE BASIS OF MANUSCRIPTS AND OLD EDITIONS AND PROVIDED WITH A TRANSLATION AND NOTES

BY

ISAAC HUSIK, LL.B., M.A., Ph.D.

Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania

VOLUME FOUR

PART ONE

PHILADELPHIA

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA 5706–1946

Copyright, 1930, by

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

Second Impression, 1946

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher: except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PRESS OF THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY PHILADELPHIA, PENNA.

CONTENTS

PAGE

Facsimile Frontispiece

Book Four (chapters 1–28), Text and Translation 1

BOOK FOUR

Herein is explained the fourth principle, which is reward and punishment—the purpose of the Torah as a whole—as well as the derivative principles implied in it and other matters dependent upon it and the derivative principles.

We said in the First Book that Freedom and Purpose are not principles of a divine law as such. Freedom is a principle of all human activity, hence we did not include it among the dogmas which are peculiar to divine law. As to Purpose, though that too is a principle of all conventional laws, still inasmuch as the purpose of divine law is different from the purpose of conventional laws, we did make the purpose of reward and punishment a fundamental principle of divine law. Inasmuch, however, as it is impossible to explain this purpose, namely reward and punishment, without knowing first about freedom, we must first speak about the latter. But we can not explain freedom without first discussing God’s knowledge of existing things. Accordingly, we shall first treat of God’s knowledge, then of freedom, then of Providence, and finally of reward and punishment and the other matters depending upon it. It is clear that we must follow this order if we want to treat of reward and punishment. For if God has no knowledge of the things existing in the sublunar world, there is no meaning in reward and punishment for conduct. And even granting that God does know the things of this world, if man is not free to choose his conduct, he should not receive either punishment or reward for it. And finally, even assuming that God knows the things of this world and man is free to determine his conduct, if God knows those things in a generic way only, as he knows the lower animals, if he exercises no provision over the particulars of their conduct, punishing them for disobedience and rewarding them for their good deeds, there can be neither reward nor punishment. It is clear, therefore, that these three, namely, God’s knowledge, freedom and providence are necessarily prior to the principle of reward and punishment and are implied in it. We must therefore consider them first and the things which depend upon them and issue from them, and then we shall speak of reward and punishment and of the things which are dependent upon it, such as repentance, resurrection and the Messiah. All this we shall discuss very briefly so as not to burden the reader, but just enough to give the believer a conception of the matter.

CHAPTER 1

We laid it down as a principle, in the Second Book, that God must be free from defects. But there is no defect greater than ignorance. Hence it is clear that God must know all the things that happen in the world, and that nothing can happen in the world of which He is ignorant and which He does not know. From this it necessarily follows that God knows all human acts, which is the subject of our discussion. But the question whether His knowledge determines one of the two alternatives or not, is one that requires careful investigation. The problem is this: If God’s knowledge does determine the act, then a person is under compulsion in his conduct, and should not receive reward or punishment for the things he does, since he does them under necessity, for a person deserves praise or blame only when the initiative of his acts is his own and there is no compulsion. On the other hand, if God’s knowledge does not determine the act, then the act may be realized contrary to God’s knowledge, His knowledge would then be in disagreement with the facts, and it would not be knowledge, but ignorance and error and falsehood.

Moreover it is clear that the category of the possible does exist. This appears both from reason and from the Torah. By reason, as follows: If the possible did not exist, all effort would be in vain. The one who makes an effort to obtain a thing and the one who makes an effort to the contrary would be in the same position, and there would be an end to all the trades and the arts and the professions. There would be no purpose in learning and training, no advantage in pursuing the useful and avoiding the injurious, and no place for the will at all. But this is opposed to the evidence of our senses and to the purpose for which we were created.

From the Torah we draw the same conclusion, both from its general statements and from the specific commandments. If the possible did not exist, the revelation of the Torah to guide mankind in the right path would be in vain, and the admonitions in the Torah that we should serve God and love Him and do righteousness and justice would be without any purpose. And yet the Torah exclaims: “Oh that they had such a heart as this alway, to fear Me, and keep all My commandments …” As for specific commands, the Torah says, “Thou shalt make a parapet for thy roof;” “Let him go and return to his house;” “Thou shalt not commit murder;” “Thou shalt not oppress thy neighbour nor rob him,” and there are many other specific commands, which show that the category of the possible exists. Moreover, if the possible did not exist, reward and punishment would be absolutely wrong, whether divine or human, since every one, on this supposition, would be acting from necessity. It is clear therefore that the possible must exist. Now if the possible must exist and it can not be that God does not know particular things, for it would be a defect in His nature, the question arises, How can God’s knowledge be in agreement with the truth and at the same time fail to determine one of the two possible alternatives? How can these two propositions be compatible, being seemingly contradictory at first sight?

Saadia Gaon in his book, “Emunot ve-Deot,” says that God’s foreknowledge of the possible things is not the cause of their existence, just as His knowledge of that which has already come into existence is not the cause of its having come into existence. The thing retains its own nature. Similarly His knowledge of possible things is not the cause of their existence, and hence they retain their character as possible things. For if His knowledge were the cause of their existence, they would always exist, like the natural species. But since we see new individuals appearing every day, it follows that their existence is not determined by His knowledge. And therefore they retain their character as possible things. These are the words of the Gaon, and the author of the Cusari in the fifth book of that treatise adopts the same view. But this is not satisfactory, for it is very much like saying that God does not know possible things. For if He knows them, and yet their existence is not determined by His knowledge, it might turn out that His knowledge would be different from the actual result, and this would not be knowledge but ignorance.

Some one of the moderns solved this difficulty by saying that a thing may be necessary if we consider it in relation to its causes, and possible if we consider it by itself. Take, for example, the question of rain to-morrow. Considered by itself, it is possible; considered in relation to its causes, namely the rise of the vapors, the great quantity of moisture and similar things already in existence, it is necessary. God, therefore, knows that it will rain to-morrow, because, considered in relation to its causes, it is necessary, though considered by itself it is possible. The author in question expatiates at length in making his solution appear plausible.

But if we examine this view carefully, we shall find that unlike the first opinion this one is very close to the view that all things are determined and that the possible does not exist. For since the things are necessary considered in relation to their causes, if God knows the causes, they are actually necessary. What good is there then in saying that they are possible considered by themselves, as long as they are determined and necessary from that side which brings them into existence, namely the causes? For they can not come into existence in any other way. They are possible in the theoretical sense that the causes might have been different and then the effect would have been different. But in reality the effect is necessary when the causes are there and God knows them. It would follow then according to this opinion that there is no thing that may equally be or not be when considered in relation to its causes. For if the causes determining the two opposite alternatives are equal, the question arises again, what is it that determined one of the alternatives in preference to the other? If it is the knowledge of God that determines, the category of the possible is done away with; and if we retain the possible, God’s knowledge is taken away, unless indeed we say that the possible exists only logically and conceptually, but not actually. But this is contrary to hypothesis. Much has been said in the solution of this question. But if we examine it all we find that it is of the nature described above, namely some of it approximates to the first opinion, and some of it approximates to the second opinion. Therefore I do not think it necessary to quote it here, so as not to prolong our discussion needlessly. My own opinion will be explained after I have made an introductory observation in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 2

The speculative sciences are not always in agreement on a given subject, but differ from one another in their fundamental and other principles. Every exponent of a given science believes and maintains that the principles of his science are absolutely true and clear, and that only a fool or an ignoramus refuses to accept them. The exponent of another science denies those principles and maintains his own, which are in disagreement with the others. This may be illustrated in the relation of the astronomer to the physicist. The astronomer lays down two principles upon which he bases all the proofs of his science, namely eccentric and epicycle. The physicist on the other hand assumes three kinds of motion, from the center, to the center and around the center. This is the most important principle which he has. He also maintains that circular motion can take place only around a body that is permanently at rest. The astronomer denies all this. For if we assume an epicycle, we have a motion that is neither to the center, nor from the center, nor around the center, unless we say that in the center of the epicycle there is a body permanently at rest, an earth as it were around which the epicycle revolves, as the diurnal sphere revolves around the earth, which is the central body and permanently at rest. It would follow according to this that within the epicycles which the planets are supposed to have there are other earths around which they revolve. There would then be other worlds in heaven. On the assumption of an eccentric it also follows that circular motion may exist around a body not permanently at rest. For the eccentric revolves around a point which is in constant motion. For, as is explained in the Treatise on Distances, the centers of the planetary eccentrics are some of them above the elements, in the lunar sphere, some above the lunar sphere, and some above the solar sphere, as Maimonides says in the Guide of the Perplexed, Part II, ch. 24.

All these strange and impossible ideas assumed by the astronomer he proves from lunar and solar eclipses which are perceived by the senses, and from the observations of conjunctions (in the aspects) of the stars, which favor his assumptions. Accordingly he bases all his proofs upon them and pays no attention to the assumptions and principles of the physicist. The physicist on the other hand denies the principles and assumptions of the astronomer, on the strength of physical theory, though the senses favor the ideas of the astronomer. The physicist does not deny the data of the senses, but maintains that they have nothing to do with the principles and assumptions laid down by the astronomer, which are inherently impossible, and he holds that the phenomena are to be explained on some other principles which are not known.

Another illustration of the disagreement of the sciences is the relation of the astrologer and the philosopher. The philosopher denies God’s knowledge and maintains the reality of the contingent. The astrologer, on the other hand, holds to the reality of God’s knowledge, saying that God knows that which the constellations determine, and which can not be otherwise. Therefore he denies the reality of the contingent. The theologian agrees with both, maintaining the reality of the contingent with the philosopher, which he proves from the evidence of the senses, as we explained in the preceding chapter, and believing likewise in the reality of God’s knowledge in agreement with the astrologer. This he proves by reason, which holds that we must not ascribe ignorance to God, for it is a defect in Him if His knowledge does not embrace all that happens in the world. He also holds that God’s knowledge is not incompatible with the category of the contingent, for we see with our senses the reality of divine providence when rain comes down in the summer in the absence of moisture and clouds, through the prayers of the righteous and the pious.

Now since the senses testify to his ideas, we pay no attention to those who deny them, any more than we pay attention to the naturalist’s disagreement with the astronomer, as long as the senses confirm the ideas of the astronomer. In the same way we pay no regard to the physicist who says that a point at rest can not exist except in a body at rest, seeing that the mathematician can show, in a revolving spherical body, two points, called poles, which are not in motion, but at rest, while the sphere as a whole is in motion. Similarly everything to which the senses testify we must admit to be true, though we do not know the cause, as the physicist admits the truth of the ideas of the astronomer, which are testified to by the senses, while denying the causes alleged by the astronomer to explain the phenomena, and holding that they are not the true causes, but that there are other causes which we do not know.

CHAPTER 3

Having shown that the exponents of the different sciences differ from one another in their assumptions, we must find for everything a basis in sense perception, and pay no regard to anybody’s ideas, except where they are in agreement with sense data.

Now the senses testify, in agreement with the theologian, that the contingent exists; also that God communicates through the prophets knowledge concerning particular and individual things; also we know that God provides specially for particular individuals, witness the patriarchs in all their relations, according to the continuous tradition which has come down to us, the exodus from Egypt, and other special individuals mentioned in the books of the Prophets. Hence we pay no regard to those who deny these things. For we do not deny what we see with our senses despite the speculations of philosopher, as we do not deny that a sphere revolves about two stationary poles, though the physicist according to his theory denies it. We must use the senses as a basis in everything, even though the reason is not able to know the cause thereof.

For the reason is imperfect in two respects. First, there are many things which the intellect can not comprehend as they really are. And second, it can not know the causes of all things, even of those things which are perceived by the senses. Thus, we can not deny the reality of the diurnal motion, since we see it with our senses. And yet the human mind can not understand its nature in any way. If we say that the cause of this motion is a ninth body, as many scientists agree, calling it the diurnal sphere, because it determines the appearance of evening and morning which are called one day, we can not understand how this body can move all the spheres. If the motion is caused by contact, for a body can not move another body except by contact, how can we suppose that the contact between the sphere of Mars and the sphere of the sun imparts to the latter the diurnal motion which came to Mars per accidens through contact with the sphere of Jupiter (which in turn received it through contact with the sphere of Saturn, which in turn received it from the sphere of the fixed stars, which received the diurnal motion per accidens through contact with the ninth sphere, i. e. the diurnal sphere) and yet the sphere of the sun does not receive through its contact with Mars the proper motion of the latter, which is its motion per se? Similarly how is it that the sphere of the moon receives the diurnal motion through indirect contact with the ninth sphere, and does not receive the proper and essential motion of the sphere of Mercury, with which it comes into immediate contact?

This may be the reason why R. Abraham Ibn Ezra says in the name of a great Spanish scientist that it is clearly proved that there is no body above the sphere of the fixed stars. This means that the diurnal motion can not be due to a ninth body. Nor can we say that the diurnal motion is caused by the sphere of the fixed stars, as I have seen some one actually maintain, because the sphere of the fixed stars has also a retrograde motion, and one and the same sphere can not have two different per se motions, but the one must be per se and by itself while the other is per accidens and due to an external agent. But it seems that Ibn Ezra means to say that the cause of the diurnal motion is not a body but a Separate Intelligence. But I am not satisfied with this explanation either, which is inadequate. For a Separate Intelligence can not move a body unless the latter has a soul. The motion is then caused by means of a concept, as is explained in the proper place, and as Maimonides explains the matter in the Guide of the Perplexed. But a body endowed with a soul can not at the same time have two different motions due to two different concepts, just as a man can not move to the east and to the west at the same time in obedience to the commands of two kings, one of whom commands him to move toward the east, and the other orders him to move toward the west. Furthermore, the elements are inanimate bodies and yet we see that the comets which become visible through the element of fire, have the diurnal motion, as is stated in Aristotle’s Meteorologics. This motion is perceptible by the senses, and it can have no other cause except contact with the sphere of the moon. But if so, why does this comet which becomes visible in the element fire have the diurnal motion only and not also the specific motion of the lunar sphere with which it is in contact? For we see the chain-stars following the diurnal motion of the sun for a month or two, but having no connection with the motion of the moon. This is a serious difficulty which stands in the way of the theory that their diurnal motion is due to contact.

Nor can the motion be due to a concept, because the elements are dead bodies and do not move by way of representation at all. Hence when Samuel said, “The paths of the heavens are as clear to me as the paths of Nehardea,” he was asked, “Do you know the comet?” That is, Do you know why the tailed or chain-star has the diurnal motion and not the motion of the moon? His answer was that he did not know. For the explanation is really unknown, unless we suppose that the diurnal sphere is below the lunar sphere. We should then have to assume that every planet has a diurnal mover below it which imparts to it the diurnal motion, as was the opinion of the ancients before Ptolemy. The human mind is not adequate to know this, any more than it is able to explain the cause of the heavenly motions without doing violence to the theories of physics. The human mind is not even able to explain the causes of natural things upon the earth, for example the magnet’s attraction of iron. Therefore we must not ignore and deny that which we perceive with our senses merely because we do not know its cause. In the same way we must not deny the category of the contingent, which we perceive with our senses, and God’s knowledge, which follows from reason, because we do not understand the causes.

But if you ask, how is it possible to maintain both of these opinions, viz. to maintain the reality of the contingent and at the same time to hold that God’s knowledge embraces it? Our answer is the same as that of Maimonides, who says. that since God’s knowledge is essential in Him and not something added to His essence, the investigation of the character of His knowledge is tantamount to an investigation of His essence. But His essence is absolutely unknown, hence the character of His knowledge is also absolutely unknown. As there is no comparison or similarity between His existence and the existence of other things, so there is no comparison between His knowledge and the knowledge of others. Hence though if we picture His knowledge on the analogy of our own, a great many objections follow, such as that we must either deny the reality of the contingent or assume that His knowledge embraces that which we can not conceive as knowable, for He would have to know the infinite, or His knowledge would change with the change of the objects, and other difficulties of this sort—this would follow only if we conceive of His knowledge on the analogy of our own, but since His knowledge is not of the same kind as ours, these difficulties do not follow. God’s knowledge is infinite, and infinite knowledge is not liable to these difficulties.

Isaiah uses this argument when he reproves those who deny God’s knowledge: “Why sayest thou O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel: ‘My way is hid from the Lord, and my right is passed over from my God?’ Hast thou not known? Hast thou not heard …” “Hast thou not known,” refers to investigation; “Hast thou not heard,” refers to tradition. “That the Lord is the everlasting God,” i. e. it can be proved apodictically that there is a being who is a necessary existent, and He is the everlasting God, i. e. the cause of all existing things; and He is the Lord, i. e. He is a separate Intelligence, neither a body nor a corporeal force. Hence we infer that He is one and eternal in both directions, as well as all the other things which follow necessarily from the principle of the existence of God as proved by investigation. And though He is a Separate Intelligence, He is nevertheless “the Creator of the ends of the earth,” i. e. He is the cause of all corporeal existences. And despite His infinity He is the cause of the corporeal world, which is finite, the “Creator of the ends of the earth.” This is not due to weariness and lack of strength, for “He fainteth not;” nor is it due to change, for He is not “weary.”

We challenge therefore the one who believes in the eternity of the world and denies God’s knowledge to tell us how a corporeal thing can come from a separate and unchangeable Intelligence. He will have to admit that for a material thing to come from a Separate Intelligence is such a change as the coming of something out of nothing, of which the human intellect can give no explanation. We also challenge him to explain how a finite world can come from a being whose power is infinite. We must therefore admit that this matter rests in God’s knowledge in so far as it is infinite, and that He knows the explanation of all this, though we with our knowledge are unable to conceive it. Similarly we must say that the error of those who deny God’s knowledge and say, “My way is hid from the Lord,” is due to the fact that they compare God’s knowledge with human knowledge. Human knowledge being finite, all the difficulties that we mentioned present themselves, namely that the knowledge changes with the change of the objects, and that it can not embrace the unembraceable, namely the infinite, so far as we can conceive with our knowledge. But as God’s knowledge is infinite, it can embrace the infinite and the non-existent, without necessitating a change in God. Hence he concludes the verse, “His discernment is past searching out.” Likewise when you say, “and my judgment is passed over from my God,” which means that your choice of and determination upon one of the two possible alternatives can not be known by God, or else the contingent would cease to exist—your statement is not true. For such an inference may apply to finite knowledge, but the discernment of God is past searching out, and since His knowledge is infinite, the category of the contingent is not destroyed thereby, though we do not know the nature of His knowledge any more than we know the character of His essence.

This is Maimonides’ conception of God’s knowledge. He says, as we can not compare His essence with our essence, so we can not compare His knowledge with our knowledge, for the term knowledge is applied to God and to us as a pure homonym. Maimonides does not mean that the term as applied to us means knowledge and as applied to God means ignorance, or vice versa, as absolute homonymity would signify. By no means. What he means is this. The term existence is applied to God and to ourselves in an absolutely homonymous manner. Yet there is no doubt that though God’s existence is absolutely different from the existence of anything else, nevertheless the term does not denote existence in the one case and non-existence in the other. So far as the negative signification is concerned, i. e. the denial of non-existence, the term has the same meaning in both cases, as is explained in Book Two, chapter 30. The term existence denotes the negation of non-existence, whether applied to us or to God. The absolute homonymity of the term applies to its positive signification, because there is no comparison at all between God’s existence and the existence of anything else. Similarly the term knowledge, both as applied to God and as applied to us, means negation of ignorance. In this respect, i. e. in respect of its negative signification, the relation of the two applications, i. e. to God and to us, is one of priority and posteriority, and not of absolute homonymity. In respect of the positive signification, on the other hand, the term knowledge is applied to God and to us as a pure homonym, and God’s knowledge is absolutely unknown as His essence is absolutely unknown.

If we understand the words of Maimonides concerning God’s knowledge in this manner, all the objections adduced by later writers will disappear. The result of all this is that God’s knowledge, being infinite, embraces everything that happens in the world without necessitating change in God, and without destroying the category of the contingent. It also embraces the infinite. I have selected this view as the best in this matter. Our Rabbis also adopt it, expressing the idea anonymously and without naming any opponent thereof: “All is foreseen, yet permission is given.” “All is foreseen,” signifies that God’s knowledge embraces everything that happens in the world, and that nothing happens by accident without being known in advance. “Yet permission is given,” signifies that the category of the contingent is real and God’s knowledge does not destroy it. This is the truth in reference to this matter, though our knowledge is not sufficient to understand the possibility of this thing. This much will suffice as a brief discussion of God’s knowledge.

CHAPTER 4

We must now discuss the signification of the constellations. Among the ancients we find that there were two opinions concerning the signification of the constellations. One is the view of the Philosopher, who says that the heavenly bodies and the stars exert an influence upon the lower world by means of their various motions, by which they cause the elements to move, and combine them and prepare them in various ways to receive the natural forms, so that some persons are prepared to acquire wisdom and others are not; some are prepared to receive the divine prophetic influence, and others are not. This form of signification or of control which the stars have over the lower world can not be denied, for we see that the sun warms the air, and the moon moistens and cools it, and increases the force of water. Hence we can not but admit that by their motions they sometimes increase moisture or dryness, sometimes cold or heat, and in this way prepare matter to receive various forms. As for any other signification the stars may have in relation to other things which have no connection with their elemental qualities, as for example in the determination of poverty or wealth, or whether a given person will marry one wife or more than one, or whether he will be virtuous or vicious—this school denies any such power. It is false, they say, and extremely unlikely that the stars should give indications of things which have nothing to do with them, like poverty, wealth, love, hate, etc.

The second view is that of the astrologers and star-gazers. They say that all things that happen to a man, do so by the decree of the stars. And they prove it by actual verification. The astrologer tells a person what will happen to him in all particulars, whether he will live long, whether he will be poor or rich, in what occupation he will make a better success, how many wives he will have and how many children he will beget, and so on. This shows that all things that happen to a man are due to the decree of the stars, which it is impossible to escape. In this way, they say, we can maintain God’s knowledge without any change. Some of the Rabbis hold this view—“The constellation makes rich, the constellation makes wise—Israel is governed by the constellation.”

Both of these views are open to criticism. We may object to the first view as follows: Wherever anything causes another to pass from potentiality to actuality, the efficient cause must have actually that which the thing acted upon has potentially, as is explained in the Metaphysics. But the stars have no qualities. How, then, can the sun heat the air and the moon moisten it? We must therefore say that the proposition just mentioned, viz. that the efficient cause must have actually what the thing acted upon has potentially, applies only to a physical agent, and not to an intellectual agent. And as the spheres are living beings, endowed with intelligent souls, they may act upon the lower existences and produce in them what they themselves have not. Hence they give predominance now to the element fire, now to the element water, now to the element air, and now to the element earth. For as we see that the spark of the sun, though incorporeal, moves the element of fire, causing it to predominate, and the moon acts in the same way upon the element of water, so it may be that the sparks of the other planets move the other elements and cause them to predominate sometimes, in a mysterious manner which we do not understand. In the same way, therefore, we may say of the other indications, that they indicate poverty or wealth or wisdom or ignorance, or other things, though they have no such qualities in themselves, and that they do this by virtue of some condition or relation which is unknown to us, provided the recipient has in him the capacity to receive the effect. So a teacher produces knowledge in the pupil, which gives more benefit to the one who is prepared than to the one who is not prepared to receive the instruction. Moreover, since our senses testify to the realization of those things which the astrologers foretell to individuals, we can not deny the data of our senses.

The second view also, namely that of the astrologers and star-gazers, is open to manifold objection. In the first place they remove the category of the contingent, the reality of which is proved by experience and by our discussion in the first chapter of this Book. Secondly, their principles are open to objection. They say that in the sphere of the fixed stars there are the forms of lamb, ox, twins, and so on, which indicate so and so. They draw imaginary lines from star to star so as to produce the figure in question, making in this way forty-eight figures. Why do they not draw other lines in another way and produce other forms? Thus they say that the sixth of the southern forms has the shape of a small dog, saying at the same time that there are only two stars in it. Now, how can such a figure be made out of two stars? They say that the ancients, who were more perfect creatures than we, saw those forms, though we do not see them. But this is foolishness. How can any one imagine that the human person of to-day is inferior in his powers of sense perception to the ancients? On the contrary, the smaller the intellect, the stronger the sense perception. Thus the lower animals, who have no intellect, have much stronger senses than man. They say there are forty-eight figures which the ancients saw. How did they see them? And how did they know that in a given constellation there was a given figure? Thus they say that in the third aspect of the sign of the ox there is a man, all of whose thoughts are evil. In the first aspect of cancer there is the form of a pig of iron, whose head is of copper. In the third aspect of it, there is a man about to enter a ship for an ocean voyage, to bring back gold and silver in order to make a ring. In the first aspect of virgo, there is the form of a virgin, holding a lamp in her hand and walking among the myrtles, desiring to go to her father’s house. How can they know all such things, when they can not be seen?

And if you say that they know this by means of divination, then the principles of this science are built on the ideas of the imagination, upon which the entire science of divination is based. And the astrologer is like a person who gives free rein to an insane fantasy and thinks that whatever is conceivable in the imagination is possible. Or he is like a dreamer. But how can the truth of such things be known by the human intellect? They also speak of the positions of the stars, their aspects and relations to one another, for example the aspect of opposition is, according to them, an aspect of absolute hatred. The reason they give is that at that time the two stars are the extreme distance apart, namely 180°, as it is usually the case that enemies are as far apart from each other as possible. For the same reason they say that a quarter aspect (distance of 90°) denotes half hatred. But according to this why do they say that a third aspect (distance of 120°) denotes perfect love, seeing that the distance here is greater than in the quarter aspect? Their explanation is that those stars which face each other at a third aspect, i. e. at a distance of 120°, have more inclination for each other than those which face each other at a quarter aspect, which is 90°. But all this is prophecy and assumption and hypothesis, which the opponent will not admit.

If they say that the matter is verified by experience, the same claim is made by those who are given to geomancy or other means of prognostication that are prevalent among mankind. Without any rhyme or reason some persons decide everything that happens by means of these arts, although the figures in themselves bear no relation whatsoever to the idea expressed, and yet they say that the truth of the art is verified by experience. Thus the one who is an adept in geomancy says that when a figure with lifted head comes out first, it denotes prosperity or happiness, while a figure with head lowered signifies the opposite. And yet there is no difference between these two figures except in the position of one point, which is located above in the one figure, and below in the other. The same thing applies to the other figures. The whole thing has no real meaning in itself and is purely arbitrary, like the method of prognostication by means of the shoulder blade. There are indeed some persons who have a special knack in such things, like Ahithophel, who had the peculiar knack of giving correct advice, so that David found it necessary to pray to God to mislead him into giving wrong advice.

And even if we grant all their principles and assumptions, they must admit that the assumptions are not necessary determinants. For when a plague or a famine or war happens in a certain city, people die before their proper time. Now why should the individual horoscopes be nullified, which were determined by the constellations at the time of the birth of the various individuals, and which indicated different terms of life to the different individuals, according to the time of their birth? Their explanation is that a general indication annuls a special indication, and therefore the indication of famine or plague which is decreed upon the country, nullifies the indication concerning the various individuals. It is clear therefore, on their own showing, that the indication of a special horoscope is not a necessary determinant, since it may be nullified in various ways.

Another objection to their views is the following. We may grant the propriety of the general nullifying the particular in respect to those things which happen in the course of nature, like famine, plague, and the like, but what explanation can they give in the matter of those things which happen as a result of human choice, whether it be the choice of a group, like a war, or the choice of an individual, as when a person builds a ship of his own accord and the ship sinks with a hundred or more passengers on board, every one of whom, no doubt, had a different horoscope? Why should the lives of those men be shortened because the stars decreed that that individual’s ship should sink? Why should the horoscopes of all the passengers be annulled rather than that of the owner of the ship?

The truth of the matter is that this proves that the indications of the stars are not necessary causes; and though we see some of them being verified, like the prognostications of astrologers, nevertheless they may be nullified for various reasons, through the freedom of the will, or by reason of some merit or good deed, as the Rabbis say—“The constellations play no part in the destinies of Israel.” Rashi’s comment on the passage is that charity, prayer, or some meritorious deed can change the horoscope from evil to good; not to speak of the will of God, which is the highest principle of all and nullifies all other indications, no matter what their origin, the reason being known to God alone. This was the purpose for which the Torah was given, namely that by performing the commandments man may be saved from the decrees of the stars, as the prophet says: “And be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the nations are dismayed at them.”

So Rabbi Abraham Ibn Ezra in his “Sefer ha-Moladot” (Book on Nativities), names the general causes which annul particular horoscopes. Speaking of the eighth cause, he says that the freedom of the rational soul may annul a particular indication. He also says in the same place that if a man trusts in God, by whom all actions are controlled, the Lord will contrive means to deliver him from any evil which is indicated in his horoscope. This is true, as we have said, and agrees with the opinion of the Rabbis. They say that change of name, change of act, charity and prayer nullify the destiny indicated for man. Also, “Abram had no children, Abraham did.” Some of them also say that Isaac was born under the sign of Mars, which was an indication that he would be killed. Hence God ordered that he be offered as a burnt-offering and then substituted a ram as ransom in order that he might be delivered from his fate. In the same way God contrives means to deliver those who observe the Torah and its commandments from the fate decreed for them by the stars. Hence we see that the prophets admonished the people to turn away from their evil ways. Jeremiah says: “Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.” They knew that observance of the commandments and obedience to God have the power of nullifying the indications of the stars, which are nullified also by other causes, according to the astrologers, as we explained in our examples of war, plague and the ship. So much for the decrees of the stars.

CHAPTER 5

It is appropriate now to discuss freedom of the will. Human acts are either all absolutely necessary, or all absolutely free, or all composed of necessity and freedom, or some of them are necessary, some are free and some are composed of necessity and freedom.

The first, namely that they are all necessary, as the astrologers say, is impossible, because this opinion does away with the category of the contingent, which is proved by experience, and upsets all the principles of the Torah, in general and in particular, as we have already explained. Moreover, the reason for their adoption of this view is because they think that in this way they can maintain God’s knowledge without any change. For if God knows what has been decreed concerning a person by the stars, and the decree is bound to be realized, then God’s knowledge is true. On the other hand, if it were possible that the opposite of the decree of the stars might happen, God’s knowledge would have to change, and it would not be uniformly true. But this opinion does not protect them from change. For the knowledge of a thing before it comes into being is not the same as the knowledge of the thing after it has come into being. If, therefore, we assume that His knowledge is similar to ours, there would still be a change in His knowledge in this respect as there would be in ours. The truth of the matter is that we can not institute any comparison between God’s knowledge and ours, as we said above. His knowledge does not undergo any change, because it is infinite. It is clear, therefore, that this opinion can not be maintained.

The second view that all human acts are absolutely free, and that effort is of value in all cases, as is implied in the nature of the contingent and as is the opinion of the Philosopher, is also impossible. For we see with our senses many instances in which a person endeavors to attain something, making all the possible preparations for the attainment of the end, and yet he not merely fails to attain his end, but the very preparations which he has made produce the opposite effect. We see an illustration of this in the Joseph story. The brothers of Joseph endeavored to nullify the dreams which he had dreamed by doing the opposite of that which was indicated in the dreams. They sold him as a slave so that it should not be possible for him to rule over them at all. But those very efforts which they made to nullify the decree brought about its realization, namely Joseph’s rule over them. Similarly Adonijah endeavored to obtain the kingdom by making the princes and servants of the king love and obey him. But these very efforts brought about his failure. For David became angry when he heard of it, and made Solomon king in his lifetime. There are also many cases in which good comes to a man without any effort at all. Thus Saul obtained the kingdom without any previous effort. All this shows that not all human acts are absolutely free.

The third opinion that all human acts are composite and made up of necessity and freedom, is also impossible. For if this were true, there would be no acts for which a person deserved praise or blame, for the acts involving praise and blame are those in which there is no necessity at all. If all acts are composed of necessity and freedom, a person would not deserve praise if they are good, nor blame if they are evil, he would have an excuse every time and would never deserve either praise or blame. Now since not all acts are necessary, nor all free, nor all composed of freedom and necessity, it remains that some are free, some necessary, and some made up of necessity and freedom. And we must now explain every one of these three kinds of human acts.

Absolutely free acts are those which have the character of contingency, which may be affected by diligence and effort and for which a person deserves praise or blame. Command and prohibition apply to such acts, and reward and punishment attach to them, because the initiative resides in the agent himself, and there is no compulsion or hindrance.

Absolutely necessary acts are those which are determined either by the stars or by the providence of God, as we shall see. Human choice has no control over these acts, and effort therein is to no purpose, because they do not depend upon a man’s choice, whether they be good or evil. Free will has indeed the power to nullify a decree of fate, but it sometimes happens that by reason of the prior disobedience of a person or of his ancestors, he loses a good which his effort and diligence would normally have obtained for him, or that by reason of a prior meritorious act of his own or of his ancestors, he obtains a good without any effort at all. It happens also that a good or an evil comes to one from the stars if there is no sin to prevent the good from coming or merit to counteract the evil decreed by the stars. In such a case the good may come to a person without his expecting it. Thus a person may desire to go on a certain journey, and is prevented from doing so by accidentally injuring his foot on a stone. Or a person may intend to board a ship and is prevented from doing so by suddenly becoming ill. Later those who took the journey are attacked by robbers and put to death, or the ship sinks. It is clear in these cases that the failure of his efforts to go on the journey or to board the ship was a good, which saved him from the misfortune of being killed by the robbers or drowned in the shipwreck, by reason of some prior merit of his.

In this connection our Rabbis, commenting upon the verse, “I will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord; for Thou wast angry with me,” say: “The text has reference to the case of two persons who intended to go on a journey for business, and one of them met with an accident by injuring his foot with a thorn and was unable to go. He was much annoyed and began grumbling and cursing his fate. Later on he heard that the ship in which he was to sail was wrecked on the sea, and he began to thank God for his escape. This is the meaning of the sequel to the verse quoted above: ‘Thine anger is turned away, and Thou comfortest me.’ Hence the statement of Rabbi Eleazar: ‘The Psalmist says: “Who only doeth wondrous things.” ’ The meaning is that even the person in whose behalf a miracle is performed, is not aware of his good fortune.” In the same way evil may befall a person unexpectedly, without his having done anything deserving such punishment. Such good or evil, it is clear, comes by the decree of fate without any choice.

Acts which are mixed and composed of necessity, i. e. decree of fate, and freedom, may be illustrated as follows: A person digs a foundation and finds a treasure, or he plants grain and prospers. It is clear that if he had not taken the trouble to dig the foundation or plant the grain, he would not have found the treasure, nor had success in his crop. These are, therefore, cases in which necessity and freedom are combined. Sometimes a person obtains a given good through his efforts, and thereby misses a greater good. For example, he is trying to buy wheat, which would give him a great profit in a short time. But not being worthy of such great profit, he encounters, by divine contrivance, on his way to buy the wheat, beautiful garments, which he buys with the money intended for the purchase of the wheat, and makes no profit at all or very little. Or the opposite thing may happen. The wheat would not have brought him much profit, therefore the Lord puts the garments in his way, from which he makes a great profit, by reason of the meritorious deeds which he has to his credit, or because of a decree [of fate] that he should make profit or lose. The greater number of human acts which come by way of reward and punishment through divine providence are of this nature, i. e. they are made up of divine decree, i. e. necessity, and freedom.

Confusion and perplexity in respect to human affairs is due to the fact that people are ignorant of this matter and do not know that some acts are purely necessary, some are absolutely free, and some are mixed, combining necessity and freedom. But some people think that all the evils befalling them are determined and necessary, owing nothing to free choice; and they find in this way an excuse for their evil deeds, because they think that everything is determined. Others again think that all acts are free and deserve praise and blame. This confusion is prevalent not only among the generality of men, but also among men of thought. Among the latter, too, some maintain that all the good and evil fortunes of men are determined and necessary, some say that everything is due to man’s free choice, and some say that all acts are made up of necessity and freedom.

It appears that Job maintained that all the good and evil fortunes of man are determined by the heavenly bodies. Therefore he cursed his day. Eliphaz opposed him in his first reply, and said that if all good and evil fortune were due to the determination of fate, then the righteous and the wicked would owe their respective characters also to fate, but it is impossible that God should determine that a given person should be a righteous man. Hence he said to him: “Shall mortal man be just through God? Shall a man be pure through his Maker?” The meaning is, Is it possible that a man is righteous through God’s decree, or pure through the decree of his Maker? This can not be, for, “Behold, He putteth no firmness in His servants …” He does not determine the stability of their character, that they should not change, “How much more them that dwell in houses of clay,” who are constantly changing by reason of the elements of which they are composed. Surely there is no determination in their respect, making it necessary that a given person should be righteous or wicked, without being able by his free will to change. But since righteousness and wickedness depend upon a person’s choice, it follows that good and bad fortune also follow man’s free choice, and Job is wrong in thinking that all is determined. This is why Eliphaz adds, “For anger killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth the silly one,” to show that there are evils which come upon a man through his free choice, like those which are the result of anger or envy. And since there are free acts and evils which are their effects, it follows that those evils which come upon a man not of his own free will, are in the nature of punishment. Hence he says at the end of his speech: “Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth … For He maketh sore, and bindeth up …”

The true and pious philosophers hold this opinion that all the evil and good fortune which befalls a man is by way of reward and punishment, as Eliphaz said, in opposition to the opinion of Job.

Hence the Rabbis always say that every evil which befalls a man is in the nature of punishment. Thus they relate: “Four hundred barrels of wine of Rab Huna became sour … Said the Rabbis to him, Look into your conduct. Said he to them: Am I suspect in your eyes? Said they, Is the Holy One, blessed be He, suspect of doing injustice? They made an investigation and found that he had not given to the gardener the portion of the grapes due to him by law.” Here Rab Huna thought that the wine became sour because of his bad luck or as a natural thing. His pupils, however, and the members of his school said that it must be a punishment, and that a man of his character should examine carefully all his acts. Rab Huna replied that they should not suspect him of being a sinner, and therefore the occurrence was an accident. But they replied, from their point of view that everything comes from God by way of reward and punishment, that they would rather suspect him than cast aspersion upon God’s ways. Finally it was discovered that the incident was a punishment for a sin he had committed in connection with the wine. And when the sin was removed the punishment was removed too. Similarly we find in many places that the Rabbis attribute all things that happen to man as being in the nature of punishments.

The truth of the matter is as we have said, namely that there are things which should be attributed to punishment, other things should be attributed to man’s choice, and still others are made up of necessity and choice, and inferences should not be applied from one class of things to another. Thinkers have not been aware of this situation and made inferences from one class of acts to another, and hence they got hopelessly perplexed without the possibility of a solution. Some of them maintain fate and necessity and deny the contingent, others maintain absolute freedom and deny God’s knowledge. But the truth is as we have said, that there are three kinds of human acts, but man can not distinguish between them, and hence mistakes the one for the other and grumbles and finds fault with God’s ways and doings.

CHAPTER 6

Diligence and effort are useful and necessary in all human acts. This is clearly true of those acts which are contingent. For since they are wholly the result of free choice, without compulsion or hindrance, there is no doubt that effort therein brings about realization. It is also clear that effort is necessary to bring about the realization of those acts which are made up of necessity and freedom. For whenever anything is an effect of two causes, both being requisite for the existence of the thing in question, like wheat which is produced by the work of the farmer and the rain, there is no doubt that the work of the husbandman and his efforts are as necessary a condition of the growth of the wheat as the rain, and without them the wheat would not grow. Similarly ink can not be made without gall-nuts and vitriol, for both are requisite for the existence of ink. This is clear.

As to the necessary acts which are determined, viz. the decrees of fate, as we said before, it might seem that effort has no place in these. But if we consider the matter carefully we shall find that here too effort is proper and necessary. For we have said that the failure to realize a good which comes from effort is due to punishment for an evil deed, or it may be that fate has decreed otherwise and the person’s merit is not sufficient to nullify fate’s decree. Hence when a person sees that he tries very diligently to obtain some good or some end and is not able to attain it, he may be sure that such is the decree of God as a punishment for his sins, or that the stars have so decreed and he has not enough merit to nullify the decree of the stars. This will lead him to examine his conduct and he will return to God and receive compassion. For when a man sees that he labors in vain, and that his work does not succeed, and he is not able to realize the purpose which he strives to attain, he may be sure that this is due to punishment which has been decreed for his sin. He will know then that there is something wrong with his conduct and will try to correct it as soon as possible. The Rabbis say: “If a man sees that misfortune comes upon him, he should examine his deeds, as is said: ‘Let us search and try our ways.’ If after the search he has found the cause, he should do penance, as is said: ‘And return to the Lord.’ ”

But if a man sees that by dint of work and effort he obtains what he expects, and that his work is not in vain, he knows that he is not guilty of any great sin which might prevent him from obtaining his livelihood through his efforts and will not cease from doing all that is in his power to obtain what he desires, since he knows that there is no decree against him, and he will be glad of it.

Hence the Bible says: “When thou eatest the labour of thy hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.” The meaning is, if the labor of your hands and your toil enables you to obtain your livelihood, and your strength is not spent in vain, “happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.” The Rabbis, commenting on this expression, say: “ ‘Happy shalt thou be,’ in this world, ‘and it shall be well with thee,’ in the world to come.” “Happy shalt thou be in this world,” because you will be sure that you are not guilty of any sin serious enough to interfere with your obtaining what you desire through your efforts. “And it shall be well with thee in the world to come,” for your good fortune is an indication that your conduct is good and upright and acceptable to God, since you have attained the degree of the righteous, concerning whom the Bible says: “They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth terror …”

It is clear, therefore, from all this that effort and diligence are desirable in all cases. Hence Solomon praises diligence: “The hand of the diligent maketh rich,” and blames idleness in order to urge man to make all the efforts in his power to obtain his desires. The Rabbis also say: “In order that the Lord thy God may bless thee”—Will He do so even if a man sits in idleness? No, “In all the work of thy hand which thou doest,” thus explaining that God’s blessing comes with effort. The Psalmist also says: “Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.” The inference is that if God does keep the city, the watchman does well to wake, for divine help comes with human watching and effort but not otherwise. Therefore a man should endeavor as far as he can to exert himself in all those matters which can be obtained by human effort, for we know that effort is useful everywhere and in all actions, as we have explained. We must not assume that because there is a particular event which seems destined (as the Rabbis say, commenting on the verse, “If any man fall from thence:” It was destined that he should fall), all things are determined. But we should exert our efforts in all things as though they were dependent on our free choice, and God will do as He thinks fit. So much will suffice as a brief discussion on freedom of will.

CHAPTER 7

We must now treat of the various kinds of Providence. Every one who professes a divine religion is obliged to believe that God provides for the individuals of the human race, that He takes notice of their particular acts, and rewards and punishes individuals and classes. This is a fundamental belief of all divine religions.

Whether according to rational speculation also this is possible, requires examination. If the opinion of the Philosopher is correct, who says that God’s knowledge does not embrace particulars, it follows a fortiori that He takes no notice of individuals to punish them for disobedience. But we have decided, as a result of proofs conclusive to every intelligent man, that God knows all existing things and all individual acts. The point that requires investigation is this: Granting that God knows individuals and their acts, does He take notice of them and pay each one according to his conduct, or does He know them as He knows the individual animals? Since His knowledge embraces everything that exists and happens in the world, and nothing great or small is hidden from Him, He necessarily knows the animals, but He takes no notice of them individually to reward or punish them for their deeds, He provides for the individuals as part of the species which He preserves, and no more.

The motive which has led men who admit God’s knowledge to deny providence is the unjust distribution in the world, according to them, of the world’s goods and evils, for we find good men faring as if they acted like wicked men, and vice versa. This difficulty led Job to think that God pays no attention to the individual man, and that there is no difference between the good and the bad in the human race, as there is none in the animal species: “It is all one—therefore I say: He destroyeth the innocent and the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly, He will mock at the calamity of the guiltless. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked; He covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if it be not so, who then is it?” Job says there is one reason which leads him to think that God’s providence does not attach to the individuals of the human species, and that He destroys both the innocent and the guilty and makes no distinction between the righteous and the wicked, and that reason is that he sees the scourge and misfortune befalling those who are innocent of sin, and putting them to death suddenly and mocking them and making trial of them. The wicked men, on the other hand, prosper, so that the earth is given into the hand of the wicked, and he, as it were, covers the faces of the judges, and makes them not to see, since they are not permitted to exercise justice upon him. This shows that there is no one in the world who takes notice of the individual. Hence Job finishes with the words, “If it be not so, who then is it?” i. e. if it is not so, then who is the leader who does such wrong or allows its being done?

The prophets too, who believe in Providence and preach it to the world, and the wise men believing in the Torah complain of these two situations, the prosperity of the wicked and the adversity of the righteous. The two cases are not indeed of the same gravity. The complaint of the prosperity of the wicked is very real and serious, for all people see with their eyes the wickedness of the bad man, his idolatry, licentiousness, bloodshed, open violence and injustice without the fear of God, and yet he prospers. This leads all men to doubt Providence, and they say, “Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?” The complaint about the adversity of the righteous is not so serious, because wrongdoing is not visible to everybody, and all people know “that there is not a righteous man upon the earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not,” whether little or much. If then the righteous man meets with misfortune, they are not surprised, for they say, may be he has sinned secretly when no one saw him but God—“If a man profanes the name of God secretly, he is punished openly”—or may be he sinned in thought. In this connection the Rabbis say: “If one says to a woman, Thou art married to me, provided I am a wicked man, she is married to him even if he is as righteous as Rabbi Akiba, for it is possible that he thought of idolatry in imagination.” It is clear from this that not everybody can judge whether a given person is a righteous man or not, for man judges by appearance and thinks the man is righteous, but God sees into the heart and knows that he is not righteous, but wicked.

From the expression of the Tanna in the treatise “Abot” it is also clear that the problem of the adversity of the righteous is not as serious as that of the prosperity of the wicked. For he says: “We do not know anything about the tranquillity of the wicked,” i. e. we do not know the reason of the prosperity of the wicked. And then he says, “And neither do we know of the misfortunes of the righteous,” i. e. one might suppose that we do know the reason for the sufferings of the righteous, but that is not so. We infer this interpretation from the expression, “and neither,” when he might have said, “nor.” This indicates that the complaint about the adversity of the righteous is not so serious, for the world does not know who is a really righteous person. The only one who can properly make the complaint, is the one who knows in himself that he is a truly righteous man. Thus Jeremiah says: “But Thou, O Lord, knowest me, Thou seest me, and triest my heart toward Thee” … Job, too, complained of God’s judgment because he felt that he was a righteous man.

The fault of Job’s companions was that they ascribed evil to Job, because they knew of no explanation why evil should befall a righteous man, except that he is really wicked, though they were able to explain good coming to a wicked man. Job, who knew his own righteousness, was not satisfied with their explanation. This is why Elihu became angry, as we read: “Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and had condemned Job.” The meaning is, they knew no explanation why evil should befall a righteous man, unless God was unjust, and therefore they condemned Job and accused him of wickedness. This is why God said to Eliphaz: “My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken of Me the thing that is right, as My servant Job hath.” The meaning is, Job believed that evil may befall a truly righteous man, and in this he was right. His error consisted in the fact that, not knowing the explanation of this, he accused God of injustice if He had notice of the individual man, or he denied Providence, for he did not know how it was possible that misfortune should befall the righteous with God’s knowledge, unless God was unjust. Then when Elihu showed him that there must be Providence, and charged him with sin because he had accused God of wrong, he changed his mind and believed that evil may befall a righteous man with the knowledge of God, and yet without any injustice on God’s part. For God may test the righteous man to find whether he served God for love and would think nothing of bearing pain and trouble, no matter how great, for the love of God, and would not grumble against God’s treatment of him. Job’s sin was that he did grumble against God and accused Him of wrong.

Thus were verified the words of Satan, who said: “Doth Job fear God for nought?” The test of the righteous, whether he serves God for love, is not when he is prosperous, but when he endures misfortune for love of God. When Job found this out from God, who said to him: “Wilt thou even make void My judgment? Wilt thou condemn Me that thou mayest be justified?” and the rest of that answer, in which God showed Job that he was guilty of sin in charging God with weakness or limitation or injustice, he admitted his error and said: “I know that Thou canst do everything, and that no purpose can be withholden from Thee.” The meaning is, I know that it is impossible to charge Thee with weakness or inability, for Thou canst do everything, and canst realize Thy will. Nor can one charge Thee with wrongdoing because of want of knowledge, for no purpose can be withholden from Thee and Thy knowledge embraces all things. Hence wrong can not come from Thee, since Thou canst do everything and art wise in everything. He ends up by saying: “Wherefore I abhor my words, and am comforted …,” i. e. Job despised all the desires of the world and its goods, and was comforted for the suffering which he had endured, sitting in dust and ashes, because he knew that it was for his good.

The purpose of the book of Job is to answer these two questions. And since the solution of these questions is essential to a divine law, the chief of the prophets saw fit to compose this book, namely the book of Job, in dialogue form, representing wise men endeavoring to solve these two questions in various ways, the most important arguments of whom I shall mention briefly.

But since these two problems can not be solved without first proving the existence of Providence, I will first speak briefly of the arguments for Providence found in this book, i. e. Job, and elsewhere. There are three kinds of proof in favor of Providence. One kind consists of arguments derived from the providence which exists over the general things. The second takes its arguments from the providence which exists over particular things; while the third kind uses arguments derived from the intellect. I will speak of each of these in a separate chapter.

CHAPTER 8

I. Arguments derived from general things:

1. The first argument is derived from the visibility of the dry land. He who denies Providence maintains that the world has always been going on in accordance with the laws of nature which we observe to-day, holding that there is no one who can by his will force things to behave against their nature. As against a person of this class we can use the visibility of dry land as an argument to show that the world was created by a voluntary agent.

According to the nature of the elements the earth should be covered with the element water, and there would then be neither plants nor animals. The visibility of the dry land is therefore a proof of the existence of a voluntary agent who compels nature to do His will. This is the first argument which God mentioned to Job when He began to speak to him: “Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou hast the understanding.” The meaning is this: He who believes in the eternity of the world holds to this opinion because he applies what he observes to-day in the particular objects of nature to the whole of creation. But this is not correct. For if the world were eternal and had always been going on according to the laws of nature observable today, without any interference of a voluntary agent, we would necessarily expect that that which nature requires should at some time exist actually. Now nature requires that the earth should be covered with water. If then the world is governed by nature, why does it never happen that the whole earth should be covered with water? We must say, therefore, that the element water is always forcibly kept away from its natural place. But this can not be due to nature, for by nature the element should realize at some time its natural tendency, and at that time there would be neither man nor animal nor plant. And if this condition was realized at some time in the past, the question arises, who compelled the element water to depart from its own nature in order that the existing plants and animals might come into being for the sake of man? This is proof positive that the world is the work of a voluntary agent and has not always been going on naturally as it does to-day, but that it came into existence through a voluntary agent.

This is what God meant when He said to Job: “Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?” That is, Thou Job who thinkest that the world was not made by a voluntary agent, but has always been going on according to nature, “Declare, if thou hast the understanding,” where wast thou, or the human race, when the element earth was the base of all the elements, i. e. was covered by water and surrounded by all the elements, as its nature demands that it should be the foundation of everything? Thou must necessarily admit that the earth became visible through a voluntary agent. And when the land became visible, “Who determined the measures thereof, if thou knowest? Or who stretched the line upon it?” That is, Who determined that just so much of the element earth should appear, no more and no less? And again, “Whereupon were the foundations thereof fastened?” That is, what natural law made it necessary that earth should stand above water? “Or who laid the cornerstone thereof?” It is customary in the creation of great edifices to have the cornerstone laid by a king or prince to the accompaniment of bells and cymbals and stringed instruments and the timbrel and the harp, so that the building may stand permanently. Hence he says in rhetorical fashion, who was the prince who laid the earth’s cornerstone, when the stars were the musicians and the singers and all the sons of God shouted aloud, i. e. the earth became an element in this manner, “when the morning stars sang together”? Then he adds, “Or who shut up the sea with doors?” That is, who is the prince who shut up the sea with doors that it should not return and cover the earth, as I have done? And he adds by way of explanation, “And broke for it My decree,” i. e. I changed for it the decree of nature, “And set bars and doors, and said: Thus far shalt thou come, but no further.…” The meaning of the entire passage is that the appearance of the dry land and its remaining permanently in that condition are a proof that there is a voluntary agent who maintains the world with His will and not merely in accordance with impersonal nature.

Jeremiah also, reproving his generation because they had no fear of God and thought that there was no personal being who provided for the world and acted with will, but that the world was ruled by natural necessity, spoke to them in the same strain: “Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding, that have eyes and see not, that have ears, and hear not: Fear ye not Me? Saith the Lord; Will ye not tremble at My presence? Who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea, an everlasting ordinance, which it can not pass …” The prophet means that the mind is compelled to acknowledge that the appearance of the dry land shows that the world was made by a voluntary agent and is not simply the work of impersonal nature. Our Rabbis also say in “Bereshit Rabbah:” “When God said, ‘Let the waters be gathered together,’ the Prince of the Sea rose up before God, and said: ‘Lord of the universe, I fill the whole world.’ At once the Lord struck him and put him to death, as is said: ‘He stirreth up the sea with His power.’ ” The Rabbis use the expression, “Prince of the Sea,” to denote the substance of water. He fills the universe, i. e. the natural tendency of water is to cover the earth, but the latter appears above the water by the will of God. Hence they say further that in the future God will restore them to their places, thus indicating that the appearance of dry land is not due to nature, but to the will of a being who made the world and maintains it. Since that which is natural must be realized at some time, they say that in the future God will restore them to their proper places. This is proof conclusive that the universe is maintained by the will of God and not by nature. God provides for it and governs it with righteousness and justice.

The Psalmist also argues in the same way: “He loveth righteousness and justice; the earth is full of the loving-kindness of the Lord.” The meaning is, although God loves righteousness and justice, i. e., those things which follow the necessity of nature, nevertheless the earth is full of the loving-kindness of the Lord, i. e. it can not be denied that the world is maintained by kindness and will. And the proof is again derived from the appearance of the dry land: “He gathereth the waters of the sea together as a heap.” Then he adds: “Let all the earth fear the Lord … For He spoke, and it was.” That is, since the world came into being and continues in being by the order and command of a voluntary agent and not by nature, there is in this an important argument for Providence, upon which the whole Psalm is built. “The Lord looketh from heaven; He beholdeth all the sons of men. From the place of His habitation He looketh intently … That considereth all their doings.” The meaning is, since the appearance of the dry land so as to produce plants and animals for man’s need is due to the will of a personal being, we can infer from this that God provides for man more than He does for the lower animals. The latter are provided for as species, while man is provided for as an individual, by the will of God and not merely by nature. For, “A king is not saved by the multitude of a host; a mighty man is not delivered by great strength,” as is the case among the lower animals, and as nature requires. This being so, it is clear that though all the lower animals are provided for as species, man is looked after as an individual.

2. The second argument derived from general phenomena is the one taken from the phenomenon of rain. At first sight it does not seem to be a real argument in favor of individual Providence of the human race. But since we find that Eliphaz mentions it in his first speech and Elihu in his fourth, and God confirms it in His first answer, we must explain the nature of the argument derived from rain.

It is clear that sublunar nature can not exist without rain. Rain is required to make plants grow so as to supply food for animals. It is also required to supply moisture to the bodies of animals that they should not dry up and become black from the great heat of the sun. Eliphaz speaks of both these utilities: “But as for me, I would seek unto God … Who giveth rain upon the earth, So that He setteth up on high those that are low, and those that are black are exalted to safety.” The meaning is, there are two benefits in rain. One is that the rain makes the low plants grow high above the earth, and the other is that He “Sendeth waters upon the fields,” in the inhabited parts of the earth. This is in order that the bodies of those who become black from the heat of the sun should become moist and be able to maintain themselves—“Those that are black are exalted to safety.” Elihu also alludes to this when he says: “Which the skies pour down and drop upon the multitudes of men,” and in the sequel describes more fully the wondrous phenomenon of rain.

Rain is indeed necessary for the existence of all animals in general, but since all animals exist for the sake of man, the rain too is for the sake of man. Now the existence of rain can not be ascribed to nature, because it is not a thing which occurs every year at the same time in the same way, like the other natural phenomena. Rain comes at different times, in different ways, in a wonderful manner, not uniformly and naturally. For when there has been no rain for a long time and the drought is very great, we would not expect the air to become moist again and send up vapors. This shows that the coming of rain at different times is not the work of nature, but is due to the will of a personal being. God in speaking to Job alludes to this argument. Job having said: “When He made a decree for the rain,” from which it would seem that he thought the rain was governed by natural law, God replied: “Hath the rain a father? Or who hath begotten the drops of dew?” The meaning is, has the rain a natural law, as you say, which is like a father begetting it to make plants grow in a determinate manner in order to supply all animals with food? Or what is that nature which must always beget drops of dew when there is no rain in order to moisten the bodies of animals in the inhabited parts of the earth? For you can not deny that this is not a purely natural phenomenon.

Nor can its origin be ascribed to chance, for chance phenomena do not happen regularly to maintain the existence of the world in so perfect a way as we observe in experience. But since it is not due to nature or to chance, it remains that it is due to the will of a personal being, God, who provides for the human species and maintains plants and animals for the need of man. This Providence takes care of the species. Nevertheless when we see that rain is brought down sometimes through the instrumentality of perfect men like Elijah and Honi ha-Me‘aggel, there is no doubt that it shows special providence so far as that individual is concerned, and is not simply a natural phenomenon. Hence the Rabbis say: Three keys have not been handed over to intermediaries, the keys of fertility (childbirth), of rain, and of the resurrection of the dead. The meaning is that these three matters are not controlled by purely natural laws. (Fertility denotes bearing of children by a barren woman.)

The prophets also cite rain as a sign of Providence. Jeremiah says: “But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted, and gone. Neither say they in their heart: ‘Let us now fear the Lord our God, that giveth the former rain, and the latter in due season; that keepeth for us the appointed weeks of the harvest.’ ” The Psalmist says: “Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth.” For rain can not come unless the wind blows, covering the heaven with clouds and carrying them from place to place, whithersoever God wills to take them. Amos, reproving the people because they denied Providence, says: “And I also have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest; and I caused it to rain upon one city and caused it not to rain upon another city,” intimating that this is proof that rain is due to God’s will. The Rabbis say: “Greater is the day of rain than the day of the resurrection of the dead. For the resurrection is for the righteous only, whereas the wondrous phenomenon of rain benefits the righteous as well as the wicked.” They mean to say that as the resurrection is not a natural phenomenon, neither is the rain purely a phenomenon of nature, but is dependent upon the will of a personal being, and gives indication of Providence which is renewed every year according to the will of God.

One might say, however, that this does not point to individual providence but to providence for the species, as they say that rain comes alike to the righteous and the wicked, hence the prophet says: “Ask ye of the Lord rain the time of the latter rain,” for the rain which comes as a result of prayer is a sure indication of Providence. For the same reason Elihu cites the rain which comes in answer to public prayer: “Which the skies pour down and drop for the sake of the multitudes of men.” This shows that the rain comes not as a natural thing but providentially, in answer to the prayers of the many. In the same way Providence can be proved with certainty from the rain which comes in answer to the righteous and pious men of every generation and from examples of divine providence which attaches to each man according to his perfection or to the many according to their perfection. David also says: “In the day that I called, Thou didst answer me; Thou didst encourage me in my soul with strength.” That is, because it is a sure sign of Providence. Moses also cites the acceptance of public prayer as a proof of Providence: “For what great nation is there, that hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is whensoever we call upon Him?”

CHAPTER 9

II. The proofs which are derived from special and particular events in human life are three in number.

1. Many clever and shrewd persons endeavor with appropriate means to realize their purposes in doing harm to a given person, but fail; the very means they employ for harm often prove to be causes for good, as in the case of the brothers of Joseph. The very means they employed to do harm to Joseph brought about his success. Similarly the very means that Saul used to ruin David were the cause of his success: “For Saul said: ‘Let not my hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.’ ” This very thing spread his fame among all Israel as a strong man, a fighting man who was successful in his battles. Such instances prove without a doubt the reality of Providence, particularly in the case of those who are weak and without help, as the Psalmist says: “Who executeth justice for the oppressed.”

The Rabbis say: “A certain heretic asked Rabbi Joshua son of Hanania, ‘How can a lamb maintain itself in the midst of seventy wolves?’ Rabbi Joshua replied: ‘Great is the Shepherd who protects it.’ ” The heretic expressed his astonishment at the fact that all the nations aim to do harm to Israel, as wolves aim to harm the lamb, and yet their purpose is not realized. The reply was that it is the Shepherd who protects them, namely the divine Providence which looks out for them. This shows that the evil which comes to men also comes through divine providence, since we see many wicked people trying to do harm to the simple without success. This is a proof that the simpletons are preserved by Providence and not by their own wisdom, as David says: “The Lord preserveth the simple.” Eliphaz also mentions this proof: “He frustrateth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands can perform nothing substantial. He taketh the wise in their own craftiness; and the counsel of the wily is carried headlong. They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope at noonday as in the night. But He saveth from the sword of their mouth, even the needy from the hand of the mighty. So the poor hath hope.” God confirmed this statement in His first answer: “But from the wicked their light is withholden …” The meaning is, it is withholden from the wicked to realize their purposes, which he calls their light. If there were no Providence we would expect the wicked to realize their purposes, since they employ the appropriate means to the end. In the arts we see that the purposes are realized because the artisan employs the appropriate means. If the purposes of the wicked are not realized, there is proof therein of Providence.

2. The second proof is derived from the special punishments which come upon the wicked corresponding to their offences. This proves that there is a being who takes notice and judges justly. For instance, if a person injures another financially, he is himself injured financially. If he injures him physically, for example, cuts off his hand, or blinds his eye, his own hand is cut off, or his eye is blinded. And if one kills another, he is killed. So we observe in all punishments that they fit the crime. Thus the Egyptians wronged Israel by throwing them into the water: “Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river.” For a punishment they were drowned in the Red Sea. Similarly when the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, it was said to Ahab: “In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.” For David’s wrong of lying with Bathsheba, he was told: “And he shall lie with thy wives.” Similarly the Tanna says: “Thou wast drowned because thou didst drown others.” This shows that God punishes a man in a manner corresponding to his deeds. Jeremiah says: “Great in counsel, and mighty in work.” “Great in counsel,” because He contrives means and makes far-flung combinations in order to punish the sinner according to the measure of his sin and after the manner thereof, “according to his ways.” The expression, “according to his ways,” has also another meaning: A person follows an evil way, and makes special effort to harm his neighbor. He is punished even if he does not succeed in doing the harm intended. For since the failure of his effort to do harm is not due to him but to God’s providence who preserves the simple, He punishes him because he followed an evil way, though his intention was not realized. “According to the fruit of his doings,” means that God punishes a man for the consequences of his deeds as affecting his neighbor, even though there was no deliberate effort on his part, but merely a word, “as a madman who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death …” He is punished for the harmful result which comes to his neighbor, whether by his deliberate effort or not. This proves beyond a doubt that God looks after and judges the wicked, since He punishes them according to their ways.

This is the meaning of the Psalmist’s words: “The Lord hath made Himself known, He hath executed judgment …” The meaning is, We know that God does justice when the wicked man is punished for the evil which he does and the harm which he causes to others: “In the net which they hid is their own foot taken.” This matter is explained in many passages in the book of Psalms: “The wicked have drawn out the sword … Their sword shall enter into their own heart.” And the Rabbis expatiate upon the matter at length. Thus they say, commenting on the verse: “And God seeketh that which is pursued:” God always seeketh him who is pursued, even if the righteous pursues the wicked. The prophet also testifies to this: “For three transgressions of Moab, yea, for four, I will not reverse it: because he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime.” This is not because of the goodness of the king of Edom, but solely because he was the persecuted. We also find frequently in the prophetic books warning of punishment of the wicked, corresponding to their crimes. Isaiah says: “But ye said: ‘No, for we will flee upon horses,’ therefore shall ye flee; and: ‘we will ride upon the swift;’ therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.” Joel says: “And they have cast lots for My people; and have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine and have drunk … behold, I will stir them up from the place whither ye have sold them … and I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the men of Sheba …” Our Rabbis also say: “In the measure which one employs for others is it measured out to him.” This is a conclusive proof of Providence that should make a great impression upon those of little faith.

3. The third proof is found in the words of Elihu, and is taken from the information which comes to man concerning particular matters in a dream: “In a dream, in a vision of the night … Then He openeth the ears of men …” Then he explains the reason: “That men may put away their purpose, and that He may hide the body from man.” The meaning is, In order to keep man away from the evil deed in which he is entangled, by concealing from him the corporeal things and the shameful attributes, so as to separate him from them. Then he explains the benefit which follows from this in this world and the next: “That He may keep back his soul from the pit”—i. e. in the next world; “And his life from perishing by the sword”—in this world. Or it may be that both expressions refer to this world, and “keep back his soul from the pit,” refers to natural death, while “his life from perishing by the sword,” has reference to accidental death. Now this information which comes to a man in a vision of the night is conclusive proof of individual Providence over the human race. It is not general providence, since it concerns particular individual things, and the other species have not got it. If it were due to general providence, it would have to exist also in other species beside the human and would not concern itself with particular things.

CHAPTER 10

III. The arguments derived from the intellect are of two kinds. The one is derived from a consideration of the recipient, and the other from a consideration of the giver.

1. The first is as follows: The intellectual power in man can not have been intended merely for the preservation of the species, for we see that the other species are preserved without it. Since therefore we see that man has this superiority to the lower animals, it is unlikely that he would be abandoned to himself and no notice be taken of his particular affairs, as is the case with the lower animals, since he is superior to them in knowledge.

To this argument God alludes in His first answer to Job, where He first enumerates the benefits He bestows upon the various animal species in providing for each one specially, as distinct from the other species, by preserving it or by giving it a peculiar perfection different from that of other species: “Who provideth for the raven his prey … Who hath sent out the wild ass free? Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? Or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?… Hast thou given the horse his strength?” Then he describes the benefit He bestows upon man in implanting in his nature a peculiar perfection, namely the power to apprehend intelligible concepts: “Who hath given understanding to the mind?” The Hebrew word sekvi denotes the intellectual power in man, as I explained in the First Book. First he says: “Who hath implanted secure wisdom?” alluding to the “prima intelligibilia” or axioms, which were placed in man at the basis of his created nature. These first intelligibilia are the real causes which make demonstration possible, preventing an infinite regress. (The bet, the first letter of the Hebrew word battuhot, is part of the root, as was explained in the First Book.) He says this in order to explain that this gift that was given to man was without doubt intended for a more noble purpose than is realized in the lower animals. This superiority of man indicates that he is taken more notice of by God than any other animal species. This being so, it follows that divine providence should attach to him in a greater degree in accordance with the superiority of his intellect to that of the lower animals. Maimonides has the same idea, namely that the degree of divine providence one enjoys depends upon the degree of intellectual power he possesses. It follows that he who perfects his intellect as far as lies in his power will enjoy a greater degree of divine providence than one who has not done so. On the other hand, he who does not perfect his soul at all and wastes his intellectual energies is reduced to the degree of the lower animals, and loses divine providence altogether. This is a conclusive proof that the measure of divine providence attaching to a rational individual depends upon the perfection of his reason, just as in the beginning, when the human species was created, Providence took more notice of man than of the other animal species in giving him that ability.

David also uses the intellectual faculty in man as a proof that divine providence takes care of the sublunar world: “O Lord, our Lord, what glory is there in Thy name in all the earth!” The word mah (how, what) is derogatory, as in the expression: “and what (mah) are we …” The Psalmist expresses his wonder and says, what worth and glory can there be for Thy name upon all the earth, seeing that “Thou hast put Thy majesty above the heavens,” which are as “strong as a molten mirror,” and permanent and bright without any doubt? I do not see that among the creatures of the earth there is any one through whose creation one may have an idea of Thy dignity and the glory of Thy name. But when I consider the matter carefully, I find that, “Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast Thou founded strength,” i. e. valid propositions or principles, which are innate in man and not derived from experience and habit. These are the “prima intelligibilia,” which are in the mouth of babes and sucklings, or the “sensibilia,” all of which are strong foundations of knowledge and proofs of the reality of Providence; “because of Thine adversaries,” those who say: “The Lord hath forsaken the land,” and, “that Thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger,” who afflicts the poor and the needy, and follows his own desires, since he denies Providence.

Then he explains at length the same topic, which he has stated briefly: “When I behold Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers … What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?” That is, when I behold the heavens and their noble beauty and the structure of the moon and the stars, which Thou hast established, I say in my heart, What is man …? For man is nothing in comparison with their nobility, and he is not worthy of divine providence, since he is a lowly creature made of waste matter and a putrid drop. Then again he contradicts this idea, and says: “Yet Thou hast made him but little lower than the angels” … That is, when I consider the creation of man and see the perfection thereof, namely that he possesses an intellectual faculty by which he comes near to the angels (being only a little below them, they being active intelligences, while he is a potential intelligence)—“Thou hast made him but little lower than the angels”—through the glory and the honor and the beautiful divine crown with which Thou didst crown him, and by means of this power “Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands;” for without it he could not have subdued, and would not have been worthy of subduing, all the animals, which are stronger and mightier than he, and of putting them all under his feet; nor could he have made a way in the sea and a path in the mighty waters; all of which shows that the divine power mingles with him through his intellect and he has some of the knowledge of his Maker,—this being so, I say that from the creations of the earth proof may be derived of the glory of Thy name and Thy worth, since Thou didst bestow a rational faculty upon so coarse a matter. Therein can be seen Thy noble perfection, for the worth of an artisan can be seen when he bestows perfection upon an inferior material which is far from perfection, as I explained in the first chapter of the Second Book. Hence he concludes, “O Lord, our Lord, How glorious is Thy name in all the earth!” The word mah (how, what) in this passage is intended to magnify the attribute, as in the expression: “How (mah) manifold are Thy works, O Lord!” “How (mah) great are Thy works, O Lord!” The meaning is this: Although the heavens are made of a much nobler material than the sublunar creatures, nevertheless, from the rational faculty in man, who is but little lower than the angels, we can infer that Thy name is glorious in all the earth and that Thy providence takes care of the human race in the sublunar world.

2. The second proof is taken from a consideration of the giver, and has two forms. One is based upon God’s wisdom and power and the other upon the consideration that man is the work of His hands.

A. The first, based upon God’s wisdom and power, is as follows: It is an axiomatic proposition that all kinds of perfection should be ascribed to God, and all kinds of defects should be denied of Him. Now it is a sign of perfection in man if he takes care of the work of his hands so that it may completely realize its purpose. It is also a sign of perfection in a master if he takes care of those who are governed by him, whom he guides with righteousness and justice. And if they fail to do this, it is a sign of a defect in the man and the master respectively. A human being may have such defect for lack of knowledge or of power. A master who has the necessary ability may owe his defect to the fact that he is wicked, unjust or indifferent. But God is “Wise in heart and mighty in strength,” as Job himself says. Hence He has absolute power, and there can be no failure of providence on account of weakness and inability to satisfy the needs of those governed by Him. And since He is wise there can be no failure of Providence on account of ignorance. Nor can there be a failure to take care of those under His guidance by reason of wickedness or injustice, as Job argued when he said that God, being one without any one to oppose Him, does wrong, if He so desires, to those dependent upon His rule: “But He is at one with Himself and who can turn Him?” also: “There is no arbiter betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.” For Elihu answered this argument when he said: “Far be it from God, that He should do wickedness, and from the Almighty that He should commit iniquity.” “Far be it from God,” refers to His absolute power, for the word El (God) denotes power. And since He has absolute power, He does no wrong or iniquity by failing to punish evil-doers. Nor can He fail to take care of the work of His hands and reward the righteous because He can not supply their needs, for He is Shaddai (lit. having enough), Almighty, who has enough in His being to bestow upon everything its final perfection. Having enough therefore to supply every one his need, if He did not do so, it would be iniquity. Hence he says: “And [far be it] from the Almighty that He should commit iniquity.”

Then he says: “For the work of man will He requite unto him,” alluding to reward; “And cause every man to find according to his ways,” an allusion to the punishment which comes upon the wicked. Then he emphasizes his argument from power and says: “Yea, of a surety, God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert justice.” That is to say, God has absolute power, as we have seen and as the word El (God) signifies. Also, He can supply every existing thing with the perfection of which it is capable, as is indicated in the word Shaddai (Almighty). But this can not be unless He takes care of the particular acts of man and recompenses every one according to his work, and causes every man to find according to his ways. For if He does not pay the wicked according to his wickedness, it would be wickedness in God, and God does not do wickedness. Also, if He does not reward the righteous according to his ways, it is perversion of justice, and the Almighty does not pervert justice. We must therefore say that God does take notice of human acts, and requites every one according to his ways.

He then proves that God has absolute power: “Who gave Him a charge over the earth?” i. e. Who is in charge of Him, who commanded Him to make the earth, and has more power than He? “Or who hath disposed the whole world?” and is more generous than He? “If He set His heart upon man, If He gather unto Himself his spirit and his breath; all flesh would perish together …” The meaning is, Who is the one in charge, who has more power than He, so that if he set his heart upon the world of nature, all flesh would perish together, and man would return unto dust? There is no other being who can do all this except Him, hence it is clear that He has absolute power. And since this is clear, He can not do this, for it would be wickedness or iniquity, and He would be a hater of justice. Therefore he says: “If now thou hast understanding, hear this; Hearken to the voice of my words. Shall even one that hateth right govern? And wilt thou condemn Him that is just and mighty—Is it fit to say to a king: ‘Thou art base?’ Or to nobles: ‘Ye are wicked?’ That respecteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? For they all are the work of His hands.” The meaning is, Since we have shown that He has power and is king of all, we can not say that a lord who hates justice can govern. Nor can we condemn the one who is absolutely righteous. We can not say to a king who has absolute power that he is base and does iniquity and chooses to be called a wrongdoer. Nor is it proper to call a generous person who can give as much as he pleases, wicked. For he would not choose to be called wicked or iniquitous by withholding the good that is due to the deserving and failing to reward him according to his righteousness. Nor can we say that He does this because He is obliged to respect the great ones of the land, for God respects no persons, as we read, “That respecteth not the persons of princes … For they are all the work of His hands,” and should therefore be judged all of them in an equal manner, since He has the power to do so and there is no one who can prevent Him; “For in a moment they die, even at midnight; the people are shaken and pass away,” through His messengers, “and they [the messengers] take away the mighty and the strong without touching them with the hand.” This proves that “His eyes are upon the ways of a man, and He seeth all his goings. There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.” This is the style of the whole second reply in which Elihu argues to prove the existence of Providence on the basis of God’s power.

B. The second form of the proof, which is based upon the fact that man is the work of God’s hands, is given by Elihu in his fourth speech, as follows: The strongest argument which Job advanced against the idea of Providence is based upon man’s inferiority, “What is man, that Thou shouldest magnify him, and that Thou shouldest set Thy heart upon him, and that Thou shouldest remember him every morning, and try him every moment?” Job thought that because man was despicable and contemptible in the sight of God, He does not pay any attention to his various deeds any more than He takes notice of the acts of the pig, for the same reason. At the same time Job held this to be unjust on the part of God, and an improper withholding from man of that which is his due, since man is the work of God’s hands and is endowed with a rational faculty. For this reason he calls man God’s “handiwork,” because his origin is not due to nature alone, like the lower animals, but to nature and the divine power, i. e. the intellectual power with which man is endowed, as we are told, “Let us make man in our image, etc.” Accordingly Job said that it was injustice in God to deprive man of God’s care on the ground of man’s great inferiority to God; for it is not proper for a perfect being to despise the work of His hands and to reject it because it is inferior. Hence he said: “Is it good unto Thee that Thou shouldest oppress, that Thou shouldest despise the work of Thy hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?” The meaning is, Dost Thou think it is right, because Thou art absolutely perfect and man is lowly and despicable in comparison with Thy greatness, that Thou shouldest deprive him of his due and prevent him from attaining that perfection of which he is capable through the rational power which Thou gavest him, and abandon him by reason of his worthlessness, thus despising the work of Thy hands? By so acting Thou art, as it were, confirming the words of the wicked, who say that right doing is of no benefit.

Accordingly Elihu in his fourth reply undertakes to answer the argument based upon man’s inferiority: “Behold, God is mighty and despiseth not him who is mighty in strength of understanding.” The meaning is, It is impossible that God should ignore the human species by reason of their inferiority. For it is not the nature of a wise agent to abandon the work of his hands because of its inferiority, seeing that he can improve it. “God is mighty,” i. e. He is all-powerful and all-wise in actuality, being able to cause man to attain the measure of perfection of which he is capable, by reason of His great power. Hence it is not possible that He should despise man, who has a strong intellectual potentiality, and is capable of intelligence. Since man has intellect potentially, it stands to reason that God will help him to bring it to actuality and would not rob mankind of the perfection which it is capable of attaining, for this would be a defect in God, since He has the power. As Job said at the end of his argument: “Thou shinest upon the counsel of the wicked,” Elihu says here that it is not so, but the converse is true: “He preserveth not the life of the wicked; but giveth to the poor their right. He withdraweth not His eyes from the righteous; But with kings upon the throne He setteth them forever, and they are exalted. And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction; then He declareth unto them their work, and their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly. He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.” In this way he shows that all evil that comes to the righteous is due to divine providence.

At the end of this reply, following this argument, he concludes by calling attention to the wonderful phenomenon of rain, which indicates wisdom and Providence, and the marvels of the thunder, which is evidence of power, wisdom and power being very strong arguments, which God Himself emphasizes in His two replies. In one answer He proves His wisdom and providence from the wisdom that is evident in the formation of the animals and the providence which is similarly evident in the way in which the various species of animals are provided with their appropriate protection and endowed with their specific form of perfection. This denotes wisdom, which it is the purpose of that reply to prove. In the second reply He proves power: “Wilt thou even make void My judgment? Wilt thou condemn Me, that thou mayest be justified?” The meaning is, Wilt thou deny My providence and say that I do not deal justly with existing things, as if I were not able to do so? “Or hast thou an arm like God? And canst thou thunder with a voice like Him? Deck thyself with majesty and excellency, … And look upon every one that is proud, and abase him. Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place.”

The whole answer proceeds in this style to point out the great power of God to create huge creatures which man is afraid to look at, and at the sight of which he falls full length upon the ground. Hence He says: “Shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him?” All this is to show that since God has absolute power, it is impossible to attribute to Him any inability in any respect. Nor can we attribute to Him lack of knowledge after seeing the extraordinary wisdom contained in all the things which He created. As a result of this Job was reconciled and admitted the two arguments. He acknowledged the argument proving God’s power when he said: “I know that Thou canst do everything,” and the argument proving God’s knowledge in the expression: “And that no purpose can be withholden from Thee.”

CHAPTER 11

As we find that God provides in various ways for the several species of animals in order that the species may reach the most perfect form that is possible for it, so it is reasonable to suppose that He similarly provides for every individual human being according to his degree and worth, in order that he may reach his proper perfection.

In the lower animals we see that God has provided for every one of the animal species in a wonderful manner in giving them all the perfection of which they are capable. This is evident in every one of the animal species. God gave them members and organs and faculties calculated to preserve the species so that it may have permanent existence in a perfect manner. Take as an example the horned animals that eat grass. The material intended for the teeth was used up in the formation of the horns and nature was not able to make teeth for them in the upper jaw, as a consequence of which they can not masticate their food properly. Hence nature gave them the power to chew the cud in order that they might complete in the second mastication what was left undone in the first. Again, those animals that can find food readily digest their food quickly, as for example fish and fowl, as the Rabbis say: In the case of fowl and fish, their food is digested in the time it takes them to be consumed when thrown into the fire. The dog on the other hand, who can not find food readily, digests his food slowly, as the Rabbis say, commenting on the verse, “The righteous taketh knowledge of the cause of the poor:” God knows that the dog can not find food in sufficiency, therefore He makes his food stay in his bowels three days. Beasts and birds of prey, which do not feed on plants, are provided by nature with organs which enable them to feed on what they catch, and with a poison in their claws, which they inject into the flesh of the animal they kill, and which cooks the food and grinds it. The virus of the poison and its heat takes the place of fire and prepares the flesh for food. From the nature of the ant, which is a tiny creature and yet is so active, we can form an idea of God’s wisdom and providence, taking care of all existing things and of every part of them. The camel is provided with a long neck, proportional to the length of his thighs, so that he may be able to pick up his food easily.

All these examples are, indeed, instances of divine providence touching the genus or the species. Nevertheless we can infer from them the existence of divine providence in relation to the individuals of the human species. For we find that the mode of provision varies in the different species in accordance with that which every species requires to attain its perfection. According to its temperament and nature it is provided with organs for its protection and the procuring of food, in order that it may attain the means of perfection intended for it. Those animals which require especial care, like the young raven, are provided with food, and we never see young ravens die of hunger. The roe is protected and provided for at the time of its birth, not one of them being without this protection at that time, as the Rabbis say: “The roe has a narrow uterus, therefore God sends her a snake at the time she has to give birth, which bites her.” And we find similar instances of providence in the various animal species. This proves conclusively that there is one who provides for existing things and gives to each one what it needs for its perfection, as its nature requires and according to its capacity, and not one thing is deprived of that which it needs and is capable of receiving.

But human individuals differ more widely among themselves in respect to the degree of their rational power than one animal species differs from another. One individual is almost on a level with the irrational animals, while another approaches the degree of the angels. Hence it follows that divine providence must vary with the individual in the human species as it varies with the species in the animal kingdom. And it follows from this that the difference between one individual and another in the matter of providence depends upon the difference in their perfection and worth. Hence a person may have such a high degree of perfection that providence takes care of him and God communicates with the person himself in a prophetic revelation or in a dream.

Prophetic revelation is illustrated in the case of Abraham, to whom God said: “Get thee out of thy country … and I will make of thee a great nation …” Communication in a dream is illustrated in the case of Abimelech, who was told in a dream of the night: “Behold thou shalt die, because of the woman whom thou hast taken.” Pharaoh, who was a wicked man, received the divine communication in the shape of plagues, as the Bible says: “And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues …”

Sometimes the divine communication comes to a person through the message of a prophet, as it came to Barak, the son of Abinoam, through Deborah, or to Eli and Saul through Samuel. Sometimes again a person occupies a lower grade, and the divine communication comes to him neither in a prophetic revelation nor through the message of a prophet, but through a divine impulsion, such as Judah experienced when he turned aside to visit his daughter-in-law Tamar, the divine purpose being that Perez and Zerach should be his descendants, or the impulse which came to Abigail to go out to meet David, who knew that it was divine in its origin. Therefore he said: “Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me.” Or the impulse which came to some of the judges to go out to fight and save Israel. Sometimes also such divine impulsion comes to a person so that God may punish him for a previous sin, like the impulse which came to Ahab to go out to fight, the purpose being that he should be killed, as a punishment for the death of Naboth. There are many illustrations of this.

Sometimes persons are afflicted with suffering in the shape of sickness, imprisonment, and the like, either as a warning that they should abandon the evil in which they are enmeshed and return to God, or in order to wipe out the few sins which they have committed. Sufferings of the last kind are used to test those who serve God. If the motive of their service is love, they will accept the suffering gracefully for the love of God. But if the motive of their service is fear of punishment and love of reward, they will grumble against God’s treatment of them and say improper things about Him, as Job did. Job was a God-fearing man, but he served God from love of reward and fear of punishment. Therefore when he was afflicted with suffering he grumbled against God’s judgment. Elihu in his first speech explained to him this type of divine communication: “In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men … Then He openeth the ears of men, and by their chastisement sealeth the decree, that men may put away their purpose, and that He may hide the body from man.” The meaning is, that sometimes divine communication may come to a person in a dream in order to turn him aside from the evil deed in which he is entangled and to conceal from him the corporeal interests, so as to withhold his soul from the pit. He goes on to say that sometimes the divine communication may be made through illness: “He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and all his bones grow stiff,” i. e. he is punished with great pain. He describes at length the pain that he suffers through the sickness, and then says: “He prayeth unto God, and He is favourable unto him, so that he seeth His face with joy; and He restoreth unto man his righteousness.” The meaning is, that when he prays unto God, He shows him favor and restores his righteousness unto him, i. e. He credits him with the knowledge that his illness was the effect of his sins, and therefore he returns to God and acknowledges before Him in a great assembly and in the seat of the elders that his sins were the cause of his illness: “He cometh before men and saith: ‘I have sinned, and perverted that which was right.’ ” And this is accounted to his credit.

Similarly in his last speech Elihu says that sometimes sufferings of a different kind come upon a man, like imprisonment, etc., in order to rouse him up that he may turn away from the sins in which he is caught: “And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction; then He declareth unto them their work and their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly. He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.” Then he concludes the subject: “If they hearken and serve Him, they shall spend their days in prosperity … But if they hearken not, they shall perish by the sword … But they that are insincere in heart lay up anger; they cry not for help when He bindeth them.” The meaning is, that when sufferings, such as imprisonment and the like, come upon a person, it is a divine communication to a man that he should turn away from his sins and also a way of finding out whether he accepts his sufferings gracefully, as a punishment for his sins. If he returns to God and serves Him, God will reward him: “If they hearken and serve Him, they shall spend their days in prosperity … But if they hearken not, they shall perish by the sword …,” i. e. if one does not accept his sufferings gracefully and does not believe in the admonition to return to God, he is doomed to the sword and will expire without knowledge: “But they that are insincere in heart lay up anger; They cry not for help when He bindeth them.” The meaning is, that those who serve God insincerely—“the insincere in heart”—alluding to Job, are exceedingly angry with God for having inflicted suffering upon them, as Job was angry, and do not return to God, “They cry not for help when He bindeth them.” Hence, “Their soul perisheth in youth, and their life as that of the depraved.”

But the afflicted man is delivered from these sufferings through his affliction, i.e. since he has endured the suffering of affliction, “He delivereth the afflicted by His affliction, and openeth their ear by tribulation.” That is, through the tribulation which he suffered on account of the affliction, He opens their ear that they should return to God, and there is no need of imprisonment or other sufferings. But if one does not return to God despite his sufferings and regards them as matters of chance and accident and not as a punishment for his sins, then the Bible tells us what the punishment for that is: “If … ye … will walk with Me as though your sufferings were an accident, then will I also walk with you in the same manner,” i.e. until you understand that it is not accident.

CHAPTER 12

An answer to the complaint about the prosperity of the wicked.

The wicked man is well treated for four reasons, assuming that the person we think wicked is really wicked and the person we think righteous is really righteous.

1. Good things may come to the wicked as a result of general providence, as for example by reason of the fact that it has been decreed that the nation as a whole shall dwell in quiet and tranquillity and its members shall be prosperous. This corresponds to the providence governing the species that is ordered by the heavenly bodies, against which it is unreasonable to grumble. Just as there is no sense in complaining against God that He gave the wicked man hands to do evil with, and perfect organs and good health and strength to be able to indulge in illicit sexual relations, and so on, so it is unreasonable to complain that God does not change the constellations or the decree concerning the nation, in order that the wicked man may not receive benefits through the nation as a whole or the country in which he lives, concerning which it has been decreed that its members shall enjoy tranquillity. Benefits may also come to the wicked in this manner by reason of his own specific horoscope, if he is not so wicked that the astral decree is overruled and is changed from good to evil. This mode is similar to general providence, for the benefit which comes in this way is due to the general law which determines that one born under a given star shall be prosperous.

2. Benefits may come to a wicked man as a result of individual providence. The purpose may be to reward him for some merit of his or for some good deed that he has done. For God is just and upright and does not withhold the reward of any creature. Hence it is proper that He should recompense the wicked man for the good deeds he has done so as to exclude him from spiritual reward and spiritual happiness. This is the meaning of the biblical expression: “And repaveth them that hate Him to their face, to destroy them.” Onkelos translates the above verse: “And repays His enemies for the good deeds which they performed before Him in their life time, in order to destroy them [in the future life].” The Rabbis also say: “If a wicked man is prosperous, it is an indication that he is not absolutely wicked.” Also, “If a person’s sins predominate over his good deeds, he is well treated, as if he had fulfilled the entire Torah.” Another statement is as follows: “The two tears which Esau shed were accounted to his credit, and hence he became the ancestor of the Aluphim …”

This idea is also clearly expressed in the words of the Psalmist: “A brutish man knoweth not, neither doth a man understand this. When the wicked spring up as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish.” It is, as he explains in the sequel, in order that they may be punished eternally: “It is that they may be destroyed forever.” Then at the end he explains the reason for their prosperity. It is, “To declare that the Lord is upright,” and does not withhold its reward from any creature. Ahab was an idolater, and we read concerning him: “But there was none like unto Ahab, who did give himself over to do that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.” And yet because he covered himself with sackcloth and humbled himself before God, the reward for that act of submission was not withheld from him, and the decree was kept in abeyance during his life time, and was realized in the time of his son. God said to Elijah: “Seest thou how Ahab humbled himself before Me?… I will not bring the evil in his days …” Our Rabbis infer from the benefits which come to the wicked in this manner that the righteous will be rewarded in the next world: “If those who transgress His will are treated thus, how much better will be the treatment of those who carry out His will.”

They say also: “As the wicked are rewarded in this world for any slight merit which they have, so the righteous are paid in the world to come.” 

3. Benefits may come to the wicked for the sake of others whom Providence is protecting, good men or wicked as the case may be. Examples of a wicked man well treated for the sake of a good man are: Laban, who prospered for the sake of Jacob; the house of the Egyptian, which was blessed for the sake of Joseph; Lot, who was saved through the merit of Abraham. And not merely Lot, but the inhabitants of Zoar were saved for the sake of Lot, who in turn was saved for the sake of Abraham, as the angel said: “See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow the city …” In this way, sons may be prosperous, though they are wicked, through the merit of their fathers, as Moses said: “Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel, Thy servants.” Similarly fathers may prosper for the sake of their children: “He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on;” “And the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous.” Sometimes a wicked man succeeds in accumulating great wealth and achieving prosperity, so that he may die before his son. On the other hand, the wicked man may live long in order that he may beget a righteous son, as the Rabbis say that God prolonged the life of Ahaz in order that Hezekiah should be descended from him, and there are many instances of this kind.

A wicked man may receive benefits for the sake of a bad man whom God desires to punish through the instrumentality of the former as, for example, God gave prosperity to the wicked Nebuchadnezzar, to Sennacherib and Titus, in order that they might be instrumental in punishing the wicked men of Israel and other nations. In reference to Sennacherib the Bible says: “O Asshur, the rod of Mine anger, in whose hand as a staff is Mine indignation! I do send him against an ungodly nation, and against the people of My wrath do I give him a charge, To take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.” In reference to Nebuchadnezzar it is said: “Thou art My maul and weapons of war, and with thee will I shatter the nations.”

4. Benefits may come to the wicked for their own sake or for the sake of the righteous. For their own sake they are well treated sometimes so as to harden their hearts that they may not repent after having rebelled against and grieved His holy name and committed great wrong. This is what the Rabbis mean when they say that God withholds the ways of repentance from the wicked, or the opposite, namely that God is kind and prolongs their days in order that they may repent.

A wicked man may also be prosperous for the sake of the righteous in order to increase the reward of his righteous contemporaries who, despite the example of the wicked man’s prosperity, continue in their innocence and integrity. For if the wicked man were punished as soon as he commits a wrong act, the righteous men who serve God from love would not receive their due credit, for one might suspect that their worship of God was due not to love, but to the fear of punishment which they see coming upon the wicked. But when one sees that the wicked are not punished as soon as they do evil, he thinks that they will never be punished, and hence every one does as he pleases.

Solomon calls attention to this in Ecclesiastes: “Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.” In these words Solomon expresses the problem. Why is it, he says, that the wicked man is not punished as soon as he does an evil deed? This surely leads to men’s hearts being fully set in them to do evil. Then he answers the question by saying that there are two reasons, as we said, for this situation: “Because a sinner doeth evil a hundred times, He prolongeth his days.” What he means to say is that the reason God prolongs the wicked man’s life is either in order that he may repent, or in order that he may not, as we said before. Then he says that there is another reason: “Though yet I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, that they may fear before Him,” i. e. the reason for prolonging their life is also in order to benefit those who fear God, that they may fear Him and serve Him from love and not from fear of punishment.

These are the reasons why prosperity comes to the wicked. This is on the assumption that we admit both the predicate and the subject, namely that the supposedly wicked is really wicked, and that the supposed benefit is a real benefit. But it is possible to deny the subject. We may say that the person we think wicked is not really wicked. He who knows a man’s inner thoughts may know that he is a righteous man, as the Rabbis say: “If a man says to a woman, ‘You are sanctified unto me as my wife, provided I am a righteous man,’ she becomes his wife, even if he is an absolutely bad man. For it may be that he has repented in his heart.”

We may also deny the predicate, and say that the apparent good is not a good at all, as Solomon says: “Riches kept by the owner thereof to his hurt;” or as Eliphaz says: “The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days,” i. e. it may be that those strokes of fortune which come to him are evils, because he is always in pain and sorrow and worry, as the Rabbis say: “Increase of possessions leads to increase of worry;” or as David says: “Many are the sorrows of the wicked.” Even that which clearly appears to be a good, may not be a good. For example, the hidden treasure under the wall which was about to fall. If the wall fell, the owner would have found the treasure. By divine providence, however, the wall became straight and everybody wondered at the extraordinary good fortune that happened to the wicked man by divine providence, whereas in fact the incident happened to the wicked man’s hurt, to prevent him from finding the treasure. Examples may be multiplied indefinitely.

CHAPTER 13

An answer to the complaint of the adversity of the righteous.

Sometimes men know that their sins are the causes of their sufferings, and yet they complain and grumble against the ways of God. It is like a man whose eye-sight is injured as a result of excessive sexual indulgence, or a sick man who knows that his bad habits are responsible for his illness, and yet he is irritated and complains because of his illness. Solomon had such cases in mind when he said: “The foolishness of man perverteth his way; and his heart fretteth against the Lord.” Joseph’s brothers are a case in point: “What is this that God hath done unto us?” they exclaimed, though in the same breath they said: “We are verily guilty concerning our brother.” There is no need of expatiating on this class of cases. Sometimes God in His mercy waits a long time for the sinner to repent, until the sinner forgets his sin. And then when God brings misfortune upon him for his sin in order to rouse him to repentance, he complains. He has forgotten his sin and thinks that God has forgotten it also, hence he complains that the misfortune came upon him without cause. Men who do not know or remember their sins, wrongly misjudge God. It is like the case of a man who lends his neighbor one thousand zuz. The creditor is kind to the debtor and extends the time of the loan. A long time passes and the debtor forgets the debt. When finally the creditor demands his debt from the debtor, the latter denies it and complains that the creditor is pressing him without cause. The other people, who do not know of the debt, exculpate the debtor, saying that if the debtor owed the money, why did not the creditor demand it before this. The debtor, on the other hand, when he recalls the debt still complains, desiring further extension as before. But this is foolishness, for then God would never collect His debt at all.

The Rabbis had this in mind when they said: “If any one says that God yeilds easily, may there be a yielding of his bowels. God is long-suffering, but He exacts His penalty in the end.” The prophet thought of this when he said: “Behold, it is written before Me; I will not keep silence, except I have requited.” The meaning is, you must not think that because you have forgotten your sins, I have forgotten them also. No, they are written before Me, and I will not keep silence, but will requite the iniquities of the sinners. We are not concerned either with those who forget their sins or with those who are well aware of them and nevertheless complain by reason of their simplicity and folly. Eliphaz says: “For anger killeth the foolish man.”

There are also many people who complain and find fault with God and His ways without any rhyme or reason, though they are supplied with sufficiency for a livelihood. They complain because they have not a great abundance of wealth to enable them to fill their bellies and get drunk with strong wine, and because they have not enough health and strength to be able to indulge freely in eating and drinking and sexual intercourse without discomfort, and live the life of a pig and an ass, complaining that others have more money than they.

Maimonides has already answered these people at length in the twelfth chapter of the third Part of the Guide of the Perplexed. It is clear that complaints of this sort have no justification at all. The general answer to all of them is denial of the subject or the predicate. The person they think to be righteous is not righteous. A fool and a simpleton who forgets himself, or a glutton and a drunkard, or a greedy person who is never satisfied with the money that he has, can not be called a righteous man. For the reality is not as man sees it. Man sees the surface, but God sees into the heart. We can also deny the predicate. What is thought to be evil is not evil. Sometimes a small evil comes to a man so as to save him from a great one, as the Rabbis say, by way of comment on the verse: “I will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord; for Thou wast angry with me …”, which we mentioned above. Elihu says the same thing: “He delivereth the afflicted by His affliction.” We also find often people complaining of a small evil which leads to a great good. This the prophet had in mind when he said: “Though I have trained and strengthened their arms, yet do they devise evil against Me.” In short all such cases can be answered by denying the predicate or the subject.

But even if we assume that the man is really righteous and the evil that befalls him is real evil, there still are instances of evil befalling the righteous, and the reasons are four, similar to the four which we mentioned in discussing the prosperity of the wicked.

1. One reason is general nature, the nature of generation and destruction. Thus the rain floods the righteous as well as the wicked, unless the righteous man stands so high that Providence delivers him from such evil. Or general nature as shown by the stars, if the man is not so meritorious that the prognosis of the stars is overruled. Or it may be that a person is of weak constitution and is always sick. Or he is a member of a low race, or an inhabitant of a country concerning which a certain decree has been declared and the righteous man is involved in the decree and suffers accordingly. For the general decrees of fate which concern a nation come upon the individuals not per se, but by virtue of their being part of the nation in question. And therefore the evils come upon them whether they deserve them or not, as Daniel and his companions were exiled in the captivity of king Jehoiachin, and Jeremiah went into exile in the captivity of Zedekiah. They did not deserve to be exiled personally, but were involved in the decree which was made concerning Jerusalem or the nation.

Sometimes also a righteous man is afflicted with misfortune on account of the nation as a whole, as a punishment for his sin of omission in not asking for mercy for his fellow men, as the Rabbis say that Elimelech, Mahlon and Chilion, the greatest men in their generation, were punished because they did not carry out their duty of praying for mercy for their contemporaries. The reason is because the righteous man ought to follow in the ways of God and desire the continuance of the world as God desires its continuance: “For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God, but rather that he should return from his ways and live.” And if the righteous man does not act in accordance with such desire he is punished.

Sometimes again misfortune comes upon the righteous on account of the nation as a whole, not, however, by way of punishment, but in order to atone for the nation as a whole. God desires the world to continue, and He knows at the same time that the righteous man will accept his sufferings gracefully without grumbling against God’s methods. Therefore God inflicts sufferings upon the righteous as ransom and atonement for the calamity which was destined to come upon the whole nation. Hence the Rabbis say that the death of the righteous is an atonement. We find this idea clearly expressed in the Bible also. God said to Ezekiel: “Moreover lie thou upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it; according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity … and again, when thou hast accomplished these, thou shalt lie on thy right side, and shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah …” The same idea is expressed in the fifty-second chapter of Isaiah, in which Israel is called “My servant:” “Behold, My servant shall prosper;” “Fear not, O Jacob, My servant;” “But thou, Israel, My servant;” “Surely our diseases he did bear, and our pains he carried; whereas we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.” The meaning is that if we see misfortune coming upon the righteous we think that they are due to some guilt of their own, and we wonder; whereas it is not so, the sufferings are not due to their own sins, but are inflicted upon them as an atonement for the whole world or nation or country.

2. Sometimes misfortunes come to the righteous through individual Providence. There is no man in the world so righteous that he does good and never sins. Hence it is possible that he committed certain wrongful acts, with intention at the beginning or the end of the act, and did not think of repenting, or there was no real regret. God now desires to wipe out those transgressions of his with a little suffering in his lifetime, so that he may be free from all sin and may merit the future life. Just as God recompenses the wicked man for his good deeds in this world in order to punish him with eternal destruction, so the righteous man is punished here for the few transgressions of which he is guilty in order that he may enjoy eternal delight. So our Rabbis say: If one has many merits and few demerits, he pays for the few light transgressions in this world, so that he may get his reward in full in the next world.

Sometimes also sufferings come to the righteous through individual Providence in order to protect him from a sin in which he is about to be entangled or which he is ready to commit on account of prosperity: “Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked,” Our Rabbis say in this connection: “Poverty is as becoming to Israel as a red strap to a white horse.” If they have it too good they may kick, as the prophet says: “And multiplied unto her silver and gold, which they used for Baal.”

3. Sometimes the righteous suffer on account of the wicked, as the wicked are sometimes well treated for the sake of the righteous, as we have seen, and this in a variety of ways. Their ancestors may have been wicked and punishment was decreed upon them and their descendants. The punishment must therefore necessarily come upon their descendants whether the latter be wicked or righteous, as all the seed of Eli were punished for the sin of their ancestors, and the result was the death of Ahimelekh and the priests of Nob. The punishment for the sin of Adam continues to be inflicted upon all his descendants, whether they be righteous or wicked, as our Rabbis say: “Four persons died through the instigation of the serpent.” This means that they were not personally guilty of any sin for which they deserved death, outside of the original sin which Adam committed on the advice of the serpent.

Or it may be that the punishment was decreed for the fathers only, and yet it befalls the children also per accidens, even if they are righteous. The father may have been a rich man who lost his wealth by reason of his sins. The result is that the children are poor, though righteous, by reason of the sin of the father. Or it may be the fathers were exiled for their sins, and the children remain in exile because of their fathers’ sin. This is the meaning of the biblical expression: “Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their iniquities.” If the fathers had not sinned, they would not have lost their money, or would not have gone into exile. Their sons would then have remained in their own land, or they would have inherited their fathers’ wealth, provided the sons themselves were not wicked men deserving exile or loss of possessions. They might not have been so righteous as to merit restoration to their own land or acquisition of wealth on their own account, nevertheless if they had been in their own land in the first place they would not have been exiled, and if they had inherited their fathers’ wealth, they would not have lost it. We see, therefore, that the exile or poverty which comes to the fathers for their sins is borne by the children, not that the son suffers for the iniquity of the father, for this would be injustice in God. Ezekiel made this clear when he said: “The soul that sinneth, it shall die; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father with him, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son with him,” unless the sin involves the profanation of the holy name, and is such as might influence for evil the masses who witness it. In that case the punishment follows the children also, as in the case of Eli.

4. Sometimes the righteous man is afflicted with misfortune for his own good. These are called sufferings for love, they are also called trials. They may be of three kinds.

A. First are those sufferings which come upon an absolutely righteous man, who serves God from pure love. To such a man God in His love for him brings suffering to wipe out some impurity or sinful stain in his soul. For a person can not help committing a light sin sometimes, such as does not oblige him to bring an offering, or neglecting the performance of some duty. And even the really righteous man may not think of doing penitence in these cases. Now though these things are not so serious as to require an offering or to deserve punishment, nevertheless they put a stain of impurity upon the soul and lower its degree in the future world. This is the reason why the violation of a law, without intention either at the beginning or at the end, requires atonement, though it does not deserve punishment, as is mentioned in the first chapter of the treatise Shebu‘ot. In such a case God in His love for the righteous man inflicts suffering upon him to wipe out the stain of impurity in the soul in order that she may attain the degree which she deserves through her good deeds, without being hindered by anything.

These sufferings are in reality for the purpose of wiping out sins, neverthless, since no one knows why they come when they do come, they are called trials and also sufferings of love. This is in accordance with the opinion of Nahmanides in his treatise on Reward and Punishment. Quoting the words of Rabbi Ammi, who said, “There is no death without sin, and no suffering without iniquity,” he agrees with him in part and holds that the refutation of R. Ammi’s view applies only to the first part, that there is no death without sin, but not to the second. Hence he holds that sufferings never befall any person unless he is guilty of sin. But when they are such as I have described, they are called sufferings of love; because they are due to God’s love of the person, for He desires that no stain of any slight and unconscious sin should prevent his soul from attaining the degree which it deserves in accordance with its conduct.

B. The second species of punishment under cause number four is explained according to an old opinion well known among us, the opinion held by the Geonim, who say that a person may suffer for no sin at all. Such sufferings are called sufferings of love, because they are not due to sin, and they are also called trial. For God sometimes brings sufferings upon a righteous person to try him in order to see whether he serves God from pure love, as we find in the Bible: “For the Lord your God putteth you to proof, to know whether ye do love the Lord your God …,” or whether he serves God from love of reward and fear of punishment.

Not every man who is sincere and serves God out of pure love in times of tranquillity and prosperity has enough strength of character and will to endure hardship and trouble for the love of God and to serve God in poverty and affliction as he served Him in quiet and tranquillity, without complaining and finding fault with God when trouble comes upon him. Therefore God brings sufferings upon the righteous to find out whether his good deeds coincide with his good intentions. Thus Job was “whole-hearted and upright and one that feared God and shunned evil.” His thoughts and intentions were good, and yet he could not bear actual hardship and trouble for the love of God. When sufferings came upon him he found fault with God, and thus verified the words of Satan who said: “Doth Job fear God for nought? Hast not Thou made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath?” It thus became known that his service of God was motivated by love of reward and fear of punishment, and not by perfect love. Hence when God brings sufferings of this kind upon a righteous man they are called sufferings of love, because in this way those persons who say that the righteous men who are prosperous do not serve God from love will be convinced when they see that those righteous men serve God in time of suffering as they did in times of tranquillity.

This is what the Rabbis have in mind when they say: “If a person sees suffering coming upon him, he should search his conduct, as is said: ‘Let us search and try our ways.’ If after searching he finds something wrong, he should repent, as it says, ‘and return.’ If, however, he has not found any wrong in his conduct, he should charge his suffering to neglect of the study of the Torah, as is said: ‘Happy is the man whom Thou instructest, O Lord, and teachest out of Thy law.’ If he can not find that he is guilty of neglect of the study of the Law, then it is certain that they are sufferings of love, as is said: ‘For whom the Lord loveth, He correcteth.’ And what is his reward if he accepts his sufferings with love? ‘He will see his seed, prolong his days.’ And not only this, but he will retain all that he has learned, as is said: ‘And the purpose of the Lord will prosper by his hand’.”

In this passage the Rabbis included all kinds of sufferings which come to a person. They say, “If one sees that sufferings come upon him,” i. e. upon him specially, that is if he sees that they are not determined by general nature, as discussed under the first head, but that he is singled out specially and not as coming under the general rule, then he should search his conduct, to see if they belong to the species discussed under the second head, namely punishment for intentional transgression. He must therefore examine his conduct, and if he finds anything, he must repent and return to God, who will have mercy upon him. If after searching he does not find, i. e. he does not find that the suffering can come under the second head, he must charge it to neglect of the Torah, i. e. to ignorance and unintentional wrong. He may have failed to recognize his sin because he was not sufficiently familiar with the Torah and its commandments, as the Rabbis say, “An ignoramus can not be a pious man.” Or he can not understand in what way suffering may come upon him, though he is not guilty of sin. This comes under the third head in our discussion. “But if he can not charge it to this either, then they must be sufferings of love, as is said: ‘Whom the Lord loveth, He correcteth,’ ” The meaning is, If he is a wise and absolutely righteous person, and can not charge his sufferings either to the second or to the third cause, i. e. to lack of knowledge as to certain sins, then his sufferings must surely be those of love. That is, they come under the fourth head which we are now considering. It may be the first class under this head, viz. that they are due to God’s love, whose purpose is to wipe out any light sin which requires atonement, so as to cleanse the stain and uncleanness of the soul, in order that it may attain to the degree it deserves, as a father chastises the son whom he loves, not in order to have the satisfaction of punishing him, but in order to purify him of his impurity for his own good, so that he may attain a high station, as we read: “Even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.” Or it may be the second class, to try him, so as to see whether he can endure hardship and trouble for the love of God without finding fault with His treatment. Hence the statement of the Rabbis, “And what is his reward if he accepts them with love, etc.?” For if a person accepts suffering with good grace, his reward is increased. For all people realize through his example how far the love of God can go, and are thus inspired to serve God from pure love.

C. The third kind of suffering is called suffering of love in the true sense. These are sufferings which come upon a person not to wipe out any sin he has committed, for he is not guilty of any sin, having had his stain wiped out; nor in order to put him to the proof, for he has already been put to the proof. But God in His loving kindness brings suffering upon him, not merely such as everybody can see, but also such as nobody knows, like the sacrifice of Isaac, which took place on one of the mountains, where nobody saw but God. This is in order to increase his reward, that he may deserve the reward for good deeds and not merely for good intentions.

One may object against the second and third kinds by saying that since God knows whether the person will stand the test or not and, in the third case, that he serves God from pure love with all his heart and soul and might, as is shown by the test, why the need of suffering? The answer is that the reward of him who actually endured pain and trouble for the love of God can not be the same as that of him who has not actually endured. This is what the king had in mind when he said: “Let not him that girdeth on his armour boast himself as he that putteth it off.” The meaning is, Let not him who has not actually shown bravery, though he is armed and ready to show it, boast himself as much as he who has actually shown it and is now taking off his armor.

For this reason God often brings punishment upon a righteous man to habituate him to combine good intentions with good deeds, so that he may earn greater reward, for practice will strengthen his heart in the love of God. For an act makes a greater impression upon the soul than intention without act, and hence the person earns the reward for deed and intention instead of the reward of intention alone.

Habituation in God’s service is called trial, as Maimonides writes. The biblical expression, “That He might afflict thee, to prove thee,” Maimonides interprets: “To habituate thee to endure actually hardship and trouble for the love of God.” He interprets in the same way the verse in Exodus: “For God is come to prove you.” God, he says, came with awful thunders and fearful lightnings for two reasons. One is to habituate you to endure actually hardship and trouble and pain for the love of God, for practice makes a strong impress on the soul, inspiring it with the love of God. And when your good intention and good word—“We will do and obey”— are realized in act, you will have the reward due to the one who is habituated to do good deeds, and not merely the reward of good intention. The second reason is to call your attention to the greatness of the punishment which is inflicted upon him who transgresses the words of God, hence the words, “And that His fear may be before you.”

Similarly the verse, “For the Lord your God putteth you to proof,” is explained by him to mean that God habituates you in the ways of His service in order that love of God may be firmly implanted in your hearts, and that you may also be rewarded for good deeds, when it becomes clearly known that you serve God from love and are not led astray by the words of a certain prophet or dreamer of dreams because of the imaginary advantage which you see in the worship of other gods, and the prosperity and wealth and honor derived from it—considerations which induce people to worship idols. Moses says: “For ye know how we dwelt in the land of Egypt … and ye have seen their detestable things … lest there should be among you man, or woman, … whose heart turneth away … from the Lord our God, to go to serve the gods of those nations.” The meaning is, though you saw that their detestable things and idols are wood and stone, you at the same time saw the great quantities of silver and gold which those idolatrous nations had. Therefore I fear lest some of you may be enticed to follow them because of your desire for that prosperity. Hence the expression, “Lest there should be among you …” The same idea is expressed in the words, “For the Lord your God putteth you to proof.” The meaning is that if you will not be induced to follow after the prosperity in question, you will habituate yourselves to the quality of love, and your reward will be greater because of the hardship you will actually endure for love of Him, and it will be known that your service is motivated by pure love and not by the desire of reward and the fear of punishment. This is sufficient as an explanation of the sufferings which are inflicted for the second reason.

The meaning of the word trial, which is mentioned in the sacrifice of Isaac, belongs under the third division. God desired that the good intention in the mind of Abraham should be realized in actuality, so that he might be rewarded for good deed and good intention and not merely for good intention alone. Now inasmuch as the knowledge of a thing after it is realized is necessarily different from the knowledge of the thing before it is realized, the Bible says: “For now I know that thou art a God-fearing man,” though there was no new knowledge in God which He had not before. A similar expression is: “Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon.” The knowledge was not new, but the actual circumstance was new, which called attention to the truth of what was known before. So in the case of Isaac, God said, the circumstance has actually come to pass which shows that you are a God-fearing man, and that you serve Him from pure love.

As to such knowledge, we have explained in the third chapter of this Book that though it necessitates change in us it does not imply change in God. The Torah uses the expression, “I know,” a human form of speech, because it was not given to angels, and therefore has to use expressions which we can understand. This is the meaning of the word trial wherever it occurs in the Bible. The expression, “Now I know,” is used because it was then that the actual incident occurred which showed what He knew already, namely that Abraham was God-fearing and served God from love and not from the fear of punishment. For there can not be a greater punishment than to kill one’s only son, after he has reached the age of thirty-seven. Nevertheless Abraham did not hesitate to do this for the love of God. This is a conclusive proof that he served God from pure love. Hence the Bible describes him as a friend, “The seed of Abraham My friend.”

These are the real sufferings of love, of which the Geonim speak, i. e. such as God in His love brings upon a righteous man to increase his reward. In other words, the suffering is inflicted in order that the person may actually endure trouble and hardship for the love of God, and be rewarded for good deeds and not merely for good intentions. These are not the kind of sufferings which were inflicted upon Job, nor is it the same kind of trial as came to Hezekiah, concerning whom it is said: “Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that He might know all that was in his heart.” For Hezekiah failed to stand the test, as the Bible testifies: “But Hezekiah rendered not according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up …” These sufferings and trials belong to the second class only. But those sufferings which belong to the third class come only to absolutely righteous men, as our Rabbis say in Bereshit Rabbah. Commenting on the verse in the Psalms: “The Lord trieth the righteous,” they say, “When a potter examines his kiln, he does not use the weak jars which break as soon as he knocks on them; he uses the good jars, which do not break no matter how many times he knocks on them, hence we read: ‘God proved Abraham.’ ”

When such sufferings come upon the righteous, like Rabbi Akiba and his associates, they do not constitute injustice in God, on the contrary, they indicate mercy and kindness, because He desires to reward those who serve Him from love for good deeds and not merely for good intentions, for a person does not reach the degree of pure love until he actually endures trouble and hardship for the love of God.

This, then, is the answer to the objection which is raised against this third form of suffering, namely that since God knows that the righteous person in question is a devotee of long standing and will endure the test, why does He try him? The answer is as we have said. The reward destined for one who serves God in deed is not the same as the reward of him who serves in thought only. The objector might as well say, why did God command us to perform the commandments actually, is it not sufficient that we have the intention of performing them? The answer here is obvious, the reward for a good deed is given for doing it and not merely for thinking it. The Torah mentions it frequently: “And ye shall do them;” “Hear, therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it.” The same thing applies to the matter of trial. God desires that the person should have the actual experience and not merely the good intention.

Consider carefully what we have said under this fourth head concerning sufferings of love and trial, for our point of view is correct and nearer the truth than anything we have seen elsewhere.

To return to the subject of this chapter, we will say in a general way that the evils which the righteous suffer come upon them rightly and justly, though we may not know to which one of the four causes which we mentioned the sufferings are due.

CHAPTER 14

Having explained the justice of God’s ways, and having made clear that we have no complaint to make either on account of the adversity of the righteous or the prosperity of the wicked, we must now give a reason why the prophets and the sages were so much exercised about these two phenomena. For according to the Rabbis, even Moses had this perplexing question in mind when he said to God: “Show me now Thy ways, that I may know Thee.” And Job, too, complained of this, as we have seen. Asaph also said: “But as for me, my feet were almost gone; … For I was envious at the arrogant, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.” This is the problem of the prosperity of the wicked. In the sequel he says: “Surely in vain have I cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in innocency; For all the day have I been plagued, and my chastisement came every morning.” This deals with the problem of the adversity of the righteous. Jeremiah also says: “Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?” Habakkuk says: “Wherefore lookest Thou, when they deal treacherously, and holdest Thy peace, when the wicked swalloweth up the man that is more righteous than he;” again, “For the wicked doth beset the righteous; Therefore right goeth forth perverted.” Malachi says: “Ye have wearied the Lord with your words. Yet ye say: ‘Wherein have we wearied Him?’ In that ye say: ‘Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord …;’ ” also: “Yea, they that work wickedness are built up; Yea, they try God, and are delivered.” Ecclesiastes says: “There is a vanity which is done upon the earth: that there are righteous men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked; again, there are wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous;” and there are many other passages in the Prophets besides. This matter surely requires explanation.

Asaph, it seems to me, set down the difficulties in the seventy-third Psalm in order to state their solution. His solution of the two questions, the adversity of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked, is like that which we discussed under the second head. He begins: “Surely God is good to Israel,” meaning to emphasize the fact that every evil which comes to the righteous is for a good purpose. This is why he says, “surely,” meaning that though at first sight it does not seem that the evil which comes to Israel, who are righteous, is a good, nevertheless it is nothing else than a good. However, the knowledge that it is a good is not given to every one, but only “to such as are pure in heart.” All other people are ready to believe erroneously that the evil which comes to Israel is not for a good purpose. This is why he says: “As for me, my feet were almost gone …” The reason is because “I was envious at the arrogant” and their prosperity. I saw the continual peace of the wicked and their tranquillity, which endures as long as they live. They die without pain or suffering, “For there are no pangs at their death.” Their health is good at the time of their death; and even in their life time: “In the trouble of man they are not … Therefore pride is as a chain about their neck …”

And so he goes on describing their prosperity: “Their eyes stand forth from fatness,” i. e. they are handsome in form and appearance, their color is whiter than fat; or the meaning is, they are so fat that their eyes protrude from the abundance of fat. And lest one think that the fat disfigures them and makes them ugly in form and figure, he says: “They are gone beyond the imaginations of the heart;” i. e. they are more handsome than any picture one can imagine in one’s heart. Moreover they are unpleasant to their fellowmen, “They scoff, and in wickedness utter oppression.” They are also wicked in relation to God. “They speak as if there were none on high. They have set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.”

Then he explains the evil which follows from the prosperity of these men: “Therefore His people return crushed …” The meaning is that when the people of Israel see the prosperity of the wicked in this way, they return beaten down and crushed to their homes, “And waters of fulness are drained out by them,” i. e. they imbibe a spirit of unbelief from these bad waters, from the man who is full. They are led to deny Providence and to say: “How doth God know? And is there knowledge in the Most High?” Behold, such are the wicked, and they are always at ease and increasing their riches, therefore it is vain to serve God, and in vain have I cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in innocency from sin. For with all that I have been plagued the whole day, I endure suffering every day, and my chastisement comes every morning.

Then the Psalmist proceeds: If I should express such doubts as these, I would be excluded from the company of righteous men and be “faithless to the generation of Thy children.” And if I should try to know the reason of all this, it would be “wearisome in mine eyes, until I entered into the sanctuaries of God”—a place where every man is destined to come at the end of his life, that his soul may unite with other souls. He calls it, “the sanctuaries of God,” because it is under the Throne of Glory and is divided into different parts for the various degrees of soul. “And considered their end,” i. e. the end of these wicked men, to see whether they can cleave and unite to that holy place. But I see that they can not cleave to it, because everything cleaves to its like and turns away from its opposite. There is no doubt, therefore, that the wicked can not cleave to that place, because it is contrary to their nature. They will rather slip away from it and fall into the nether part of Sheol. This is the meaning of the verse: “Surely thou settest them in slippery places,” and as a result, “Thou hurlest them down to utter ruin.” Or we may say that the verse in question is an allusion to the fact that in giving prosperity to the wicked in this world, God merely humors them, so that they may not repent, to the end that they may enjoy the few merits which they have in this world and be hurled down to everlasting ruin in the world to come. And then they will “become a desolation in a moment.” And as a dream which one dreams while sleeping during waking time, namely during the day, is very short and insignificant, so wilt Thou despise their image (zelem), i. e. their soul, as Maimonides interprets the word “image” (zelem). This is the solution of the problem of the prosperity of the wicked, as we discussed it under the second head.

Then he undertakes to solve the problem of the adversity of the righteous in a different way. The evil which comes to the righteous, he says, is not evil if we consider the eternal good which is destined for him. “For my heart is in a ferment …,” i. e. although I have assigned a reason for the prosperity of the wicked, the problem of the adversity of the righteous still remains, and my heart is in a ferment about it, “and I am pricked in my veins.” And with all this, “I am brutish and ignorant,” knowing not the reason of the adversity of the righteous. But I see and feel in myself that when “I am continually with Thee,” and my thought cleaves to Thee, “Thou holdest my right hand,” to help me and deliver me from the accidents that would come to me by the laws of the natural world, as the Psalmist says in another passage: “My soul cleaveth unto Thee; Thy right hand holdeth me fast.” The meaning is, when my soul cleaves to Thee, and I follow after Thee and serve Thee with a pure heart, I am immediately upheld by Thy right hand, i. e. divine providence, which helps me as though Thou didst hold my right hand and guardedst me from injury. I see that during this corporeal life, “Thou guidest me with Thy counsel,” i. e. with divine inspirations, as we said in the eleventh chapter of this Book, Thou guidest and leadest me, so that I am saved from the hand of the evil one. And after this life, “Thou wilt receive me with glory.” On this great glory and distinction which are destined for me I ponder and say: “Whom have I in heaven but Thee?” namely Thy glory which hovers over me and takes care of me from heaven. “And beside Thee,” whom I have in heaven, “I desire nothing upon earth.” For I know that when the body and its powers—“My flesh and my heart”—those psychic powers which are dependent upon the body, are destroyed, I am not destroyed. There will still remain something permanent in me—“the rock of my heart”—i. e. the rational power, which is as permanent as a strong rock, and my portion in existence is that I shall cleave to God forever, because He is eternal, and I shall not fear destruction, since I cleave to an eternal being. “But they that go far from Thee shall perish,” without doubt, “Thou wilt destroy all them that go astray from Thee,” i. e. those who depart from Thee and cleave to something else. “But as for me, the nearness of God is my good,” i. e. all my good is that I may cleave to God, and that I shall “make the Lord God my refuge, that I may tell of all Thy works,” viz. the missions of the prophets and the wonders performed by them.

This is the method in which Asaph solved these problems. It is correct and in agreement with the truth.

CHAPTER 15

The next question is, since Asaph stated these problems and solved them, as we have seen, why did the prophets who came after concern themselves again with the same problems, and what new ideas did they contribute to the problems or their solutions?

We might say that the matter was no longer a problem to the prophets since Asaph had given the solution; but that they mentioned these two points because it gave them great pain when they saw with their own eyes wicked men prosper and righteous men suffer. For actual seeing of a thing causes more pain than mere knowing about it. A person is moved more by that which he perceives with the senses than by that which he merely knows, though he has no doubt whatever of its reality. For example, Moses was told by God on the mountain, “Go, get thee down; for thy people … have made them a molten calf …” And since God had told him this, he had no doubt it was true. And yet that did not prevent him from taking the tables down with him. He did not want to leave them on the mountain. But when he came near to the camp and saw the calf with his own eyes, he became angry and cast away the tables and broke them at the foot of the mount. We see thus that he was more affected by that which he saw with his eyes, being moved by pain and anger, than by what he heard, though he knew that that which God had told him was absolutely true. In the same way it is possible to say that when the prophets saw with their own eyes righteous men suffer and wicked men prosper, they were grieved and complained, as a sick man complains of his sickness, even if he knew the cause of his sickness in advance and knew that he must get sick, nevertheless this does not keep him from complaining when he is sick. This is clear from the statement of Jeremiah: “Right wouldest Thou be, O Lord, were I to contend with Thee.” He means, I know that Thou art right and that Thy judgments are correct when I contend with Thee, i. e. when I complain of this matter, and yet I can not forget the sorrow I feel: “Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?” We might say therefore that all the prophets were in the same position. But this is altogether unsatisfactory, and is not in agreement with the biblical texts.

It seems to me that the prophets were not troubled by the same aspect of the problem that troubled Asaph. Their complaint is expressed in the words of David: “Let me fall now into the hand of the Lord, for very great are His mercies; and let me not fall into the hand of man.” God’s judgments are right, and a righteous man may suffer for various reasons, as we have seen. But it does not seem just that this suffering should be inflicted upon the righteous by the wicked man himself. This leads people to find fault with God’s judgments and the Torah loses its hold upon them. This is indicated in the expression of Habakkuk’s complaint: “For the wicked doth beset the righteous; therefore right goeth forth perverted.” He knew that Israel had sinned and deserved punishment, but he complained because the punishment was inflicted upon them through the wicked Nebuchadnezzar. The proper thing would have been that their punishment should come from God, as a plague or a famine, or sickness, such as afflicted Job, or that Jerusalem should be overthrown instantaneously like Sodom, and not that the wicked should beset the righteous.

To show that this is the meaning of his complaint, he says: “Wherefore lookest Thou, when they deal treacherously, and holdest Thy peace, when the wicked swalloweth up the man that is more righteous than he?” He does not say, “Swalloweth up the righteous,” simply, but, “The man that is more righteous than he.” His meaning is, The Israelites are not, indeed, absolutely righteous men, but they are more righteous than the wicked Nebuchadnezzar, who swallowed them up. This was his complaint, why does God arrange the world so that the wicked should inflict evil upon a person more righteous than he, though he be not absolutely righteous?

Jeremiah’s complaint was of the same kind. He complained of the men of Anathoth, who were wicked men and pursued him, seeking his life, and desiring to make him drink poison without his knowledge: “But I was like a docile lamb that is led to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me: ‘Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, That his name may be no more remembered.’ ” If not for divine providence, he would have fallen into their hands, as he says: “And the Lord gave me knowledge of it, and I knew it; Then Thou showedst me their doings.” The point of the complaint is not that it is not just that God should use the wicked man as an instrument to avenge himself on the wicked, as I explained in the discussion of the prosperity of the wicked under the third head. The point of the criticism is that it leads men to suspect God’s justice.

This is why Habakkuk says: “Therefore the law is slacked, and right doth never go forth.” Solomon had the same thing in mind when he said: “As a troubled fountain, and a corrupted spring, so is a righteous man that giveth way before the wicked.” The meaning is this: Just as the harm and the injury of a troubled fountain and a corrupted spring do not affect the fountain or the spring, but those who look at it and use it, who are grieved at seeing their fountain troubled and their spring corrupted, so when a righteous man gives way before the wicked, there is no harm done to the righteous, for he knows that the sufferings which are inflicted upon him are for his good, in order to wipe out the few iniquities which he has. He knows also that God has many ways of punishing those who transgress His will, and it makes no difference to him whether his sin is atoned for through a serpent or a lion or some other animal, or through a wicked man. But the harm that is done is to the spectators who will throw suspicion upon God’s judgments and say: “So and so is an absolutely wicked man, and he did harm to so and so, who is more righteous than he, though he is not an absolutely righteous man.” And it will seem to them that the thing is unjust, not that it is really unjust, for Habakkuk himself explains it when he says: “O Lord, Thou hast ordained them for judgment, and Thou, O Rock, hast established them for correction.” The meaning is, the wicked man is nothing more than an instrument with which God exercises judgment upon the wicked, and He also corrects the righteous through it, causing them pain and grief, in order to wipe out the few iniquities which they have, so that they may merit life in the world to come, and that the wicked man may perish instantaneously and forever, as all the seed of Nebuchadnezzar perished, while Israel returned from the Babylonian exile and prospered.

The upshot of it all is that all the sufferings of the righteous are for a good purpose, and the prosperity of the wicked is for a bad purpose. But the character of a thing as good or bad is determined by the purpose. This is the way we must understand all the prophets and the sages. Some of them speak from the point of view of Asaph and Job, and some from the point of view of Habakkuk and Jeremiah. This will suffice as a discussion of Providence.

CHAPTER 16

Having treated of Providence, it is proper to follow it up with a discussion of prayer. For though prayer is not a fundamental principle of the Torah, nevertheless it is a branch growing out of Providence. The acceptance of prayer necessarily indicates Providence, as we said before. And on the other hand, every one who believes in Providence must believe that prayer will help him and save him from misfortune. If one does not pray in a time of trouble, it is either because he does not believe in Providence, or because, though he does believe in Providence, he doubts God’s ability to save him—both of which are forms of unbelief—or because, though he believes in Providence and doubts not God’s ability to save him, for God is all powerful, he doubts whether he is worthy of the privilege of having his prayer heard.

Now it is true that a man must never be righteous in his own eyes, nevertheless this should not prevent him from praying to God to satisfy his needs. For to refrain from prayer on this account indicates a belief that the good which comes to man from God is a reward for his good deeds and not due to God’s mercy and kindness. But this opinion is incorrect, as we read in the Bible: “We do not present our supplications before Thee because of our righteousness, but because of Thy great compassions.” The kindness of God and the mercy He bestows upon all His creatures are based upon pure loving kindness, and are not in the nature of compensation, as God said to Job: “Who hath given Me anything beforehand, that I should repay him?” The Rabbis say: If a man makes a mezuzah have I not given him the house? And if he attaches zizit (fringes) to his garment, have I not given him the garment?

The proper belief, then, is that all benefits which come from God are due purely to His loving kindness, and are not compensation for one’s good deeds. This being so, benefits may come from God whether the recipient deserves to receive them or not. For prayer confers a capacity upon a person who is not by nature fit to receive a given benefit. No one else except God can do anything like this unless the recipient has a capacity, natural or artificial; because all the superlunar powers are finite and can act only upon that which is prepared to receive their influence. As fire has the power to make warm, and water to make cold, so Mars has the power, for example, to destroy, to kill and to ruin. But it can not bestow the opposite of that which the recipient is prepared to receive or vary its activity, as the fire has no power to make cool. Similarly Jupiter has the power to make prosperous and rich, but he can not change that indication and give the recipient the opposite, as water has not the power to make warm, except per accidens. The same thing applies to the other superlunar powers.

The Rabbis explain this matter in the Talmud: “When the wicked Nebuchadnezzar cast Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah into the fiery furnace, Yurkemi, the spirit of hail, came before God and said, Lord of the world, let me go down and cool the furnace, and save the righteous men. Thereupon Gabriel rose before God, and said: This is not in consonance with the dignity of God, but let me, the spirit of fire, go and heat the furnace on the outside and cool it within so that there may be a miracle within a miracle.” It is clear from this that Yurkemi only had the power to cool and Gabriel had the power only to heat, except when God desired otherwise. The superlunar powers, therefore, can not act upon the recipients unless the latter have the capacity, whether the influence comes upon the recipient through a visible property or an invisible. For example, drugs act upon those who take them, either through their natural qualities or through their properties, which are invisible qualities, according as the recipients are prepared to receive the quality or property in question.

Now when the recipient prepares himself to receive the influence which comes from the visible nature of a given star, as for example, to receive moisture from the moon or heat from the sun, there is no likelihood of an erroneous opinion that the effect is due to the favor of the star. But if the recipient prepares himself to receive the influence of the star through one of those acts whose causes are unknown, like the acts of drugs which come from their properties, people are led into the erroneous opinion that the effect is due to the favor of the star. But it is not true. The fact is this, that just as the influence of the teacher affects the pupil who is prepared more than the one who is not prepared, though the teacher is not directing his instruction to the one more than the other, so the influence of the star reaches the one who is prepared more than the one who is unprepared, without any intention or will on the part of the star.

The error of the idolaters was just this, namely, that they thought that the influence which comes from the star is due to the favor of the star gained by doing those things which are of particular interest to the particular star, not knowing that the real reason is because those activities prepare the recipient. The error was due to the fact that the causes are unknown. For this reason they bowed down before the star and prayed to it, offered sacrifices, burned incense and poured out libations to it, thinking to obtain its favor through these rites.

The error here is clear, for the force of the higher powers is limited, and no one of them can do anything else than that which its nature determines. And its activity depends upon the preparation of the recipient and is not in the nature of a voluntary act. Baal Peor, for example, had the power to act as a purgative for those who performed the act of defecation before him. The Rabbis say that the priests fed the person with beets and gave him beer of hizme to drink. The purpose was to prepare the recipient for the effect, which followed in the person who defecated before it, whether he needed it or not, thus benefiting the one who needed it, and injuring and killing the one who needed it not, for the effect was not voluntary. This is why the Bible calls that service, “sacrifices of the dead:” “They joined themselves also unto Baal of Peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.” The point of the analogy is that just as the dead have not the power to will or not to will, so the stars have not the power to will or not to will. As the fire has not the power to refrain from burning the garment of the righteous man if he comes near it, nor the power to burn the garment of the wicked when he is far away, or if the object is such that it is not subject to being burned, so the star has no power to do good or evil except as its nature dictates and as the recipient is prepared for the effect. Therefore it is not proper to pray to it since it can not act voluntarily. God alone is the one to pray to, because His activities are voluntary. He can will or not, can do a thing as well as its opposite, can do a kindness gratis, i. e. whether the recipient is deserving or not, provided he prepares himself by prayer alone.

This is stated clearly in the Bible in many places, and especially in relation to Menasseh, son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, who was a thoroughly wicked man, and never had his like before or after in disobedience and wrongdoing. And yet we read: “And when he was in distress, he besought the Lord his God … and he prayed unto Him; and He was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him back to Jerusalem into his kingdom.” We learn from this two things, one is that even though a person is thoroughly wicked like Menasseh, he may become fit to receive divine grace through prayer. The second is that prayer is heard even though it is forced by distress, as the text testifies: “And when he was in distress …”

This shows how wonderfully great is God’s kindness to His creatures. For a human being under similar circumstances would say, “Why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?” But God delights in loving-kindness, and His right hand is extended to receive penitents at all times. Thus the Psalmist says: “Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and He delivered them …” Jonah says: “I called out of mine affliction unto the Lord, and He answered me.” He means, although I did not deserve to have my prayer in distress accepted, after I ran away from Him, nevertheless He did not forbear to answer me.

CHAPTER 17

All kinds of loving-kindness emanate and derive from God, and there is no other being who can bestow a kindness on any one. The reason is because one can not expect an absolute kindness from any one unless the latter has the following four attributes.

1. He must be unchangeable; for if he is subject to change, the kindness coming from him can not be absolute because it will not be permanent. But God is the only unchangeable being, as I explained in Book II, chapter 2.

2. He must not require the aid of any other being in bestowing the kindness or benefit in question. For if he requires the aid of another, the recipient can not be sure of the continuance of that kindness unless the aid continues. The superlunar powers are a case in point. They indicate a certain event if a certain other condition or cause is there to assist them, for example, if the rising star is in its elevation, or faces a favorable star, and the like. But there is no other being who requires no assistance except God, as the Bible says: “I am the Lord that maketh all things; That stretcheth forth the heavens alone; That spread abroad the earth by Myself.”

3. He must be equally able to do either of two opposed things, else the recipient would not be able to obtain his desire at all times. For a person sometimes needs one thing and sometimes its opposite, for example sometimes he has to make war, and sometimes he has need of peace. Now it is well known in relation to the superlunar powers that the star which indicates war does not indicate peace, and the star which indicates destruction does not indicate building up, and the star which indicates war has no power to change its indication into one of peace. Similarly the star which indicates disease does not indicate health. Hence the recipient of a kindness can never be sure that he will always have the kindness that he needs, unless the giver has equal ability to give either of two opposite things. But there is no one else who has this power except God, as we read: “I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace and create evil; I am the Lord that doeth all these things.”

4. The giver must be so situated that there is no other being who can prevent him from doing his will. For if there is one who can prevent him, then the recipient of the kindness can never be sure of obtaining the favor which he desires of the giver, for the latter may be prevented from doing it. Now it is clear that every being except God can be prevented by God, but no one can prevent God from doing His will, as we read: “Behold, He snatcheth away, who can hinder Him? Who will say unto Him: ‘What doest Thou?’ ”

When these conditions are combined in the giver, the recipient is assured that he will obtain his desire and that the kindness he receives will be permanent. Now since there is no one but God who combines in him these four conditions, it is clear that one should not desire or hope for any favor from any one else. The Bible makes this clear in the Song of Moses: “See now that I, even I, am He, and there is no God with Me …” The meaning is as follows: The Gentiles, who oppress the Jews, think that God can not save them. “Where are their gods,” they say, “The rock in whom they trusted; who did eat the fat of their sacrifices …?” These words indicate that they think the God of Israel is like the other superlunar powers, that He is subject to change, or that He needs the help of another god, or that He is not equally able to do all things and opposite things, or that there is another being who can prevent Him. Hence the text explains that the God of Israel is not like the other superlunar powers, as they think, but on the contrary that God is eternal and unchanging. This is the meaning of the expression: “See now that I, even I, am He,” i. e. there is no other being in the world who can say about himself, “I, I am he,” except God.

The prophet says: “To whom then will ye liken Me, that I should be equal? saith the Holy One,” i. e. that should be equal to Me in deserving the name holy. For every other being except God changes from day to day, and is not to-day what he was yesterday, having changed since then. Hence he can not use the expression, “I, I am he,” for He is not always the same in attribute. God, on the other hand, who is not subject to change, can say of Himself: “I, I am He.” Similarly the prophet says: “I, even I, am the Lord.” The repetition of the pronoun can apply only to God, who is to-day what He was yesterday without any change. This is a reference to the first attribute. Then Moses says: “And there is no God with Me.” This means, I do not need any one else to help Me in My work, and refers to the second attribute. Then he continues: “I kill, and I make alive.” This means, I can do equally either of two opposite things—an allusion to the third attribute. Then, alluding to the fourth attribute, he ends up: “And there is none that can deliver out of My hand.” This means, there is no being who can prevent Me from doing what I desire. And since there is no other being who combines in himself these four requirements, no kindness can come from any one else but God. Hence the Psalmist says: “O Israel, hope in the Lord; For with the Lord there is mercy.” The meaning is, hope in the Lord, because that which you desire is not a matter of compensation, but an act of loving-kindness, and there is no being but God who can do kindness, for He alone is the source of all favor and kindness: “For with the Lord there is mercy,” and not with any one else.

Prayer should therefore be directed to Him alone and to no one else. For how can a man pray to one who can not grant his prayer or request? Reason dictates that one should pray only to one who is able to grant one’s request. For the impulse to pray comes from reason. It is true that we read in the Bible: “Lord, Thou hast heard the desire of the humble,” from which it may appear that the impulse to pray is due to the faculty of desire, but it is not so. As soon as the power of desire begins to act, the rational faculty is aroused and reflects and seeks for a way to realize the desire. And when it determines that it can not be attained except through God who can do all things, and bestows kindness even upon those who are not deserving, it comes at once to the conclusion that God is the one to pray to.

It is because the first beginning comes from the power of desire that the Bible connects the hearing of prayer with the power of desire. Hence the Bible says: “Lord, Thou hast heard the desire of the humble,” as if prayer came from the faculty of desire. But it is not so. Prayer is due to the power of reason, which prompts man to do good and to love God, whereas the power of desire has the opposite tendency. For this reason the biblical verse ends up with the words: “Thou wilt direct their heart, Thou wilt cause Thine ear to attend”, to indicate that God does not hear the desire of the humble until the rational power is prepared for prayer and to cleave to God. First, “Thou wilt direct their heart,” and then, “cause Thine ear to attend.”

Daniel also was told: “From the first day that thou didst set thy heart to understand, and to humble thyself before thy God, thy words were heard.” In explanation of this our Rabbis say: “From this we learn that the intention to fast, even before the actual fasting, helps one in having his prayer received, by reason of the fact that his heart is prepared.” This is the meaning of the biblical expression: “And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer.” The meaning is, when the rational power prepares itself to pray or to submit to God and fast, even before the actual prayer and fasting take place, I will answer; and while they are talking about praying and fasting, I will hear them, even before they actually begin their prayer; provided, however, that the rational power has decided that the thing in question is a proper thing to pray for, and that it is possible of attainment, not merely so far as the giver is concerned—for God can do everything—but that the possibility is there also so far as the recipient is concerned, i. e. that he is properly prepared to receive the favor in question. For if the recipient is not capable of receiving so great a kindness, if it is something which it is not in his power to receive, it is wrong to pray for it. Thus it is wrong to pray to God that He should make one king of the whole world like Alexander the Great, though it is possible so far as the giver is concerned, since God can do everything. The reason is because the recipient is not capable of receiving so great a favor, for not every one is fit to rule over all the inhabitants of the earth, as there may be among them some one who is better prepared for it than he, and God would not deprive the other one on account of this one. The kindness of God invoked by prayer shows itself to the recipient according to the power of the latter to receive. This is what the Psalmist had in mind when he said: “Commit thy way unto the Lord …” The meaning is that it is the wisdom of God that determines what things are beneficial to man, and who is worthy to receive His benefits.

CHAPTER 18

The reason which leads men to doubt the efficacy of prayer is the same as that which leads them to deny God’s knowledge. Their argument is as follows: Either God has determined that a given person shall receive a given benefit, or He has not so determined. If He has determined, there is no need of prayer; and if He has not determined, how can prayer avail to change God’s will that He should now determine to benefit the person, when He had not so determined before? For God does not change from a state of willing to a state of not willing, or vice versa. For this reason they say that right conduct is of no avail for receiving a good from God. And similarly they say that prayer does not avail to enable one to receive a benefit, or to be saved from an evil which has been decreed against him.

Job argues in this manner in the name of the wicked and inclines to it. Sceptically he asks, If God takes notice of human conduct, why does He not punish the wicked for believing in this manner? “Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, wax mighty in power? Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes … Yet they say unto God: ‘Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of Thy ways. What is the Almighty, that we should serve Him? And what profit should we have, if we pray unto Him?’ ” This shows their opinion that right conduct is of no benefit: “What is the Almighty that we should serve Him?” and that prayer is of no avail: “And what profit should we have, if we pray unto Him?” The reason for this belief is their opinion that when a certain evil has been determined for any one, it can not be annulled in any way.

That Job was inclined to sympathize with this idea appears from the remark which follows: “Lo, their prosperity is not in their hand; the counsel of the wicked is far from me.” The meaning is, I see that their prosperity is not in their hands, i. e. they can not increase their goods by right conduct, nor do their evil deeds injure them by taking away from them the benefits which they get. Hence I say: “The counsel of the wicked is far from me.” That is, the divine plan which decides that these wicked men should spend their lives in prosperity is far from my understanding. Therefore I say that everything is pre-ordained, for if everything were not pre-ordained, and right conduct were of any benefit, the wicked should have misfortune for their deeds. But it is not so, for: “How oft is it that the lamp of the wicked is put out? That their calamity cometh upon them? That He distributeth pains in His anger?” That is, how often does it happen that they are punished for their evil deeds, and that God sends misfortunes upon them in His anger on account of their wrong doing? From this it seems that Job inclined to the opinion of the wicked men who said that everything is pre-ordained, and that neither right conduct nor prayer can avail to annul the pre-determined event.

But this opinion is not true, for the influences from above come down upon the recipient when he is in a certain degree and state of preparation to receive them. And if a person does not prepare himself, he withholds the good from himself. For example, if it has been determined from on high that a given person’s crops shall prosper in a given year, and he neglects to plow or sow his land that year, then God may bring the most abundant rain upon the land, but his crops will not prosper, seeing that he has not plowed or sowed. He withheld the good from himself because he did not prepare himself to receive it.

Our idea therefore is that when a benefit is determined in favor of any one, it is conditional upon a certain degree of right conduct. This must be taken to be a general principle as regards the promises in the Bible. In the same way when a certain evil is determined upon some one, it is also conditional upon his being wicked in a certain degree or of being predisposed to it. And if the degree of wickedness or predisposition thereto changes, the pre-determined event or fate changes also necessarily for the better or the worse.

The matter is similar to the hypothetical case of a king who made a decree that all the uncircumcised persons in a given country should be killed, or should receive a talent of gold. Now if one of the people has himself circumcised, there is no doubt that the decree is of no effect so far as he is concerned, whether for good or for evil, by reason of the new state into which the person has been brought. The effort, therefore, to do good is essential everywhere, for it serves as a preparation for the reception of the divine influence or for the annulment of a divine decree.

This is in agreement with the statement of our Rabbis: “Rabba came to Mamla, and saw that all the people had black hair. He inquired for the reason and was told that they were descendants of Eli, concerning whom it is said; ‘And all the increase of thy house shall die young men.’ Then he said to them: Go and study the Torah, concerning which it is written: ‘For she is thy life and the length of thy days.’ ” From this it is clear that divine decrees are conditional upon the recipient being in a certain state and degree of preparation. And if that changes, the decree changes also. This is the reason why the Rabbis say that a change of name may avail to nullify a decree, as also change of conduct may have the same effect.

In this way repentance benefits a wicked man, for through repentance he becomes another person, as it were, concerning whom no such decree was made. Take the case of Ahab. The Bible says concerning him: “But there was none like unto Ahab, who did give himself over to do that which was evil in the sight of the Lord,” and a divine decree was made against him. And then, because he fasted, and covered himself with sackcloth, and humbled himself before God, it was said to Elijah: “Because he humbleth himself before Me, I will not bring the evil in his days; but in his son’s days will I bring the evil upon his house.” This shows that when a decree is made upon a wicked person, it is conditional upon his maintaining his state of wickedness. But if he changes that state through repentance, he, as it were, changes into another person upon whom that decree was not made.

In this way it is clear that prayer and right conduct help to prepare the person to receive the good influence or to nullify the evil that has been decreed concerning him, because he changes from the evil state in which he was. Zophar alludes to this argument when he blames Job for not praying to God to deliver him from his misfortune, and for not preparing himself to nullify the decree: “If thou set thy heart aright, and stretch out thy hands toward Him—If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away …

Surely then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot …” That is, if you set your heart to pray and to improve your conduct, there is no doubt that through prayer and right conduct you will escape from these troubles. From this it is clear that prayer and right conduct are always helpful in nullifying a divine decree. Our Rabbis also say: “The cry [of prayer] is good for a man both before the divine decision and after.”

As for the objection that the divine will can not be changed by prayer, the answer is that the divine will in the first place is that the decree should be realized if the person in question continues in the same state, and that the decree should be changed if the person’s state changes.

The other problem, namely that God’s knowledge would change as the man’s state changes through prayer, is related to the problem of the relation of God’s knowledge to the category of the contingent. Now just as we do not find it necessary that God’s knowledge should change because the contingent is a real category, so we do not find it necessary that it should change because of prayer, but we believe that as God’s knowledge does not change because of the existence of the contingent, so it does not change because of the efficacy of prayer. We believe that the contingent is real because experience testifies to it, and similarly we believe that prayer has the effect of nullifying a divine decree because experience testifies to it, as we shall see, and though we do not know how to reconcile God’s changeless knowledge with the efficacy of prayer, as we do not know how to reconcile it with the contingent, we do not on this account deny what experience proves, namely that God listens to prayer and grants the person’s request, whatever it be.

This is the answer which Eliphaz gave to Job when he saw that Job was inclined to accept the view of the wicked, who say: “What is the

Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit should we have, if we pray unto Him?” In answer to this Eliphaz says: “And thou sayest: ‘What doth God know? Can He judge through the dark cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to Him, that He seeth not …’ ” That is, since you incline to the opinion of the wicked, who say: “What profit should we have, if we pray unto Him?” thus denying the efficacy of prayer in order to save God’s changeless knowledge, you must also in the same way deny God’s knowledge of the contingent in order to save His changeless knowledge: “And thou sayest: ‘What doth God know?’ ” Your opinion seems to be that the world is ruled by unchanging law, which Eliphaz calls “The way of the world,” when he says to Job: “Wilt thou keep the way of the world which wicked men have trodden? … who said unto God: ‘Depart from us;’ and what could the Almighty do unto them?” He calls those men wicked who say that the world is ruled by unchanging law, because they deny the efficacy of right conduct and prayer. Hence he concludes: “If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up … thou shalt make thy prayer unto Him, and He will hear thee …” alluding, as it were, to the fact that his misfortunes came upon him because he believed that his prosperity had been due not to God, but to nature; and he entertained the same belief about the origin of his misfortune, and hence he did not pray to God concerning them. Eliphaz, therefore, says to him that if he returns to God and prays to Him and acknowledges that everything came to him from God, He will hear his prayer, will save him from his sufferings and will prosper his affairs. Hence he says: “Thou shalt make thy prayer unto Him, and He will hear thee … and the Almighty be thy treasure, and precious silver unto thee,” i. e. through prayer your affairs will prosper. The Bible also testifies to the truth of this when it says: “And the Lord changed the fortune of Job, when he prayed for his friends.” When he came to believe that prayer has efficacy, he prayed to God, and immediately God changed his fortune.

CHAPTER 19

The blessings conferred upon persons by the prophets, the righteous men and the pious are a subject that has caused perplexity to commentators, who have not been able to explain the matter properly. Their argument is as follows: These blessings are either in the nature of a prayer or of a prognostication of the future. If they are a prayer, why was Isaac so terrified when he found that he had blessed some one other than Esau, exclaiming as he did, “Who then is he that hath taken venison … yea, and he shall be blessed?” He could have prayed again for Esau as he had prayed before for Jacob. And there is no doubt that his second prayer for Esau, made voluntarily, would have been more likely to be heard than the one for Jacob, which had been obtained through fraud. On the other hand, if the blessings are prognostications, why was Esau so indignant, exclaiming as he did, “He took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing?” Also how could Isaac say to him: “Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants?” Isaac had done nothing, he had merely foretold by prophetic inspiration the things that would happen to the person who received the blessing. Why then should Isaac or Esau have been indignant?

A great deal has been said on this matter. The best interpretation that has so far been agreed upon is that the blessing is a composite of both prognostication and prayer in the following way. The prophet sees through his prophetic inspiration what will happen to the recipient of the blessing, and prays for him to increase the good that is to come to him. For example, the prophet sees that the person in question will prosper as a tiller of the soil, and he blesses him to the effect that the produce of his field may be a hundred fold. Or if he sees that the person in question will prosper as a breeder of cattle, he will bless him by praying that his cattle should multiply many fold, and should not drop their young prematurely; and so on, they say, with all other kinds of prosperity. Any difficulty which arises from the prayer aspect of the blessing is solved by bringing forward the aspect of prognostication, and a difficulty arising from the element of prognostication is answered by emphasizing the element of prayer. Adopting this interpretation, they have to make a distinction between the blessings conferred by a prophet and those pronounced by the righteous men and the pious who are not prophets.

Against the above interpretation are also all those blessings conferred upon Israel by the priests, in which there is no element of prognostication at all, unless we say that all these are in the nature of prayers, while the blessings of Isaac, who was a prophet, had the element of prognostication in them. This is the reason why Isaac was so much troubled. Esau was very dear to him, and therefore he was grieved when he saw the good fortune that was destined for Jacob and the prosperity which he was destined to enjoy at the expense of Esau. But the difficulty remains, if prayer avails in blessings, why did not Isaac pray for Esau that he should be more prosperous than Jacob, as the righteous men pray for those who receive a blessing at their hands? Also why did he not say to Esau that the blessings were prognostications of the future and that Esau had lost nothing by Isaac’s blessing Jacob? This would have been a very proper thing to do, so that Esau should not hate Jacob for the blessing which he received from his father.

My opinion therefore is that the blessings are not declarations of the future at all. A blessing is a prayer plus the bestowal upon the recipient of the capacity to receive the divine influence. Celestial influences descend upon the recipients through a chain of intermediate agents and in varying degrees, provided, however, that the recipients are worthy, and occupy a certain definite relation and order, and are in addition prepared to receive the influence in question.

And if the transmission is interrupted in any of the intermediate agents, or the relation or order is changed, or the recipient is not prepared, the influence or relation gets confused, and the divine influence does not rest upon the person if the order is changed. For this reason there must be in the recipient the proper preparation to enable him to receive the influence in question.

But if the recipient is not himself prepared to receive the divine influence, he may be prepared by a prophet or a righteous or pious man, and thus the one who bestows the blessing becomes an intermediate agent in causing the influence in question to descend. This is the reason for the laying on of hands by those who gave the blessings upon those who received them. The purpose was to confer upon the recipient of the blessing the capacity or preparation to receive the influence or good in question. Thus the pious or righteous man who conferred the blessing was a sort of channel conducting the divine influence. We found similarly that the prophetic inspiration rested, through the mediation of a prophet, upon those who were not fit, provided they had some measure of preparation. Thus God said to Moses: “Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is spirit, and lay thy hand upon him.” The degree of the influence received corresponds to the quality of the one who lays on his hands or who confers the blessing. For this reason when Elisha, in answer to the question of Elijah: “Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken from thee,” said: “I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me,” Elijah replied: “Thou hast asked a hard thing.” For a person can not give to another as a preparation more than he has himself. Therefore he said to him that if he saw him after he was taken away, his request would be granted. For Elijah would surely stand on a higher plane after being taken away than before, and would therefore be able to bestow upon Elisha twice as much as Elijah had before he was taken away, a thing that he could not have done before he was taken away.

The expression, “Thou hast asked a hard thing,” shows that the words, “A double portion of thy spirit,” have not the same meaning as the words, “Shall acknowledge the first-born … by giving him a double portion …,” which are used in connection with the law of the first-born, as some commentators have said. For if this were the case, he would not have said, “Thou hast asked a hard thing.” For Elisha was on his own account more fit to prophesy than the other sons of the prophets, although they waited upon Elijah before Elisha and prepared themselves for prophecy more than he did. This we learn from the fact that Elijah was told on Mount Carmel: “And Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-Meholah Shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.” since therefore Elisha was the “first-born,” so to speak, among the sons of the prophets, it would not have been a hard thing to ask that he should receive a double portion of what the others received. The truth of the matter is that he asked for a double portion of the spirit of Elijah as it was before Elijah was taken away. And his request was granted, for Elijah is credited with eight miracles, while Elisha had sixteen miracles to his credit.

The Rabbis support this view in the first chapter of the treatise Hullin. It also appears from the text of the Bible that Elijah appeared to Elisha after he was taken away, as the Rabbis say that he appeared to some of the pious men of the Talmud. We read: “He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of the Jordan … and said: where is the Lord, the God of Elijah? And when he also had smitten the waters, they were divided hither and thither; and Elisha went over.” Since the Bible says, “And Elisha went over,” and does not say simply, “And he went over,” we infer that Elisha was not alone in smiting the waters, but that Elijah was with him, having appeared to him at that moment, and Elijah also is referred to in the words, “And when he also had smitten the waters.”

I find a similar interpretation ascribed to the ancient commentators, namely that Elijah appeared to Elisha at that moment and that then the spirit of Elijah rested upon Elisha, and the latter’s request was granted in that he obtained a double portion of Elijah’s spirit, since he saw him after he had been taken away from him. We also find, after Elijah had been taken away, that: “There came a writing to him [Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah] from Elijah the prophet;” from which it seems that Elijah at that time appeared among men and corrected their conduct.

In reference to laying on of hands there is no doubt that it is more effective when the person upon whom the hands are laid has much preparation than when he has little. For this reason Jacob laid his right hand on the head of Ephraim, who had much more preparation than Menasseh. For he desired that through his instrumentality a generous blessing should rest upon Ephraim in accordance with his abundant preparation. On the other hand, since Menasseh had little preparation for receiving the divine influence, he thought it sufficient to lay his left hand upon him in order that through the blessing of Jacob he might receive the influence which he was capable of receiving.

The same purpose is intended in the priestly benediction. The priests blessed the people in order that they (the priests) might be the intermediate agents to cause the divine influence to rest upon the recipients of the blessing in accordance with each one’s preparation. The lifting of their hands at the time of the blessing was a sort of laying on of hands. The priests blessed all Israel, or the congregation, because the many collectively are more prepared to receive divine influence than an individual. For it is impossible that there should not be among them some one who has preparation for receiving some measure of divine influence through the mediation of the priests. Of similar nature are the blessings which the righteous or the pious confer upon their recipients. The purpose is that the divine influence may rest upon the recipient through their mediation, as we explained in connection with prophecy in the eleventh chapter of the Third Book of this treatise.

The question may be asked, how can the righteous or the pious man be an instrument through which a blessing may come upon a person when the pious man himself is poor and dependent upon the bounty of others. The answer is given by the Rabbis, who say that the merits of the righteous avail others, but do not avail the righteous man himself.

After the influence is transmitted to the recipient of the blessing through the instrumentality of the blesser and in accordance with the amount of preparation of the recipient, the blesser has no power to stop the influence and prevent it from descending upon the recipient. For it descends of its own accord, the blesser being merely an instrument for the blessing to reach the recipient. Therefore though the instrument be removed, the blessing does not depart. It is the same as if a person drew [by means of an aqueduct] the water of a spring to a garden in order to promote the growth of the plants. The author of the conduit might cease to exist, but the stream made by the channel would not cease to water the garden. Similarly a person makes windows in a dark house so that the light of the sun may enter. The artisan who made the windows may disappear, but the light of the sun will not cease to illuminate the dark house.

This is the meaning of the words Isaac used when he was troubled exceedingly: “And have blessed him, yea, and he will be blessed.” The meaning is, he will be blessed whether I will or no since I blessed him. The words, “Yea, and he will be blessed,” form part of the reason for Isaac’s alarm, the meaning being, I can not put a stop to the influence which I was instrumental in drawing upon him. It is like the case of a person who orders a goldsmith to make beautiful vessels of gold with beautiful figures engraved upon them, for a friend of the goldsmith. The artist, thinking that the vessels are really for his friend, engraves them most beautifully, and works upon them with zest and joy. Then he finds out that the vessels are not intended for his friend at all. Undoubtedly the goldsmith is very much disappointed and troubled, but he can not prevent the beautiful engravings from being on those vessels, even though he knows that they are intended for his enemy. This is why Isaac said to Esau: “Behold, I have made him thy lord …” i. e. through my instrumentality and through the means of his preparation all this influence has already come to him, and I have no power to stop it, since it has already been drawn, “And what then shall I do for thee, my son?” Then Esau replied: “Hast thou but one blessing, my father?” meaning that Isaac should give him another blessing that should not conflict with the previous one. And Isaac did so, but he included in Esau’s blessing the words: “And thou shalt serve thy brother,” for he could not dispense with them. So much concerning the subject of the blessings.

CHAPTER 20

Prayer is, indeed, one of the commandments of the Torah, as our Rabbis explain in Sifre. The words, “And to serve Him with all your heart,” they say, refer to prayer. The Rabbis also say: “Be as careful about a light commandment as about a weighty one, for thou knowest not the reward of the commandments.” This latter remark does not mean that all commandments are rewarded alike, and that there is no distinction of value and measure of reward between one commandment and another. The meaning is rather as one might say concerning medicinal drugs, be as careful about an unimportant drug as about an important one, for they are all of great value to the body. This would not mean that some drugs are not more valuable than others. It would mean simply that though rhubarb, for example, is very valuable and saranjun is not so valuable, still one should be careful of both, though they are not equally valuable, because each has a specific property which is beneficial to the human body as a whole. For just as rhubarb has the property of curing diseases of the liver, so saranjun has the property of curing diseases of the feet, the thighs and the knees, which is also beneficial to the human body. At the same time, however, each one of them has its own specific value in its place, and in this their values differ. Thus rhubarb has the property of curing a vital organ, whereas saranjun, though it has its own specific property, can not cure a vital organ.

The same thing is true of the commandments. Although every one of them has a common property and benefit as being a divine commandment—a value common to all the commandments—and therefore we should be careful about a light commandment as well as a weighty one, nevertheless their values are not equal, for every one has its own peculiar property and its own peculiar benefit, as being the specific commandment that it is. And in this respect some must be superior to others.

Therefore I say that though prayer is one of the commandments of the Torah and is rewarded in a general way like any other, nevertheless it is much superior to all the others. For every commandment by itself has appertaining to it a specific reward. Thus in connection with the commandment not to take the mother bird together with the young, we read, “That it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days.” And in relation to charity we read: “That the Lord thy God may bless thee in all thine increase and in all the work of thy hands.” But the specific property of prayer is a general benefit which is available for all things. For we find that it avails in curing illness, as in the case of Hezekiah, where we read: “I have heard thy prayer … behold, I will heal thee; on the third day thou shalt go up unto the house of the Lord.” It is also effective to deliver from death. Thus, when Israel committed the sin of the golden calf, Moses was told: “Let me alone, that I may destroy them,” and Moses saved them by his prayer. Similarly, Jonah was saved by his prayer from the bowels of the fish.

Prayer is also efficacious in causing barren women to bear children, as we find: “And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife … and the Lord let Himself be entreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.” Hannah also was remembered as a result of her prayer. Prayer avails also in time of famine, as we read: “And there was a famine in the days of David three years … and David sought the face of the Lord.” Prayer avails also in time of war. Thus in the war of Sennacherib the Bible says: “And Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, prayed because of this, and cried to heaven. And the Lord sent an angel, who cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains, in the camp of the king of Assyria.”

Prayer is thus a universal balm, good for all kinds of diseases and poisons, whether hot or cold, unlike the other kinds of theriaca, which are good only for particular diseases, some only for hot poison, some only for cold. Not one of them is good for both hot and cold poison and for contrary diseases, except the great theriaca only. Similarly prayer is good for all things, even contrary things. Thus Moses said in his prayer: “Remember Abraham …” while Asaph said: “Remember not against us the iniquities of our forefathers.” We see, therefore, that prayer is good for remembering as well as forgetting. There is no other commandment that is good for all things except prayer. This is the meaning of the statement of the Rabbis that the verse: “And ye shall serve the Lord your God …,” refers not to service by means of sacrifices, which is confined to one place, but to service which is good everywhere. Nor can this service be compared to that which a servant does for his master, for God needs not anybody’s service. Necessarily, therefore, this service consists in mentioning God’s praises, acknowledging that all things come from Him, requesting God to supply our needs in supplicating Him and acknowledging that we have no other helper and support outside of Him. This is divine service.

As the Rabbis found in the verse above cited and the one following it four general things obtainable by prayer alone, and not by any other commandments or services, they say that the service mentioned here denotes prayer, or service of the heart. Thus we read here in reference to this service: “And He will bless thy bread and thy water,” and in the days of David we find that prayer was good for famine, as we said before. Similarly we read here: “And I will take sickness away from the midst of thee,” and in the case of Hezekiah we find that he was cured by prayer. Again, we read here: “None shall miscarry, nor be barren, in thy land,” and we find that Hannah was helped by prayer. Further, we read here: “The number of thy days I will fulfil,” and we find that Hezekiah and the Israelites after they made the golden calf were saved from death by prayer. We also read here: “I will send My terror before thee, and will discomfit all the people …,” and we find in the days of Hezekiah that Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, and his camp were destroyed as a result of prayer. We find also that prayer is good for all troubles, as we learn from the prayer of Solomon: “If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting or mildew, locust or caterpillar … whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be … what prayer and supplication soever be made … hear Thou in heaven …” Prayer is also good for salvation from distress and captivity. Thus when Israel was in Egypt we read: “And they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage. And God heard their groaning …” Moreover through the prayers of Daniel and Ezra the Israelites returned from captivity.

We find, therefore, that prayer is like a universal balm, which cures all diseases, and is good for all bodies, and therefore for all kinds of people. Thus Solomon says: “Moreover concerning the stranger that is not of Thy people Israel … when he shall come and pray …” Prayer is good even for absolutely wicked men, as was stated in the sixteenth chapter of this Book in connection with the prayer of Menasseh.

CHAPTER 21

There is a great difficulty in connection with the subject of prayer. There was no greater man than Moses, the chief of all prophets, and yet though he prayed to God that he might be allowed to enter the land of Israel, he was not answered. Thus we read: “And I besought the Lord … Let me go over, I pray Thee … and the Lord said unto me: ‘Let it suffice thee …’ ” This would seem to indicate that a thing decreed by God can not be changed by prayer. This being so, one may very well say that it is in vain to serve God and that there is no advantage in praying to Him, since that which has been decreed can not be annulled.

The solution of this problem is that prayer does avail, at any rate before the matter in question has been finally decreed, and it avails also after the decision if the latter is not accompanied by an oath. Our Rabbis also say: “Prayer is good for a man both before the decision and after,” as we infer from the case of Hezekiah, who was told: “Set thy house in order; for thou shalt die and not live.” And shortly after we read: “I have heard thy prayer … behold, I will add unto thy days …” This was a change after the decision, as our Rabbis say. In the case of Moses, however, the decree was accompanied by an oath, for we read: “Therefore ye shall not bring …”, and our Rabbis say that the expression, “therefore” (laken), indicates an oath, inferring this from the words, “And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli …” This is the reason why the prayer of Moses was of no avail.

There is a difference, however, between an individual and a community. A decree announced concerning an individual can not be reversed if it was accompanied by an oath, whereas a decree concerning a community may be reversed by prayer. This will be seen to follow from the sequence of thought in the text.

Accordingly, in order to make the matter clear, I will explain the language used in the prayer of Moses to make clear the connection of thought. In the beginning he says: “And I besought (vaëthanan) the Lord.” Now the Rabbis say that the word hanan (to beseech) denotes asking a favor gratis (hinnam); their reason being because the word hinnam (gratis) is derived from the root hanan. The idea is that one should not, in praying to God, support his claim by his good deeds or his own merit, for, as Eliphaz said: “What is man that he should be clean? And he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?”

The talmudic sages find fault with Hezekiah who based his prayer on his own merit, and they say that because he based his request on his own merit, God granted his request for the merit of others, and he was told: “I will defend this city to save it, for Mine own sake, and for My servant David’s sake.” Moses, accordingly, did not support his prayer on his own merit, but requested a favor gratuitously. Hence he said: “O Lord God, Thou hast begun …” i. e. it has always been Thy way to show me kindness gratis. Thou hast in the beginning, of Thy own accord, at the burning bush, shed Thy prophetic influence upon me, though I was neither worthy nor prepared.

Our Rabbis in Sifre explain it in the same way: “Thou hast begun to show Thy servant wonders and strength,” as it is said: “I will turn aside now, and see this great sight.” It is clear, therefore, that the Rabbis refer the expression: “Thou hast begun,” to the beginning of Moses’ prophetic call. Moses said in effect, O Lord, Thou needest not hesitate to show me a kindness even though I do not deserve it, or to do me a favor gratis, for it has been Thy way with me. Thou of Thy own accord, didst begin at the burning bush to show Thy servant, etc. Since, therefore, this has been Thy way with me, do me this kindness also which I ask: “Let me go over, I pray Thee, and see the good land …” (This attitude is well expressed in the words: “Save us, O God of our salvation”). What is there to keep Thee from doing this kindness to me? The decree of death that has been made concerning me can only be due to one of three causes. It is either in the nature of punishment from Thee for my sins, or it is my fate as determined by the stars, or my time has come to die. These are the three fixed causes determining a person’s death. Thus David said concerning Saul: “Nay, but the Lord shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall go down into battle, and be swept away,” indicating that there are three kinds of death, penal, natural and accidental. “The Lord shall smite him,” denotes penal death, death as a punishment for a sin. “Or his day shall come to die,” denotes natural death, when the time has come for a man to die by reason of his temperament (mixture of humors). “Or he shall go down into battle, and be swept away,” denoted accidental death, which comes to a man prematurely and not for any sin, but through the indication of the stars, or by reason of a universal decree or law that every one going into a particular battle shall die. If he had not gone into the battle, he would not have died; if he does go he will die by reason of this general indication, though he is not guilty of having committed any sin. He did not mention voluntary death, because no man prefers death to life. But he made a mistake, for Saul’s death was voluntary, as we read: “Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell upon it.” Moses too did not mention voluntary death, for he did not prefer death to life. Therefore he mentioned these three only.

His plea was then as follows: O Lord, if the death decreed upon me is a punishment for my sin, is my iniquity so great that it can not be forgiven? As Cain said: “Is my iniquity too great to bear?” which the Rabbis explain as follows: Cain said to God, O Lord, Thou bearest heaven and earth, and canst not bear my sin! What they mean is this: Cain said to God: If my sin is so great that it can not be forgiven, then my power to sin is greater than God’s power to forgive; but this is impossible, for God’s power is infinite. This was the doubt he expresses in the words: “Is my iniquity too great to bear?” And Moses expressed precisely the same idea when he said: “Thy greatness …” What he meant to say was: I know that Thy greatness is infinite, and that my iniquity can not be so great that Thy infinite greatness is not sufficient to forgive it. Then he said, “And Thy strong hand …,” meaning to say: If my death is due to the stars, Thou hast shown me miracles and wonders which prove that Thy hand is strong enough to overcome the stars. Then he said: “For what god is there …,” referring to natural death, such as the righteous die of. Thus the Rabbis say: “God counts the years of the righteous …” The meaning is, God counts their years to see that they should not be shortened either by punishment or by accident, but that they should live as many years as they are capable of living in accordance with their nature, the composition of their humors, and the fundamental vigor which they possess from the time of their creation. This is the reason why the Bible, referring to Sarah, uses the expression: “The years of the life of Sarah,” having just said: “And the life of Sarah was a hundred and seven and twenty years.” The Bible desires to indicate that the hundred and twenty-seven years that she lived was the number of years of her life, i. e. the number of years which her nature and fundamental and original vigor determined that she should live. Her days were not shortened as were those of Abraham, who, as the Rabbis say, should have lived a hundred and eighty years, like Isaac, but lived only a hundred and seventy-five, his years having been shortened by five, so that he should not see the evil life of Esau. In order to indicate this the expression used in his case is: “And these are the days of the years of Abraham’s life which he lived,” i. e. these are the years which he actually lived, but not those which, according to the nature of his temperament and his original vigor, he should have lived, as was the case with Sarah.

Accordingly, Moses said: If my death is natural, that is, if there is no power in the composition of my temperament to enable me to live longer, Thou canst renew my youth like an eagle, and give me power to be restored like a green fir tree so as to be strong, for there is no other god in the world beside Thee who can do what Thou doest, namely who can create living things and endow them with new natural strength. If, therefore, Thou shouldest give me new life and make me a new creature, there would be none to say Thee nay, for there is no one in the world who can do what Thou doest, or who has Thy strength. All this being so, and there being none to prevent Thee, “Let me go over, I pray Thee, and see …”

But God replied: “Let it suffice thee … But charge Joshua … for he shall go over …” To such an extent, continues Moses, was the divine decree fixed against me, that when we reached the valley opposite Beth-peor, we dwelt there and He did not allow me to go further: “So we abode in the valley over against Beth-peor,” i. e. we could not go on further, because I was to be buried there, as is written: “And he was buried in the valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor.”

To this statement Moses adds the exhortation: “And now, O Israel, hearken unto the statutes … that ye may live, and go in and possess the land …” He says in effect: I took all this trouble in order to enter the land, but was not given the privilege. You are given the privilege to enter the land, therefore be strong in observing the commandment of God that you may be worthy to enter.

You might perhaps say: if my prayer was not heard, it is possible that to-day or to-morrow you may sin and your prayers will not be heard either; my answer is: “Your eyes have seen what the Lord did in Baal-peor … But ye that did cleave unto the Lord … For what great nation is there, that hath God so nigh unto them …” The meaning is, do not think that an individual and a congregation are equal in this matter, for it is not so. With all my worth, my prayer in my own behalf was not accepted, because I am an individual; whereas though you worshipped idols and bowed down to Peor—and there is no one the Lord hates as much as the one who worships idols—my prayer in your behalf was accepted. When I prayed for you on the occasion of the golden calf and of Peor, my prayer was accepted, and God forgave you, though my own prayer for myself was not accepted.

It appears also from the language of the Rabbis in Sifre that the reason Moses speaks of the sin of Baal-peor in this place is in order to indicate the difference between the prayer of an individual for an individual and his prayer for a congregation. Although the two prayers may be equal and of the same kind, yet the prayer for the congregation is more likely to be heard than the prayer for the individual. Therefore he adds the words: “As the Lord our God is whensoever we call upon Him,” the meaning being that no matter what the content of the prayer is, if it is for the congregation, it is accepted. Hence the Rabbis say: “God does not reject the prayers of the congregation, as is said: ‘Behold, God despiseth not the many.’ ” They also say: “A person should always join a congregation,” thus indicating that the prayer of a congregation is always accepted, while that of an individual is not accepted when it concerns a matter that has been decided under oath, as was the case with the prayer of Moses to be allowed to enter the land of Israel. It was not accepted because the matter had already been decided under oath.

CHAPTER 22

We must, however, explain the reason why the decision concerning Moses was accompanied by an oath, so that his prayer was not accepted. According to the Rabbis the essence of Moses’ sin at the waters of Meribah was the expression: “Hear now, ye rebels,” used by Moses, which was an insult to the honor of Israel. And they infer from this that he who insults the honor of a community is guilty of an offence equal to that of profaning the name of God. But it is very difficult to suppose that such a sin should not be capable of atonement. Besides we find in Deuteronomy that Moses again says to Israel: “Ye have been rebellious against the Lord.” If Moses had been punished for saying to them: “Hear now, ye rebels,” he would scarcely have used a similar expression again.

The explanation of the sin of the waters of Meribah has given the commentators a great deal of dufficulty, so much so that Maimonides gave a far fetched explanation, saying that the sin of Moses consisted in becoming angry with Israel for no sufficient reason, when God was not angry with them. For God was not angry with them when they asked for things that were necessities, like water or the manna. According to Maimonides, then, there was here a profanation of the Holy Name, for the people would think that God was angry with them because they asked for water, although they needed it. Else, they would say, Moses would not have been angry with them for no reason. For anger is an unworthy quality, and it is not likely that the head of the prophets would give way to such a low impulse without reason, far be it! Hence the people would come to think ill of God, assuming that He was angry for no good reason. This is the gist of Maimonides’ interpretation, but it is far fetched.

Nahmanides refuted this opinion in his commentary on the Torah. It appears, however, from his words that he, too, agrees with Maimonides that the sin did not consist in the fact that they did not speak to the rock; and for the following reasons: either because the rock is not a rational being to receive a command from God, or because, since Moses was told: “Take the rod, and assemble the congregation, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock …,” it seems that he was expected to strike the rock, since he was told to take the rod, else why was it necessary to mention the rod? But this is no proof, for in Horeb he was told: “And thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river …,” and yet it was found necessary to state specifically in the sequel: “And thou shalt smite the rock.” Here too therefore he should have been told to strike the rock if that was the intention, as he was told the first time. The taking of the rod is no proof that he would have to strike, for the rod does not cause the flow of the water by the force of striking, for it is not the natural property of a rod when it strikes a rock to split it and bring out water by the force of the blow. The phenomenon is a miracle, and the waters come out by decree of God when the rod is near the rock. In the beginning of his prophetic career Moses was told: “And thou shalt take in thy hand thisrod, wherewith thou shalt do the signs.” This shows plainly that the rod was endowed with the property of being the instrument in the performance of the signs, according to the decree of God as commanded through Moses. The proof is as follows: In connection with the plague of hail Moses was told: “Stretch forth thy hand toward heaven, that there may be hail …” and in the sequel it says: “And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and fire ran down unto the earth.” Now the hail was not produced by the rod’s striking the air. But the miracle of the hail was produced in the air by the will of God when the rod in the hand of Moses was in contact with the air. Here too, therefore, the taking of the rod is no proof that it had to be used to strike.

As for the first argument that God would give a command only to a rational being, and the rock was not a rational being to receive a command from God to give forth its waters (this is the opinion of Maimonides, as can be seen in “Pirke Moshe,” ch. 25), it is not valid, for matter does not become affected by itself, but is acted upon by a mover which moves it and prepares it to receive the form. Now when God commands the matter to receive a form or undergo a certain change, as in the verse: “Let the earth bring forth the living creature …;” “Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures” …, and similar passages, the command is not given to the matter, but to the mover that he should prepare the matter to receive the form or to undergo the change which God has decreed. Now the command which is directed to the mover is given to a rational being undoubtedly.

My opinion is that the sin at the waters of Meribah was that they [Moses and Aaron] did not speak to the rock, as the Bible literally says. The text proves it, which says: “Because ye rebelled against My word at the waters of Meribah.” Such an expression cannot apply to the words: “Hear now, ye rebels,” nor to Moses’ anger, but only to their violation of God’s command. The essence of the sin, however, which caused God to take an oath, was that the act evinced a lack of faith, as we read: “Because ye believed not in Me … therefore ye shall not bring …”

The explanation is as follows: One great principle of the Torah and foundation of faith which is contained in the belief in God’s Providence, is that God subjects nature to the control of believers, as Moses says in the Psalm following his prayer. In the name of God he assures him who dwells “in the covert of the Most High,” and abides “in the shadow of the Almighty,” that God will deliver him from the snare of the fowler and from pestilence and from natural accidents, so that he shall tread “upon the lion and asp,” and trample under feet “the young lion and the serpent.”

We find this verified in the lives of some of the pious men. For example, we are told about Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa that he set his foot on the hole of a lizard and was bitten; but the lizard died, a reversal of the natural course. Rabbi Hanina then said to his disciples: My children, it is not the lizard that kills, but sin it is that kills. We thus see that by the command of the righteous changes occur in nature. We are also told concerning R. Hanina that he said: “He who said that oil should burn, will command vinegar to burn,” and it was so, and we find other similar cases. Similarly the Rabbis say concerning Rabbi Phinehas ben Yair that by his command he divided a river many times. A river is not a rational being, and yet it was divided for those who fulfil the divine commandments and those who associate with them. We are also told of a great many miracles that were performed by Nahum of Gamzo and other righteous men by a mere word without prophecy or divine speech or command. Similarly, Eliphaz said to Job: “Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee.” From this it appears that the prophets and those who speak with the Holy Spirit, like Eliphaz, agree that nature changes by the command of the righteous according to their will, not to speak of the prophets, who performed miracles by their commands. Thus Elijah said: “As the Lord, the God of Israel, liveth … there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.” He also said: “If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty,” and it was so. Elisha said: “To-morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel …,” and it was so. Also he “made the iron to swim,” and performed other miracles without a previous prophetic message or divine commandment concerning the matter. The same is true of the other prophets. Moses himself said: “If these men die the common death of all men … But if the Lord make a new thing … And it came to pass, as he made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground did cleave asunder that was under them. And the earth opened her mouth …” But we are not told that God commanded him to do this. Isaiah also says: “That confirmeth the word of His servant, and performeth the counsel of His messengers.”

He, therefore, who doubts that God performs the will of the prophet or the righteous or the pious man that is worthy, is virtually casting doubt upon the Torah and one of its principles. Particularly on an occasion for the sanctification of the divine name is it incumbent upon one to publish the fact that nature is subject to, and is compelled to do the will of those who observe the Torah and fulfil its commandments. A prophet therefore who is worthy to perform miracles and refuses to do so when he can save thereby a nation or a community, is surely responsible for casting a doubt upon the belief. For the bystander will think that there is no truth in the biblical statements, made in many places, that nature is subject to those who perform the commandments of the Torah, and this will lead to doubting the Torah.

This is especially the case when people see that the very same prophet through whom the Torah was given does not rely upon this belief to make a decree against nature so as to change its course or to perform a miracle, though the prophet in question is more worthy to perform miracles than any one else. This no doubt leads to profanation of the Holy Name and to the casting of doubt upon the faith. It looks as if the prophet himself were in doubt whether it is true that nature can be changed by his word, as the Torah promises. This is why it says: “Because ye believed not in Me.” For if, when the Israelites asked for water, Moses and Aaron had decreed that the rock should split and water should flow, God would without doubt have “confirmed the word of His servant and performed the counsel of His messengers,” and He would thus have been sanctified in the eyes of all the people.

But Moses and Aaron did not do so, instead they went to the door of the tent of meeting as though they were fleeing from the people, as Ibn Ezra explains, and as though they had no idea what to do. This was no doubt a profanation of the divine name, and was likely to cause lack of faith in God and His Torah on the part of those who witnessed the affair. Therefore the Bible says: “Ye believed not in Me.” For if you had believed you would have decreed a change in the course of nature, in order that My name might be sanctified through you, when all people would see that I “confirm the words of My servant and perform the counsel of My messengers.”

And though Moses and Aaron acted as they did by reason of their great humility, not wishing to take any credit unto themselves without the command of God, nevertheless it was accounted to them as an iniquity and a lack of faith because of the profanation of the divine name which resulted from it, as we have explained. Hence we find that when Joshua was in a similar predicament, he did not wait for divine permission or advice, but relied on God that He would do his will, and said: “Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon …” As the Bible testifies: “Then spoke Joshua to the Lord …; and he said in the sight of Israel: ‘Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon …’ ” God confirmed his word, and the Bible even says that such a great thing did not happen even in the days of Moses, namely that Moses should of his own accord have given so great a command and it should be fulfilled. The Bible says: “And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man,” i. e. that God should confirm such an important command given by a man of his own accord. This is an allusion to the lack of faith which the Bible imputes to Moses and Aaron because they refused to act of their own accord without divine authority. Then again when they were told: “And ye shall speak unto the rock,” and they did not speak, but struck it instead, they sinned again in that they transgressed the command of God. For if they had spoken, the name of God would have been sanctified and they would have made good part of their error. But not having spoken, they added to their sin.

The reason they committed the sin was that they thought that as in Horeb the waters came out by striking, they would in this case too come out only by striking. But God had intended otherwise. At the first time the Torah had not yet been given and nature was not as yet subject to Israel to such an extent. But now in the fortieth year they were worthy of having miracles done for them and of having nature submit to them by the mere word of Moses. Therefore there was rebellion in the fact that they did not speak to the rock as they had been commanded, and lack of faith and profanation of the Holy Name in that they did not, on their own responsibility and without divine command, decree that the rock should give forth its water. Similarly we find when God said to Moses: “Get thee up into this mountain of Abarim … and be gathered unto thy people,” that the Bible mentions two things: “Because ye trespassed against Me …” and “Because ye sanctified Me not,” alluding thereby to the two sins.

Now since the sin involved lack of faith and profanation of the Holy Name, it was not subject to forgiveness, as we find in the treatise Yoma: “But if one is guilty of profanation of the Holy Name, repentance has no power to suspend punishment, nor can suffering wipe out the guilt, death alone erases the stain.” Therefore God made a decree with an oath, and for this reason neither Moses’ prayer nor his repentance availed him in this sin. Study this chapter very carefully that you may understand it, for it contains the best that has been said on this subject, and may God in His mercy deliver us from error, amen.

CHAPTER 23

Some words denote good solely and absolutely, and do not denote evil at all. Some denote evil absolutely, and in no way denote good, while there are certain words that denote for the most part good, but in some aspect denote also evil, and vice versa.

Those which denote good only, like “upright,” “faithful,” “merciful,” “gracious,” and so on, may be applied to God and used in praying to Him. Those which denote absolute evil, like “wicked,” “wrong doer,” “robber,” “doer of violence,” and so on, may not be ascribed to God, much less be used in prayer. Those words which denote good for the most part may not be applied to God unless the prophets apply them to Him, like the word Hasid (pious, merciful), for example. For though it denotes good for the most part, nevertheless since we also find it used sometimes, though rarely, to signify shame, as: “Lest he that heareth it revile (yehasedeka) thee;” “It is a shameful (hesed) thing”, we should not permit ourselves to apply it to God if we did not find in the Bible the expression: “For I am merciful (Hasid), saith the Lord, I will not bear grudge forever.”

But those words which denote for the most part something evil or shameful, we must not permit ourselves to apply to God in our prayer even though we find that the prophets apply them to Him, unless they apply them in prayer. For example, grief and sorrow are ascribed to God in the Bible: “And it grieved Him at His heart;” “And His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.” And yet we do not apply such phrases to God in prayer, as, “Grieve for me,” or “May Thy soul grieve for me.” Similarly we do not permit ourselves to ascribe to God weeping, although the prophets do ascribe it to Him, according to the opinion of our Rabbis: “Said Rab Samuel son of Unya in the name of Rab: There is a place where God weeps, and its name is Mistarim, as is said: ‘But if ye will not hear it, My soul shall weep in Mistarim for your pride.’ ‘For your pride,’ means the pride of Israel, which has been humbled. Is there weeping in the presence of God? Do we not read: ‘Strength and gladness are in His place?’ Answer: The two are not incompatible, the one has reference to the inner chambers, the other to the outer.”

The Rabbis, as we see, take the verse to represent the words of God and not those of the prophet, because the section begins: “Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud; for the Lord hath spoken.” This language shows that they are the words of God and not those of the prophet, as we read: “Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken: Children I have reared, and brought up …” The passage reads: “Give glory to the Lord your God, before it grow dark … But if ye will not hear it, My soul shall weep in Mistarim for your pride.” According to the Rabbis, the meaning is as follows: The words: “Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud (tigbahu),” mean: Do not think you are eternal like those on high (gebohim), for it is not so. You belong to that part of nature which is subject to genesis and decay, and if you desire permanence, “Give glory to the Lord your God,” i. e. give your soul, which is called glory, as in the verse: “Yea, let him lay my glory in the dust.” Give it to God, and see to it that it should obtain spiritual perfection, which is also called glory, as in the verses: “And his resting-place shall be glorious;” “Let the saints exult in glory.” This perfection is called glory, because it shows God’s glory in that He created the human soul in such a way that though man belongs to that part of nature which is subject to genesis and decay, if the soul cleaves to Him, it can become permanent and eternal.

The prophet then says that they should endeavor to attain this perfection before the day of death, “before it grow dark,” as Solomon says: “Remember then thy Creator in the days of thy youth … Before the sun, and the moon, and the stars, are darkened,” which refers to the day of death. Then the prophet continues: “But if ye will not hear it, My soul shall weep in Mistarim,” i. e. if you will not hearken to My counsel to endeavor to attain this glory, namely the perfection of the soul, My soul will weep in Mistarim. The meaning of which is: Be assured that My wisdom and My will have decreed that you should be destined for evil and destruction. (Weeping, as is well known, is always done for something that has ceased to be.) He thus alludes to the fact that there is a place to which privation and evil attach, namely the sublunar world, which the Rabbis call the inner chambers, because the earth is in the center of the world, surrounded on all sides, while the heavens are called the outer chambers where gladness, i. e. permanence, reigns; or it may be that because privation attaches to “hyle” (matter), which can not be perceived by the senses, he calls it inner chambers, while the designation outer chambers applies to sensible existence. In this way they mean to indicate that the whole of existence is cared for and guided by God, even that portion to which privation attaches, which is called inner chambers. The existence of this part is due to the gladness which exists in that sensible nature which is called outer chambers. This is an allusion to the fact that since privation in existing things is due to matter (hyle), none of them can be eternal except through the soul. The words: “My soul shall weep,” signify: The human soul, which is Mine, will be destroyed, for “weeping” alludes to destruction. Or the words may be used figuratively, as though the Maker is grieved when His work does not realize the final perfection which He intended. Therefore the prophet says that the weeping is for the pride of Israel which is humbled. The virtue of Israel and their perfection which is intended for them through the Torah, is the perfection and permanent existence of the soul. Therefore God is grieved if the soul does not maintain its permanence and ceases to be. This is the meaning of the expression that He weeps or that there is weeping before Him.

Now, as to this and similar expressions, though we find that, according to the Rabbis, the prophet applies them to God, we must not permit ourselves to apply them to God in our prayer and say: “Weep for me,” or “Grieve for me,” or, “Let Thy soul grieve for me.” We may, however, say: “May Thy mercies yearn for us,” because we find that the prophet also uses this expression in a prayer. Isaiah says: “The yearning of Thy heart and Thy compassions, now restrained toward me.”

It is thus clear that not every one is free to express himself as he pleases in prayer, and especially is he not free to ascribe an attribute to God for which there is no authority. This is what Ecclesiastes had in mind when he said: “Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter a word before God.” Abraham Ibn Ezra goes into this matter at length in his commentary on Ecclesiastes on this verse. His ideas are right and need no corrections. To sum up, a prayer must satisfy three requirements in order to be acceptable:

1. It must be brief and have appropriate expressions indicating the suppliant’s ideas. One must not be verbose, for verbosity is the quality of a fool, hence one must not bring oneself under the verse: “For a dream cometh through a multitude of business; and a fool’s voice through a multitude of words.” The words of the prayer must be pleasant to the hearer and not tiresome. For this reason, songs and piyyutim and supplications in verse have been chosen for the prayers because all the requirements mentioned are contained in them, and they correspond to musical rhythm besides, for the definition of a poem is that it is a composition in which the parts bear relation to and have connection with each other, and it expresses the idea of the composer in brief and pleasant words, metrically arranged in accordance with musical rhythm.

2. The intention of the mind must be in agreement with the words one expresses. The suppliant must not put himself under the designation: “But they beguiled Him with their mouth, and lied unto Him with their tongue. For their heart was not stedfast with Him.” He must be of those whose speech agrees with their thoughts, as David said: “Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before Thee.” The meaning is, since the words of my mouth are in agreement with the meditation of my heart, let them be acceptable before Thee.

3. The voice must be low and indicative of submission, as of a person who beseeches his master, as the Psalmist says: “Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint;” “Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto Thee.” One must not lay oneself open to the charge: “She hath uttered her voice against Me; therefore have I hated her.”

These three requirements are alluded to by David in the fifth Psalm. “Give ear to my words,” alludes to the first requirement, which is that of brevity. “Consider my meditation,” alludes to the second requirement, sincerity; “Hearken unto the voice of my cry,” alludes to the third requirement, submissiveness as indicated in the voice. These are the indispensable conditions, without which prayer can not be accepted. But even though the three requirements are present, it does not follow that the prayer is bound, under all circumstances, to be accepted. It may be that the suppliant is so far from God that he must pray repeatedly and intensely before he can be heard, but after he has prayed repeatedly and devoutly he may be heard. This is why Isaiah finds fault with Israel because they did not importune God with prayer: “And there is none that calleth upon Thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of Thee.” From this it seems that if they had persisted in praying to God, they would have been heard. Similarly we find in relation to the men of Nineveh: “Let them cry mightily unto God,” and they were heard. Moses, also, when he prayed concerning the matter of the calf, continued and persisted in his prayer many days until he was answered. The same is true of his prayer at the time of the spies, until he was told: “I have pardoned according to thy word.”

And sometimes the suppliant is so far from God, or the thing that is requested is so great that prayer alone, though continuous and earnest, is not enough, and there is need of some act or acts indicating submission and repentance. Isaiah says: “Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear,” and later he says: “Wash you, make you clean …” In relation to the men of Nineveh it says: “Let them be covered with sackcloth, both man and beast.” The righteous men, too, performed acts indicative of submission. Daniel said: “I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all.” And the angel said to him: “From the first day that thou didst set thy heart to understand, and to humble thyself before thy God, thy words were heard.”

There are certain persons for whom it is sufficient to pray in thought alone. David says: “The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart;” “The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon Him.” There are still others of so high a degree that they are granted even what they do not ask for. This is the position of the “God-fearing:” “He will fulfil the desire of them that fear Him.” Nevertheless they are obliged to pray actually, as the verse continues: “He also will hear their cry, and will save them.” Finally there are those who occupy the highest degree, the “lovers of God.” They do not need to pray to God, who keeps them of His own accord, as the sequel has it: “The Lord preserveth all them that love Him.” The Rabbis say, in commenting upon the verse: “Who alone doeth wondrous things,” The one for whom the miracle is done does not realize that a miracle has been done for him. This was the position of Abraham.

CHAPTER 24

All the acts which a man does do not necessarily realize the purpose intended in doing them. It happens that a person does all that is necessary in the proper way and yet fails to realize the purpose intended. Thus the physician in many cases does all that is necessary and in the best way in which it can be done, without any error on his or the patient’s part, and yet the cure, which is intended, does not come about. Similarly, the farmer may do all that is proper, he may sow at the proper time and his field may be good and kept in good shape, and yet the seed may not prosper. The explanation of all this is clear. Neither the physician alone nor the physician plus the patient are the cause of the cure, but the physician and nature. Similarly in agriculture, the cause of the produce is not the husbandman alone, nor the field, but the husbandman and nature.

So in the case of prayer. It often happens that a person prays in a proper way, at the proper time, and yet his prayer is not accepted, not because of any sin on his part, but because the will of God does not assent. In the same way a shipbuilder, in many cases, makes his ship properly, navigates it properly on the sea at the proper time, and yet fails to reach his desired destination, simply because the will of God does not desire it, either as a punishment, like the case of Jonah, or by way of providence, for a good end, as determined in the several ways discussed above. So prayer sometimes fails of acceptance, either as a punishment, as we explained in the case of Moses, or because the recipient [of God’s influence] is not prepared until he persists in offering many prayers, or performs certain acts indicative of submission, such as fasting or putting on sackcloth, like the men of Nineveh, and so on, as we explained; or there may be some other obstacle, as the Rabbis say, that David’s prayer that he should not die on the Sabbath, was not accepted, because the time had come for Solomon his son to reign, and one reign can not encroach upon another even a hair’s breadth. Or because God knows that the favor requested is not good for the suppliant, and hence his prayer is not accepted by way of providence, for his own good. For example, a person may pray for children, and his prayer is not accepted because God knows that his children will be hostile to him and will seek to kill him, as Absalom sought to kill David; or a person may pray for wealth, and God knows that his wealth will be the cause of his death, as Solomon says: “Riches kept by the owner thereof to his hurt;” or the cause of unbelief, as Solomon says: “Lest I be full and deny, and say: ‘Who is the Lord?’ ” or for some other cause hidden from us and known to God.

The best kind of prayer is therefore that of the wise man, who said: “O Lord, do Thy will in heaven above, show kindness to those who fear Thee here below, and do what is good in Thine eyes.” He meant that God should do His will in heaven, so that pleasure may be afforded below to those who fear the Lord, i. e. that He should overcome the stars and annul their decree against those who perform His will, so that they may have power to save themselves from their trouble. Then he says: “And do what is good in Thine eyes,” that is, whatever it is that I pray to Thee for, attend not to my words or request, to do what my heart desires, or what I ask, for many times I ask and pray for something which is bad for me, thinking it is a good. But Thou knowest better than I whether the thing is good for me or bad. Therefore decide Thou and not I; do what Thou knowest is good. Therefore he says: “Good in Thine eyes,” and not in my eyes. This is the meaning of the rabbinical statement: “One is obliged to bless God for evil, as well as for good.” The reason is because God knows what is good, not man, and it is God who has to choose the way of good and of salvation for man, but man has nothing to do but to bless God always. This is what David meant when he said: “Salvation belongeth unto the Lord;” i. e. God alone knows how to choose the way of salvation, not man. Upon man it is incumbent always to bless the Lord for good as well as for evil, and to recognize that everything is for his good. Hence the Psalmist concludes: “Thy blessing be upon Thy people, Selah.”

For this reason the most fitting prayer is to ask the divine favor in general terms, and not in terms definite and specific. A person who prays to God in particular and specific terms is, as it were, desirous of forcing the divine will to his own ideas and preferences instead of bending his ideas to God’s will; but this is tantamount to a contempt for God’s knowledge and power, as though God knew no other way of granting his request except the one which he has chosen. Concerning such as he does the Psalmist say: “Only for God wait thou in stillness, my soul; For from Him cometh my hope,” i. e. when thou prayest to a human being, thou must specify thy request and state the way in which thou desirest to attain thy purpose, for without this he would not know what is in thy mind, what thou requirest and what is good and advantageous for thee. But when thou prayest before God, thou must not specify thy request, but, “wait in silence for Him, my soul,” and do not thou choose the way for thy salvation, for He knows what is good and beneficial for thee better than thou. This is the meaning of the words: “From Him cometh my salvation,” or, “From Him cometh my hope,” for He knows the way of salvation or the way to realize the hope better than I. For sometimes I think of a certain way of obtaining honor or some other good or salvation and the result is the opposite. Therefore one must pray to Him in general terms and cast one’s burden upon Him. This is the meaning of the Psalmist who, after saying: “So shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord,” adds: “Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in Him, and He will bring it to pass.” That is, he will bring to pass what is good and beneficial to thee, for He knows how to choose the way of good or honor or salvation better than thou. Hence the Psalmist also says: “Upon God resteth my salvation and my glory.” That is, the reason I say, “Only for God wait thou in stillness, my soul,” is because it is for Him to choose what is salvation for me or relief or deliverance or honor, for I am not able to tell, but I put my trust in Him that He will choose what is good and proper and beneficial for me. Hence he concludes: “The rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God.” This will suffice concerning prayer.

CHAPTER 25

If we examine all the mandatory precepts in the Torah, we do not find any one precept through which alone one may attain the purpose intended by the Torah except repentance. The purpose intended by the Torah to be realized through the performance of its commandments, as we explained in the Third Book of this treatise, is the love of God, which leads man to the great reward destined for the soul. Now we find that this very purpose is stated in the Torah in relation to repentance. This proves the great importance of this commandment, and shows that it is a more comprehensive precept than prayer. For though prayer avails for particular purposes, it does not give the soul the comprehensive reward that is attained by repentance. Therefore we must treat this subject after prayer, rather than the other precepts, and with due brevity, as required by the limits of our treatise.

If we examine carefully the section “Nizabim,” we find that the words: “See, I have set before thee … in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God … to hearken to His voice, and to cleave unto Him …,” as the context and sequence of thought show, have reference to repentance. For it says first: “And shalt return unto the Lord thy God, and hearken to His voice …” And it concludes with repentance, saying that it must be with perfect sincerity and that God will help one if it is; hence the concluding words: “If thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.” Then the Bible speaks of the great importance of repentance and the ease with which it may be performed: “For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not too hard for thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven … Neither is it beyond the sea.… But the word is very nigh unto thee …” All this no doubt has reference to repentance, as is shown by the words: “In thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.” For the essence of repentance consists in confession as expressed in words, and regret as felt in the heart, as we shall explain. Nahmanides also says that the text in question deals with repentance. The text gives it exceeding high praise, when it says: it is not in heaven, nor beyond the sea.

The idea is: This thing (viz. repentance) is so valuable that you should undergo for its sake all the trouble in the world, even to go up to heaven, if possible, or beyond the sea, in order to obtain it, for it is something extremely valuable. For logically speaking, the sinner should not be forgiven under any circumstances, as the prophet says: “Wherewith shall I come before the Lord … Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams?” That is, the price of being delivered from punishment for one’s sins ought to be so great that he knows not how much he should give, or what would be sufficient, thousands of rams or ten thousands of rivers of oil; whether he should give his first-born for his transgression or the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul. All this shows that, logically speaking, no ransom should suffice to remove one’s sin. How much less reason is there then that the sinner should be received and forgiven for mere verbal repentance, as the prophet says: “Take with you words, and return unto the Lord,” unless it be by divine grace? Therefore the Torah calls solemn attention to it: “See I have set before thee this day … therefore choose life, that thou mayest live …”

Having shown the facility of obtaining it: “But the word is very nigh unto thee …” he says: “See I have set before thee …” That is, you have no excuse in this case as you may have in respect to the other commandments, which, by reason of their great number and difficulty, you can not perform. It is not so here, for this commandment is very easy. And if you perform it you will obtain life and good, while if you indolently neglect it, death and misfortune will come upon you. Therefore you must be careful not to slight it. It is like the case of a person who is suffering from a serious illness which is regarded as incurable. Then a physician comes and says to the patient: I will tell you of a drug which will cure you of your illness. The patient thinks that since it can cure what is regarded as an incurable disease, the drug must be very costly, and extremely difficult to obtain. But the physician says: Do not think that there is any difficulty in obtaining this drug, or that you have to go up to heaven for it, or to spend a great deal of money to cross the sea in a ship, as ought to be the case. No, it is very easy to get. This is the meaning of the concluding words: “But the word is very nigh …,” i. e. since it is nigh, you must not be indolent and neglect to obtain it, for it is life to your soul, and as you do not indolently neglect to seek life, so you must not neglect this. Hence he adds: “Therefore choose life …,” explaining that the life which is obtained through this commandment is the very purpose intended to be obtained through the Torah: “To love the Lord thy God, to hearken to His voice, and to cleave unto Him; for that is thy life and the length of thy days; that thou mayest dwell in the land …” “For that is thy life,” refers to the world of souls. “And the length of thy days,” means this world, viz. to “dwell in the land.” In other words‘ through this love are obtained communion with God, eternal life and physical happiness.

This is all true if repentance is motived by love, but if the motive is fear, he will indeed receive his reward, but it is not that complete repentance which confers the great reward of which we have been speaking. Our Rabbis say: “Resh Lakish said: ‘Great is the penitent, for his wilful sins are accounted to him as errors, as is said: “For thou hast stumbled in thy iniquity.” “Iniquity,” is a wrong done deliberately, and yet he calls it stumbling!’ But did not Resh Lakish say: ‘Great is the penitent, for his deliberate wrongs are changed into merits, as is said: “And when the wicked turneth from his wickedness, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby?” ’ Answer: The two statements are not contradictory, the one has reference to a person who repents from love, the other refers to one who repents from fear.”

This matter requires explanation. How does Resh Lakish infer that if a man repents from fear, his wilful deeds are converted into errors? Justice requires that if one repents from fear of punishment, his repentance should not avail him at all. For an act deserving praise or blame or reward or punishment is one that is done voluntarily, without any mixture of compulsion, whereas the act of repentance from fear is not completely voluntary, why then should one receive any reward at all?

The answer is that there are two kinds of repentance from fear. The first is that of the man who repents from fear of the punishment which is upon him, like a slave entreating his master while he is beating him, but as soon as his master removes the rod from him, he disobeys him as before, as was the case with Pharaoh. As long as the plague was upon him, he said: “The Lord is righteous,” but as soon as he was relieved, he hardened his heart again as before. This showed clearly that the first repentance was forced by the terrors of death which had fallen upon him …, and was not a free act. Such an attitude should not be regarded as repentance at all.

The other is the case of the man who repents from fear of God and His punishment, who has the fear of the Lord before him even in time of respite. He is afraid of God’s punishment because he believes that all things come from God as reward or punishment, and does not ascribe events to nature and chance, as Pharaoh did, who as soon as the plague departed went back to his original bad behavior. Even after the plague of the first born, the moment he thought the Israelites had lost their way, he ascribed all the signs and wonders which he had seen, to chance. Therefore he took courage and pursued the Israelites, thereby proving clearly that his repentance in the first place was due to compulsion on account of the plagues, and was not voluntary.

In this way we must explain the statements in the Bible that God hardens the heart of the wicked, or makes them stiff-necked, and prevents them from repenting. The wicked man, when misfortune comes upon him, pretends to become pious, and returns to God from the fear of the punishment which is upon him, as Pharaoh said: “I have sinned this time; the Lord is righteous.” Now, since this act is like one that is forced and not free, God hardens his heart, by suggesting to him other causes to which he can attribute the misfortune, accident, for example, rather than divine providence. This is done in order to remove from his heart the softening effect which came from the misfortune, so that he may return to his natural state, and act freely without compulsion. Then it may be found out whether his repentance was free or not. Now since, when the yoke of the plague was removed from Pharaoh, his choice was evil, God said: “I hardened his heart,” i. e. I removed from his heart the softening effect which came from the plague and restored him to the natural state of freedom; while he, owing to his wicked attitude, when in a state of freedom, sought for various causes and excuses to which he might ascribe the plagues so that they might seem accidental.

This is the meaning of the words: “If you will walk with me keri (קרי),” i. e. if you ascribe events to chance (mikreh), “Then will I also walk with you with the wrath of Keri, etc.” It is in this way that the gates of repentance are closed before the wicked. God does not prevent a person from making a good choice, Heaven forbid! As the Bible says: “For I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that he should return from his ways and live.” But God leaves him to his freedom without any external compulsion, and he chooses his own way. This was also the case with Sihon, concerning whom the Bible says: “For the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate.” Sihon was guilty before God for his wickedness, but he was afraid to come into conflict with Israel because he feared God’s punishment, therefore God introduced various remote circumstances in order to remove from his heart the softening effect due to what he had heard of the miracles that were done for Israel, and to leave him solely to his freedom.

God commanded Moses to send messengers to the king of Edom, saying to him: “Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy land.” And when Edom refused and came out against Israel, “with much people, and with a strong hand,” God commanded Israel to turn away from him. When Sihon saw this, he planned and plotted wickedly, saying to himself that Israel’s success was not due to divine providence, seeing that they turned away from the king of Edom and from the king of Moab, as Jephthah explained, and hence he thought he was no whit inferior to these, took courage and went out against them to fight, but Israel smote him with the edge of the sword and took possession of his land. If Moses had not sent messengers to the king of Edom, Sihon would not have had the courage to go out to fight against them, for fear of the Lord, and they would have required a long time to subdue all his land. This is the meaning of the hardening of heart of which the Bible speaks in such expressions as: “For the Lord thy God hardened his spirit … that He might deliver him into thy hand …”

In this way we can explain why the Torah mentions the incident of the mission to the king of Edom. For at first sight it would seem to be obviously discreditable to Israel. When Israel said: “Thou shalt sell me food for money …,” the king of Edom thought that they were in want of bread and water, since they were willing to pay him for water, and therefore he asked to be paid also for allowing them to pass, so that Israel was obliged to say: “And if we drink of thy water, I and my cattle, then will I give the price thereof,” explaining that it was not necessary for them to buy water, but if they drank it, they would pay. But, they said, we will not pay for the mere passage. Then the king of Edom said: “Thou shalt not pass through. And … came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.” God, then, commanded Israel to turn away from him, and Moses and all Israel were astonished at this. Later when God commanded them to send messengers to Sihon, king of Heshbon, against whom, when he came out against them, they fought and whom they defeated, they understood the deep thoughts of God. It was clear to them then that the command of God to send messengers to the king of Edom and the king of Moab and to turn away from them, was in order to strengthen the heart of Sihon, that he should go out to fight, so that Israel might defeat him and take quick possession of his land, in order to show his bad will.

Accordingly we say that one who repents from fear in the manner of Sihon and Pharaoh, is not credited with repentance at all, but he who repents from fear because he believes in Providence, and for this reason is afraid of the word of God and does not seek for pretexts and extraneous explanations for God’s righteous judgments, but recognizes that all things that happen to a person are the result of providence and in the nature of punishment for his evil deeds,—a person of this sort deserves compensation for his repentance, though it is from fear, and concerning him Resh Lakish said that his wilful deeds are accounted as though they were unintentional, as he infers from the biblical expression: “For thou hast stumbled in thine iniquity.” From the text it would seem as if it refers to one who has not repented at all, but Resh Lakish infers from the expression: “Return O Israel, unto (‘ad) the Lord” [instead of to (’el)], that the text refers to one who has returned a little, but has not completely returned to God, from love. The first mode of repentance, namely from fear, still has remaining in it the obstacle of iniquity: “For thou hast stumbled in thine iniquity.”

We still have to explain, however, the statement that if a man repents from love, his wilful misdeeds are converted for him into merits. Justice dictates that it is sufficient that repentance wipes out a man’s sins, so that they are as if they had never been, but how can such a person attain any degree meriting future life? If he has no merits, his status is zero and there is no distinction in this respect between the one who repents from fear and the one who repents from love.

The explanation of the difficulty is as follows: Strict justice has no room for repentance at all, as we explained in the beginning of the chapter. Repentance is a matter of divine grace and charity. Hence there is no reason for surprise if God’s infinite kindness goes so far. Hosea explains this matter, when he says concerning the penitent: “I will heal their backsliding.” His contemporaries expressed their doubts and said to him: How is it possible that repentance should avail the person to obtain reward or happiness, since it is quite sufficient if it wipes out his sins? The person remains, therefore, equally devoid of sins as well as merits, how then can he be entitled to divine pleasure or love, which are promised in the Bible to the penitent? To this the prophet answers in the name of God: “I will hear their backsliding, I will love them freely,” i. e. It is true that the penitent does not deserve any degree of happiness by his own merit, the love of God which comes to him through repentance is due to divine grace and is in the nature of charity. This may be either because the precept of repentance stands higher than all the other precepts of the Torah, and through it alone one can attain the purpose intended by the Torah, viz. the love of God, or it means literally that the penitent gets his reward as a matter of pure grace and generosity, as we read: “I will love them freely,” i. e. as their repentance came from love, so I will love them freely. David also, when he repented of the Bathsheba affair, said: “And let a willing spirit uphold me,” i. e. a spirit of free gift and grace, not as the result of any merit, but as coming purely from God’s love and from the kindness which flows from God and influences every man in the measure in which he prepares himself to receive the divine kindness. The Psalmist also says: “So shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord;” “Ask of Me, and I will give the nations for thine inheritance;” “Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.” We thus see that he makes the granting of the favor dependent upon the asking.

A person who repents from fear, does so because he is afraid that punishment will come upon him for the sins he has committed. God, as a reward for his repentance, gives him grace as he requests, protects him from punishment, converts his wilful misdeeds into errors, and he is not punished for them, but requires atonement as for a deed done in error. But he who repents from love, not from fear of the punishment that may come upon him for his sin, who is not afraid of punishment, his heart being “as an adamant harder than flint,” in bearing punishment, who repents solely from a love of God, because he desires to do that which is pleasing to God solely because it is pleasing to God, as a lover does that which is pleasing to his friend, not because of the fear of any punishment,—such a person attains through such repentance the purpose intended by the Torah, viz. the love of God. Therefore it is fitting that God should love him, as we read: “I love them that love me,” which is not the case in the one who repents from fear. Therefore it is not proper that they should stand on the same plane. Nevertheless, although the repentance is not at first due to love, as is proper, but to fear of punishment, God promises that He will help him who repents in the first place from fear to achieve complete repentance before God, viz. repentance from love. This we infer from the fact that in the beginning of the section dealing with repentance, it says: “In thy distress, when all these things are come upon thee …,” showing that the original motive of repentance was the fear of punishment which has come upon him. Then it says: “And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart …,” which indicates that though originally repentance was due to fear, God will circumcise the heart of the sinner and help him to repent from love, which is true repentance, as we explained.

CHAPTER 26

The elements of repentance by which a person may be cleansed of his iniquities and purified of his sin before God are correction of thought, speech and act. Correction of thought means that he should feel regret on account of his sins. Correction of speech signifies that he should confess his transgressions; while correction of act denotes that he should take it upon himself never again to return to his folly, but should do instead such acts as would indicate that the former were done in error and unintentionally.

It is clearly expressed in the Prophets that regret is essential to repentance. Jeremiah says: “No man repenteth him of his wickedness, saying: ‘What have I done?’ ” Joel says: “Who knoweth whether He will not turn and repent, and leave a blessing behind Him.” Confession is specifically mentioned in the Torah: “Then they shall confess their sin which they have done;” “And they shall confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers;” “He shall confess that wherein he hath sinned.” A promise not to repeat the sin is also mentioned by the prophet: “Neither will we call any more the work of our hands our gods;” and in the Psalms we read: “For He will speak peace unto His people, and to His saints; But let them not turn back to folly.”

The things hindering and preventing repentance are three: ignorance of having committed a sin, excusing oneself, and the love of money and glory. It is clear that every one of these hinders repentance. If a man does not recognize or know that he has sinned, he will never regret doing the thing he does, nor repent, as a sick man can not be cured as long as he does not feel or know that he is sick, for he will never seek a cure. So if one does not know that he has sinned, he will never repent. For this reason God found fault with Israel for not recognizing their sins, for this was a reason why they did not repent: “I will go and return to My place, till they acknowledge their fault, and seek My face,” i. e. until they regard themselves as transgressors and sinners, when they will repent and seek My face. David also said: “For I know my transgressions.” God said: “Cry aloud,” indicating that a knowledge of one’s sin is essential to repentance.

It is also clear from the thing itself that self-excuse prevents repentance. For if a man thinks that excusing himself for his sin will avail him, he will never regret the doing of it, nor confess his sin. Such a one is called a man “who covers his transgressions,” as Solomon says: “He that covereth his transgressions shall not prosper.” Covering one’s sin means to make something else responsible for one’s sin, as Job says: “If after the manner of Adam I covered my transgressions.” The reference is to Adam, who excused himself for his sin by saying: “The woman whom Thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree …” But his excuse did not do him any good, for man was given reason so that he should always watch his conduct and not sin. This is why one who commits a misdeed through error is called a sinner and requires atonement. Similarly one must be careful not to be misled by any one, and hence Adam was told: “Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife … cursed is the ground …,” although Adam had not been told not to listen to the voice of his wife. This shows that it does not avail one to excuse himself by saying, So and so made me sin, for nothing excuses a sin except absolute compulsion, concerning which the Rabbis say that heaven acquits a man in case of compulsion. We shall treat of the subject of compulsion in the next chapter.

Love of money and of glory prevents repentance. For if a person repents in order to get some financial benefit or honor, his act is not repentance at all. One must undertake not to return again to folly for the love of God and not for any other motive. Thus David said that his repentance should be accepted because there was no element in it to prevent its acceptance: “I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid …” The words: “I acknowledged my sin,” allude to the necessity of knowing that one has sinned. “And mine iniquity have I not hid,” indicates that he did not excuse himself for his sin. Then he says: “I said: ‘I will make confession concerning my transgressions,’ ” to show that his repentance and confession were solely for the love of God and not for the sake of money or glory.

Saul’s repentance when he sinned in reference to Amalek lacked these three requirements, and therefore even though he confessed his sin before Samuel twice, saying: “I have sinned,” his repentance was not accepted. At first he denied the sin, not knowing that he had committed one. When Samuel said to him: “Wherefore then didst thou not hearken to the voice of the Lord …? he replied: “Yea, I have hearkened to the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which the Lord sent me …” And when Samuel said to him that this obstinacy was a greater sin than his disobedience in the first place, which was the sin proper: “For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbournness is as idolatry and teraphim,”—i. e.: rebellion, which was the main sin of Saul, is like the sin of witchcraft, which is an ordinary negative commandment, whereas stubbornness, viz. his insisting that he had not sinned, is like idolatry and teraphim, which is more serious than witchcraft to which his main sin is compared—when Samuel said these things to him, Saul was led to admit that he had sinned, and said, “I have sinned,” but he excused himself for his sin by words of falsehood, when he said: “Because I feared the people …” Therefore Samuel refused to return with him when he asked him: “And return with me, that I may worship the Lord,” and replied: “I will not return with thee; for thou hast rejected the word of the Lord … And as Samuel turned about to go away …” This was because the acknowledgement of his sin was not genuine, since he excused himself with words of falsehood. Later on, when Saul admitted that he had sinned, and said simply, “I have sinned,” Samuel consented to return with him. But since Saul showed that his repentance was for the sake of receiving honor, as he said: “Honour me now, I pray thee …,” and not for the love of God, his repentance was not accepted, and Samuel was told at once to anoint David as king.

For this reason the years of Saul’s reign after this time are not counted as part of his reign. This we infer as follows: David was a fugitive from Saul two years or more, for the Bible says that he was a year and four months in the country of the Philistines, not to count the long time that he hid himself in Palestine in the wilderness of Ziph, in the fortress and in Carmel with the shepherds of Nabal. And yet the Bible tells us: “When Saul had reigned a year (Saul reigned two years over Israel), Saul chose three thousand men …” The meaning is that one year after he was anointed king, he chose the three thousand men and began to wage wars, and after that, we are told, he reigned over Israel two years and no more. Now it is impossible that he should have waged all those wars which the Bible mentions: “And fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines …”—all this in two years, while pursuing David at the same time. The only explanation is that the moment David was anointed king, Saul’s reign was not counted, though he was still king in fact. In the same way we find that Ish-bosheth reigned over Israel all those years that David reigned in Hebron over Judah, namely seven years, and yet he is credited only with the two years that he was king without any wars, as we read: “Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years.” After his two years’ reign, war broke out between the house of Saul and the house of David. The house of Saul was getting weaker and weaker, while the house of David was getting stronger. These years were not counted in Ish-bosheth’s reign. In the same way Saul’s years were no counted to his credit after David was anointed king.

There is a question, however, why was Saul punished for his sin by having the kingdom taken away from him, and not in some other way, as David was punished for the Bathsheba affair, without losing his kingdom? The reason, according to my opinion, is that David’s sin did not regard a specific commandment which was given to him after he was king, or a specific command given in the Torah which concerned him as king. His sin concerned a commandment which he had in common with all men, for the prohibition of adultery or homicide is common to all men. Therefore it was fitting that his punishment should be like that given to the generality of men. Saul, on the other hand, sinned in reference to a specific command given to him by Samuel after he was king, or given to him because he was king, for Samuel said to him: “Seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come unto thee.” He also told him: “Now go and smite Amalek … and spare them not …” For this reason he was punished by having the kingdom removed from his descendants and by dying prematurely. Hence, when he transgressed Samuel’s command and offered a burnt-offering in Gilgal before Samuel came, he was told: “But now thy kingdom shall not continue,” i. e. the kingdom would be cut off from his descendants, but he was not told that he would die before his time. But when he sinned in relation to Amalek, he was told: “Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, He hath also rejected thee from being king.” This means that he would die prematurely and that henceforth the kingdom would not be credited to him, for a thing that has been rejected can not be maintained by man. Therefore, when Saul brought up Samuel with the aid of the witch, Samuel said to him: “Because thou didst not hearken to the voice of the Lord, and didst not execute His fierce wrath upon Amalek …; and to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me.” In these words he indicated to him that because the commandments in question were specifically given to him, he would die before his time, and his kingdom would be cut off from him.

An allusion to this reason is found in the promise God made to Jehu, that the kingdom would be established in the hand of his descendants unto the fourth generation, because he observed the specific command he had been given to destroy the house of Ahab and the worshippers of Baal. Similarly, because Solomon transgressed the commandment against multiplying wives and other specific commandments given to him as king, the kingdom of the ten tribes was taken away from his descendants, and he had left only the tribes of Judah and Benjamin because of the oath God had sworn to David. This is my opinion in this matter.

Some have given another explanation of this matter, as follows: Saul committed a misdeed in relation to the kingly art, hence it was fitting that he should lose that art, whereas David did not sin in relation to the kingly art, his sin was different and had nothing to do with the kingly art, hence he was forgiven. It is like the case of two scribes of whom one is found guilty of forging a document and the other of an incestuous marriage. When the king administers to each of them the punishment that befits the crime, punishing with stripes the one guilty of incest, there is no reason why he should lose his position, and he therefore retains his position as before. The scribe, on the other hand, who forged a document, in addition to being punished for his crime, deserves to be removed from his position and not to be trusted with such an office. In the same way, since Saul committed a wrong pertaining to the kingly art, in that he spared Agag and did not execute proper vengeance on Amalek, he deserved to be removed from it.

This explanation, however, without further qualification, will not do, because he was told before the war with Amalek: “But now thy kingdom will not stand,” as a punishment for bringing a burnt-offering in Gilgal before Samuel came. But it is possible to amend this explanation and reduce it to the first, as follows: viz. by explaining the qualities requisite in a king in such a way that the first sin will be included under one of them.

It seems, then, that there are six qualities a king, as such, must have. The purpose of appointing a king is to fight the enemy and to judge the people justly. When Israel demanded a king, they said: “That our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.” Hence he must have the qualities necessary for this purpose. Now we know that judges must have four qualities: They must be men of valor, God-fearing, men of truth, and hating unlawful gain. If we add to these the qualities necessary in war, we shall have six.

One is that the king must be cruel to strangers, but merciful to his own people and willing to give his life to save them, as a shepherd ought to risk his life to remove harm and to fight with the lion and the bear in order to preserve the flock and show kindness to them: “Gathereth the lambs in his arm, and carrieth them in his bosom, and gently leadeth those that give suck.” The second quality is to be good to those who are good to him, to his servants and those who fight his battles, for if he will not do this, who will risk his life for the king’s glory and who will take his part against those who are treacherous? The third quality is that he should hate unlawful gain and not be covetous. A shepherd that is appointed to guard the sheep must not strip their skin and their flesh from their bones, for in that case the relation would be reversed, the flock would support the shepherd instead of the shepherd guarding the flock. For this reason the Bible says: “Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold,” for if he takes pains to gather silver and gold, even though it be from the enemy, he will take from his own people if he can not find it among the enemy. The fourth quality is that he should be a man of valor, strong and mighty to “break the jaws of the unrighteous.” He must not respect the faces of the poor, nor honor the faces of the great, nor fear to do justice. The fifth quality is that he should speak the truth, no wrong must be found upon his lips, and he should judge a righteous judgment, for the man who lies or speaks falsehoods, does so either from fear or because he can not obtain his desire without it, but the judge must not be afraid of any man, as we read in the Bible: “Ye shall not be afraid of the face of any man,” not to speak of the king, for there is no one to prevent him from doing what he will. Hence he must not speak falsely. Besides, no one will trust the words of the king if he speaks falsely. The sixth quality is that he should fear God and tremble at His words. He should be submissive to those who serve God, and observe those commandments which he was given in the capacity of king or after he became king. And in regard to the other commandments, too, he must not consider himself as superior to his brethren and think he is free from the commandments any more than they, as the Bible says: “That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left.” A similar thought is expressed in the saying of the wise man: “The king and the law are faithful brothers.” If, therefore, the people see the king disregarding the law and the teachers thereof, they will all come to ignore it, and the whole Torah will fall.

Now if we examine Saul’s qualities, we find that he was lacking in all of them. 1. He spared Agag [The Rabbis say, commenting on the verse: “And he lay in wait in the valley”—“In the valley,” means concerning the doings in the valley. Saul used a foolish a fortiori argument. If, said he, when one life is taken, the Torah says: Take a heifer and break its neck …], and was cruel to his own people, in that he destroyed Nob, the city of the priests. David acted differently. He smote Moab and put them under saws and under harrows of iron, but when he saw the destroying angel, he said: “Lo, I have sinned, and I have done iniquitously; but these sheep, what have they done? Let Thy hand, I pray Thee, be against me, and against my father’s house.” 2. He did not treat David kindly, who risked his life when he slew Goliath. David, on the contrary, gave an order at the time of his death: “But show kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite.” 3. The Bible says concerning Saul: “But didst fly upon the spoil.” David was different. He was generous and divided the spoil, saying: “Behold, a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the Lord.” 4. Saul said: “Because I feared the people, and hearkened to their voice,” whereas David was not afraid to do justice, as the Bible says: “And David executed justice and righteousness unto all his people.” 5. Saul lied to Samuel so as to cover his transgressions, while David confessed at once when Nathan the prophet came to him after he had gone in to Bathsheba. 6. He did not obey Samuel, but violated the specific commands which were given to him, whereas David obeyed all the commands of Nathan the prophet, Gad the seer, and Samuel. In this way it is clear that by reason of this sixth quality, the second explanation is reduced to the first.

When we examine the texts we also find that David was perfect in all these qualities, while Saul lacked them all. This was why God saw to it that the kingdom did not remain with Saul and why Saul left no descendants worthy of the kingship. Even Abner, the chief of his army, died in order that the kingdom might be firmly established in the hand of David and his children, as a lesson and example to the kings who came after him, that they should not in their pride disobey God’s will, for the kingdom is His. Hence a human king should not slight those who serve God and observe His Torah, for He alone is the King of Glory, as I explained before, and the Bible says: “He removeth kings and setteth up kings.”

To return to the subject of the chapter, we say that just as the repentance of Saul was not accepted because it lacked the three requirements that we mentioned, so the repentance of David after the Bathsheba affair was accepted because it fulfilled the three requirements mentioned. This is clear from the expressions he uses on that occasion: “Be gracious unto me, O God, according to Thy mercy.” These words indicate that repentance is accepted only as a matter of grace, as we said before. Then he says: “According to the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgressions,” i. e. even though my transgressions are great and many, blot them out according to the multitude of Thy compassions, which are infinite, so that my power to sin may not be greater than Thy power to forgive. Then he adds: “For I know my transgressions,” alluding to the first requirement, and stating that the sin was not unknown to him. “And my sin is ever before me,” indicates that he offered no excuses for his sin, nor pretended that he had not sinned, but was always aware that he had sinned. “Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned,” alludes to the third requirement. It shows that his repentance was not due to the desire for honor or money or the fear of human punishment, but to the love of God, for his transgressions were those which concerned the relations between God and man, i. e. private matters, which men did not know, but only God.

He repeats: “And done that which is evil in Thy sight,” to indicate his confession of both kinds of sins, those concerning the relations between man and God, and those between man and his fellow. He alludes to the former in the words: “Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned.” To the latter, such as, “You shall not steal,” “You shall not oppress,” and so on, he refers in the words: “And done that which is evil in Thy sight,” the meaning being that though they are precepts which govern the relations between man and man, nevertheless since God is the author of those commandments, the man who violates His commandments is evil in the sight of God. “That Thou mayest be justified when Thou speakest, and be in the right when Thou judgest,”—these words go back to the prayer: “Blot out my transgressions, Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin,” and the meaning is: Blot out my transgressions in order that Thou mayest be justified in Thy statement that Thou receivest penitents and forgivest their sins. And in order that Thou mayest be right when Thou judgest a man for his sin, since he can repent and does not, cleanse me from my sin, since I do repent before Thee. Some say that the words in question allude to the statement made to Cain: “If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted up?” and to the judgment decreed upon him.

Since a sin may be committed in thought, in speech and in act, or in all the three combined, repentance must include the three. Regret corresponds to thought, confession to speech, and corresponding to act it is not sufficient that one discontinue the sin, but he must do acts of a nature opposed to the transgressions which he has committed.

For this reason David prayed for all three. In relation to thought he said: “Create me a clean heart, O God …” In regard to speech, he said, “O Lord, open Thou my lips; and my mouth shall declare Thy praise.” With regard to action, he said: “I will teach transgressors Thy ways,” i. e. he will do acts opposed to the transgressions in order that men may see and take instruction and learn to return to the Lord. The prophet also makes it clear that repentance requires the doing of acts opposed to the transgressions: “And God saw their works that they turned from their evil way.” Our Rabbis explain this verse as follows: It does not say: “He saw their sackcloth and fasting,” but, “He saw their works.” This shows that if one of them, by force, took away a beam from his neighbor and inserted it into a palace he was building, he threw down the whole palace [in order to return the beam to its owner.] Isaiah also said: “Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts.” The first part of the verse refers to a transgression carried out in deed, in which case the remedy is recommended of doing acts opposed to the transgression and choosing another mode of conduct. For example, if his sin consisted in eating forbidden food, he should fast and not eat enough even of those things which are permitted, as the Rabbis say: “Sanctify thyself in those things which are permitted to thee.” And if his sin was that he did not give alms, he should give lavishly of his money to the poor. And if he taught men to neglect the commandments, he should teach them the proper way to be punctilious about the commandments and to return to God, for he who makes others sin can not do complete repentance. For how can he correct the wrong he has done in causing a man to sin? Hence David says: “Then will I teach transgressors Thy ways,” and similarly in other cases of transgressions. If a man’s sin is one of thought only, he should purify his thoughts before Him who knows man’s thoughts: “And the man of iniquity [shall forsake] his thoughts.”

“And let him return unto the Lord and He will have compassion upon him”—this alludes to the fact that repentance must be solely for the love of God and not for the pleasure of money or the love of glory. “And to our God [let him return] for He will abundantly pardon”—this is intended to encourage penitents, who must not despair of repentance because of their many sins, for God’s forgiveness is more abundant than their iniquities. Hence a man must know that if he does not repent, he deserves severe punishment, since it lies in his power to repent and he does not; he should fear that God will punish him if he does not repent when he is able: “For with Thee there is forgiveness, that Thou mayest be feared.” At first sight the expression just quoted seems strange, for how does it follow that because forgiveness is with God, He is to be feared? The contrary would seem to be the case, namely that if a man knows that God will forgive all his iniquities, he will not be afraid to sin. But the passage is to be explained as we suggested. A man is not afraid of a thing that is inevitable, for example death. If then punishment were inevitable when one has sinned and there were no hope of forgiveness, a person would not be afraid of God, as he would know that he can not escape punishment, since he can not help sinning. But since as a matter of fact he knows that God forgives sinners if they repent and he can escape punishment, he will necessarily be afraid that if he continues to sin and does not think of repenting, God will refuse to forgive him. Therefore the sinner will be afraid of God, since he knows that punishment is not inevitable for a sinner, and that if he repents before God with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his might, God will have pity upon him and abundantly forgive him, for forgiveness is His.

CHAPTER 27

There is a great difficulty in connection with repentance as we explained it, as follows: Since the transgression has been carried out in deed, how can repentance, in the form of regret and confession, avail? If a man takes a life or profanes the Sabbath, does the life of the murdered person return to him, or does the profaned Sabbath become observed through confession and regret? It is like a person throwing down a house and then rebuilding it with his mouth. Words without deeds can not rebuild the house. How then can such repentance avail to wipe out and cleanse a sin actually committed? This is a matter that requires an explanation, viz. in what way repentance benefits the penitent.

Human acts deserving praise or blame are those which are voluntary and done of one’s own free will. This means that the person who does the act knows at the time of doing the act that he is doing it, and desires to do it in preference to something else. Hence drunkards excuse themselves for acts committed by them while they were in a state of intoxication, saying that they did not know what they were doing, though they did the act voluntarily and freely. Similarly we do not blame a person for an act committed involuntarily, even though it was done knowingly and deliberately, i. e. that he knew what he was doing at the time and chose to do it rather than bear the punishment he would have received if he had not done it. As long as the act was not done voluntarily but under compulsion, the person is not blamed. It follows then that an act for which a person deserves praise if it is good and blame if it is bad, is such as he does knowingly when he does it and willingly, in preference to something else. Acts to which praise and blame do not apply at all are those of absolute compulsion, such namely as the person does not know of, does not desire, nor prefer to other acts, as for example, when a person throws a stone and another puts out his head, is struck and dies. Here the person who is the cause of the death did not know of the act when he did it, exercised no preference in regard to it, and did not desire it. This is an instance of absolute compulsion, to which praise and blame do not apply. Hence the Torah does not banish a compulsory homicide of this sort, but only an unintentional homicide in which there is a combination of compulsion and free will.

Those acts which combine compulsion and freedom and which stand midway between the two kinds mentioned before, are hard to classify. Shall they be assigned to the class of compulsory acts or to that of free acts, or shall we say that some of them should be classed with compulsory acts and others with free acts? Thus if a man does a bad thing from fear of violence at the hands of strong men, it would seem as if such an act belongs to the compulsory class and is done under necessity; except that if the act is such that one should endure any pain and trouble rather than do it, it should be classed in the voluntary group; while, on the other hand, if the act is such that it is not worth while suffering great pain and trouble on account of it, it should be classified among compulsory acts.

Now if we examine the matter carefully, we see that there must be certain acts rather than do which one should endure any pain in the world. Such acts, when done, must be classified as voluntary rather than compulsory; because any act which a person does and at the time of doing it chooses to do it in preference to something else, is to be classed as voluntary rather than compulsory. Hence a person deserves blame if he does not suffer great trouble or extraordinary pain rather than lift his hand to strike his father or rebel against his king or his God. On the other hand, there are acts for the sake of which it is not necessary to endure great pain or trouble.

It seems therefore that we should define a voluntary act as follows: Any act a person does which, at the time of doing it, he desires and prefers to something else, and which, after it is done, he desires to maintain, i. e. desires it to have been done, must be classified as voluntary, even though at the beginning there is some element of compulsion; as, for example, when travellers on the sea cast their cargo overboard when a great storm comes. Although no man throws his cargo overboard voluntarily, and the act seems compulsory, nevertheless, since he chooses this in preference to his own pain and danger, it should be classed as voluntary, because even after they land, they accept the deed that was done and desire it to have been done because they owe to it their survival. Such acts must therefore be classed as voluntary and not as compulsory. On the other hand, if after landing they are not satisfied and desire the opposite, the act should be classed as compulsory, since they do not desire to maintain the act. It seems, however, that since there is no man who would not always prefer to cast his merchandise into the sea in order to save his life, we must class such an act as voluntary without qualification, since a person in all cases desires to maintain it. From the above it follows that any act done voluntarily at the time which, after it is done, the author does not accept or ratify, but desires it not to have been done, should be classed as compulsory or as done by mistake even though in the beginning it was done voluntarily, or at least the will played a part in its doing. But if after the act is done, he desires and accepts it and is satisfied that it should have been done, it must be classed as voluntary, even though in the beginning there was some compulsion.

The same thing appears also from the statement of the Rabbis: “The rule is that a leading question is permitted for releasing a vow in case the person regrets it.” In the Gemara it is explained that the person is asked, “Do you still desire to abide by the vow?” or, “Are you sorry?” This shows that everything depends upon the continuance of the will. If the will continues, the oath continues to bind him, and if the will does not continue, the oath is regarded as having been made by mistake and is annulled even though originally it was taken voluntarily. According to this if a penitent regrets his sin and determines in his mind that he wishes he had not done the transgression which he has done and that if he finds himself in the same position again he will not do it, his regret shows that the act was done in the first place by mistake and without real understanding. This agrees with Aristotle, who says in his Ethics that an act of reason does not permit of retraction.

The Rabbis say: When is one a penitent? Answer: If a temptation comes to him more than once and he escapes it. Rab Judah says: Provided it happens at the same time and place and in relation to the same woman. The meaning is that if the temptation comes to him under the same circumstances as before and he subdues his desire for the love of God and does not yield, it is clear that he feels real regret and has determined in his mind that the act which he committed in the first place was done in error and without knowledge, since he regrets it. A man should not be punished for a transgression of this sort, as one should not be blamed for an act done in ignorance and through a mistake. Similarly a person should not be praised for a good act unless it was done voluntarily in the first place and its continuance is desired after it is done, i. e. it is accepted and the person feels no regret. If he changes his mind, he loses his reward and the act is not credited to him.

The Rabbis explain this matter. Commenting on the biblical verse: “But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity … for his trespass that he trespassed … shall he die,” they ask: Why should he not be treated as though he were half meritorious and half guilty? And the answer is, as Rab says, that the text refers to a person who regrets the good acts he has done formerly. Here we see that even a good act is not deserving of praise or reward unless the agent accepts it as done and does not regret it, but if he does regret it, it is as if it had not been done and he does not deserve any reward. According to this it is clear that if one duly regrets a transgression he has committed and does not desire its continuance, he shows thereby that the act was not absolutely voluntary and that if he had been left to his simple will in its present determination, he would not have done it. The proof of it is that the same temptation came to him another time and he escaped it knowingly, willingly and freely, because he thought that the thing is evil in the sight of God and a man must not do that which is evil in God’s sight. This is complete repentance. This is the way in which repentance benefits the penitent. It renders the evil deed as though it had not been done and as though it had been done in error and ignorance. In this way one has his sins wiped out. By grace it is credited to him as a merit, and God loves him by an act of charity, as was explained above.

CHAPTER 28

The acceptance of repentance is, indeed, a matter of grace, as we have explained, nevertheless there is a certain necessity in the existence of this grace. Every agent always desires that his activity should realize the purpose intended. The purpose of the creation of man is the survival of the soul after death, as we explained in Book Three. Since man is the work of God, He desires that he should attain the purpose intended, namely the immortality of the soul. Now the evil inclination of man importunes him every day and entices him to sin, as Solomon describes in Ecclesiastes. In speaking of the inveigling words of the evil inclination, he describes how he entices and persuades man with smooth words, little by little, until he finally makes a complete sinner of him. At first he says to him: “Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy.” From the context it is clear that these are the words of the evil inclination, speaking to the penitent, who is always worried about his sins. So he says to him: “Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy … For God hath already accepted thy works.” Now there is no one, however pious he may be, who would not be persuaded by words like these, in which there seems to be nothing lurking of sin or evil. When the person lends a willing ear to this, the evil inclination continues: “Let thy garments be always white,” i. e. take care of thy personal appearance and make thyself handsome. Having persuaded him to this, too, in which there is no sin, he continues: “Enjoy life with the wife whom thou lovest …” Having brought him to this stage, where he obeys him in all these things, which are legitimate, he does not rest until he brings him to deny the fundamental principles of the faith, saying: There is no judgment, there is no judge and there is no giving account for one’s deeds: “Whatsoever thy hand attaineth to do by thy strength, that do; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.” He goes on to prove his statement by saying: “I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift … neither yet bread to the wise … but time and chance happeneth to them all.”

With these words and others like them he turns the man away from the right path and leads him in an evil way, pretending that he is interested in the person’s good and concerned about his honor and welfare, as he behaved in the early time of the creation towards Eve, when he said to her: “Yea (Heb. af), hath God said: Ye shall not eat of any tree of the garden?” The word af here, in my opinion, denotes “anger,” and the meaning of the sentence is, I am very angry that God said to you you shall not eat of all the trees of the garden except certain ones, for the command was not given for your benefit, as the opposite would be more beneficial to you. In this way he persuaded her, so that she left the ways of right to walk in the ways of darkness. In the same way a man’s evil inclination constantly devises means to hurt him and to seduce him, as God Himself testifies: “For the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth.” And the Rabbis say in this connection: Bad indeed is the dough which the baker himself admits to be bad.

Hence a person can not help sinning in act whether little or much, and if he sins, he can not help doubting in his mind some one of the principles of the faith; for whoever commits a sin deliberately, would never have permitted himself to commit it unless an evil thought had come into his mind, as our Rabbis say: A person does not commit a sin unless a spirit of madness enters into him. Either he denies in thought the existence of God, thinking there is no one who governs the world, and therefore he permits himself to commit the transgression, as the Bible says: “The fool hath said in his heart: ‘There is no God;’ they have dealt corruptly, they have done abominably; there is none that doeth good.” We thus see that the reason for committing a sin is that he thinks there is no God. Or he admits that there is a God who brought the world into being, but thinks that He does not concern Himself with the individual and does not reward or punish him for his deeds. This too leads him to permit himself to sin, as we read: “Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? Because he sayeth in his heart: ‘Thou wilt not require.’ ” Or he admits that there is a God who governs the world and takes account of man’s deeds, but he says to himself, may be God did not give this command or did not prohibit this act—for example, he thinks that God did not forbid the eating of fat or blood or intercourse with a menstruous woman, and therefore he permits himself to do these things. Such a person virtually denies revelation of the Torah. For our Rabbis say: He who says concerning a verse or even a single word of the Torah that Moses said it of his own accord, comes within the designation of those who deny the divine revelation of the Torah.

Now it is clear that if he thinks in any one of the three ways we mentioned, he is denying one of the fundamental general principles of a divine law, principles which embrace all the rest, as we have explained. This is surely a more serious thing than the eating of fat or blood. This is the reason why the Rabbis say: Thoughts of sin are worse than sin itself. The reason is because the punishment for the commission of a sin is finite in duration, as we shall see, whereas the punishment for denying a principle is infinite in duration, as our Rabbis say: The judgment of the wicked in gehenna lasts twelve months, i. e. those wicked persons who transgress the words of the Torah without denying the fundamental principles. As for those who deny the fundamental principles, the Rabbis explained before that their punishment lasts forever: “But heretics (Minim) and traitors, those who deny the Torah, and those who deny the resurrection of the dead, go down to gehenna and are judged therein for generations and generations.”

Now since those persons who escape denying one of the fundamental principles are, as we have seen, very few, and the majority would therefore deserve eternal punishment, God in His mercy and great kindness devised a mode of showing favor to the human race by opening to them the gates of repentance, in order that by means of it they may escape the snares of the evil spirit and the death of the soul. Our Rabbis say: A person’s evil inclination opposes him constantly, as is said: “The wicked watcheth the righteous …,” and if it were not for the help of God, he would not be able to overcome him, as is said: “The Lord will not leave him in his hand.” This shows that through the help of God a person is delivered from the death which the evil spirit seeks to inflict upon him. Ezekiel explains that the death spoken of is that of the soul: “For I have no pleasure in the death of the dead, but rather that he should return from his ways and live.” The expression, “in the death of the dead” (be-mot ha-met), indicates that he is speaking of one who is already dead, and the meaning is: I do not desire the soul’s death of one who has died, but that he should return from his way during his lifetime so that his soul may live. It appears therefore that through repentance a man who has died does not die, but his soul lives and obtains life in the world to come. In this way man, who is the work of God, realizes his final purpose, his eternal life, even if he is guilty of a sin which is deserving of eternal punishment.

Isaiah has the same idea in mind, when he says concerning the penitent: “For I will not contend forever, neither will I be always wroth …” The meaning is: Although by rights I should contend and be wroth for ever, inflicting upon the sinner eternal punishment, nevertheless I will not do it, “For the spirit (ruah) that enwrappeth itself is from Me, and the souls (neshamot) I have made.” That is, although the animal spirit, which enwraps the body, is before Me, i. e. comes from the movers of the heavenly bodies who are before Me, the human souls I Myself made and must show them especial kindness since they are the work of My hands. (The word neshamah applies to the human soul, while ruah refers to the vital soul of animals: “He that giveth breath (neshamah) to the people upon it.”) Since, therefore, the souls are the work of My hands, I must see to it that the human race should obtain the purpose intended in its creation. And therefore although “for the iniquity of his covetousness I was wroth and smote him,” I did not smite him cruelly, but only to chastise him, in order that he may turn to Me in repentance. I did not smite him according to the punishment which he deserved for his sins, but, “I hid Me and was wroth,” i. e. I hid My wrath from the punishment and was wroth only a little, in order to chastise him, because, “He went on frowardly in the way of his heart.” But when “I saw his ways,” i. e. his repentance, “I healed hini,” i. e. I accepted his repentance even though he was near to his death; and therefore, “I will lead him” in the way of all the earth, and he will be gathered to his fathers, so that he may go to the world to come, with his sins forgiven, and I will thus “requite with comforts him and his mourners”—him, by giving him a share in the world to come; and his mourners, who will be comforted for his death when they know that his soul will not be cut off. The expression, “Comforts to his mourners,” shows that he is speaking of a dead person. The expression, “I will heal him,” is used because acceptance of repentance is a healing to the soul, which merits the life of the world to come.

We have thus explained that the existence of the Torah requires the existence of penitence, in order that the human race may obtain the purpose intended by its creation, which is the purpose of the whole sublunar world. This is what the Rabbis had in mind when they said that the Torah and repentance came before the creation of the world. This will suffice concerning repentance.