The SCHIFF LIBRARY of JEWISH CLASSICS

This Series of JEWISH CLASSICS was made possible through a fund given to the Jewish Publication Society of America by Jacob H. Schiff, and it is named in his honor, the Schiff Library of JEWISH CLASSICS.

SEFER HA-‘IKKARIM

BOOK OF PRINCIPLES

BY

JOSEPH ALBO

CRITICALLY EDITED ON THE BASIS OF MANUSCRIPTS AND OLD EDITIONS AND PROVIDED WITH A TRANSLATION AND NOTES

BY

ISAAC HUSIK, LL.B., M.A., Ph.D.

Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania

VOLUME FOUR

PART TWO

PHILADELPHIA

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA 

5706–1946

Copyright, 1930, by

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

Second Impression, 1946

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher: except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PRESS OF THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY PHILADELPHIA, PENNA.

CONTENTS

PAGE

Facsimile Frontispiece

Book Four (chapters 29–51) Text and Translation 273

Index of Sources 501

Bibliography 505

List of Biblical Passages 509

List of Rabbinical Passages 529

List of Aristotelian Passages 536

Additions and Corrections 540

General Index 565

CHAPTER 29

We will now treat of reward and punishment, which is the third of the general principles of a divine law. It takes the place of the purpose intended by all laws. It is true that he who serves God from love does not concern himself at all about reward and punishment, having no other purpose except to fulfil the will of the object of his love, as the Rabbis say: “Be not like servants who serve their master in order to receive compensation …” But this does not mean that there is no reward and punishment, Heaven forbid! The above statement simply means that one who serves God from love must not be prompted in his service by love of reward and fear of punishment, though he believes that there is reward in store for those who believe and fear God and think on His name. All this reward is as nothing in his sight as compared with the purpose of fulfilling the will of the object of his love. Service of this sort leads to the ultimate reward and punishment that is intended in all laws.

Now inasmuch as the purpose of a divine law is different from those of conventional laws, as we said before, we laid it down as a general principle of divine law. We analyze the possibilities as follows: Either there is reward and punishment or there is not. If there is, it is either all corporeal and in this world, or all spiritual and in the other world, or there is both corporeal reward in this world and spiritual reward in the next world.

Opinion, we find, is divided in the matter of reward and punishment into four classes according to the four possibilities of which the situation admits. Some believe there is no reward and punishment, either corporeal or spiritual. Some believe there is both corporeal and spiritual reward. Some believe there is corporeal reward but no spiritual, and some believe there is spiritual reward but no corporeal.

This difference of opinion is based upon the division of opinion among men concerning the nature of the soul. Some say that the human soul is not superior to the animal soul except that man has more shrewdness than the other animals in devising means and inventing arts necessary for arranging his life in a complete manner, as in the animal world some are superior to others in this respect. For this reason those who hold this opinion think that there is no reward or punishment at all, either corporeal or spiritual. They hold that man is governed by accident like the other animals, concerning which the divine purpose is directed merely to the preservation of the species. This opinion has been given its death-blow by the philosophers, who say that the human soul can not be compared to the animal souls. The latter have only knowledge of particulars, while man has knowledge of universals. Moreover, man can perceive a thing when it is no longer present to the sense, while an animal can not. Man, moreover, distinguishes between substance and accident, and so on, all of which shows the great difference between the human soul and the animal soul. Hence there must be a special purpose that is peculiar to the human soul, as we explained before. Hence, though there is no spiritual perfection in animals, there must be such in man. The Jewish sages were also opposed to this opinion and maintained that there ought to be reward and punishment for man, either spiritual in the world to come, or corporeal in this world through divine providence, as we explained when we treated of Providence.

The second opinion is that there is reward and punishment, but that it is corporeal and in this world. Some believe that the human soul is superior to that of the animals because it has a rational power through which the divine spirit cleaves to man and provides for him according to the superiority of his intellect. But since this superiority is merely a capacity or preparation, it always requires, they say, a subject; and when the union between soul and body is sundered, the soul disappears. A certain school of philosophers erroneously adopt this view, saying that we can not conceive of any perfection of soul without the body. The Zadokites and the Boethusians adopted this view. They believed in the Torah of Moses and in Providence, but maintained at the same time that reward and punishment are only corporeal and in this world, as is mentioned in Abot de Rabbi Natan, and denied spiritual reward after death altogether. They adduced as proof of their opinion the fact that in the Law of Moses there is no mention at all of spiritual reward, but only of physical prosperity. They adopted this erroneous opinion because they thought that the human soul is composed of various faculties, such as nutrition, growth, sensation, reason. And since we see that the other powers disappear when the union between soul and body is sundered, they said that the power of understanding which it has will also disappear along with the conceptions which it already has, and therefore the human soul will cease to exist like the souls of animals, and the one will die like the other.

The great philosophers, however, have refuted this opinion, saying that the variety of activities emanating from an agent does not necessarily prove multiplicity in the essence of the agent, as we explained above. Nor does the cessation of the life of the body necessarily prove the cessation of the rational soul, any more than the cessation of the power of growth after forty makes necessary the cessation of the soul. The body is an instrument through which some of the activities of the soul become visible. Hence when the instrument is destroyed, these functions alone disappear, like nutrition, growth, sensation. But it does not follow from this that the essence of the soul should disappear. For the existence of the reason is not dependent upon the body like the other corporeal powers. On the contrary, the reason grows stronger after the age of forty, when the corporeal powers grow weaker. Moreover, the reason is not like the corporeal powers, for it can perceive itself as well as its instruments, which is not the case in the corporeal powers. They adduce also other strong and irrefutable arguments to show that the human soul can not be compared with the soul of animals, but there is no need to expatiate upon this matter.

As an indication of the erroneous character of this opinion, Maimonides says in the Introduction to his commentary on Abot that the term soul in its application to the soul of man and that of animal is a homonym. And though we see that the functions emanating from the one are similar to those emanating from the other, it does not follow from this that the respective agents are similar in essence. The light of the sun and the light of a lamp are similar in that they illumine dark places, but this does not show that the agencies are alike. The light of the sun is permanent and does not go out, it illumines also where the sun does not shine; while a lamp goes out, is not permanent and illumines only where the ray strikes. It does not follow, therefore, that because the soul of the animal is destroyed, the human soul too is destroyed and ceases to be when it is separated from the body, since they admit that it is superior to the soul of the animal. As for the argument which the Zadokites and the Boethusians adduce in favor of their view from the fact that no mention is made in the Law of Moses of spiritual reward, but only of corporeal, the facts are not as they say. Corporeal reward is mentioned only in those cases where there is no room for spiritual reward, and spiritual reward is mentioned by allusion, for a reason which we will explain later with the help of God.

The third opinion is the converse of the second, and is adopted by some of our Rabbis, who say: There is no reward for good deeds in this world. They adduce an argument from experience. A father says to his son, Go up upon the tower and bring me some pigeons. The son goes up upon the tower, sends away the mother pigeon and takes the young, and on his return he falls down and is killed. Where is his good and where is his length of days? The answer is that the scriptural promise, “That it may be well with thee,” has reference to that world which is wholly good; and the promise, “That thou mayest prolong thy days,” refers to that world which is altogether long (eternal). The world that is wholly good and altogether long is none other than the world to come after death, and the promise has reference to spiritual reward.

This opinion is also adopted by a great school of philosophers, and some learned men of the Torah follow them. Their opinion is that man has no perfection qua man except after death, when the intellect is separated from matter and corporeal things. This follows from the fact that rational things are graded according to their degree of understanding, the one that understands more is superior to the one that understands less. Since, therefore, man’s superiority to animals consists in his reason, his perfection must be a degree of excellence based upon intelligence alone. For if it consisted in a corporeal thing which is common to him and the animals, the perfection and rational superiority which were given to him above the animals would be a tantalizing punishment rather than a degree of perfection. For the animals, being devoid of reason and intelligence, are not troubled by the thought of misfortune which is fated to come upon them and are not grieved by the knowledge that they must die, as man does, nor do they anticipate in imagination the pain which is to come to them, and they worry about nothing; whereas man feels all this; he is worried and grieved on account of the evil that is destined to come upon him and lives in sorrow. Nay, the greater his power of understanding the more does he grieve for the evil that is destined to come upon him. For this reason they say that it is not likely that the perfection to be attained by reason is something corporeal that is common to the lower animals, but that it must be something which distinguishes man from the animal, viz. intellect, and not a corporeal thing. This is the opinion of the Philosopher in this matter. Although he denies Providence, nevertheless he believes that the soul of man has a perfection after death, when it is separated from the body. And many of the sages of the Torah follow his opinion.

But there is a difficulty in this explanation. For though these arguments are a sound reply to the second opinion, still they do not prove that man’s perfection is after death. For since perfection and permanence can pertain only to a rational thing, as they maintain, and the rational power in man is merely a preparation or capacity, how can we conceive of its surviving the body, since a capacity can not exist by itself? The statement in reply to this, namely that the acquired intellect becomes a substance through the concepts, so that the intellect and the concepts become identical, is unintelligible. For if the rational faculty in man is a hylic (material) power whose nature it is to cease to exist except through the activity of understanding, how can that activity exist by itself? And how can we conceive of its identifying itself with the Active Intellect? All this is very unlikely, as we explained before. Hence, some scholars say that the soul is a spiritual substance, having independent existence and the capacity of understanding. It can not therefore cease to exist, since it is an independent substance, and it feels pleasure according to its activity in cognition. But this is not correct, either. For, even though the soul be an independent substance, nevertheless, since it has the capacity of cognition, the perfection of this capacity would be in vain if the soul should not attain this cognition, and not one in a thousand would attain the perfection of the soul, and possibly no one at all, as we explained above; unless we say that the perfection of cognition consists in an understanding of the axioms. But if so, the righteous and the wicked would stand on the same plane, an idea which never occurred to any one before.

It seems to us therefore that the proper and correct opinion of the Torah is that the soul is a spiritual substance, having the capacity to understand the service of God, and not mere understanding. Hence when a person attains any degree of understanding of God’s service, by reason of attaining some idea or notion of God, be it great or small, he immediately attains a certain degree of life in the world to come. The Rabbis also say, commenting on the verse: “A seed shall serve Him,” When do small children deserve the future life? Said they in the name of Rabbi Meir: As soon as they are able to say Amen, as is written: “Open ye the gates, That the righteous nation that keepeth faithfulness (emunim) may enter in.” Read not: “That keepeth (shomer) faithfulness (emunim),” but: “That sayeth (she-omer) Amens (amenim).” The meaning of this is made clear from our explanation above, namely that the soul’s perfection consists in understanding the service of God, whatever it be; so that when a child attains understanding of the least important service, viz. to say Amen to any benediction, he merits some degree of future life. This is in agreement with what we have written before, namely, that a man may attain a certain degree of future life by the fulfilment of one precept.

That the soul is an independent spiritual substance is also clear from the statement of the Rabbis that the world is maintained only by the breath of the mouth of the school children. Said Rab Papa to Abaye, What about your breath and mine? Said the latter: You can not compare breath that is without sin to breath that is with sin. Now if the soul is not an independent substance, how can school children, who have attained a very small degree of cognition, be superior to Abaye and Raba who attained a very high degree, without doubt? The truth is that a very small degree in God’s service on the part of one who is not stained by sin, avails more than a high degree of one who is stained by sin; for the soul, being an independent spiritual substance, depends for its degree of worth upon the measure of its purity and its worship of God by fulfilling the commandments. This is the reason why Moses was grieved because he could not enter the land and perform the commandments actually. He was not grieved about attaining ideas, for there is no doubt that Moses had attained the degree where he could comprehend by means of understanding, but he was eager to carry out the commandments in practice, i. e. divine service with understanding, which gives perfection and permanence to the soul, as we explained before.

The Rabbis discuss the question whether the soul is in its essence a hylic (material) power or an independent substance. Two and a half years, we are told, the schools of Shammai and Hillel disputed the question whether it was worth while for man to have been created. The one said, It would have been better for man not to have been created than to have been created. The other said, It was better for man to have been created than not to have been created. They took a vote and decided that it would have been better if man had not been created, but now that he has been created, he must be careful about his conduct.

Now it seems to us that he who said it was better for man to have been created, held that man’s soul is a hylic power, as the Philosopher thinks. Hence he said that it was better for him to have been created, because existence is always better than non-existence, and one may rise to the degree of permanent existence by rational activity. On the other hand, the one who said that it would have been better for man not to have been created, believed that the soul is an independent spiritual substance. Now as a result of creation the soul may be destroyed or severely punished. Hence he said, It would have been better if man had not been created, i. e. that the soul had not been put into the human body. Solomon also said: “But better than they both is he that hath not yet been.” Now if the soul were a hylic (material) power, how could he say about a non-existent thing that it is better than both? How can non-existence be better than existence, since all existence is good, as the Bible testifies: “And God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good”? Without doubt, then, his opinion is that the soul is a spiritual substance and not a material power. And since this is the correct opinion and the one that is in agreement with the Torah, they voted and decided that it would have been better for man if he had not been created, and they added that he must be careful of his conduct, so that the soul may not be destroyed or punished.

From this the Cabalists derived the doctrine of transmigration. Since the true opinion is, according to the Torah,—so they argued—that the soul is not a material power but an independent substance, as we said before, then just as the spiritual substance entered the human body when it was created, it is possible that after having functioned in one human body, it may return and live in another. But this is not correct. The divine Wisdom did indeed decree that the spiritual substance, which by its nature is not a free agent, should dwell in the human body in order that it may become a free agent in the body, because this is no doubt a valuable quality in it. So much so that, as we are told by the Rabbis, the angels made a mistake and when God created man, they wanted to worship him … This was because he was a free agent and they were not. Nevertheless, why should a soul which has already functioned in a human body and has become a free agent, return to the body again? And why should the seminal drop have the capacity to receive a soul which has already functioned in a body rather than to receive a soul which has not functioned in a body and is not a free agent? A still less likely view is that of those who say that human souls are transmigrated into bodies of animals. God knows.

The fourth opinion is that some reward is corporeal in this world and some is spiritual in the next world, after death. This is the opinion of our sacred Torah, which makes specific material promises to the righteous, like the patriarchs and others, and also spiritual promises for the soul alone, punishment or reward, as we shall explain with the help of God. This is also the opinion of our Rabbis in many places, and particularly in Sifre, where, commenting on the verse in Deuteronomy, they say: “That your days may be multiplied”—in this world; “And the days of your children”—in the times of the Messiah; “As the days of the heavens above the earth”—in the world to come. It is clear from this that the Bible promises, for the fulfilment of the commandments, reward in this world and in the next. This is a general statement of human opinion concerning reward and punishment and the opinion of our Torah on the subject.

CHAPTER 30

Concerning the spiritual reward which comes to a man after death, the later Jewish scholars are divided into two schools. The one holds that while it is true that the perfectly righteous receive in this world reward for their deeds, as did the patriarchs, nevertheless, the main reward is spiritual, bestowed upon the soul alone in the world to come, i. e. the world which comes to a person after death as soon as the soul is separated from the body—a world in which there is no eating or drinking or any of the physical pleasures. As our Rabbis say: Rab was accustomed to say: In the next world there is neither eating nor drinking, nor hatred, nor envy, nor strife, but the righteous sit with their crowns on their heads and enjoy the splendor of the Shekinah. The meaning is: the crown of a good name resulting from their good deeds stands above their heads and confers upon them the privilege of enjoying the splendor of the Shekinah.

The men of this opinion also hold that while the main reward is purely spiritual, there is also another corporeal reward in this world at the time of the Messiah. This is the same as the time of the resurrection, when the perfectly righteous will come to life, either in order to publish God’s miracles and truth, or in order that they may receive some corporeal pleasure corresponding to the pain they suffered during life, or more, according as the divine Wisdom shall decree, or in order that they may acquire a higher perfection than before, in case they were not able in their lifetime to attain the degree to which they were entitled, considering their upright character, on account of external hindrances and the yoke of the exile. Then they will die again and return to dust, and then the souls will, by reason of their attainments during the second life, be privileged to enjoy the future world in a higher degree than the one they enjoyed before resurrection. This is the view of Maimonides and the distinguished men who came after him and adopted his opinion. If we examine this view, we find that it is correct and inevitable logically, and in agreement with the Torah.

Since the works of God are absolutely perfect, it follows that everything that can exist should exist in all the divisions which a logical classification suggests. Now we find that some corporeal things are permanent as individuals, for example the spheres and the stars, as the senses testify and as the prophet, too, agrees: “Lift up your eyes on high, and see: who hath created these?… Not one faileth.” Some are permanent only as species, for example, those animals which are born of individuals of the same species, while some are permanent neither as individuals nor as species, as, for example, those animals which are generated of putrefaction. It follows, therefore, that the remaining class of the division should also exist, namely there must be beings which are permanent both as individuals and as species, though in different aspects. This is the human species, which, in respect of the body and its material powers, has specific permanence only and not individual, like the other animals, but in respect of the rational soul and its intellectual power, man has individual permanence like the angels.

These two kinds of permanance are alluded to in the book Yezirah in the words: “He made a covenant with him between the ten fingers of his hands and the ten toes of his feet by the circumcision of the tongue and the circumcision of his nakedness.” Specific permanence is cearly indicated in the expression, “the circumcision of his nakedness,” which needs no explanation, while individual permanence is indicated in the words, “circumcision of the tongue,” i. e. the rational (speaking) soul. The reason for this is because an eternal being can not make a covenant with a thing that is subject to genesis and decay except in so far as it has some permanence.

The subject must be explained as follows: The powers existing in the composite beings in the sublunar world can not be perceived by the senses, nevertheless we infer their existence from their activities, which are perceived by the senses, for from the activities we know the powers. We see, for example, a plant moving in all directions, and we know that the natural power is not sufficient to cause such motion, for natural motion is either from the center to the circumference or from the circumference to the center or around the center, whereas the plant moves in all directions. Hence we infer that in the plant species there is another principle which causes this motion, and we call this principle the vegetative soul. In the same way we find that an animal besides having the principle of the vegetative soul has sensation and voluntary motion, activities which do not reside in a natural power or in the vegetative soul. Hence we infer that in this species there is another principle from which these activities follow, viz. those of growth and sensation, and we call it animal soul. Similarly we see that man, in addition to this principle has the ability to understand universals, to know the essences of things, to distinguish between substance and accident, and so on, activities which can not be attributed to the vegetative or animal powers. Hence we infer that he has a still higher power which we call human or rational soul.

Further, we find that this superior function which the human soul has, namely cognition, is different from the perceptions of the corporeal faculties. The corporeal faculties are destroyed by a strong perception (intense stimulus). For example, an intense light destroys sight, so that thereafter the person can not even perceive a dim light, and the same thing is true of an intense sound. In the rational power the case is reversed. The more profound the subject of thought, the stronger the intellect becomes and the more brilliancy it acquires for further understanding. Also, the perceptions of the material powers are changeable because they are particular, whereas the cognitions of the intellect are not changeable but permanent because they are universal. Hence we infer that he who gives this soul which has this power of cognition is superior to the one who gives the animal soul to animals.

Therefore the philosophers say that the animal soul comes from the power of the spheres, for the spheres through their motions prepare the matter to receive the forms, while their souls bestow the various forms of plant and animal, which exist in matter only, according to the latter’s status of preparation. Hence the perceptions of animals are changeable and concern particulars according to the change and variety of the particular degrees of preparation [of the matters]. But the rational soul in man comes from a permanent rational principle separate from matter and unchangeable, a principle superior to that which bestows the animal soul. Hence its cognitions are universals and permanent.

We find that the prophet or the perfectly pious man can influence the matter of the sublunar world, as the Separate Intelligences do, because the principle of his soul comes from a Separate Intelligence. The Torah testifies to this, for we find in the account of creation that the Bible ascribes the animal soul to a material principle solely. Thus in the creation of the animals, the text says: “Let the earth bring forth the living creature after its kind.” But in the creation of man the Bible ascribes the soul to a rational principle: “Then the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,” concluding: “And man became a living soul,” thus indicating that the vital power in man comes from the rational power which God breathed into his nostrils, and not from another principle, as in the lower animals.

Now since the vital soul in animals and the human soul which has intelligence come from two different principles, it does not follow because the vital powers in animals disappear as soon as the union between them and the body is sundered (because they come from the power of the sphere, which is a material thing, and from its soul, which is a material power), that the human soul ceases to exist, since it comes from another principle, a rational principle separate from matter, not having in it the possibility of dissolution at all, as a material thing has. Therefore if we find that the powers of growth and nutrition and sensation in man and the other powers disappear in death, this is merely because the union has ceased between the soul and the body, which was the instrument through which the soul performed those functions. On the other hand, since we see the power of reason existing in angels without the other powers, and we also see the powers of growth and of life disappear by themselves in plants and animals, we infer that since man has in him both material powers and a rational power, even though the material powers cease to exist as soon as the instrument is removed, the rational power is not destroyed with the destruction of the vital power, any more than the vital power is destroyed with the destruction of the power of growth in animals, for the vital power is a preparation and background for the rational soul, as the power of growth is a preparation and background for the vital power.

And since we find that the intellect in angels exists by itself without matter, and the intellectual power in man similarly has a function peculiar to itself, viz. the apprehension of the separate substances and things abstracted from matter, we infer that since this intellect depends upon something permanent, it is not destroyed with the destruction of the body and the disappearance of the material powers. But when it is separated from the body it will, by reason of its obedience to God’s will, unite with the permanent thing which it apprehended. It will thus attain the degree of the angels, whose perfection essentially consists in their obedience to God’s will, as was explained above. This is the purpose of man, and the essence of the reward and punishment which the Torah promises to man after death when the soul parts from the body. This is the correct conception of this subject, as Maimonides and his followers understand it.

The second opinion is that though the perfectly righteous get material reward in this world, yet since their number is small, and the great majority of righteous men do not get corporeal reward in this world, there should be in the next world corporeal as well as spiritual reward. This comes, they say, after the resurrection when the soul and the body will exist in conjunction, but without food and drink, as Moses lived forty days and forty nights with body and soul without eating and drinking. This is what, according to them, the Rabbis call the world to come, when they say concerning the righteous that they are prepared for the life of the world to come. They believe at the same time that the human soul does not die when the body dies, but that there is a stage of existence called Gan Eden (Paradise) where, immediately after death, the souls of the righteous are kept until they rise in resurrection and obtain the life in the world to come after the resurrection. This is what the Rabbis mean when they relate concerning Rabban Simon ben Gamaliel that he said to Rabbi Ishmael, who was weeping when he was condemned to die: Master, why weepest thou? In a brief moment thou wilt be placed in Gan Eden in the community of the righteous. We are also told that Rabbah bar Rab Huna said concerning Rabbah bar Shela, who died a short time before him: He preceded me in Gan Eden by a brief hour. This is the opinion of Nahmanides, of R. Meir Halevi, and a number of modern writers who follow them, may they all be blessed.

The argument in favor of this opinion is explained by one of the great disciples of Nahmanides in the following way. There are three degrees of rational creatures: 1. Pure intellect existing without body. This is the most perfect existence. 2. Intellect joined with a body existing forever. These are the spheres. 3. Intellect joined with a body that is subject to destruction. This is man, the lowest in rank of the intellectual creatures. Those that come after, namely the lower animals, which consist of body and soul, both subject to dissolution; and plants, consisting of body that is subject to dissolution and having no animal soul, all these are for the sake of man. Man was created last because of his perfection. The lower creatures were made for his sake, they reached their perfection in his creation, and are all embraced in him—the four elements, the power of growth, the animal power, and in addition to all he has reason. Therefore he rules over all of them, and he came last to complete their activity and to rule over them, because he possesses reason, which has immortality. But it needs the body for its perfection, hence the expression that the souls of the righteous are “hidden” under the throne of glory or in Gan Eden. For the word, “hidden,” denotes something incomplete, i. e. they need the body and are not complete without the body. But at the end he will be an honorable and permanent body. This is their idea of the human intellect, as R. Aaron Halevi says.

And if the objection is raised that since the intellect can exist only with the body and the body is dissolved like the beast and returns to dust, how can the intellect survive to receive its reward, since according to them it can exist only with the body? R. Aaron says that when the time of the resurrection comes, God will create a new body for every one of the righteous, under exactly the same constellation as their original bodies, and they will rise again and eat and drink and have children; every member of the body will perform its proper function, will receive all that belongs to it, will be nourished properly, will do what it should without any hindrance internal or external,—such will be the state of all those who will live at that time. Their bodies will enjoy the best of health that is attainable according to their temperament, and will obtain the highest perfection possible, each according to his degree. Then after a long time, as each one in turn has attained the highest perfection possible for him, he will consciously and deliberately rise to the status of Elijah. That is, the matter of their body, namely the matter of the four elements, will be changed and receive another form, and become a simple element, permanent, mobile, bright in color, like the whiteness of sapphire, and invisible like Elijah, prepared to receive the divine splendor and the light of the King’s living countenance, like the moon, which is a light-receiving body. Hence we say in the benediction of the moon: “A crown of glory to those who are laden with a body (i. e. the righteous), who will be renewed like her (the moon),” namely after the resurrection, when their body will be changed and will receive another structure.

There are examples of this in this world, where certain animals undergo a transformation and their body receives a different form. Some of them need certain things to eat, for example a certain kind of food. This is the meaning of the tree of life, whose fruit prepares the one who eats thereof to receive this form, and he lives forever, as is alluded to in the account of the creation. This is the meaning of the resurrection of the dead, for the divine intention is that man should live forever with his body. For man is not complete without a body, like the spheres to which he is compared, bright as the “brightness of the firmament,” and as “the stars for ever and ever.” If man were complete without body, he would be a separate intellect and more perfect than the spheres, who have bodies. But this is impossible, for in the series of creations the higher comes first and the lower come later, as we explained before. Since, therefore, man is not complete without body, he must attain this completeness in accordance with the original intention of his creation. This change of form and swift mobility is described in the expression that God makes wings for them. So far R. Aaron Halevi.

It is obvious that there are many objections to this conception. 1. This opinion is close to that which holds that the soul is a material power and therefore always needs the body for its existence. 2. If the human soul can not exist without a body, how can it exist immediately after death, as soon as it is separated from the body? They say that its existence is incomplete in paradise, in which the soul has no complete delight and does not attain any degree at all. If you ask them, why is not the body purified right after death, changing from its perishable to a permanent nature, as they say happens later, they say that they must come to life again after they die in order that they may merit immortality. But it is very unlikely that immortality can not be attained except after resurrection. The Aramaic proverb is applicable here: Your surety requires a surety. For according to this a person must first experience a first resurrection and then immortality. But if at the time of the resurrection men eat and bear children, as they say, and are free agents, they may sin again. How can they be sure, then, of the higher degree?

According to that Rabbi who says that only the perfectly righteous are resurrected, it follows that none of all those men that have existed and that will exist until the time of the resurrection will be privileged to participate in immortality or in any degree of the future life except the perfectly righteous. And even among the perfectly righteous, who will merit resurrection, none will enjoy any degree of the other world until that time. And even in the case of those who will experience resurrection, how can their bodies, which are composed of the four elements and are perishable by nature, become permanent, and how can the nature of impermanence change to one of permanence? Moreover, if, according to them, it is possible that matter, by nature perishable, may change and assume the nature of permanence, like the matter of the spheres, why not assume that the human soul, though it is a material power, as they say, nevertheless, since it has the capacity to receive perfection of ideas, can change from imperfection to perfection, so that it may exist by itself like a Separate Intelligence?

This is more plausible and appeals more to reason than that matter should change its nature and assume another. It would not then be necessary for them to say that real immortality does not come until after resurrection. Besides, their opinion contradicts that of the Rabbis, who say that souls exist before they come into the human body. And in Bereshit Rabbah we find the biblical verse: “There they dwelt occupied in the king’s work,” explained as follows: “With the King of kings, the Lord, blessed be He, the souls of the righteous sat, and were consulted by God when He created the world.” The soul is not therefore a material power, but they were created on the first day, as we are told: “ ‘And the spirit of God hovered …’—this is the spirit of Adam the first man.” Nahmanides also writes in a responsum that souls were created together with the primitive light, according to the Rabbis. They are not therefore a material power.

Moreover, they prove their idea from Elijah, but it is well known that the case of Elijah was extraordinary and miraculous, no one else can stand in his position, and not even Moses had the privilege of so great a miracle. Besides, Elijah, according to tradition, never tasted death, and did not require the miracle of resurrection; whereas, according to their opinion, a person can not attain to this degree unless he dies and comes to life again as before. Moreover, the resurrection that they speak of is altogether unintelligible: For how is it possible that in the course of the sphere’s motion there should be a position such that at one and the same time the constellations of all the righteous men that lived at various times should be the same as their original ones. And assuming that this is possible, it is a new creation and not resurrection.

In short, the arguments which these people use to support their idea are very far-fetched. If it is a tradition from the prophets we must accept it, but if it is a question of argument, we can certainly refute it. Besides their opinion is close to that of the Christians who hold that the righteous were punished for the sin of Adam, that their souls attained but a small degree of perfection until the ‘Messiah’ came, as they say, and atoned for the sin. Then the patriarchs and the righteous men attained the degree of perfection which they deserved. From this dogma they derive other secondary principles which they lay down as fundamental to their faith—may the Lord deliver us from them!

CHAPTER 31

The foundation upon which the advocates of this second opinion base their great idea that the world to come is a degree of reward to which a man can not attain until after the resurrection, is a passage in the Mishnah: “These have no share in the world to come—He who says that the resurrection of the dead is not referred to in the Torah …” The Gemara, commenting upon this statement, says: He denies the resurrection of the dead, therefore he will have no share therein. From this passage they inferred that the world to come, which is the main reward referred to in the statement of the Rabbis that all Israel have a share in the world to come, comes after the resurrection of the dead and only to those who deserve resurrection.

But the inference is invalid, for we may say that the expression, “resurrection,” in this place denotes the reward of the soul and its life in the world of souls, which comes right after death. They call it resurrection of the dead in opposition to the Sadducees and the Samaritans, who denied the immortality of the soul and said that the soul dies with the body. This follows also from the language of the Gemara in that place: R. Eliezer son of R. Jose said: I showed the Cutheans that their books are corrupt. They say that the resurrection is not mentioned in the Torah. So I said to them: You corrupted your Torah but accomplished nothing. You say that the resurrection is not mentioned in the Torah, but it says: “That soul shall utterly be cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him”—“Shall utterly be cut off” (hikkaret tikkaret), refers to this world; “His iniquity shall be upon him,” refers to the next world. Said Rab Papa to Abaye, why could he not have inferred both worlds from the expression, “Shall utterly be cut off” (hikkaret tikkaret)? Answer: They would have replied that the Torah uses a current expression. From this it would seem that his intention was to prove to them from the Torah that the soul has an existence after death, and nothing else. But this can not be, for this would be in conflict with the accepted belief among our people concerning the resurrection of the dead, and any one who denies it is ascribing a defect to God’s power. It is one of those beliefs which every adherent of the Mosaic Law must hold, as we explained above.

I say, therefore, that the expression in the Mishnah: “All Israel have a share in the world to come,” refers to the reward of the soul after death, both that degree which man has after the resurrection and that which he has immediately after death. This is proved by the statement of the Rabbis that the pious men of other nations have a share in the world to come. Now if the world to come denoted only a stage which comes after the resurrection, how could they say that the pious men of other nations enjoy it, since that stage is reserved exclusively for the perfectly righteous, as they say: “The benefit of rain is for the righteous as well as for the wicked, the resurrection of the dead is for the perfectly righteous only?” The expression, “world to come,” in this place must therefore mean that degree which a man attains after death, at the expiration of the twelve months during which the soul is purged of its material habits.

The stage which a man attains immediately after death, within the twelve months, is called in the language of the Rabbis, Gan Eden (Paradise). And it is in reference to this that it is said that the whole nation enjoys it, entering this stage immediately at death. Thus we find: “Rab Judah said in the name of Samuel: When Moses died and entered Gan Eden, he said to Joshua: ‘Ask me all the things about which you are in doubt …’ ” It seems therefore that the reward or the degree of existence which Moses enjoyed as soon as he died was Gan Eden. The Rabbis also say: Jose ben Joezer dozed off and saw the bed of Yorkis of Zereda flying in the air. He said then: “He has preceded me in Gan Eden by a brief hour.” This stage is incomplete before the end of twelve months. After twelve months one rises to one of the stages of the ‘world to come,’ which is a degree of perfection and glory. Thus we are told: The souls of the righteous are hidden beneath the Throne of Glory, as is said: “The soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God.” Also we find: “The inside thereof being inlaid with love from the daughters of Jerusalem”—these are the souls of the righteous which are with Him in heaven. In the Midrash on Psalms they say that this degree is attained right after death and before the resurrection. Commenting on the verse in the Psalms: “Let the saints exult in glory,” they say: In what glory? Answer: In the glory which God confers upon the righteous when they depart this world. And they praise God, who bound them in the bundle of life, as is said: “The soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life.” Also in the treatise Hagigah: “Arabot is the place in which are righteousness and judgment, treasures of life and treasures of peace and treasures of blessing, and the souls of the righteous. There are the Ofannim and the Seraphim and the Holy Hayyot and the attending angels and the Throne of Glory, while the Living and Eternal King, high and exalted, dwells above them.” Here it is stated clearly that the degree occupied by the souls of the righteous after they leave the body and before resurrection is the same as that of the attending angels. The literal meaning of the verse in Zechariah points to the same thing: “I will give thee free access among these that stand by.” This degree is called in the Mishnah, “world to come,” because it comes to a man after death. The statement: “All Israel have a share in the world to come,” refers to it.

But there is another degree which is also called “world to come” without qualification. This is that which comes after resurrection. This is referred to in the Mishnah above mentioned, where the Gemara says that the one who denies resurrection will have no share in resurrection. For it appears from that passage that “the world to come” is a state of reward which comes after resurrection, a reward which is accepted traditionally among our people as conferred upon those whom God brings back to life at the resurrection. The same thing appears also from the statement of the Rabbis: “There are three classes on the day of judgment … the perfectly righteous are immediately written down, and their destiny is sealed for life in the world to come.” This shows that the world to come is a state which comes to a person after the great day of judgment, i. e. after the resurrection, as is traditionally accepted among our people. The same idea can also be found in the statement of the Rabbis: “ ‘The land of the living,’ i. e. a land whose dead are the first to live again in the world to come. If so, how can those men who died outside of Palestine, like Moses and Aaron, be resurrected and enter the world to come? Answer: At the time of the resurrection God will make for them pathways under ground …” It is thus clear from this that Moses and Aaron must first be resurrected before they can attain the world to come. This also shows that the degree of Gan Eden in which Moses and Aaron have been from the time of their death until now, is not the same as the state of life in the world to come after resurrection. The latter is a much higher degree than Gan Eden and superior to all others. Only those perfectly righteous men have this privilege who merit the life of the resurrection, as the Rabbis say that resurrection is only for the perfectly righteous.

We must say, therefore, that the expression, “world to come,” is used both in a broad and a narrow sense. In a broad sense it applies to any degree of reward which the soul gets after death. In a narrow and specific sense it denotes the highest degree that the soul of the perfectly righteous man can attain, a degree which comes after resurrection. This degree is called “life in the world to come” par excellence. “All Israel have a share in the world to come,” means that in the world of souls which is after death every Israelite will attain to some degree according to his conduct. The pious men of other nations also have a share in the world to come in this sense. But the highest and last degree—“life in the world to come”—no one can attain except the perfectly righteous, and that only after the resurrection. Those righteous men who, as God knows, were unable to fulfil the whole Torah, not because of evil will, but because of the yoke of the exile and external hindrances, or for some other cause, like Moses and Aaron who were not able to fulfil the entire Law, namely those commandments which can be performed only in Palestine, because they did not enter the land of Palestine—these men will be resurrected, so that they may perform all those commandments which are rooted in Palestine as well as those other commandments which they were not able to perform in their first life, and then they will attain to the highest and last degree, viz. “life in the world to come.”

I found a support to these ideas in the Midrash of R. Nehunyah ben ha-Kanah: R. Berechiah held forth, saying: We speak of the world to come (‘olam haba) and we do not know what we are saying. We translate the Hebrew expression ‘olam haba (= the world to come) by the Aramaic ‘alma deate (= world to come), but what is ‘alma deate? Answer: Before the world was created God thought of creating light. So He created a great light which no creature could control. Seeing that the creatures would not be able to endure it, He took a seventh part thereof and put it in its stead and the rest He hid away for the future, saying at the same time: If they are found worthy of this seventh part and take good care of it, I will give them this on the last day. Hence it is called ha‘olam haba, the world that has come, i. e. it came before the six days of creation. This is the meaning of the verse: “Oh how abundant is Thy goodness, which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee; which Thou hast wrought for them that take their refuge in Thee!” So far the Midrash,

Nahmanides comments on this as follows: ‘Olam haba means the world that has already come. He mentions the Aramaic expression used by the Rabbis, ‘alma deate, which means, the world that is about to come. Then he explains that this “world to come” is light, viz. the light which God intended to, and did, create before this world, to indicate that this is the last attainment to which a man can rise. So far Nahmanides. This explanation agrees with what we said, namely that the world to come is always in the act of coming, namely for every righteous man immediately after death, before resurrection. Hence it is called ‘alma deate. Then there is an ultimate degree to which man rises, which is also called ‘olam haba.

It appears therefore that there are four different periods of reward: 1. This world. 2. The world to come after death, either before resurrection or after resurrection. 3. The days of the Messiah. 4. Resurrection. These rewards are all different from each other. Some are fortunate enough to receive reward in all these periods, namely the perfectly righteous. Some are rewarded in this world only, viz. the wicked, who are paid for the few good deeds they have to their credit in this world, so that they may be punished in the next. Then there are good men who have not the privilege of receiving reward in this world. They enjoy life in the world to come right after death, but not resurrection. Then there are some who have the privilege of resurrection also, and some there are who merit the days of the Messiah also.

The four different expressions for reward which occur in the Yozer prayers for the Sabbath probably refer to the four different kinds of reward which we have mentioned. The expressions are: “There is none to compare with Thee,” “There is none beside Thee,” “No other, save Thee,” “Who is like unto Thee?” And the explanation of these various expressions as referring to the four different periods and kinds of reward follows in the immediate sequel: “There is none to compare with Thee, O Lord our Lord, in this world, and there is none beside Thee, our King, in the life of the world to come.” These are the two general periods of reward. Then he speaks of the best reward in this world, which was mentioned first: “There is no other save Thee, our Redeemer, in the days of the Messiah,” and then comes the best reward in the world to come after death, at the time of resurrection: [“And there will be none like Thee, our Saviour, at the resurrection of the dead].” The “world to come” is mentioned right after this world because it comes right after death for every one, before the days of the Messiah and before resurrection. This is more in agreement with the words of Maimonides. For according to Nahmanides, Gan Eden should have been mentioned after this world, because that is the state which comes after this world and not life in the world to come, which is the last stage, according to him. Since Gan Eden is not mentioned at all, it seems that the term, “world to come,” includes all the stages which come after death. But he speaks of “life in the world to come,” because it is the best of all.

CHAPTER 32

Every change from the customary, even though natural and for the person’s good, causes him pain so long as he does not understand the good. Thus when a child leaves his mother’s womb, he passes from potentiality to actuality and to a form of existence superior to and more worthy than the first, being prepared to see the light, to perceive objects with his senses, and to apprehend concepts with his intellect. And yet he cries because he can not understand the good. Similarly when he is weaned and his milk food is discontinued, he cries, although the change is for better and more substantial food and such as is more fitting and wholesome. Yet he feels pain because it is a change from that to which he has been accustomed. Similarly if one is accustomed to sit in darkness a long time and he suddenly comes out into the light, the light is difficult for him and causes discomfort until he gets gradually accustomed to it. So in the day of death, although a person changes for a superior and worthier existence and for a perpetual brightness which the intellect can not know while it is sunk in matter, yet he is extremely grieved by death—not because he is removed from existence to non-existence, as those think who hold that the human intellect can not exist without the body, but because the change from that to which a person has been accustomed is hard and painful until he becomes gradually accustomed to the new. Hence the Rabbis say, concerning the souls of the righteous, that during the entire twelve months [following the person’s death] the soul comes up and then comes down again, i. e. because it is hard for her to be taken away from the corporeal things to which she was accustomed.

And although after she is separated from the body, she does not need to pay any attention to it, nor does she require sensations in order to receive the spiritual influence which she was prepared to receive during life when the body and its powers hindered and prevented her from complete communion with the spiritual, whereas as soon as the hindrance of the body and the corporeal powers is removed in death the veil is removed, the obstacle is taken away and the communion is constant,—nevertheless the soul is grieved at the time of death, and after death it is hard for her to be separated from the body and the corporeal things of which she made use, because she was accustomed to them at first when she needed the sensations and the corporeal powers in order by means of them to acquire the sensible images, from which the soul removed the element of particularity, which is perishable, and retained the element of universality, which is permanent. Thus of Reuben and Simeon the soul retains only animality and rationality in general, but not the particular. Similarly in all things the soul removes the elements of particularity and retains the elements of universality. This universality, however, the soul can not comprehend except by means of the particular sensations which the corporeal powers receive.

A human being is like a house of five gates, through which there come into the house all the moneys and possessions and provisions which are needed by the master of the house. They are all gathered at first in one house, and later all the possessions and provisions are distributed from that house into the various rooms, each thing being placed in the appropriate room. After all the rooms have been filled with the moneys and possessions, each room according to its capacity, the open gates are no longer needed to bring anything into the house or to keep the valuable possessions. It is better for the house that the gates should be shut in order that the valuable contents should be safe in their rooms.

So the human being has five senses by means of which all sensations are perceived. After being all taken into the common sense, the perceptions are distributed among the various compartments in a proper manner. The power of imagination takes from them that which is appropriate to it, while the rational power takes their universal element and essence, removing the elements of particularity, and separating the accidents from the substances. And after the universal elements of things enter the soul, she does not need any longer the senses and the sense perceptions, as the house no longer needs the open gates after the rooms are filled with all the valuable things. And as it is best to shut the gates in order to keep the valuable property, so it is better for the soul to abandon the corporeal powers. The sense perceptions, in relation to the soul, are like a net or like a ship or animal which bring a man to his destination. When he has arrived there, he has no longer any need of the ship or the animal and they become a great trouble and a heavy burden, though at first he could not have reached his destination without them. Similarly the sense perceptions and the corporeal powers, after the ideas have been apprehended, are no longer needed to keep the ideas in the soul; on the contrary, they hinder and prevent the soul from comprehending the idea completely and from being in constant communion with it, because the Active Intellect is abstract, pure and free from matter. Hence the soul can not properly unite with it as long as she is entangled in matter.

But despite all this it is hard for the soul to get away from the things to which she has been accustomed, and she feels pain in death, for every man feels pain in parting from that to which he has been accustomed. Our Rabbis say: “ ‘All the days of the poor are evil’—even their Sabbaths and holy days, as Samuel said: Change of habit is the beginning of intestinal disease.” The meaning is, it is hard for a poor man to change his habits even if the change be to a state of greater pleasure. In the same way it is hard for the soul to give up corporeal things until she gets accustomed to it in the course of twelve months. Hence our Rabbis say: The entire twelve months the soul goes up and comes down, after twelve months the soul goes up but does not come down.

Therefore the man of intelligence who understands the good which comes to a person after death will not grieve on account of death, but will be eager for it, because he knows that the body and its powers hinder the soul from obtaining that good and from the enjoyment of continual delight. He will understand that a man’s grief at the time of death is like the child’s pain when it leaves its mother’s womb, which it feels because it does not know the good which it obtains in birth. The reason we find righteous men, like Moses and others, being grieved on account of death, is because they knew that the degree which the soul attains in the world to come depends upon its service in this world. Hence they wanted to acquire more perfection during life in this world in order that they might merit a greater degree of existence in the world to come, because they knew how great the reward and the pleasure in the other world are. Their grief was not because they thought that they were passing from existence to non-existence because the soul can not exist without the body, as the fools think, far be it!

CHAPTER 33

We will now explain the conception of future reward and punishment according to the two opinions mentioned above. Those who say that the main reward in the next world is conferred upon body and soul together, argue as follows: Since, as they believe, the soul lives and exists only in the body, and the body is an instrument of the soul, giving it existence so that it may perform the will of the Creator, it follows from the justice of God that He should compensate the body for the toil and trouble which it had in the service of God together with the soul. This reward consists in the entire person—body and soul—continuing to exist forever after the resurrection. This, they say, will happen when God will purify the matter of the body so that it becomes like the matter of the spheres or the stars. The body together with the soul will then exist forever as the stars exist, who are living and intelligent beings, having body and soul.

Now if this is the nature of the reward, as the advocates of this opinion say, it follows that punishment is also eternal and of the same nature. God will create in the body a strong attribute or property enabling it to endure the punishments of gehenna, as Job said in allusion to gehenna: “A land of thick darkness, as darkness itself; a land of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as darkness.” He says it is like the shadow of death, not like death itself, in order that the wicked may have sufficient power to receive punishment. If it were like death itself, they would be destroyed and would no longer feel punishment.

If, on the other hand, the reward is bestowed upon the soul alone and not upon the body at all, as Maimonides says, the question arises, how can we conceive punishment being inflicted upon the soul, which is immaterial? The solution depends upon a proper conception of reward. When the soul parts from the body after death, she longs eagerly for her natural activity which is connected with her understanding, namely to serve God, and at the same time she still has an inclination for the things to which she was accustomed while in the body. Therefore if the person in question was one whose deeds were all in the name of God and whose purpose was to serve the Creator by fulfilling His commandments and doing His will as far as is possible while he was alive, that same purpose will not part from the soul after death and will not leave her until she unites with the Separate Intelligences, who serve God with the same intention, which is so much higher in degree as to be scarcely comparable with the other, though they are of the same kind.

Solomon compares the relation of these two purposes to each other to the relation of the light of Venus before dawn to the light of the sun: “But the path of the righteous is as the light of Venus, That shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” The meaning is this: As the planet Venus, when it occupies its greatest morning distance, rises before the morning, illumines the night and continues shining the whole morning until the light of the sun gets strong and it is veritable day, so the way and the purpose of the righteous in serving God during their lifetime is a perfect way which makes darkness before them as light (like the light of Venus which illumines the night) and continues to shine before them until the day of death, when they are placed in a great spiritual light, similar to the light called veritable day, which can not be compared at all with the first light although they are both of the same kind, as the light of Venus can not be compared with the light of the sun which causes the perfect day, although they both belong to the species light. Therefore if the soul was wise and understood immaterial things and divine matters truly, she will, on parting from the body, experience great delight when she sees that the ideas which she had agree with the divine things as they are.

The understanding which the soul has during life is like a dream. Hence just as a delightful dream disappoints and wearies a person when he finds that it does not agree with reality, so the ideas of the soul will cause him pain after death when he finds them in disagreement with reality. But if they do agree with reality, that is, if they are true ideas, the soul will experience great delight. It is like a hungry man who dreams that he is eating, or a thirsty man who dreams that he is drinking, and then he wakes up and feels empty. His pain is great. But if he wakes up and finds before him a spring in a garden, from which he proceeds to drink, or a table set with all kinds of palatable food, which he eats to his heart’s content, he experiences great delight in the actual eating and drinking, a delight that can not be compared with that of eating and drinking in a dream, which is merely in imagination, whereas this is real. So the soul will feel delight when she perceives in the spiritual world in reality those things which she perceived in this world, which is like a dream. Hence we say, in order to explain the matter by analogy, that the relation of the mind’s understanding in this world to the soul’s understanding in the next world is like that of a dream to the waking state. Hence the Bible compares the conception of the restoration of Zion as understood by the prophets—though it is true and undoubted—to a dream: “When the Lord brings back those that will return to Zion, we were like unto them that dream:” i. e. we shall know and realize that in the conception of that event which we had from the prophets we were like those that dream, for there is no comparison between the conception we had from the prophets and the thing we shall see in reality, any more than there is between a dream and the waking state. Therefore when we see the thing in reality, we shall rejoice exceedingly and, “Then will our mouth be filled with laughter.” This shows that the relation of the conceptional understanding of a thing to the thing as it is in reality is like the relation of a dream to the waking state. Therefore if the soul during life centered all her purpose upon the service of God and keeping His commandments and pursuing righteousness and loving-kindness, she will experience wonderful delight in the world of souls, when she sees that the permanence and perfection of the angels and the celestial forms are solely of this nature, i. e. that they consist in their obedience and submission to the will of God, as we explained before.

It is like the case of a person who was told that there is a great king in the cities on the sea, very awful, who loves righteousness and kindness, hates flattery, has any number of servants all standing very high and taking delight in recounting the praises of their king and doing his bidding in great awe, and that all men must finally stand before that king and give him an account of all the deeds which they did. Hearing this, the person made up his mind to follow the paths of right and to serve that king. He endeavored to find out what the king did and what was agreeable to him, and took pains to perform his will as far as lay in his power. Finally when his time came to go to the king’s palace and stand before him and greet him, he rejoiced greatly and experienced great delight when he saw the royal splendor of the king and his great glory, his servants standing before him, as he had been told. And the king rejoiced to see him when he knew that the man had served him from love on the basis of report only. This man surely deserved a much greater reward than he who knew the king before. Therefore the king, being a lover of justice and kindness and divine rectitude, showed him favor, as we explained above.

This is the degree of those who believe on the basis of hearing and tradition, the righteous men who follow tradition, concerning whom the Rabbis say: “In the future world there is neither eating nor drinking, but the righteous sit with their crowns on their heads and enjoy the splendor of the Shekinah.” They say the “righteous” and not the “wise,” to indicate that they are speaking of believers, as we said before. The words, “enjoy the splendor of the Shekinah,” allude to the fact that just as a person enjoys the rays of light coming from the sun, which make his sight pass from potentiality to actuality if he has good sight, so if he has pure thought and intentions he will enjoy in the spiritual world the rays of intellectual light, which will reach him in actual reality and which are called the splendor of the Shekinah. No corporeal being can conceive this delight. Not even the prophets were able to conceive it, as the Rabbis say: All the prophecies have reference to the days of the Messiah, but as to the world to come: “No eye hath seen it, O God, beside Thee.” The meaning is that since the pleasures of the days of the Messiah are to be enjoyed by body and soul together, an image of their sweetness may be perceived with the eye, i. e. the senses. But the world to come being spiritual and abstract, no likeness of it can be perceived by means of the corporeal powers. All that the prophets knew of it was that it is a spiritual pleasure and delight, nothing more.

This is the reason why the Rabbis denominate it by the expression, “Wine kept in the grapes:” “What is the meaning of the words: ‘No eye hath seen it, O God, beside Thee?’ Said R. Joshua ben Levi, This is the wine that has been kept in its grapes since the six days of creation.” The meaning is as follows: A person who eats grapes and enjoys them but has never seen wine, can not imagine that there can come from the grape something that is sweeter, more delightful and more beneficial than the grape itself, and if he were told that by viniculture he can obtain more delight than by eating grapes, he would be very much surprised and would refuse to believe it, but if he were given wine to drink he would know that the wine which comes from the grapes is much better and sweeter and more wholesome than the grapes themselves, and he would wonder how such a wonderfully delightful thing can come from grapes. So the soul can not imagine that by performing the commandments she will obtain spiritual delight, until she is separated from the body. Then she will understand how such delight can come from performing the commandments as wine is obtained by cultivating a vineyard, and will realize that this delight is contained in the attribute or character which results from performing the commandments, as wine is contained in the grapes which are obtained by cultivating a vineyard. Hence it is called, “Wine that is kept in the grapes,” to indicate that just as there is no comparison between the taste of grapes and the taste of wine, so there is no comparison between the delights of this world and the delights of the world to come. It is also called “celestial paradise,” to indicate that the soul can not conceive the pleasure of the spiritual which is celestial, as long as she is in the sublunar world.

As for the nature of the soul’s pain and punishment, that is to be explained as follows: If a person in his lifetime pursued his desires and physical pleasures, and his soul departed from doing the will of God and accommodated her acts to the nature of the body, which is opposed to her own nature, then when this soul is separated from the body, she longs for those things to which she was accustomed and feels a desire for them, but has no instruments with which to obtain them. On the other hand, by reason of her own nature she will desire to unite with the higher forms and the immaterial substances, and will experience a longing for them. But she has not learned the elements, nor been accustomed to the service of God, the delight in which can not be enjoyed except by one who has accustomed and prepared himself for it, as the Rabbis say: The Lord gives wisdom to him only who has wisdom, for it says: “He giveth wisdom unto the wise.” Accordingly the soul will be drawn in two directions at once, upwards and downwards, the one by reason of her nature, the other by reason of her habit and custom. But she will have no instruments for obtaining the lower desires and no preparation to obtain the higher. This will cause her great pain and suffering, greater than any pain in the world or any kind of fracture—more pain than the burning of fire or cold and terrible frost, more than the wounds of knives and swords or the stings of snakes and scorpions.

When a person is burned by fire, he feels pain, but it is not the body that feels the pain, but the soul. And the soul feels pain not because the fire has any effect upon the soul—fire can not affect a spiritual thing—but because the vital power is a corporeal power residing in the body when its parts are united to each other. Now when the soul becomes aware of the separation of the parts of the body one from another through fire or cold or a sword or any other agency having a similar effect, and perceives the pain which the vital power feels when the parts of the body which are its seat are divided, and the grief which it suffers on account of the dissolution of the body upon whose integrity it depends—then the soul feels pain on account of the pain of the vital power which is the seat of the soul, and is grieved on account of the separation of their union. In a similar way when the soul herself is separated from the body and is drawn in two opposite directions, as said before, by her own nature upward and by habit downward, she experiences great pain as if her parts were torn asunder. To be sure, the soul has no parts, but we use this expression to give an imaginary idea, the point being that she has two contrary desires and can not follow either one of them alone. This is the meaning of the rabbinic statement: R. Eliezer said: “The souls of the righteous are hidden under the Throne of Glory, as is said: ‘The soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God.’ As to the souls of the wicked, one angel stands at one end of the world and another at the other end and they throw it to each other, as is said: ‘And the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as from the hollow of a sling.’” This is an allusion to the two contrary desires which she has. But the soul of the righteous has no downward desire, hence she is united at once with that which is akin to her nature, namely the Throne of Glory under which she dwells. As the pleasure is greater than any that can be imagined, as we said before, so is the pain greater than any imaginable pain.

We have already explained above that though the soul is not in place, not being a corporeal thing, nevertheless she is confined by direction, so that she can feel pain, as she is confined by the body, though she is not in place. This is the meaning of the rabbinic statement: “Antoninus said to Rabbi: The body and the soul can both evade the day of judgment. The body can say: It is the soul that has sinned, for since she has parted from me I am lying in the grave like a stone. The soul will say: It is the body that sinned, for since I parted from it, I am like a bird flying in the air. Said Rabbi to Antoninus, I will give you a parable. This is similar to the case of a human king … So God takes the soul, throws her into the body and judges them together, as is said: ‘He calleth to the heavens above, and to the earth, that He may judge His people.’ ‘The heavens above,’ signifies the soul, ‘And to the earth, that He may judge His people,’ refers to the body.”

It seems to me that they mean to say that though the soul is a spiritual thing which can not be held in place, God does confine her in a place, which they call body, in order that she may receive punishment and be afflicted with pain for her conduct. This place is called gehenna. They call it body to indicate that just as the body confines the soul in a place—for though the soul does not occupy space, nevertheless since she is not outside of the body she is necessarily confined by the body—so the place of gehenna, which is called body, also confines the soul in order that she may receive her punishment there.

Note carefully that they make this statement only concerning pain and punishment, for we can not conceive of the soul receiving punishment unless she is confined in a place. But the statement does not apply to spiritual reward and delight. For we can conceive the soul receiving this without being confined to a place. Perhaps this is the error of those who say that the bodies must be purified to receive their reward and that the soul is not rewarded without the body. They think that just as a definite place is mentioned for judgment, i. e. punishment, so is a definite place necessary for reward. But it is not so, for both punishment and reward are given to the soul alone, but a definite place is necessary for punishment, not for reward, as we have explained.

CHAPTER 34

The punishment of which we have been speaking, which is inflicted upon the body and the soul together or upon the soul alone, differs according to the different degrees of the individuals. If a person has a few good deeds to his credit and is also guilty of a few transgressions, he can not be continually punished in the extraordinary manner that we mentioned, for a limited period will make him forget his habit [of committing sins]. According to the Rabbis, this period lasts twelve months. After twelve months of punishment, the individual attains to some degree [of reward] according to the number of good deeds which he has to his credit. Then there are individuals who, after they have forgotten their habits through twelve months’ punishment, have no good deeds to entitle them to any degree of reward, and so they become non-existent, since they have no preparation at all for receiving spiritual reward. This is what the Bible means when it speaks of the soul being cut off. In reference to these the Rabbis say that after twelve months their body is destroyed, their soul is burned, and they are scattered by the wind under the soles of the feet of the righteous.

Then there are other wicked men who are punished eternally for their misdeeds, those, for example, who deny the principles of the Torah, as we shall see later with the help of God. The souls of these men must be confined in a place that they may receive continuous punishment, as we explained before. There are others who after twelve months attain a great degree, as the Rabbis say concerning Samuel, who was a perfectly righteous man, that the entire twelve months his soul went up and down, and that this was the reason the witch was able to bring him up, because it was within the twelve months, as she said: “I see a god-like being coming up out of the earth.” But after twelve months the soul goes up but does not come down. This shows that even perfectly righteous men find it hard to give up the material things to which they have been accustomed, until they have been purified for a certain length of time. This purification lasts twelve months, a period embracing the four seasons, which include all temporal changes. This is the meaning of the passage in which we are told concerning Rabbah bar Nahamani that shortly before his death, when he was fleeing from a horseman, an officer of the king who wanted to capture him, he saw or heard in a dream or in a vision that after death the souls study the laws of the plagues as they used to do in life, and he heard them discussing: “If the bright spot comes before white hair … If it is doubtful, the celestial college said, the man was unclean and God said, he was clean. Then he heard them say: Who shall decide the matter? Answer: Rabbah bar Nahamani, who is an expert in the subject of clean and unclean …” From the entire context there it is clear that the souls after death are eager to occupy themselves with the things to which they were accustomed in life, for even the souls of the righteous are engaged in studying the laws of the plagues and of the clean and unclean with which they occupied themselves in life. This desire, they say, disappears after twelve months.

The Rabbis speak of this frequently in different places. Concerning Rabbi Judah ha-Nasi they say that he came to his house every Friday evening and pronounced the Sabbath benediction, thus indicating that even after death the souls of the righteous are eager to perform the commandments which they were accustomed to perform during life, so much so that R. Judah ha-Nasi came home every Sabbath eve to pronounce the Kiddush. We find the same thing in a few other pious men, but it never lasts more than twelve months, as the Rabbis say: After twelve months the soul goes up but she does not come down. The case of Elijah, who goes up and down all the time, is unique even now among the righteous men, as we find in the Zohar on the section “Vayakhel:” “We find a mystery in the book of Adam, which says that among the generations of the world there will be one spirit that will go down to the earth and clothe itself in a body. His name is Elijah. In this body he will go up, put it off and leave it in the storm. Then he will put on another body of light, in which he will remain among the angels. Later he will go down again and put on the body which remained in the storm, and appear in it down below. With the other body he appears above. This is the mystery contained in the words: ‘Who hath ascended up into heaven, and descended?’ There is no human being whose spirit ascended to heaven and then came down, except Elijah. He it is who ascended above and then descended.” This is also the mystery of the “garment,” which is mentioned in the works of the Cabalists, but I can not say more.

CHAPTER 35

Belief in the resurrection of the dead is obligatory according to the tradition of our people, as we explained above. Logic does not require it, but since it is something whose existence is rationally conceivable, we are obliged to believe it, as we explained in that place. Particularly is this the case, since it is confirmed by experience. Elijah brought back to life the son of the widow of Zarephath, while Elisha revived the son of the Shunammite woman, and a thing to which experience testifies must be believed, even if it is not required by logic. For example, it is absolutely true that there is a stone which attracts iron, because experience shows it, though logic does not require it. We must therefore believe that God will revive the dead, even after they turn to dust, because it is something the mind can conceive.

To understand why this is a resurrection and not a new creation, we must bear in mind that a thing which has once received a higher influence or power and has lost it, is more prepared to receive it a second time than it was in the beginning. For example, wood which has once been kindled and has received the form of fire, which was later extinguished, is more ready to receive the form of fire a second time than in the beginning. Also a person who once received the spirit of prophecy and lost it, is more prepared to receive it a second time than he was in the beginning. The reason is because when a thing receives any higher influence or power, though it loses it later, there remains in it an impression of the influence which it once received. Hence the Rabbis say: “ ‘And I will bring your sanctuaries unto desolation’—they are sacred even in their desolation.” They also say: an article which was used in connection with holy things should be hidden. The reason is because it retains an impression of the divine object for which it served as a seat or in some other capacity. In the same way, therefore, we say that the body, which was the seat of the soul, a higher power, retains an impression of the divine power which it received in the beginning, even after the soul leaves it at the time of death.

And the proof of this is found in the case of the man who died and was buried in the grave of Elisha. The bones of Elisha had sufficient power to bring him back to life by coming in contact with him, although the soul of Elisha had long departed from the body, for he had been dead more than a year, as the Bible testifies. Nevertheless as soon as the dead man came in contact with the bones of Elisha, he rose and stood on his feet. This was due to the impression which remained in the bones of the divine object of which they were the seat. This is the reason also why in time of trouble we prostrate ourselves upon the graves of the righteous. For on account of the impression, in those bones, of the divine spirit which they lodged, they are more prepared to mediate the divine influence than others. This may be illustrated also in the rod of Moses. It was nothing but dry wood, nevertheless, since it was in the hand of Moses when the prophetic inspiration began to rest upon him, it was always used in the performance of the signs, as we read: “And thou shalt take in thy hand this rod, wherewith thou shalt do the signs.” And Elisha said to Gehazi: “And lay my staff upon the face of the child.”

The resurrection must be explained in the same way. The body of the righteous man, by reason of the impression remaining in it of the divine spirit which it lodged, is more prepared without doubt to receive the same divine spirit a second time than it was at first, as the Rabbis say: “If those who never had been came to life, surely those who once had been would come to life again.” In other words, a thing which was not fit to receive a higher power and yet received it once, is surely fit to receive it a second time, because it retains an impression and preparation for receiving it a second time more easily than at first.

Moreover the object which has the fitness to receive some power or influence, has the power, as it were, to compel the giver to bestow the influence or power upon it, as, for example, though fire does not by nature move downward, yet when we take a lamp which has been extinguished and is still smoking and put it under another lamp that is burning, the smoke rising from the extinguished lamp will force the fire of the burning lamp to let down its flame through the smoke to the extinguished lamp and it will burn again as before. This is the reason why the Bible compares the human soul to a lamp: “The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord.” The soul of man is like the light of a burning lamp. Just as the light of a burning lamp, even after it has left the wick, will burn a second time more easily than at first because of the impression of the fire which it retains, so the light of the soul which has left the body can return to the body and dwell in it, by reason of the preparation which it retains, more easily than it came to it in the beginning. This takes place when the divine Wisdom decrees that it should.

Seeing, however, that this thing is very far from being a natural phenomenon, the men of the Great Synagogue, in composing the benedictions, ascribed this thing to the power of God: “Thou art powerful forever, O Lord, Thou revivest the dead.” The meaning is: Thou art powerful and canst do everything which the mind can conceive. Thy power is not like that of a human being. A human being has power to put to death the living, but the power of God is the reverse—He can revive the dead. In this benediction they mention God’s kindness to His creatures during life: “He supports the living with kindness;” and after death: “He reviveth the dead with great mercy.” Then they say: “He supporteth the fallen, He healeth the sick, He looseth the bound …,” to show that the power of God is not like that of a human being. A human being has power to bring men low and subdue them, while the power of God is the reverse—He supporteth the fallen. A human being has power to strike and bruise and make sick; God, on the contrary, healeth the sick. A human being has power to punish his fellow by imposing a fine or by imprisonment, God, on the contrary, looseth the bound. A human being has power deliberately to make a false promise, for who would dare to tell him to keep his promise? God, on the contrary, keeps His faith. And not merely does He keep His faith with the living, who supplicate Him, as the Psalmist says: “Remember the word unto Thy servant, Because Thou hast made me to hope;” but also with those who sleep in the dust, the dead, who have no power to supplicate Him, does He keep faith, and He revives them, as the Torah says: “I kill, and I make alive.” The Rabbis, commenting on this verse, say: You might suppose it means, He kills one and gives life to another, hence the sequel says: “I have wounded and I heal.” As the one wounded is the same as the one healed, so the one killed is the same as the one brought to life.

Since this belief is the most remarkable of the beliefs accepted by our people, it was placed right after the benediction of the Fathers. The expression, “abundant mercies,” is applied to resurrection, because the life of man is divided into three parts, the years of growth, the stationary years and the years of decline. In all these three periods God nourishes man and supports him in life with grace, kindness and mercy. Hence these three expressions are mentioned in Grace after Meals, which Moses composed for Israel, to correspond to the three periods mentioned. In the years of growth, when the assimilation of the food is great and exceeds the dissolution, there is no need of extraordinary kindness to keep the individual alive. Still, inasmuch as the assimilated food is altogether unlike the original fluid, some divine help is necessary, and the grace (hen) of God is sufficient. In the stationary years, when the dissolution is equal, or approximately so, to the assimilation, greater help is needed of divine kindness (hesed) to maintain life. Finally, in the years of decline, when the dissolution is much greater than the assimilation resulting from the food, man needs God’s mercy (rahamim) to maintain him alive. After death, neither grace, nor kindness, nor mercy is sufficient to bring man to life again, but there is need of great mercy, hence they say, “He reviveth the dead with great mercy.”

As to the manner of resurrection, the Rabbis say that there is a certain dew with which God will revive the dead. It seems, therefore, that the dew which God will cause to descend upon the earth will have in it the virtue of the semen of the male, which gives the form of the person, while the earth at that time, by reason of its preparation, will have the virtue of the seed of the female, which gives the matter of the newly born individual. The prophecy of Ezekiel concerning the dead which he brought back to life disagrees with this opinion, if we interpret the text literally. Be this, however, as it may, whether after the resurrection the people will eat and drink and beget children and die in the usual manner [or not], we have already explained that it is a matter of dispute among the great men of more recent times. Maimonides and a great many distinguished men who follow him say that the persons resurrected will use all their sense functions in the natural way, and then will die again and return to dust. Rabbi Meir Halevi and Nahmanides are of the opinion that after resurrection, the persons in question will live as long as their natural capacity permits them, and then their bodies will be transmuted by purification and will become like the body of Elijah. And thenceforth they will continue to exist as body and soul, but will no longer use any sense functions, will not eat or drink or die and will remain forever without eating and drinking. It seems too that this latter is the opinion of some of the Rabbis of the Talmud, for they say that the righteous whom God will resurrect will not return to dust.

Although this opinion seems strange, nevertheless it may be believed, since the mind can conceive it and experience testifies in its favor, for Moses lived forty days and forty nights without eating and drinking, though Moses did not exist forever in his body, since he died when his time came. They hold that the individual will exist forever, and prove their point from Elijah. The best solution in this and similar cases is the answer R. Joshua ben Hananiah gave to the Alexandrians—“When they come to life again, we will consult about the matter.”

An important question in connection with the resurrection is whether it embraces the whole world, as some nations think, or the whole of our nation, or only a few of them. It is a matter which is not clearly alluded to in Scripture. The expression in Daniel: “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,” if it refers to the resurrection, indicates that not the whole world, nor the whole of our nation, nor even the majority of them, will be resurrected, but only a few. For the word “many” does not denote the majority of those that sleep in the dust, but only a few, like the expression: “And many from among the peoples of the land became Jews,” which does not signify a majority of the peoples of the land, but only a few—three or five or ten or a hundred or a thousand, for example. Another similar expression is: “Many will entreat the favour of the liberal man.” Moreover our Rabbis say: “The power of rain is for the righteous as well as the wicked, the resurrection of the dead is for the perfectly righteous only.”

If we say that the entire world will be resurrected, or the whole of our people, i. e. that they will all come back to life and stand in judgment on the day announced for the judgment of the world, and that the righteous will remain forever enjoying delight, while the wicked will live forever and suffer, then the passage in Daniel does not refer to resurrection, but must be understood in the way in which some literalists interpret it, as referring to the exaltation of the lowly nation in the days of the Hasmoneans or in the days of the Messiah. At that time, they say, the lowly nation, or many of the survivors, who are like those who sleep in the dust, will awake and rise to a degree which will be permanent and from which the nation will not again descend, but which it will occupy forever; while the other nations and their wicked men will always remain low and subdued under Israel: “Some to everlasting life, and some to reproaches and everlasting abhorrence.”

Some of the later writers confirm the opinion of these commentators by saying that the incident of the dead being revived by Ezekiel took place in a prophetic vision, as we read: “The hand of the Lord was upon me, and the Lord carried me out in a spirit …” The whole chapter is an allegory, typifying the misery of the Israelitish people in the Babylonian exile, where they were like dead men buried and devoid of all hope. But at the time of the second temple, in the days of the Hasmoneans, they rose again to a high degree, and rooted out the worship of idols. Then all those who came up from the Babylonian exile recognized and knew that the Lord is God. This is expressed in the biblical text in the words: “These bones are the whole house of Israel; behold, they say: Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost; we are clean cut off.” And at the end he says: “Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O My people; and I will bring you into the land of Israel.” All this is an allusion to the return from captivity and settlement in the holy land, which led the Israelites to acknowledge God, as we read further: “And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, and caused you to come up out of your graves …, and I will put My spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I will place you in your own land …”

This is also the final opinion of the Gemara: “R. Judah says: It is really (beëmet) an allegory.” It is true that there is a dispute concerning the matter in the Gemara, where some one says: “I am a descendant of those people and these are the phylacteries which my great-grandfather left me,” but this is merely a hyperbole, for it is an accepted rule that the expression ‘really’ (beëmet) indicates that the statement for which it vouches is authoritative. If, then, the passage in Daniel above mentioned does not refer to resurrection, then it is possible that resurrection embraces the whole world or the entire Jewish people, but there is no allusion to it in the Bible. The verse: “Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust,” has the same meaning as: “He raiseth up the poor out of the dust,” and other passages. The belief in resurrection is therefore merely traditional, and the verse: “I kill and I make alive; I have wounded, and I heal,” concerning which the Rabbis say that just as the wounding and the healing concern the same person so the killing and the making alive also concern the same person, is not a promise of resurrection, but a statement that God is able to do this thing.

But even if we say that resurrection is for the purpose of rewarding the body, which suffered pain in the service of God, and that it is appropriate, in view of God’s justice, to reward the identical thing that did the service and punish the same thing that was guilty of disobedience and not something else (though this is not a good argument, because punishment is inflicted upon the transgressor and not upon the instrument—we do not punish the sword, but the homicide), at any rate it follows that the resurrection will not take place at the time of the Messiah (according to the one who says that there is no difference between the present day and the Messianic age except freedom from political subjection) and that only a few persons will enjoy it at that time, like Moses and Aaron and others, who will rise up at that time miraculously to publish to the world the belief in God. The main resurrection will

take place on the day of judgment and it will embrace the whole Jewish people or the greater part thereof, or the whole world or the greater part thereof, for they all deserve reward and punishment.

But this opinion is hard to accept. For if we say that the body will be resurrected in order to be rewarded for the pain it endured, and that it will enjoy pleasure forever without eating and drinking, and will not change from day to day as our bodies now change, the question is: which body will rise at the time of the resurrection? The body of man changes continually from day to day with the food that comes in from outside. There would have to rise with any individual, say Reuben, any number of bodies belonging to the different periods of his life, so that they may all enjoy the pleasure. And if we say that Reuben will rise with a matter and a temperament similar to his original temperament, in order that his soul may dwell in that matter and temperament, and that this matter, being similar to the original matter, may enjoy pleasure, as we said above in the name of R. Aaron Halevi, then the divine justice which, on this theory, resurrects the dead in order to pay them for the trouble they suffered, fails, for it is not proper to reward Simeon for a service done by Reuben. We have already explained before the thought that led to the idea that reward and punishment must include the body as well as the soul, and we made it clear that reward and punishment are not in the same case. The nature of punishment is such that it requires the existence of a body or of something to confine the soul, so that the soul may receive its punishment therein, but there is no such necessity in reward. Hence Maimonides agrees that the main reward that God bestows upon man is conferred upon the soul and not upon the body.

It seems, therefore, that the purpose of resurrection is not in order to reward the body, but either to give the individual an opportunity to acquire greater perfection than he acquired before, prevented as he was by external hindrances, exile, poverty and the like, and not through evil choice or any condition in the individual himself; or to make known in the world the great power of God and to publish the true faith. In this case resurrection may be confined to the righteous alone, as the Rabbis say, and will take place in the Messianic age. We can find a confirmation of this view in Daniel, where we read: “But go thou thy way till the end be; and thou shalt rest, and shalt stand up to thy lot, at the end of the days.” The word “end” (kez) when used without qualification, applies to the redemption from exile. “And thou shalt rest,” means that he will die before the end. “And shalt stand up,” alludes to the resurrection which will take place in the Messianic age, and which will be for the perfectly righteous only. And if we say that “end” refers to death, which is “the end of all flesh,” the words: “shalt stand up,” would likewise denote a promise that he will live again in the resurrection. For if he were thinking of the “world to come” after death, he could not say that after he rests he will stand up to the lot at the end of the days, there being no connection between the end of days and the world to come. There is no doubt, therefore, that the text refers to the resurrection of the righteous in the Messianic age.

But there is no reference in the Bible to the general resurrection, which will take place on the day of judgment. The passage in the Bible: “I will gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat; and I will enter into judgment with them there for My people and for My heritage Israel,” does not refer to resurrection at all, as we can see from the context. This resurrection, therefore, is believed in as a result of tradition only. This is the best interpretation of these matters that I have selected.

Those who say that at the time of the resurrection the bodies will have everlasting delight or everlasting pain, without eating and drinking, and that they will not die again after resurrection in order that they may receive eternal reward or punishment for their deeds, and that this resurrection does not embrace the whole world, nor a majority, nor the whole Jewish people, nor yet a majority of them, but is limited to a few, the perfectly righteous men, can be compared to a person who affirms and denies a thing in the same breath without knowing it. For if the resurrection is intended for a few only and not for the rest, its purpose can not be to reward the body, but either to publish to the world the belief in God by means of the wonderful miracle that can be seen by every one, or to give the righteous man an opportunity to earn happiness and a degree of existence which he was not able to attain the first time on account of the yoke of the exile and the other troubles and hindrances which prevent a man from attaining the perfection of which his nature permits.

CHAPTER 36

Having explained the subject of reward and punishment, some of which is spiritual bestowed in the world to come upon the soul alone or upon body and soul together, we must now investigate whether justice requires that reward and punishment should be temporary or eternal.

Now, according to real justice and equality, reward and punishment should correspond to the act for which the reward or the punishment is received. And since the act is of finite duration, the reward or the punishment should also be of finite duration, corresponding to the finite act, without regard to the quality of the server or of the served. Thus, if one strikes his neighbor and blinds him, or breaks his arm, he should have his eye blinded or his arm broken, and similarly if one causes his neighbor pain lasting an hour, his punishment should be such as to cause him an hour’s pain, no more and no less, according to strict equality and justice. In the same way if one causes his neighbor a little pleasure, his reward should also be little, corresponding to the pleasure or enjoyment which the other person received. How then can an ordinary mortal deserve eternal reward and everlasting enjoyment, whether given to the soul alone or the soul and body together, as the religionists say, and as we explained?

We may, however, say that reward is not measured in this way, but that it is estimated according to the worth of the person for whom the service is performed, as is the case in political justice and the customs of men. In a political society reward and punishment are measured by the worth of the person served and not by the value of the service. One who serves a great prince gets a greater reward than one who serves an ordinary person, and one who serves the king, gets a greater reward than one who serves a prince. The greater the dignity of the person served, the greater the reward. From this it would follow that if the worth of the being served is infinite, the reward should be infinite. This is the point of view adopted by the religionists, who promise eternal reward for the service of God, because God’s worth is infinite. It would follow from this also that the punishment of him who disobeys God should also be infinite, and for the same reason.

If, however, we examine carefully this human custom in the matter of measuring reward by the worth of the person served, we shall find that a different method should be used in relation to the service of God. Service done to a human king does indeed deserve greater reward than service done to any other person according to the measure of the benefit received from the service. Now since the benefit which the king receives has more value than the benefit received by an ordinary person, the reward must be greater. But God does not receive any benefit from man’s service at all, as Elihu said: “If thou be righteous, what givest thou Him, or what receiveth He of thy hand?” We must say, then, that the reward should be commensurate not with the person served, but with the service, i. e. with the trouble endured by the one who does the service; and since the service is done in time, the reward should also be temporary. And similarly punishment should be temporary, as Elihu said: “If thou hast sinned, what doest thou against Him? And if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto Him?”

But if we consider this mode of measurement in punishment, we find that it is not proper, for punishment should be determined in accordance with the dignity of the person who is offended. Although God is not affected in any way by a person’s disobedience, nevertheless inasmuch as the intention of the sinner is to do contrary to the command of God, who is infinite in worth, and to rebel against Him, his sin should be regarded as very serious because of his intention. The distinction in the Torah between wilful and unintentional sin shows that sin is to be judged by the intention of the sinner and not by the mere act as such. For example, a person who disobeys the command of a great king, deserves death, even though the king did not suffer any damage on that account. Since his intention was to slight the king’s honor, he should be punished for his intention and not merely for the resulting act. Hence the punishment of the wicked should be eternal, as God is eternal and infinite.

It seems also to be the opinion of the Rabbis that eternal punishment is sometimes inflicted upon the wicked for an act done in time. Thus they say that wicked men of a certain class go down to gehenna and are judged there for ever and ever. From this it appears that there is eternal punishment which is measured in relation to the person to whom the service is due, not in relation to the person who owes the service. It seems, therefore, from our argument that while reward should not be eternal according to strict justice, nor should it be measured in relation to the person served, as we have explained, punishment sholud be eternal and should be measured in relation to the dignity of the person to whom the service is due and the intention of the sinner, as we explained above. We must, therefore, make a distinction between reward and punishment. Reward must be paid simply in accordance with the benefit received. And since the server himself knows that no benefit accrues from his service to the person served, his reward should be of limited duration, corresponding to the act which was of limited duration or the trouble which the act cost him. On the other hand, punishment should be eternal, according to the intention of the sinner to disobey the command of God, who is eternal and infinite.

That this is the correct conception of the matter appears also from Onkelos’ interpretation of the verse: “And repayeth them that hate Him to their face,” which he translates: “He repays the wicked for the good deeds which they have done before Him during their lifetime, in order to destroy them.” His meaning is that God repays those that hate Him in their lifetime, giving them a temporary reward for their good deeds, so that they may be punished with eternal destruction for their transgressions. Now if justice required that reward should be eternal and bear a relation to the person receiving the service, how is it conceivable that God would deprive any creature of its reward and give it a small temporary reward instead of the eternal reward which is its due? In the same way if strict justice required that punishment should be temporary and finite, how can we suppose that God would pervert judgment and punish the wicked eternally, as the Rabbis say that the unbelievers (minin) and informers go down to gehenna and are judged there for ever and ever, instead of giving them temporary punishment, as they deserve?

It seems therefore that the truth is as we have explained, namely that in accordance with justice reward should be temporary and punishment eternal. The original question therefore comes back—How does a mortal deserve to attain eternal reward and everlasting happiness, as we said before? The religionists also promise eternal reward as well as eternal punishment, and the tradition of the Rabbis is in agreement with the same idea. For, referring to the verse: “They shall inherit the land forever,” they say it alludes to spiritual reward, which is eternal, as they say: “All Israel have a share in the world to come, as is said: ‘Thy people … shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land forever.’ ”

My opinion is that strict justice requires that reward should be temporary, nevertheless God in His abundant kindness gives to those who do His will eternal and infinite reward, as He is eternal and infinite in worth. This is the hint that was given to Abraham in the vision, when God said to him: “Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, thy reward shall be exceeding great.” Abraham thought that reward is temporary, as justice requires, and hence he was afraid that his merits were diminished or suffered deduction by reason of his victory over the five kings. Therefore God said to him: Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, i. e. fear not that thy merits shall be deducted from, for I am the one who pay thy reward, and My power is unlimited. Therefore thy reward will be very great, i. e. infinite, for the reward will be given in relation to Me and not in relation to thee and thy act, which are finite. The conversation concludes with the words: “And he believed in the Lord; and he counted it to Him for righteousness.” The meaning is, Abraham believed God’s promise of great reward and thought that it signified God’s charity and kindness, for strict justice required that reward should be temporary and finite, but by reason of God’s charity and kindness it is infinite. This is also stated in the Torah: “Who keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love Him and keep His commandments to a thousand generations.” The last expression denotes infinite time, like the verse: “The word which He commanded to a thousand generations.” For we find in another place: “And showing mercy unto the thousandth generation of them that love Me …,” and there is no doubt that the words, “unto the thousandth generation,” refer to an infinite time. The word “mercy” is used to indicate that the eternal reward is due to mercy. But punishment is eternal by strict justice, as we have explained.

CHAPTER 37

The idea that punishment bears relation to the being to whom service is due and not to the person who owes the service, and hence is eternal, seems to be indicated in the words which God said to Moses: “And I will send an angel before thee … for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiff-necked people; lest I consume thee in the way.” Here we see that He feared they would be destroyed if God Himself with His great name should go up among them, but if an angel would go up with them, they would be saved from destruction, though some other punishment would come upon them, as we read: “Behold, I send an angel before thee … Take heed of him, and hearken unto his voice; be not rebellious against him; for he will not pardon your transgression; for My name is in him.” The words: “For he will not pardon your transgression,” do not indicate that they will get greater punishment by rebelling against the command of the angel than by rebelling against God, for the text says: “For I will not go up in the midst of thee … lest I consume thee in the way.” The meaning is this: If they disobey God, there is, indeed, the fear that they may be punished very severely—with destruction. But there is an advantage on the other hand, for God has the power to pardon them, but the angel has not this power. Despite this, however, God said that it would be better for them to be guided by an angel, for though he will not forgive their transgression, their punishment, if they disobey the angel, will not be as great as it would be if God went with them and guided them without an intermediary and they disobeyed Him, for then they would be in danger of destruction.

It is clear, therefore, that the punishment of the one who disobeys God is greater than the punishment of him who disobeys an angel. This shows that in justice punishment bears relation to the master or commander or the one to whom service is due, and not to the person owing the service. We find also Moses complaining of this characteristic in the “Prayer of Moses.” Moses was praying to God concerning the people in captivity and was deploring the length of the exile. Wishing to complain of the characteristic above mentioned, he begins by way of apology: “Lord, Thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations.” The meaning is: Although I complain of Thy principle of measuring punishment in relation to Thee and not in relation to us, nevertheless I acknowledge that all Thy ways are just and I can not quarrel with Thee, either so far as we are concerned, or so far as Thou art concerned, or so far as the punishment itself is concerned.

So far as we are concerned, I recognize and acknowledge that we are the recipients of Thy benefits, that Thou hast shown us very great kindness and we should not have sinned against Thee. And since we should not have sinned before Thee, we have no reason to complain of Thy justice so far as we are concerned, having been benefited by Thee, for Thou hast been our dwelling place and refuge and hiding-place in all generations. Nor can we complain of Thee in relation to Thyself, for Thou art eternal and infinite: “Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever Thou hadst formed the earth and the world, Even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God,” eternal and infinite in worth. Hence he who disobeys Thee should be punished severely and we can not complain of Thy judgment so far as Thou art concerned. But neither can we complain of Thee so far as the punishment itself is concerned, for I know that all which Thou doest, the sufferings which Thou bringest upon man, when “Thou turnest man to contrition,” are for a good purpose, viz. that man may turn to Thee in repentance: “And sayest: ‘Return, ye children of men.’ ”

Nevertheless I complain of, and am grieved by the evil which accrues to us on account of this method, in that Thou measurest the punishment in relation to Thee, who art infinite, instead of measuring it in relation to the sinner, who is finite. For if Thou measure it in relation to Thy worth, man will be destroyed in a moment, “For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night. Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as sleep.” The meaning is: If Thou shouldst sweep away the whole world with a flood of water, as Thou didst to the generation of the deluge, they would all be like a sleep before Thee, and in the morning they would pass away like grass before Thee—like grass which springs up in the morning, and the time of its growth passes quickly away, “For in the evening it is cut down, and withereth.” From this we get much evil, “For we are consumed in Thine anger, and by Thy wrath are we hurried away,” because, “Thou hast set our iniquities before Thee,” i. e. because Thou measurest our iniquities in relation to Thee—this is the complaint—and also because Thou hast set “our secret sins” (‘alumenu), i. e. the sins that are hidden (‘alam) from us, or it may mean the sins which we committed in our youth (biyeme ‘alumenu), “in the light of Thy countenance,” i. e. before Thee, so that Thou dost not forget them. It follows from this that “all our days are passed away in Thy wrath,” because Thou measurest punishment in relation to Thee, and “we bring our years to an end as a tale that is told.” That is, our years, which are time and belong to the category of continuous quantity, pass away like speech (hegeh), which belongs to the category of discrete quantity, whose parts are not continuous with one another. This is due to the many changes and vicissitudes that come upon us from day to day, so that our time does not flow continuously like a continuous quantity, but changes from day to day and from moment to moment like discrete quantity. Thou oughtest to measure our punishment in relation to the days of our life, which are short, for, “The days of our years are,” on the average, “Three-score years and ten; or even by reason of strength four-score years,” and not more, for if they extend beyond that limit, they are, “travail and vanity,” and not worth counting as life. I see that the time of our life is very short, “For it is speedily gone, and we fly away,” i. e. it is quickly cut off and we fly, as it were, because the years of our life pass away so quickly, for our days are like a shadow of a flying bird, which does not stand still for a moment, or like a lengthening shadow in the evening, when the sun sets quickly, and therefore I wither like grass.

All this is because Thou measurest punishment in relation to Thee, whereas Thou shouldst measure it in relation to us, who are finite beings. If Thou art going to measure it in relation to Thee, who can calculate the proper punishment, since Thou art infinite? Hence he says: “Who knoweth the power of Thine anger?” since it is infinite, “And thy wrath according to the fear that is due unto Thee,” i. e.: According to the fear which is due to Thee, who art infinite, so is Thy wrath against us infinite. But it ought not to be so, but “according to the number of our days, so should the punishment be,” i. e. the punishment should be measured in accordance with the number of our days. The word limnot is an infinitive used for a noun, and the word hoda‘ means punishment or suffering, like, “And with them he taught (punished) (vayyoda‘) the men of Succoth,” as David Kimhi wrote in The Book of Roots, s. v. yada‘, in the name of Ibn Janah.

The meaning of the text is, therefore, as follows: As the number of our days is small, so Thy punishment for our sins should also be small; and similarly, according to the number of our days, which is small, “we may get us a heart of wisdom.” But since the exile is extended for a long time, and we are laden with contempt, “Return, O Lord; how long? And let it repent Thee concerning Thy servants. O satisfy us in the morning with Thy mercy,” i. e. in the time of our youth, so “that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.” And if not in the time of our youth, then, “Make us glad according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us, according to the years wherein we have seen evil.” And if Thou say that those who come after us will inherit the land, it is more proper that we should see our share in that good: “Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants,” and the result will be, “Thy glory upon their children.” “And let the graciousness of the Lord our God be upon us and the work of our hands,” that we may prosper in all our doings, so that we may attain the delight which is found in divine works, as we explained in the introduction to this book.

Then he adds to this: “O thou that dwellest in the covert of the Most High …,” as though by way of reply to the difficulty. The answer is that though the exile is long for the nation as a whole, because they are not as a whole perfect enough to deserve redemption, yet every righteous man is provided for by special Providence and delivered from trouble.

He divides the righteous into three or four classes. 1. “He who dwells in the covert of the Most High, and abides in the shadow of the Almighty.” This embraces all those Israelites who believe in the Torah and fulfil the commandments. 2. The righteous man who trusts in God: “For thou hast made the Lord who is my refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation.” 3. He who loves God and longs for Him: “Because he hath set his love upon Me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set him on high, because he hath known My name, He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him …” 4. “Because he hath known My name,” probably represents the fourth class, who is referred to in the words: “He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him.”

The Psalmist begins: “I will say of the Lord, who is my refuge and my fortress, my God in whom I trust, that He will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, etc.” That is, Thou who dwellest in the covert of the Most High, and abidest in the shadow of the Almighty, fear not trouble, for I say to thee in the name of God, who is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust, that He will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler … and from all the troubles that come upon the world. He concludes his remarks to the men of this class in the words: “And see the recompense of the wicked.” Then he begins with the men of the second class, who say: “For Thou, O Lord art my refuge, etc.” Concerning them he says: “There shall no evil befall thee … The young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample under feet.” The words: “I will say of the Lord, who is my refuge and my fortress, My God in whom I trust …,” which Moses uses in the beginning, refer to this class also and to the other classes. But in place of the words: “That He will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler …,” which he said before, he says in relation to the second class: “There shall no evil befall thee …,” i. e. thou who sayest that the Lord is thy refuge, I say to thee, in the name of God, who is my refuge and fortress, and in whom I trust, that there shall no evil befall thee, that He will deliver thee from natural and unnatural accidents, so that “Thou shalt tread upon the lion and asp; the young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample under feet.” Similarly I say to you in the name of God that he who desires Him will be delivered from all evil in the world. He represents God as saying: “Because he hath set his love upon Me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set him on high …” And if he reaches a still higher degree, namely: “That he hath known My name,” then: “He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble; I will rescue him and bring him to honour.” The meaning is that he who knows My name stands higher than all other righteous men.

The gist of Moses’ words in this Psalm is that the righteous men are taken care of and delivered from trouble in different ways, depending on the degree which they attain. We see from this that Moses is complaining of God’s method of punishing in accordance with God’s being, to whom service is offered, whereas he thinks the punishment should be accommodated to the number of years of human life, which are few. This shows that the punishment which comes from God in accordance with strict justice is not computed in relation to the disobedient and the sinner, but in relation to the Being sinned against, whose spirit is defied.

CHAPTER 38

We have now explained that according to justice the punishments inflicted by God should be eternal, and that reward is either eternal, through divine grace, or not eternal, as strict justice demands. But there is a very important difficulty in the matter of punishment, as follows:

Since “there is not a righteous man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not,” it follows that all men should be punished eternally for any sin they have committed or for disobedience of God’s command of which they are guilty, though the nature of the punishment be different. How then can any one escape eternal punishment according to this mode of determination, and how can a mortal merit spiritual reward, whether temporary or eternal? A still greater difficulty arises from the statement of the Rabbis that the punishment of the wicked in gehenna lasts twelve months, indicating that punishment is not eternal. And, on the other hand, they say that reward is eternal, inferring it from the words: “They shall inherit the land forever.”

It seems to me that the difficulty may be solved by saying that just as reward is made eternal by divine grace, though according to strict justice it should be temporary, so punishment is made temporary by divine grace, though according to strict justice it should be eternal. The Bible indicates this very thing: “God hath spoken once, twice have I heard this: that strength belongeth unto God; also unto Thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy; for Thou renderest to every man according to his work.” The meaning is that the statement in the Torah that God does not hold the wicked guiltless but punishes them for their iniquities, contains two statements in it. One is that strength belongeth unto God to do justice to the wicked and to pay to every man according to his ways, as the Bible says: “The strength also of the king who loveth justice.” But in this very justice which He does to the wicked we also find that God has mercy, “Also unto Thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy, for Thou renderest to every man according to his work,” i. e. in the fact that Thou punishest the wicked in a temporary way, in accordance with the sin he committed, which is temporary, we can see that Thou conductest Thyself mercifully toward man in this regard, for according to strict justice, a person should receive eternal punishment for his sins in accordance with the infinity of God against whom he rebelled, as we explained above. The Psalmist says, therefore, that in the punishment which comes upon the wicked man in this world for the transgressions of which he is guilty, we see two things, viz. that God has power to do justice to those who transgress His will, and that He conducts Himself mercifully in this very justice, in that He inflicts temporary punishment, in accordance with the act of transgression, which is temporary. God does this in order that the person in question should be saved from eternal punishment in the world to come.

Some say that the words: “Also unto Thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy,” refer to the spiritual reward which God bestows by grace. For man does not deserve any reward, as the Bible says: “If thou be righteous, what givest thou Him?” and granting that he does deserve reward, it should be temporary, as his good deeds are temporary, but not eternal, except by divine grace, as we said before. This statement, taken by itself, is true and in agreement with what we said, that temporary reward is made eternal by God’s mercy. But it bears no relation to the contents of the passage and has no connection with the words: “God hath spoken once, twice have I heard this.” Moreover, the words: “For Thou renderest (teshallem) to every man according to his work,” show that he is speaking of punishment, like the words: “And recompensest (meshallem) the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them,” and: “Yea, I will requite (veshillamti) into their bosom.”

It should be noted that this mercy of which we are speaking, by virtue of which the punishment which should be eternal, in accordance with the eternity of the Being to whom service is due, is made temporary by way of accommodation to the person owing the service, is shown only to those who love God and keep His commandments, as the Torah says: “For I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate Me; and showing mercy unto the thousandth generation of them that love Me and keep My commandments.” The meaning of this passage is that in the case of those that hate Him, He visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation, so that they may be destroyed thoroughly and forever, as justice demands, but to those that love Him and keep His commandments He shows mercy, not visiting their iniquity upon them all at once, but distributing it over a thousand generations, so that they should not be completely destroyed, but that they may get a little punishment during a long time, in order that they may exist forever.

The Rabbis say in this connection: If a man has a thousand zuz owing to him and the debtor is his enemy, he collects the whole debt at once. But if he is his friend, he collects it little by little. Since, however, not every one can attain to the degree of perfect love, of which we spoke before, the Bible says that Israelites generally, who keep God’s commandments, receive this mercy. Hence the Bible adds: “And keep My commandments.” From this we infer that those who hate the Lord and do not keep His commandments will receive eternal punishment. Hence the Rabbis say that the Minim, the unbelievers (Apikorosim), those who deny the Torah and the resurrection, and the others that the Rabbis enumerate in the Mishnah and the Baraita, persons who deny the fundamental principles or some of them or the secondary principles derived from the former, being excluded from the community of Israel and the seed of those who love God and keep His commandments, are treated in accord with strict justice and suffer eternal punishment. These are the men of whom the Rabbis say that they go down to gehenna and are judged there for ever and ever. Those, however, who believe in the principles of the Torah but are guilty of some transgressions, deserve to enjoy the mercy which is shown to those who keep the divine covenant, and to the seed of those who love Him. For just as reward is made eternal through the divine mercy that was shown to Abraham, as we explained before, so punishment is made temporary through divine mercy, as we said before.

Micah explains this when he says: “Who is a God like unto Thee, that pardoneth the iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of His heritage? He retaineth not His anger forever, because He delighteth in mercy.” The meaning is that God does not punish man according to his sins, but He pardoneth the iniquity and passeth by the transgression by way of mercy, but not for every man, only for the remnant of His heritage. The words: “He retaineth not His anger forever,” indicate that according to strict justice, He ought to retain His anger forever. For it is clear that we do not say to a person: “The judge showed you mercy in not sentencing you to death,” unless he deserved death. Hence if the prophet says: “He retaineth not His anger forever,” it follows that strict justice demands that He should retain His anger forever, if not for His mercy. Hence he concludes: “Because He delighteth in mercy,” and adds: “He will again have compassion upon us; He will subdue our iniquities, … Thou wilt show faithfulness to Jacob, mercy to Abraham …” The meaning is: Even if He should subdue our iniquities and hide them, or if eternal punishment should be made temporary, we would still be in need of mercy, in order that temporary reward should be made eternal. This is the mercy shown to Abraham when he was told: “Thy reward shall be exceeding great,” as we explained above. Hence the prophet says: “Thou wilt show faithfulness to Jacob, mercy to Abraham,” i. e. wilt show and make permanent; and the mercy which Thou didst show to Abraham in making his reward eternal will become true for Jacob, just as eternal punishment is made temporary by God’s mercy, as we explained before.

The Psalmist also explains this, namely that eternal punishment is made temporary and temporary reward is made eternal through grace. In reference to punishment he says: “He will not always contend; neither will He keep His anger forever,” as should be the case, but, “He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor requited us according to our iniquities.” He explains then that this is due to God’s mercy: “For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is His mercy toward them that fear Him.” For to give eternal reward for a temporary act shows great mercy, as great as the heavens are high above the earth. The word height signifies worth, as in the verse, “But the Lord of hosts is exalted (made high) through justice,” because the heavens are eternal, as David said: “He hath also established them for ever and ever,” while the earth is temporary and destined to destruction. God’s mercy in giving eternal reward for a temporary act is similar. But in order that a person may deserve this reward, it is necessary to remove our transgressions from us far away, as far as the east is from the west, and to inflict temporary punishment upon the righteous in this world in order that they may merit eternal reward in the world to come. For if He should inflict eternal punishment, as justice demands, no person would merit eternal reward. Hence he says: “Like as a father hath compassion upon His children, so hath the Lord compassion upon them that fear Him,” to show that it is an act of compassion on the part of God to inflict temporary punishment upon the righteous in this world for the few transgressions of which they are guilty, in order that they may merit eternal reward in the world to come, as a father chastises and punishes his son by way of compassion so as to lead him to a good end and enable him to attain a high degree for his own ultimate good.

Then he explains the reason of this mercy: “For He knoweth our inclination; He remembereth that we are dust.” That is, since He knows that by reason of our inclination we are destined to sin, “For the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth,” if He should not show us this mercy in punishing a man temporarily instead of eternally, no man would escape the judgment of gehenna, and what would the righteous then do, who can not but commit some sin in this world? In the same way if God did not convert temporary reward into eternal through mercy, no man would attain eternal happiness, for man is a temporary being: “As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth, for the wind passeth over it, and it is gone …” What, then, would Moses and Abraham and the other righteous men do in order to merit eternal reward, since they are temporary beings, and can only do temporary acts, unless they merit this reward through God’s mercy? Hence he concludes: “But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him …,” i. e. even though man’s days are like grass and his acts are temporary, for he can only do a temporary act, his reward is eternal through God’s mercy, which is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him.

In the beginning of the Psalm he also refers to these two kinds of mercy. “Who forgiveth all thine iniquity,” refers to the mercy which converts eternal punishment into temporary. “Who healeth all thy diseases,” refers to the mercy which converts temporary reward into eternal. Then he explains the matter further and says: “Who redeemeth thy life from the pit,” which surely refers to redemption from the eternal punishment of gehenna, for no one is redeemed from the natural death of the body. Then he says: “Who encompasseth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies,” to indicate that by making eternal punishment temporary, it becomes possible to attain eternal spiritual reward, which is a crown of beauty to the soul and a diadem of glory on the head of every righteous man. The attainment of this reward is designated as mercy and compassion.

At the end of the Psalm he explains that these two kinds of mercy extend only to those who love God and observe His commandments: “But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him … To such as keep His covenant, and to those that remember His precepts to do them.” All this is due to the fact that the divine providence extends over all existing things above and below: “The Lord hath established His throne in the heavens; and His kingdom ruleth over all.” This much we have desired to explain concerning reward and punishment.

CHAPTER 39

We must now endeavor to solve the problem which has caused no end of difficulty to the ancients as well as the moderns, namely, why are spiritual promises not mentioned explicitly in the Torah, as well as material promises?

Some have attempted to solve the difficulty by saying that spiritual reward is a profound conception, hard for the human mind to grasp. And since the Torah was given to the masses of the people as well as the wise, it was proper to promise corporeal reward, which they can grasp and conceive. For if the Torah had promised spiritual reward, which can not be perceived by the senses nor imagined and conceived by their limited minds, they would not have believed it. And this would have led to the failure and nullification of the Torah as a whole. Therefore the Torah made corporeal promises, so that when the people see that the corporeal promises are fulfilled, they will without doubt also believe the spiritual promises mentioned only by allusion.

But this solution is not satisfactory at all. For how can the fulfilment of the corporeal promises be evidence of something which is not mentioned in the Torah at all, according to their idea? Moreover, incorporeality and the existence of a separate immaterial intellect are also matters that can not be perceived by the senses and yet the Torah did not hesitate to say: “For ye saw no manner of form …;” “Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, even any manner of likeness …,” and so on, in order to remove corporeality and corporeal attributes from God. In another place, on the other hand, we read: “And they beheld God,” which, taken literally, is absolutely untrue. But the Torah relies in this matter on the intelligence of the reader, so that the masses understand it literally and the wise interpret it in the true sense. This being so, the Torah should have mentioned spiritual reward also, and every one would understand it according to his powers and ability.

Others have said that the reason the Torah does not mention spiritual reward explicitly, is because the Torah mentions only those things which come through a miracle or sign or wonder, like the promises of material reward for fulfilment of the commandments, which comes supernaturally, for example: “Then I will command My blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth produce for three years.” It is not natural that every sixth year the land should produce enough for three years. Also: “Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.” It is well known that even a garment hanging on a line can not last forty years, and the phenomenon was supernatural. We also read: “That He might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by everything that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live,” and many other similar statements. But the immortality of the soul is something which follows by necessity from the nature of the soul, hence the Torah did not have to promise it, since it is a natural phenomenon.

This explanation, too, is weak, for immortality is no more natural in the soul than freedom of choice in man, and yet the Torah says: “See, I have set before thee this day life and good … therefore choose life …” Since immortality is not something well known, the Torah should have told us about it, as it tells us about freedom or creation or the various other ideas and beliefs which are mentioned in the Torah. Moreover, according to those who say that spiritual reward is conferred upon body and soul together, it is not a natural phenomenon, for perpetual existence is not natural to body. Hence the Torah should have mentioned it explicitly. We must, therefore, find a more adequate solution. The most difficult part of the matter is this: If the Torah does not mention spiritual promises, which are the essence of reward, why does it mention corporeal promises, which are not the essence of reward?

CHAPTER 40

If we examine the corporeal promises mentioned in the Torah one by one, we shall find that spiritual promises could not have been made in those cases. For all the promises in the Torah embrace the nation as a whole. As for the promises in the section “Behukkotai,” it is clear that they are all spoken in the plural and refer to the nation as a whole. But even those promises made in the section “Ki Tabo,” which are expressed in the singular, refer to the nation as a whole. This is proved from the fact that at the end of those curses we read: “The Lord will bring thee and thy king whom thou shalt set over thee … The Lord will bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth …,” statements which, though made in the singular, clearly refer to the nation as a whole. Similarly, the promises of material prosperity mentioned in the Torah in section “ ‘Ekeb” refer to the nation as a whole.

Now it is clear that promises referring to the nation as a whole can not be spiritual, for even if the nation as a whole is righteous and deserving of life in the world to come, we can not say that the wicked man in it deserves future life for the sake of the fifty righteous men. It would be unjust to bestow future life on an absolutely wicked man and treat alike the righteous and the wicked. It is clear, therefore, that the promises which refer to the nation as a whole must necessarily be material. That is, if the majority of the country or of the nation are righteous, the country or the nation will escape exile or famine or pestilence and universal punishments in general, because good or evil decress pronounced upon nations or countries depend upon the character of the majority of the population. If the majority are righteous, the decree is good, and if the majority are wicked, the decree is evil. Hence the Rabbis say that the world is judged according to the character of the majority. Sometimes the country or the nation is saved even if the majority are not righteous, for the sake of fifty or even fewer righteous men found therein, if they are fit men to shield the majority from suffering. Accordingly, if it is true that all the corporeal promises in the Torah refer not to the individual but to the nation as a whole, there can be no question why the Torah mentions corporeal promises. For they are mentioned only where there can be no mention of spiritual promises, namely in general promises referring to the nation as a whole, which can not be spiritual, as we have explained.

But individual reward is mentioned in the Torah only in a few places. For example, in connection with the precept not to take the mother bird with the young, we read: “That it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days,” which the Rabbis interpret as follows: “ ‘That it may be well with thee’—in a world which is wholly good; ‘And that thou mayest prolong thy days’—in a world which is wholly long.” Similarly in connection with charity we find: “Because that for this thing the Lord thy God will bless thee.” This, however, is not necessarily the main reward, but the meaning is that the Lord will bless him in addition to the main reward.

The principal individual reward which is conferred on each person separately, whether spiritual or corporeal, is not mentioned explicitly in the Torah but only allusively and in a few places. One passage is found in section “Ahare Mot”: “After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do … neither shall ye walk in their statutes.” This is not only an admonition to the nation as a whole but also to the individual, not to follow the customs of the idolaters. At the end of the section we read: “Ye shall therefore keep My statutes, and Mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them.” This no doubt refers to the individual spiritual reward, which is conferred on each individual separately, and is to be explained as follows: God admonishes the people that they should observe His statutes and His judgments, even though they entail more trouble than keeping the statutes of the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan, because, although those nations as a whole prospered by observing their respective statutes, nevertheless the individual did not attain through them his main perfection, namely the eternal life of the soul, which he can attain through the ordinances of God. Hence we read: “Ye shall keep My statutes and Mine ordinances …,” i. e. keep them, even if there is trouble in doing so, for they have advantage and superiority over others. For these statutes help the individual also to obtain future life. This is the meaning of the expression: “Which if a man do, he shall live by them,” meaning that the statutes of the other nations have not this effect. Onkelos translates it, “That through them he may live the life of eternity.” The context shows that it must have reference to the life of the soul. For how can he say that by keeping the statutes and ordinances of the Torah, the person will live longer than by keeping the statutes of the other nations? This is obviously untrue, for the man who observes the Torah does not live longer corporeally than the others. But there is no doubt that he is referring to the life of the soul and not to the life of the body, hence Onkelos translates it, “That through them he may live the life of eternity.” This is a clear proof to any intelligent man who will listen to reason and acknowledge the truth.

There is also another proof in section “Reëh,” where Moses says to the Israelites: “Ye are the children of the Lord your God: ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead. For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God.” This seems at first sight strange. How can he say: Ye shall not cut yourselves for the dead, “For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be His own treasure out of all peoples that are upon the face of the earth?” The contrary would seem to be the case, namely that for the reason given, one should grieve and mourn the more for the dead. For one should mourn more for the death of a king’s son than for an ordinary person. It is like saying to a person, don’t worry about the loss of your ring, for it had a fine pearl in it. The meaning of the text is this: Since you are sons of God and a holy people and a treasure above all peoples, you must not mourn unduly for the dead, for this would indicate that you think the person has ceased to exist, and therefore you mourn for him as for a potsherd that is broken and can not be repaired. But it is not so. He is like a vessel of silver or gold which can be repaired when it is broken, for he will come into the treasury of the Lord. Hence one should not mourn unduly, but only as one is grieved at parting from a friend or from one who goes on a long journey. Hence he concludes: “For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God,” i. e. since God is holy and His servants are holy and thou art a holy people, equals unite with equals and the soul of the departed will therefore without doubt unite with the Separate Intelligences, because it is holy and the angels are holy attendants of God. Hence it is not proper to cut oneself and mourn unduly for the dead. This shows that the soul survives after death.

There is another proof from the words of Moses at the end of the section, “Ha’azinu,” when he is about to close the Torah: “Set your heart unto all the words wherewith I testify against you this day … For it is no vain thing for you; because it is your life, and through this thing ye shall prolong your days upon the land …” In every document intended to establish a fact, the subject-matter must be repeated in the last line. So Moses wrote down these things here to allude to the two kinds of reward which may be attained through the Torah, spiritual and material. Spiritual reward is referred to in the words: “Because it is your life.” Material reward is alluded to in the words: “And through this thing ye shall prolong your days upon the land.” To indicate the difference between spiritual reward and material, he says about the spiritual: “For it is no vain thing outside of thee,” i. e. do not think that it is something distinct from you, for it is your own life, namely the essence of life surviving after death. This is in order to indicate that the intellect which is acquired through understanding of the service of God, as we explained above, is itself the life and the existence of the soul after death. The word hu (=it) is an indication of this, as we explained above, when we analyzed the meaning of the expression hu hu. Material reward is referred to in the words: “And through this thing ye shall prolong your days upon the land,” indicating that the material reward that is attained through fulfilment of the Torah and the commandments is not the main reward but something incidental that goes with the fulfilment of the Torah. Similarly the words: “Because that for this thing the Lord thy God will bless thee,” which are mentioned in connection with charity, do not represent the main reward, as we explained above.

We can also oite proof from the Hagiographa. David, speaking of the reward of the individual who fears God, says: “What man is he that feareth the Lord? Him will He instruct in the way that he should choose,” i. e. He will instruct him in the way he should choose in order to attain the human purpose, namely, that “His soul shall abide in prosperity; and his seed (who remain) shall inherit the land.” Now if the soul ceased to exist with the death of the body, he should not say that his soul shall abide in prosperity when his seed shall inherit the land. He indicates, therefore, that there is a specific good in which the soul will abide after death. This is a clear proof beyond all cavil. Solomon also says: “When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish,” alluding to the destruction of the soul of the wicked. But in referring to the righteous he says: “But the righteous, even when he is brought to death, hath hope,” which shows that there is hope for the soul of the righteous after death.

We can also cite evidence from the Prophets. Isaiah, referring to a penitent who died, says: “I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will lead him also, and requite with comforts him and his mourners.” Since he speaks of “his mourners,” it is clear thot the man is dead, and yet he says that having seen his ways He has healed him and led him in the way of all the earth so that He requited with comforts him and his mourners. But there is no comfort to him and his mourners, nor healing, if the soul perishes and goes to destruction. There is comfort to him if his soul survives, and there is comfort to his mourners if they all know that the hope of the dead one is not destroyed and that he has spiritual immortality. This shows that immortality of the soul was known in those days and derived from the Torah, and therefore the prophet promises the penitent that God will heal him of his iniquities and, in consideration of his penitence, will reward him with immortality, so as to give comfort to him and his mourners. Also in the prophecy of Zechariah the angel promises Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest: “If thou wilt walk in My ways, and if thou wilt keep My charge … then I will give thee free access among these that stand by.” This denotes the permanent existence of the soul, as we explained before. We could cite many passages of a similar nature from the Prophets, but those that we have cited are sufficient to show the nature of the evidence that may be adduced from the Bible in favor of spiritual reward. It is also clear from what we have said that the Torah does not mention individual corporeal reward, as many have thought, but individual spiritual, and universal corporeal.

CHAPTER 41

There is still another philosophical and more profound way of proving immortality of the soul from the Torah, as follows:

We have shown that the various powers or faculties result from various principles. Hence if we know that man has a faculty which is common to him and the animal, and another faculty in which he differs from it, we know that the faculty in which he differs from the animal comes from a principle different from that which gives animality to the animal. In the same way verdigris contains a power of burning and a power of corroding, which are distinct. We know that the burning function comes to it from the power of copper, and we infer that the corroding power comes to it from another principle, namely vinegar. In the same way, we see that the faculty by which man is distinguished from the lower animals has a specific and peculiar function in which the corporeal powers do not participate, namely the conception of the separate substances and of immaterial and abstract ideas, which is indestructible. Hence we infer that this faculty can exist by itself without body and is not destroyed with the destruction of the body.

Accordingly when Adam apprehended the separate substances, abstracted from matter—this is the meaning of the verse: “And the man gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air …”—he inferred that he had a psychic power independent of matter and not destroyed with the destruction thereof. But he did not understand how to maintain that power. But when God revealed Himself to him and commanded him: “But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die,” it became clear to him that the preservation of the soul is brought about by doing the will of God, and the death of it by transgressing His words.

Now the earlier divine laws, like those of Adam and of Noah, knew of this spiritual reward we mentioned, namely the separate existence of the soul through the command of God; they knew it from their own ratiocination and from Adam’s knowledge, acquired by himself and received from God, which they learned from Adam himself. Hence they threatened the loss of this spiritual reward to any one who rebelled against the command of God and transgressed His words, like a master who says to his servant: If you disobey my command, I will take away all that you have, from which we infer of course that if he does not disobey he will retain what he has.

In this way we understand the statement God made to Adam in reference to transgressing His command: “For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” The double death (mot tamut) no doubt means a special punishment for the body and a special one for the soul. Before he ate of the tree of knowledge, his natural power was adequate to supply the body with as much material as was dissolved, so that the matter that was dissolved did not exceed the new matter supplied by the food which came into the body from the outside, and hence it was possible in this way that the body should exist forever. But after he had eaten of the tree of knowledge, dissolution exceeded assimilation, as is the case to-day, and death became inevitable, as is explained in the first book of the Canon. Hence the expression: “For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die,” referring to the body, i. e. in that day dissolution will get the better of assimilation and death will be inevitable. Now the tree of life had the power to re-enforce the natural power of the individual and to enable it to make assimilation equal to dissolution or even to exceed it. Hence the text says: “And now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever.” That is, he may correct the error he has made in eating of the tree of knowledge, and live forever. This is the way we must understand the text taken literally, in reference to the death of the body as a result of eating of the tree of knowledge.

The punishment of the soul consisted also in her destruction and death. The text mentions death twice, referring to the death of the body and the death of the soul. Now since the punishment of him who transgresses the commandment of God is the death of the soul, the reward of him who fulfils the commandment of God is without doubt the permanent existence of the soul.

From all this it is clear that the immortality of the soul was known to Adam and Noah and those who observed their laws. In fact our opponents admit that the punishment announced to Adam had reference to the soul, but they say that it had reference to the soul only, whereas we say that it had reference to the body also, as the meaning of the text shows. As long as the punishment of the body has not been remitted, there is no proof of the remission of the punishment of the soul except by keeping the commandments of God. However, since we all agree that the punishment promised to the soul is without the body, reward will also be bestowed upon the soul without the body.

And this is precisely the manner in which the Torah announces punishments to the soul if she transgresses the commandments of God. Some of the things forbidden are articles of food which are good for the body and not injurious at all. For example: “For whosoever eateth leavened bread … that soul shall be cut off …;” also in relation to fat, we read: “For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast … even the soul that eateth it shall be cut off from his people.” But it is well known that leaven during Passover and fat at any time are not deadly poison to cut off the one who eats them before his time, for experience shows that it is not so. The expression that the person will be cut off must therefore refer to punishment of the soul of the sinner.

There are indeed instances in which the punishment of being cut off extends also to the children of the sinner, as our Rabbis say that in this particular punishment both he and his children are cut off. But it is not true of all cases, for it would not be fair. Reuben, for example, a man of eighty, eats a piece of fat, the size of an olive, and all his children and descendants die before their time, but the sinner himself is not punished, for he has lived his eighty years. This shows, therefore, that in the punishment of being cut off the soul of the sinner is also punished. Now since the punishment mentioned in the law of Moses under the term of being cut off, necessarily refers to the soul without the body, it follows that the soul which does not sin will not be cut off and the reward will come to the soul without the body.

This conception of the punishment of being cut off, which is mentioned in the Torah in various places, is precisely the one that was accepted by Adam, Noah, Shem, Eber, and other distinguished persons, like Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. This is the reason why Abraham was ready to give up his own life and the life of his only son and all the material prosperity which had been promised to him,—the possession of the land of Canaan and his children’s possession of the gate of their enemies: “For in Isaac shall seed be called to thee,”—and was going to kill his only son, because he knew that if one fulfils the commandments of God, the soul will exist forever and enjoy eternal bliss, whereas if one transgresses the commandments of God, the soul will not prosper and will be cut off from that bliss. Of what good would have been to him his family after his death and all the material promises if he had lost that eternal good, the immortality of the soul? To be sure, we may say here that Abraham served God from pure love and was not concerned with reward at all, but only with the fulfilment of the will of God whom he loved. Nevertheless, our argument as a whole is correct and compels every intelligent person to admit that from the punishment which is mentioned we infer that there is reward of the soul, which survives after death.

One may ask, however, why does not the Torah speak at length about this matter instead of relying on the inference which we made from the punishment of cutting off and death that is announced to the soul? The answer is this: He who gave the Torah was concerned about healing the ills of the soul, as an expert physician is concerned about healing the ills of the body. The physician is interested in curing the cause of the disease and not in curing the other attendant and incidental ailments, for if he cures the cause, all the other ailments will be cured. In the same way the Healer of souls is interested in curing the cause of the disease.

But it is clear that there can be no spiritual reward and punishment unless there is Providence.

The ancients, however, all the seed of Adam and all the descendants of Noah, except a few distinguished individuals, like Shem and Eber and Abraham and others, worshipped idols, denied Providence and followed sense experience only. Hence they paid no attention to the spiritual promises which they knew from the laws of Adam and Noah. They rejected them and did not believe in them because they could not be perceived by the senses. Therefore God, who knows the hidden things of the heart, chose another way. He promised in the law of Moses corporeal and physical rewards, supernatural in their character, to show that he who serves God and keeps His commandments is looked after by God, who provides for all the details of his existence, and is not subject to the regular course of nature. Thus the Rabbis say, commenting on the biblical verse: “Get thee out of thy country … and I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great:” “A journey diminishes three things—children, money and fame—therefore God said: ‘I will make of thee a great nation,’ to assure him of children; ‘And I will bless thee,’ to assure him of money; ‘And I will make thy name great,’ to assure him of fame.” This is in order to show that he who serves God is not subject to the laws of nature and is not injured by the natural causes of harm, but treads upon the lion and asp, and tramples under feet the young lion and the serpent.

In the Law of Moses, God followed exactly the same method as in the law of Abraham. He performed signs and wonders in the presence of all in order that it may be clear to them that he who serves God and keeps His commandments is not subject to the things of nature, but all the things of nature are subject to him. Now we find that there is not one of the things of nature that has not some value or purpose. We also find that certain acts and practices produce results which do not logically follow from those acts. Surely, then, the commandments of the Torah must have certain valuable results, though reason can not show it.

The Rabbis mention certain practices which produce certain results that do not follow logically from the acts, as for example in treatise Shabbat: “If one has a bone in his throat, he should take a bone of the same kind, put it on the back of his head and say: ‘Had had nehit, bela‘ bela‘ nehit, had had,’ ” and other matters of the same sort which are mentioned there. Also in tractate Sanhedrin it is told in the name of R. Eliezer the Great that he said: “I said a word and the whole field was filled with cucumbers; I said another word and they were all collected in one place;” from which it appears that by doing certain apparently irrelevant things, or even merely by saying certain words without doing anything, certain results follow which have no logical relation to the act or word.

So we say that the divine Wisdom knows that certain acts and practices, namely the commandments of the Torah, are followed by certain results, reward and punishment of the soul, even though we do not know how the result follows from the act. Neither do we know why certain results follow from certain acts or words mentioned by the Cabalists, where there is no logical relation between the two. In the same way the rewards and the punishments mentioned in the Torah follow upon a deliberate doing of the commandments or prohibitions and are connected with them and result from them as an effect follows from its causes.

Take as an instance Nebuchadnezzar. He was an absolutely wicked man and God decreed that he should lose his reason, abandon mankind and live among the beasts. But the decree was delayed twelve months in consideration of an act of benevolence which he had to his credit. The Rabbis even say that Daniel was punished because of a certain advice which he gave to Nebuchadnezzar: “Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by almsgiving, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor …” It is clear, therefore, that almsgiving has the effect of annulling a decree, and that such effect follows even if the recipient is not deserving. This is why Rabbi Ammi refused to take alms from idolaters.

In reference to punishment also the Rabbis say: Since the temple was destroyed, the four modes of capital punishment inflicted by the court have been annulled, but the law of the four kinds of capital punishment still holds: If one is guilty of an act punishable by stoning, he either falls down from the roof or a wild beast tramples him under foot. If he is guilty of a sin punishable by strangulation, he either drowns in the river or he dies of suffocation. The same thing holds of the other commandments of the Torah. Even though it may not be logical we must believe it is so, since experience shows that nature is subject to the control of the righteous, the pious and those who observe the commandments of the Torah. This is an important principle of the Torah.

A case in point is Marah. Moses cast a tree into the water and it became sweet. According to tradition the tree was the wall ivy, whose wood is very bitter and not apt to make water sweet. The Bible says: “There He made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there He proved it.” The correct interpretation of the trial is that given by Rabbenu Nissim. The pronominal suffix of the verb nissahu (= proved it) refers to “statute” and “ordinance,” and the meaning is as follows: God made for the people there a statute and an ordinance, as the Rabbis say that the laws of Sabbath and of civil justice were given in Marah, “and there he proved it,” i. e. Moses proved this statute and ordinance before the people when he showed them that nature is subject to those who keep the commandments of God, so that bitter water is made sweet by means of bitter wood. Hence it says in the sequel: “And He said: ‘If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right in His eyes, and wilt give ear to His commandments, and keep all His statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon thee, which I have put upon the Egyptians; for I am the Lord that healeth thee.’ ” He says here that he who hearkens to the voice of the Lord and does the things which are right and agreeable to Him and observes His commandments and His statutes, is not only delivered from accidental illnesses and those deliberately inflicted, like the diseases of the Egyptians, but is healed also from natural diseases which come upon a person at the change of the seasons of the year by reason of his temperament.

There are two kinds of diseases: 1. Natural diseases, which come to a person on account of the change of the season, and are due to his temperament, for example, a person of sanguine temperament gets sick in the spring, while a person of choleric temperament gets sick in the summer. 2. Diseases which come upon a person by reason of changes which take place in the atmosphere, like epidemics and other diseases of this sort, which are due to changes in the nature of the atmosphere and bring diseases upon a person either by chance or by divine punishment. These diseases do not come upon a person by reason of his nature, they come from outside and by deliberate imposition, like the diseases of the Egyptians. These are referred to in the words: “I will put none of the diseases upon thee which I have put upon the Egyptians;” whereas the first kind of diseases, which come upon a man by reason of his nature, is referred to in the words: “For I am the Lord that healeth thee.”

Similarly Moses promises in Deuteronomy: “And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness; and He will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee.” This statement also indicates that if one hearkens to the ordinances of the Torah and observes them and does them, he will be delivered from both kinds of diseases. Those that are due to man’s nature are indicated in the words: “And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness.” While those diseases which are intentionally inflicted are referred to in the words: “And He will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee.”

All this is in order to show that he who observes the Torah is saved from plagues and accidents, natural or unnatural, because he stands above the things of nature, as was proved in Marah, as we explained. The suffix of the word nissahu refers to “statute” and “ordinance.” The verb can not refer to the people, meaning that they proved the Lord, for we find no such thing. They merely cried to Moses, saying: “What shall we drink?” And God would not have been angry because they asked that which was necessary to them. Nor can the verb refer to God, meaning that God proved the people, for no useful purpose was served by this trial as by the other kinds, which we explained in this Book of our treatise. Therefore we say that the suffix of nissahu refers to “statute,” and the meaning is that God showed them by an experiment that he who observes the Torah is not subject to the things of nature.

God had the same purpose in sending down the manna, which came right after the event at Marah, as Moses explains in Deuteronomy: “And He afflicted thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna,” and then it says: “That He might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by everything that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live.” From this it seems that the manna and all the miracles that took place in connection with it were for the purpose of showing Israel that he who observes the Torah is above the things of nature, and that God can keep man alive without them and without bread.

Now since it was proved conclusively through all the signs and wonders which were performed in the wilderness that God changes the course of nature for those who perform His will, and that He provides for them in all their affairs, they would certainly be convinced about spiritual reward, which is the main result of providence, as they knew by tradition from the earlier laws of Adam and Noah, through Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that the soul is immortal, which is the absolute truth. The promises made through the patriarchs of the possession of the land and of corporeal benefits to all the people were in order that the people might be able to understand what spiritual happiness means if they lived in peace and tranquillity. For if they were living as exiles in a strange land, they would not be able to serve God properly, so as to attain to spiritual happiness.

This is an adequate argument according to the opinion of Maimonides, who says that the main reward in the future world is conferred upon the soul alone. According to Nahmanides, who holds that reward is conferred upon soul and body together, we must say that as we inferred punishment for body and soul together from the words: “For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die (mot tamut),” we likewise infer that reward is for both body and soul after the resurrection. This is what we desired to explain in this investigation, and may God deliver us from error.

CHAPTER 42

Every adherent of the Law of Moses is obliged to believe in the coming of the Messiah, as we explained above. The Torah expressly commands us to believe the words of the prophet: “Unto him ye shall hearken.” But the prophets announced the coming of the Messiah, hence it is clear that any one who does not believe in the coming of the Messiah denies the words of the prophets and transgresses a mandatory precept. But the belief in the coming of the Messiah is not a fundamental principle, denial of which would nullify the entire Torah.

Belief in reward is indeed obligatory upon every adherent of a divine law, and he who denies it denies a fundamental principle. But if one beieves that the soul alone is rewarded in the future world or that reward is corporeal at the time of the resurrection, he does not deny a fundamental principle even though he does not believe in reward in this world, as long as he believes in the principle of reward and punishment generally, though he has a different opinion as to one of the kinds of reward. In fact some of the Rabbis say that there is no reward in this world for obedience to the commandments, believing that the principal reward is in the future world: “That it may go well with thee,” they say, means, “in the world which is wholly good;” and “that thy days may be long,” refers to “the world which is wholly long.”

We say, therefore, that belief in the coming of the Messiah is not such a fundamental principle that he who denies it should be called an infidel. But it is a true belief which every adherent of the Mosaic law must believe. We do not intend in this part of our treatise to mention the specific prophecies which refer to his coming, as that would take too long, for the commentators differ as to which are the Messianic prophecies, though they all agree that the Messiah will come. Some of the sages of the Gemara hold that all the prophecies which refer to the Messiah have already been fulfilled—according to some they were all fulfilled in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah: “Israel has no Messiah, for they consumed him in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah.” Rab Ashi contradicts this opinion, and cites Zechariah in his favor: “Behold thy king cometh unto thee …,” but this was not at the time of the second temple. Since he does not cite Isaiah, it seems that according to Rab Ashi too there is no conclusive refutation of the former statement in the prophecies of Isaiah. Our Rabbis agree that the prophecies were said concerning Hezekiah, but were not fulfilled in him: “God wanted to make Hezekiah the Messiah, etc.” The passage in Ezekiel: “And I will make them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one king shall be king to them all,” is also interpreted as referring to the second temple. A proof of this is the statement by Rabbi Akiba that the ten tribes are not destined to return, etc. Now if the prophecy of Ezekiel referred to the distant future, how could R. Akiba say that the ten tribes will not return, when Ezekiel says the opposite? It seems, therefore, that R. Akiba referred the words of Ezekiel to the time of the second temple. The words: “And one king shall be king to them all,” may refer to Zerubbabel, the satrap of Judah, or to Nehemiah, if he was a different person from Zerubbabel, or to the Nasi, or to the reigning king of the Hasmoneans.

Some of the commentators also say that all the prophecies of Isaiah were fulfilled at the time of the second temple, which Cyrus ordered to be built: “And let the expenses be given out of the king’s house.” The passage in Isaiah, beginning: “And kings shall be thy foster fathers …,” and the whole section there refers to Cyrus and the kings of Media and Persia. In the beginning of the second commonwealth they were poor, while later in the days of the Hasmoneans they became very rich, thereby fulfilling the prophecy: “For brass I will bring gold …” In the beginning they were so poor that they made the candelabrum of tin and covered it with brass, while the other vessels were made of brass. When they became rich, they made them of gold, as the Rabbis say about king Yannai that he ate with the Pharisees at tables of gold. In Herod’s temple, which was more beautiful than that of Solomon, was fulfilled the prophecy: “And I will make thy pinnacles of rubies …”

They also say that in the second commonwealth was fulfilled the prophecy: “And they shall bring all your brethren out of all the nations for an offering unto the Lord,” because Cyrus, king of Persia, commanded: “And whosoever is left, in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold …” Similarly, the words: “Shall all flesh come to worship before Me,” do not refer to all the nations, but only to Israel, as we explained above, where we discussed the different meanings of the word kol (= all). The words: “From one new moon to another,” do not denote infinite time, for if they did, then the sequel: “And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have rebelled against Me; for their worm shall not die …,” would be a promise of eternal life to the worms. But the meaning is that the sinners of that generation will be a scorn and a mockery to their neighbors and to all that see them, so that all the men of that generation will profit by example when they see the punishment of those wicked men, hence they will come “from one new moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another,” to worship before the Lord.

R. Hayim Galipapa also writes in an epistle called, Epistle of Redemption, that all the prophecies of Daniel refer to the second temple only. The words in Daniel: “And [he] shall wear out the saints of the Most High; and he shall think to change the seasons and the law; and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time,” all refer to Antiochus. Also the words: “But the saints of the Most High shall receive the kingdom,” refer, he says, to the Hasmoneans. As for the words: “And possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever (‘ad ‘alma ve‘ad ‘alam ‘almaya),” he says that ‘olam means one jubilee, a short and definite time during which the Hasmoneans ruled. The words: “And one that was ancient of days did sit,” he refers to Mattathias the high priest, who was the head of the Hasmoneans, a very old man, all of whose sons reigned after him. He supports this interpretation by citing a statement of the Rabbis in reference to the words: “For the day of vengeance that was in My heart and My year of redemption are come”—“If the heart has not revealed it to the mouth, to whom can the mouth reveal it?” From this it appears that even the angels do not know when the redemption will come, because God did not reveal it to them; whereas in the words which the angel says to Daniel it seems that the angel knew the time, but Daniel did not understand him.

According to this writer’s words the four beasts which Daniel saw do not signify the things that all the commentators write about, but the first one denotes the kingdom of Babylon; the second the kingdom of Media; the third, Persia and Media; the fourth, the kingdom of Greece, all of which existed in the time of the second temple. Therefore it says in reference to the second beast: “And it raised up itself on one side and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth,” because Darius the Mede, who conquered Babylon and destroyed it, ruled only over Media, Babylonia and Assyria, which latter was under the power of Nebuchadnezzar, who conquered Nineveh and became king of Assyria, but Darius did not rule over Persia and all the kingdoms that were subject to Persia.

When Cyrus the Persian, the son-in-law of Darius, who was king of Persia, came to the throne and inherited the kingdom of Media from Darius, the reign of the third beast began, which embraced the whole world, as he says: “All the kingdoms of the earth hath the Lord, the God of heaven, given me.” In reference to the third beast it says: “Which had upon the sides of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads.” This is an allusion to the four kings who ruled over both Persia and Media, as the text itself says: “There shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they all; and when he is waxed strong through his riches, he shall stir up all against the realm of Greece.”

Then began the kingdom of Greece, which is the fourth beast. The expressions in the text support this interpretation: “Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was diverse from all of them, exceeding terrible …” This he refers to the rule of the Greeks, which began with Alexander of Macedon, concerning whom it is said: “And the rough he-goat is the king of Greece; and the great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.” All that comes after is an account of the rule of the fourth beast in the time of the second commonwealth until the time of Antiochus.

These commentators, therefore, say that the belief in the Messiah is mainly traditional in character, and there is no prophecy in the Torah or in the Prophets which must necessarily refer to the Messiah, for they can all be interpreted in accordance with their context as referring to an event that is past. Thus the words: “The sceptre shall not depart from Judah,” may be interpreted: “The greatness and the dignity of the tribe will not depart from Judah,” for Judah will always be the first to fight the battles until Shiloh is destroyed. [The verb yabo in ki yabo shiloh, has the same meaning as in uba hashemesh vetaher, i. e. until the setting of Shiloh, namely its destruction.] The reason is because after the destruction of Shiloh, when Saul was anointed king, that rule departed from Judah, who no longer went first to battle. Hence the words: “Until the setting of Shiloh.” Or the words may be translated, “Until his son (shiloh) comes,” alluding to David [shiloh having the same meaning as ubeshilyatah (= after-birth)]. The meaning would then be, “The scepter will not come to Judah” [yasur having the same meaning as surah adonai surah elai—turn in, my Lord, turn in to me], i. e. the rule and the law-giver will not come from Judah until David comes, to whom all the tribes will gather [the word ‘ammim in the expression velo yikhat ‘ammim having the same meaning as in the phrase ‘ammim har yikrau, which Onkelos translates, “the tribes of Israel”]. And the words may be interpreted in still another way in agreement with the other interpretations, as Ibn Ezra explains it.

Similarly they refer the words: “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion, Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; Behold, thy king cometh unto thee, he is triumphant and victorious, lowly, and riding upon an ass …,” to Zerubbabel, concerning whom it says: “Will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, My servant, the son of Shealtiel, … and will make thee as a signet; for I have chosen thee …” There are many such prophecies in Zechariah which, as the context shows, refer to him. Similarly the words of Malachi: “And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver; and there shall be they that shall offer unto the Lord offerings in righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord,” all refer to Ezra, who purged all the families and purified the priests and separated them and the Israelites from the daughters of the stranger.

In the same way they explain all the prophecies in this manner and refer them to the past, maintaining that the belief in the coming of the Messiah is mainly traditional. Onkelos, the proselyte, a disciple of Shemayah and Abtalyon, who lived in the time of the second temple, refers the words: “The sceptre shall not depart from Judah …” to the Messiah. This is the traditional interpretation to this day and we can not deny tradition, because if we were to deny tradition, then we could deny even the fundamental principles of the faith and interpret the texts differently. But the basis of all is tradition.

Our opinion is, however, that if there is no conclusive evidence in the text, tradition alone is not decisive, because one may say that even though he had not yet come in the time of Onkelos, may be he came later, as the Rabbis say: “If they deserve it, he will come ‘with the clouds of heaven;’ if they do not deserve it, then, ‘Lowly and riding upon an ass.’ ” One might therefore say that he came after the time of Onkelos, but because of our sins the good things which were promised to come through him were not fulfilled and the people did not regard him as the Messiah.

The truth of the matter is that there are in the Torah and in the Prophets passages definitely indicating the growth of Israel’s dignity, which have never yet been fulfilled in whole or in part, for example: “There shall step forth a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite through the corners of Moab, and break down all the sons of Seth.” The Rabbis say: “Shall smite through the corners of Moab,” refers to David; “and break down all the sons of Seth,” refers to the Messianic king. And their interpretation must be true, for David did not rule over all the sons of Seth and there has never been in all Israel a king who ruled over the whole world, who are the sons of Seth. Again, in Isaiah we read: “For this is as the waters of Noah unto Me; For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee …,” and yet we are still in exile to-day, which shows that the prophecy has not yet been fulfilled. We also read in Isaiah: “For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before Me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain,” a promise which without doubt points to the permanent existence of the whole nation and to its ultimate grandeur.

There are nations, like the Philistines, the Ammonites, the Amalekites and others whose name has disappeared from the world, although their descendants are still existing, for there is no Philistine or Amalekite or Ammonite or Moabite nation. On the other hand, there are other nations whose name remains but not their descendants, like Egypt, which was destroyed several times, as Ezekiel prophesied. And when it was settled again, all those who came to live there were called Egyptians, although they were not of Egyptian descent—the name remained but not the race. There is no nation which continues to exist both in name and in race except that of Israel, of whom this thing was foretold: “Shall your seed and your name remain.” The prophet connects it with the continuance of the new heavens and the new earth, for otherwise one might say that everything that comes into existence also passes out of existence. The other nations came into being and then disappeared and Israel too will necessarily disappear, since it came into being. To anticipate this notion, he says that it is not necessarily true that whatever is subject to genesis is also subject to destruction, for the heavens and the earth are new, that is, have come into being, according, to the opinion of those who adhere to the Torah and believe in the creation of the world in time, and yet they exist before the Lord continually, i. e. they are eternal, as David says: “He hath also established them for ever and ever; He hath made a decree which shall not be transgressed.” Hence the seed of Israel as well as their name will also remain forever and will not disappear.

Jeremiah also says: “Thus saith the Lord, who giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night … If these ordinances depart from before Me, saith the Lord, Then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before Me for ever.” This is also a promise of Israel’s continuance and grandeur, for if the promise were that Israel will remain forever in exile, it would be a curse and not a blessing. The same thing applies to the prophecy of Ezekiel containing a description of the temple. Some portion of it was indeed fulfilled in the second temple, as appears from the words of the Rabbis in tractate Menahot. Commenting on the verse: “Thus saith the Lord God: In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish; and thou shalt purify (vehitteta) the sanctuary,” they say, “Why a sin offering? It should be a burnt-offering.” Said R. Johanan, “Elijah will explain this passage,” thus indicating that it refers to the Messianic period. R. Ashi said: “They offered installation sacrifices in the days of Ezra as they offered them in the days of Moses,” indicating that this prophecy was fulfilled in the days of Ezra. In tractate “Middot”, it also appears that in building the second temple they followed Ezekiel as far as they were able. Nevertheless it is clear that there are many things in Ezekiel that were not fulfilled in the days of Ezra or in the second commonwealth, for example the division of the land into tribes was not carried out in the second commonwealth. They were all mixed up and there was no special possession for each tribe or prince as Ezekiel describes.

The prophecy concerning Gog was not fulfilled at any time. To judge from the account given by Joseph ben Gorion, the priest, of the war of Antiochus king of Greece against Jerusalem and his defeat by the Hasmoneans, it does not agree with the prophecy concerning Gog at all. We also find in Spanish history an account of the coming of the Goths, who are descendants of Gog, to Spain, having conquered Rome and all Italy from the Greeks. But the rule of the Goths did not extend at that time over Palestine, nor did they subdue it, nor did Israel dwell at that time in their own land, as is stated in the prophecy concerning Gog. The words of Jeremiah in Lamentations: “The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion, He will no more carry thee away into captivity,” must refer to the last exile, that is, the exile after the second temple, for after the Babylonian exile at the time of the first temple, we were exiled again by Titus. To this reference is made in the words: “He will punish thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom,” which surely refers to the Roman exile, which is the last one.

Although the Kittim are descendants of the Greeks, it is possible that they are the fourth beast, because they ruled the world after the Greeks. The Bible calls them, “Daughter of Edom,” because they were converted to their new faith by an Edomite priest. The Edomites were the first to accept the religion of Jesus, and all the other nations go by the name of that one with which they identify themselves [whose religion they adopt]. Thus those who are converted to the religion of Israel are called Israelites or Jews, although they come from other nations. In the same way the Romans are called Edomites, and those who adopted the faith of the Mohammedans are called Ishmaelites, because the first converts were descendants of Ishmael. The meaning of the text, therefore, is that after this last exile God will no more carry the daughter of Zion into captivity, but will punish Edom. In order to prevent the reader from referring this to the original Edom, who were then living in Mount Seir, the text says: “Daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz,” the grandson of Shem. The Edom that dwelt in Mount Seir was destined to disappear before the exile of the second temple, having been destroyed by the Hasmoneans, just as the early kingdom of the Greeks was destroyed and its power passed to the Kittim, who are descendants of the Greeks and are now called the Edomite nation. Nor is it possible to refer all the statements mentioned in Daniel in connection with the rule of the fourth beast to any events in Israel’s past or to the sinners of Israel so as to account for all the details. And there are many other prophecies of the same kind that can not be referred to the past, especially that of Malachi, the last of the prophets, who says: “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers,” an event which has not been fulfilled.

CHAPTER 43

There are two kinds of existence, potential and actual. We perceive actual existence in two ways:

1. By means of our senses, like seeing with the eye and hearing with the ear. This mode of perception is defective because our senses perceive only the accidents of a thing, like whiteness, blackness, width, length, etc. Hence these perceptions are often erroneous, the straight appears crooked, the square appears round, and vice versa, as is explained in the Optics of Euclid. The sense of hearing also perceives things not as they are, and there are other defects besides.

2. The perception of conceptual existence. This is the idea which the intellect conceives of a thing perceived by sense, by stripping it of its accidents and apprehending the essence of the thing, which is the actual existence of things. Hence the Bible characterizes God’s seeing things as a vision of the intellect. Thus when Samuel went to anoint David and, seeing Eliab, said: “Surely the Lord’s anointed is before Him,” God said to him: “Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature … For it is not as man seeth: for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.” Samuel thought that Eliab was fit for a king because he was handsome and tall. But God told him not to look on his countenance, i. e. redness and whiteness, which belong to the category of quality, or on the height of his stature, which is quantity, “For man looketh on the outward appearance,” i. e. man perceives things through their accidents, for it is characteristic of the eyes that they perceive only accidents. “But the Lord looketh on the heart,” i. e. He perceives things in the manner characteristic of the heart, i. e. the mind, which perceives the true substance of things and their real existence.

The perception of potential existence is also divided into two kinds:

1. The perception of the existence of a thing in its causes. This is a real perception. If the causes exist, the thing must necessarily exist.

2. The perception of the existence of a thing in God’s knowledge. This is the most important perception of all, for God’s knowledge of a thing is the absolute cause of the existence of the thing, as God is the cause of all causes. The other causes may fail through God’s will, but the perception which is due to God’s knowledge can never fail. Hence the knowledge of a prophet is truer than any other, because it emanates from God, whereas the knowledge of other persons emanates from causes other than God, which may fail. Hence Isaiah, in his prophecy concerning Babel, says: “Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels; Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from the things that shall come upon thee.” The Rabbis say: “From some (me’asher), but not from all (kol asher).” The reason is because the stargazers can not know things as they really are, for two reasons:

1. Since their knowledge emanates from the knowledge of the causes of things which are ordered by the stars, they are dependent upon a particular time for their knowledge; whereas the prophet is not dependent upon any particular time, for all times are the same to God. This inadequacy is declared by the prophet when he says concerning the diviners, the stargazers and the false prophets: “Therefore it shall be night unto you, that ye shall have no vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down upon the prophets, and the day shall be black over them. And the seers shall be put to shame, and the diviners confounded; Yea, they shall all cover their upper lips; for there shall be no answer of God. But I truly am full of power by the spirit of the Lord …” His meaning is that the diviners and the star-gazers must have sun and stars to observe their altitudes in order to determine the hour, to know what star is in the ascendant, and to foretell the future. Therefore he says that the sun will set upon the prophets and the day will grow dark for them, i. e. the night, for night is also called day, as in the expression: “On the day that I smote all the first-born.” And without sun and stars when the night is dark and the day is cloudy, they can not tell the rising star, and hence the seers shall be put to shame and the diviners confounded, for there shall be no answer of God to their questions. The prophet, on the other hand, since he prophesies by the spirit of God, which has no relation to any definite time, can prophesy whenever he wishes, for he does not have to take the altitude of sun and stars, because his knowledge emanates from a higher cause. Hence he says: “But I truly am full of power by the spirit of the Lord,” i. e. since I prophesy through the power of the spirit of the Lord, I am not dependent upon any definite hour; I can prophesy at any time, without any one to prevent, because all things depend upon the will of God alone and nothing else.

2. The second cause which prevents the stargazers from knowing things as they are is that they are not capable of knowing correctly all the causes which determine the future, and hence they can not judge correctly. Their intellect is too weak to judge correctly even of things past, all of whose causes have been completed and realized. An apt illustration is the case of the mother of Sisera. She was grieved because of her son’s delay in the battle, and sought to know, “Why is his chariot so long in coming?” attempting to get the desired information through divination or astrology or geomancy, information about an event the causes of which were all completed, the battle having been fought. She saw that her son was struck in the head by a woman. Her wise princesses saw blood in the camp of Sisera, the battle completed, and the strong men, and particularly Sisera, covered with blood at the hands of two women, Deborah and Jael. And yet they could not interpret the vision correctly and turned it to their liking. Hence Deborah said: “The wisest of her princesses answer her, yea, she returneth answer to herself. ‘Are they not finding, are they not dividing the spoil? A damsel, two damsels to every man; to Sisera a spoil of dyed garments, a spoil of dyed garments of embroidery, two dyed garments of broidery for the neck of every spoiler.’ ” They could not understand how victory in battle could be won by women, hence they assumed that the delay was due to the fact that they had found and were dividing the spoil; and the weakening of the heroes by two women was because they found a damsel or two for the head of each man, who were weakened by overindulgence in coition. The blood which they saw as Sisera was struck in the head by a woman, could be nothing else than dyed garments of embroidery. And seeing the blood caused by two women, they cleverly guessed that there were “two dyed garments of broidery for the neck of every spoiler.”

All this shows how incapable the minds of the astrologers are to interpret a thing correctly even in reference to the past, whose causes are all completed. Surely, then, they are unable to know correctly all the causes of the future. For even though they may know all the causes determined by the stars, they can not know what is determined in the knowledge of God, who is above all causes and brings to nought all causes in carrying out His will. Thus we find that Elijah withheld the rain when he wanted, and then caused rain to come down, by the decree of God’s will, though there was a great drought at that time, and caused by his prayer a small cloud like a man’s hand to rise up, though the natural causes tended in the opposite direction. This shows that the prophet has a true knowledge of things, which can not in any manner fail, because it emanates from God, who is the cause of all causes, and can bring to nought the other causes or maintain them as He pleases and as His wisdom dictates.

CHAPTER 44

The knowledge which we get to-day from the words of the Prophets is undoubtedly correct and can not fail. For error in a statement derived from hearsay or from a written source may be due to three causes. The original informant may not be truthful or he may not be well informed. The intermediate person who received the information from the original informant may not have understood correctly what he had been told or he may have added something of his own which was not told him; or the messenger of the intermediate person or the one who brought the writing from the intermediate person may lie. But no error can attach in any of these ways to the words of the Prophets which we now have.

So far as the original source is concerned, who is God, the statement is absolutely true, because He is the cause of all causes, and no cause can be hidden from Him. Hence there can be no error as far as He is concerned. Nor can there be any error as far as the intermediate person is concerned. For if the prophet were not a man of truth, God would not have given him the prophetic inspiration, as Solomon says: “Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are His delight.” But all things associate with their like and avoid their opposite. Hence it is clear that if the prophet were not a man of truth, God would not have bestowed upon him the prophetic inspiration, and the spirit of God would not have rested upon him. One might say that the prophet misunderstood what he saw, like Hananiah the son of Azur, if the words of the prophet have not been verified, but if the words of the prophet, who is the intermediate person, have been verified several times, he can not be mistaken. Nor can error attach to the words of the prophet so far as the messenger or the one who brought the writing is concerned, i. e. the continuous tradition which we have to this day. For tradition which is transmitted from father to son can not be false in any manner, seeing that no father would want to transmit falsehood to his son as an inheritance. Now the first father who heard from the prophet, if he did not know that the prophet was a man of truth, would not have handed down the information to his son and his son to his son, and so on to this day. Hence if the original statement is true, no error can occur in it as far as tradition is concerned, which is handed down from father to son. Now if the thing is true from the point of view of the giver, the receiver and the transmitter, it can admit of no doubt at all.

This is the sign of the covenant which God made with us through Isaiah concerning the coming of the redeemer: “And a redeemer will come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob … And as for Me, this is My covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit which is upon thee, and My words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth …” His meaning is that a sign of the covenant that this promise of the coming of the redeemer will be fulfilled, is that the words are absolutely true considered from every angle. The author of the promise is God and His spirit, who can not fail, as we said in the preceding chapter, because no one can prevent Him, seeing that He is the cause of all causes, hence the words: “My spirit that is upon thee.” The transmitter to whom the words were told can not lie, nor err, because his words have been tested many times and found true. Isaiah prophesied the coming of Sennacherib and foretold his defeat, which came true. He prophesied the captivity of Jerusalem through the king of Babylon, and it came true; the fall of Babylon, and it came true; the success of Cyrus, and it came true; the building of Jerusalem through Cyrus, and it came true. Hence if he prophesies the redemption of Israel, that will come true. Hence he says: “And My words which I have put in thy mouth,” i. e. inasmuch as all the words that I have put in thy mouth have been fulfilled, they are all a sign of the covenant that the redeemer will come, for from them it is known that thou art a man of truth. Finally tradition can not lie, because He promises that the tradition will be continuous from father to son, without interruption: “Shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed …” This is a great sign that the covenant of the coming of the redeemer, promised by the prophets, stands.

CHAPTER 45

The word covenant (berit) is applied to affirmation or oath or something firm which is performed by two persons to bind them to each other in love and friendship. They make a certain sign the existence of which points to the covenant, like a witness who testifies to a thing. Laban said to Jacob: “And now come, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.” Then he raised a heap of stones and said: “This heap is witness between me and thee this day.” Similarly the rainbow is a permanent sign pointing to the existence of the covenant which God made with Noah and his sons.

The method of making a covenant, as we find in the Bible, was that they cut an animal into two parts and the covenanting parties passed between the pieces. The prophet says: “When they cut the calf in twain and passed between the parts thereof.” Similarly, when God made a covenant with Abraham, He said to him: “Take me a heifer of three years old, and a shegoat of three years old, and a ram of three years old … And he took him all these and divided them in the midst, and laid each half over against the other.” In the sequel it says that Abraham saw in a porphetic vision the glory of God passing between the parts, as a sign that he had made a covenant with Abraham: “Behold a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch that passed between these pieces.” And further we read: “In that day the Lord made a covenant with Abraham.”

The reason for this practice in making a covenant is because a covenant is a permanent bond between the two parties for the purpose of cementing and binding their friendship that they should be like one body and each should take care of the other as of himself. For this reason they cut an animal in two and pass between the parts, as a sign that just as those two parts formed one body in the animal when it was alive and each felt the pain of the other, so that when disease or injury affected one part the other felt the disease or injury and nothing but death separated those two parts, so the two parties making the covenant are to be as one body while living and nothing but death shall part them. It follows, therefore, that if the one sees any harm or grief coming to the other party to the covenant, he should do his utmost, risk danger if necessary, to save him, as he would do for himself. Also he must not keep from the other any knowledge or suspicion he may have that there is an evil plot to harm him; and should, moreover, reveal to him his secrets and innermost thoughts, as he reveals them to himself, for a friend is like a person’s self. And he must love him as himself, as we read in the Torah: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” The meaning is, just as in loving thyself there is no sense of otherness, so in loving thy neighbor thou must not think that he is other than thou, for the essence of perfect love is that the lover becomes one with the loved. Hence you will find that the numerical value of the word ahabah (love) is the same as that of ehad (one), signifying that the loved is not different from himself. Hence he should trust him and reveal his secrets to him, as he reveals them to himself. This is true provided he has confidence in his friend’s loyalty to the covenant, otherwise one should not reveal his secrets to every friend. If a friend is not proved and tried he should not reveal his secrets to him, for he may turn into an enemy and do him great harm if he knows his secrets. Especially would it be serious if he thinks the other is a friend and he is not, because he would not be on his guard against him.

So we find David saying that he is more afraid of his friends who know his secrets than of his enemies: “For it was not an enemy that taunted me, then I could have borne it; neither was it mine adversary that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid myself from him.” He means to say: I would not have endured the taunt of the enemy and the wilful acts of the one who magnified himself against me, without quickly having a fight with him or hiding myself from him. But against thee, who art “Mine equal, my companion, and my familiar friend”—alluding to Ahithophel and his company, who knew his secrets: “We took sweet counsel together”—I am not able to guard myself, and am afraid that harm will come to me because thou knowest my secrets. Then he says that he does not know any remedy, but he prays to God that they should die suddenly: “Let them go down alive into the nether-world,” so that they may not be able to reveal his secrets to any one: “May He incite death against them, Let them go down alive into the nether-world.”

But if he is a true friend in whose love he trusts, he should reveal his secrets to him and be jealous for him as he would for himself, and disclose to him any evil plots against him that he may know and assure him of his help. Hence as soon as God made a covenant with Abraham, He revealed to him all that He knew of the evil that was destined to come to his descendants: “Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years; and also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge.” The meaning is: Since I have made a covenant with thee, I can not in any way conceal from thee the evil which is destined to come upon thy seed. Therefore know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger, that they will be subject to others and afflicted, and that this condition of being strangers will last four hundred years. “And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge,” i. e. I will strengthen the hands of those who enslave them, as though I consented to and assisted in their subjection. The words dan anoki (will I judge) have the same meaning as danani elohim (“God hath judged me”), which means, He has taken my part, pleading my cause, for He is on my side and has heard my voice, like the words: “Be Thou my judge (shofteni), O God, and plead my cause.” So here dan anoki (will I judge) means: I, as it were, plead their cause and strengthen their hands in the subjection of thy seed, but “afterward shall they come out with great substance.” The expression, “afterward,” supports the interpretation here given. It is not connected with the words: “will I judge,” but introduces another matter which has not been mentioned so far. Then, in the immediate sequel, we read: “In that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying: ‘Unto thy seed have I given this land.’ ”

Having revealed to him the decree which had been made concerning him, whether by way of punishment or by the stars, as some of the sages believe, He promised him that He would help him and deliver his seed from the hand of all those that will rise against them. Hence the Rabbis say that in that vision Abraham was shown all the instances of the subjection of Israel to other nations. Having made the covenant, it was proper that He should reveal to him all that was destined to come to his seed. And the meaning of the covenant is that He would be with him in his distress and sympathize with him in his trouble; even as the whole body shares in the pain of one of its limbs, as our Rabbis say: “The Shekinah suffers in the suffering of Israel, as is said: ‘I will be with him in trouble,’ ” just as a person, suffers when his friend with whom he has a covenant is in trouble.

Since, however, it was possible that Abraham’s seed might not attain that degree of perfection which would make them fit to enjoy continually the divine providence through this covenant, the divine Wisdom determined to make a permanent covenant with Abraham and his seed that they should be His people and the lot of His inheritance and that He should be their God always. Hence you will find that in the vision which he had after the vision of the parts he was at once given the commandment of circumcision for him and all his seed after him, in which commandment it is expressly stated that it is a sign of a covenant between God and the seed of Abraham: “And I will establish My covenant between Me and thee and thy seed after thee throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant.” It is thus made clear that the commandment of circumcision was given as a sign of the covenant, signifying the bond of union between God and the seed of Abraham who maintain His covenant. And hence since that sign exists continuously in our nation, it shows that the divine bond is still with us.

Hence the men of the Great Assembly, in composing the benediction for the rite of circumcision, used the words: “And He sealed his offspring with the sign of the holy covenant.” Then they explain the purpose of the covenant which is, to be delivered from the judgment of gehenna—the pit of destruction—as is specifically stated in the benediction: “Therefore as a reward for this, O living God, our portion, our Rock, command that our beloved relative shall be delivered from destruction.” And the reason given is: “For the sake of His covenant which He placed in our flesh.” The “deliverance from destruction” that is mentioned here does not refer to death, for in this respect the circumcised and the uncircumcised are alike, but undoubtedly to the punishment of gehenna.

And our Rabbis say in the Midrash that Abraham sits at the door of gehenna and saves the circumcised from going in. Therefore, as long as we see this sign of the covenant maintained in the nation, we must not despair of redemption even though we see great trouble coming upon us continually, for we are to-day like a sick man neardeath, whom everybody has given up. As long as there is some sign of life remaining, we do not give up hope that he may recover. So here, although all the nations say concerning us that we are without hope and that our expectation is lost and we are cut off, still when we see this sign of the covenant maintained among us, which points to the bond existing between the divinity and our people, we know of a certainty that we still have strength to live, and that through this bond the nation will return to its original strength and will cleave to God, as was the case before in the period of prophecy.

CHAPTER 46

One can not be sure of the permanence of his faith, though he keeps the covenant and the law and serves God, so long as he enjoys peace and tranquillity at home and prosperity in his business affairs, his flax not being damaged nor his wine souring. He can be sure only if he maintains his integrity when his fortune changes and poverty and affliction come upon him and press him to the last degree. This is the test whether the righteous man serves God from love, namely if he maintains the strength of his faith in time of trouble and distress and does not weaken nor induce others to weaken, but trusts in God at all times, acknowledging in time of tranquillity and prosperity that everything comes from God, instead of saying: “My power and the might of my hand hath gotten me this wealth,” (for it is God who gives man power to acquire wealth), and entreating Him to continue His benefits, and increasing the strength of his faith in time of trouble and trusting that God will release him from trouble and give him relief, and praying that God should give him peace, as the Psalmist says: “Trust in Him at all times, ye people,” i. e. in time of prosperity as well as in time of distress; “Pour out your heart before Him,” and say: “God is a refuge for us.”

The sons of Korah praised Israel for this quality in the forty-fourth Psalm, beginning: “O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us; a work Thou didst in their days …” The entire Psalm is a laudation of the people of Israel, who trusted in God in the day of prosperity and happiness and acknowledged that all things come from Him; nor did their heart turn away from trust in Him and loyalty to His covenant in time of trouble. And this too, though they had not seen with their own eyes the great signs and wonders, but only heard them from their fathers. Hence the Psalmist begins: “O God, we have heard with our ears,” i. e.: although we have not seen with our own eyes, we have heard with our ears from trustworthy persons. For, “Our fathers have told us,” that “a work Thou didst in their days …,” showing that Thou art in the habit of doing miracles and wonders, for “Thou with Thy hand didst drive out the nations, and didst plant them in … For not by their own sword did they get the land in possession …” If, therefore, in the beginning all the prosperity of our nation was through Thee, it is not fitting now that Thou shouldst withhold Thy compassion from us, and therefore Thou, who “art my King, O God; Command the salvation of Jacob,” for there is no obstacle either from Thy side or from mine, for Thou art my King, and as a king helps his servants whether they deserve it or not, simply in order to acquire a glorious name, so Thou shouldst help us. And since Thou art God also, i. e. all-powerful, and there is no one to prevent Thee, “Command the salvation of Jacob,” for we always trust in Thee and know that “through Thee do we push down our adversaries;” and “through Thy name do we tread them under that rise up against us,” and we have no other trust except in Thee. “For I trust not in my bow, neither can my sword save me,” but we have always put our trust in Thee, in time of prosperity as well as in time of adversity.

This is described as follows: “But Thou hast saved us from our adversaries, and hast put them to shame that hate us,” i. e. when Thou didst save us from our adversaries and puttedst them to shame that hate us, namely in the time of our prosperity, we did not become proud and haughty but “in God have we gloried all the day, and we will give thanks unto Thy name for ever,” if we are again prosperous as before. Thou shouldst not therefore refrain from helping us because Thou fearest that our heart will grow proud and we will forget the Lord our God.

Having said that in time of prosperity they always put their trust in God, he says again that in time of trouble also they trusted in Him: “Yet Thou hast cast off, and brought us to confusion,” i. e. even when Thou didst cast us off and didst bring us to confusion, i. e. in time of trouble, when Thou didst not go “forth with our hosts, and madest us to turn back from the adversary; and they that hate us spoil at their will, and didst give us like sheep to be eaten; and didst scatter us among the nations, and selledst Thy people for small gain … All the day is my confusion before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me, for the voice of him that taunteth and blasphemeth …” i. e. apart from the troubles which come upon me, I am confused and ashamed all the day because of those who taunt me and say: Such is your confidence and trust! He does not help thee even though He has power to do so. For a person who trusts in some thing that does not do him any good feels ashamed, as David says, complaining, as it were, in the name of every man in exile: “My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?”

Then he explains that he is not complaining of local abandonment, for the whole earth is full of God’s glory, but his complaint is that God is far from help, and though I call, yet, “O my God, I call by day, but Thou answerest not; and at night, and there is no surcease for me,” no one answers me and no one pays attention. This is not due to any change in Thee, for I know that “Thou art holy,” and free from corporeal changes, and “Thou sittest,” i. e. Thou art eternally the same without any change. He uses the word yosheb (sittest) because the sitting posture is the most stable of positions, as Maimonides shows in explaining the homonym yashab. 

Then he says, “The praises of Israel,” i. e. Israel praise themselves and boast of Thee continually, saying that Thou savest them in the time of their distress. Why, then, hast Thou forsaken me now? It was not so in the time of the patriarchs, for “in Thee did our fathers trust,” and Thou didst not turn their faces back empty, but “they trusted, and Thou didst deliver them. Unto Thee they cried, and escaped; In Thee did they trust, and were not ashamed” of their trust, since they trusted in Thee, who art stable and unchanging, as David says: “O my God, in Thee have I trusted, let me not be ashamed.” If one trusts in some thing that is not stable, he is ashamed of his trust, for he is not sure that his expectation will come, as Job said about those who trust in pools of rain water, which dry up in the summer: “They were ashamed because they had hoped; They came hither, and were confounded,” i. e. when they found it dry. The same is true of one who trusts in his wealth, which is not stable. Hence the Bible says: “He that trusteth in his riches shall fall.” The same thing is true of trusting in man: “Cursed is the man that trusteth in man.” 

But he who trusts in God, who is eternal, is not ashamed of his trust: “In Thee did they trust and were not ashamed.” Hence I complain of my shame when I see that “I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people. All they that see me laugh me to scorn,” saying: “Let him commit himself unto the Lord! let Him rescue him; Let Him deliver him, seeing He delighteth in him.” For this is the way the wicked scorn the man who trusts in God, as the Bible says: “Ye would put to shame the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge,” i. e. they say that the counsel of the poor is foolish because he puts his trust in God. I am very much ashamed of this. In the same way we must explain the words: “And the shame of my face hath covered me, for the voice of him that taunteth and blasphemeth …” For they taunt me and say: “Where are their gods, the rock in whom they trusted … Let him rise up and help you, let him be your protection.” They do this because they doubt Thy ability, Heaven forbid!

Then he says: “All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten Thee, neither have we been false to Thy covenant,” i. e. even though all these troubles we mentioned have come upon us, we have not forgotten Thee, but have always been firm in Thy covenant and faith and have not been false to Thy covenant either in thought or in deed. Not in thought, for “Our heart is not turned back;” not in deed, for “Neither have our steps declined from Thy path.” He says further: “Though Thou hast crushed us into a place of jackals, and covered us with the shadow of death,” i. e. though Thou hast made the yoke of exile heavy upon us and hast covered us with the darkness of trouble, which might have led us to forget Thy name, yet we did not do this. Search Thou, O Most High, “If we had forgotten the name of our God, or spread forth our hands to a strange God,” for it is God who searches this, for He knows the hidden things of the heart and to Him alone is this search fitting.

Having mentioned the praises of Israel, who endured troubles and the yoke of exile for the love of God, he mentions his complaint of God by way of prayer: “For Thy sake are we killed all the day; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Awake, why sleepest Thou, O Lord?” The meaning is: even though we bear all these troubles for love of Thee with all our soul, nevertheless, since we are killed for Thy sake all the day, so that we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, how canst Thou refrain and be silent? “Awake, why sleepest Thou, O Lord?” and, “Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face” from us? And even if Thou forget “our affliction and our oppression,” still when “our soul is bowed down to the dust, and our belly cleaveth unto the earth,” when we are in the lowest stage of poverty and lowliness, “Arise for our help, and redeem us,” not for our own sake, but “for Thy mercy’s sake,” for mercy extends to those who trust in God, as the Bible says: “But he that trusteth in the Lord, mercy compasseth him about.” Even if he is not worthy for his own sake, trust has the effect of extending gratuitous mercy to those who trust in God.

CHAPTER 47

Hope and expectation are essential to a believer in order to obtain the mercy which follows upon trust. The prophet says: “The Lord is good unto them that wait for Him.” David takes credit to himself when he says: “For Thee do I wait all the day.”

Hope is of three kinds: 1. Hope of mercy. The man hopes that God will help him by way of mercy and not as a matter of obligation. 2. Hope of glory. The man hopes that God will help him because He has been in the habit of helping him before, and if He failed him now His glory would suffer. For if a master who has been in the habit of helping his servant fails to deliver him from trouble in a given instance, the people say that it is because of the master’s inability. 3. Hope due to a promise. This is the hope of truth, the individual hoping that God will verify His promise.

The most praiseworthy of the three is the hope of mercy, except that one is not so certain that he will get all that he desires. Thinking that he has not attained such a degree as to be worthy of God’s gratuitous mercy, he believes that God will not desire to grant his request and therefore he does not hope properly, whereas if he hoped properly, mercy would not be withheld by God, for God always desires to bestow His benefits upon the one who has real hope, as the Psalmist says: “The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear Him, in those that wait for His mercy.” It is clear therefore that the failure to obtain mercy is due to the lack of real hope.

The hope of glory is more certain. For if a person has been in the habit of helping some one and has not done so in a given instance, he must, in order to prevent people thinking that his failure to help in the given instance is due to weakness or incapacity, bestir himself to help the person for the sake of the glory of his name, as the Psalmist says: “Help us, O Lord of our salvation, for the sake of the glory of Thy name.” “God of our salvation,” means: who hast been accustomed to save us. “For the sake of the glory of Thy name,” means that we do not request aid by reason of any claim that we have against Thee, nor by reason of any merits that we have to our credit, but for the sake of the glory of Thy name, that the nations should not say that Thou art not able to do now what Thou wast able to do before. Hence the words in the sequel: “Wherefore should the nations say: ‘Where is their God?’ ”

This is the method Moses followed in his prayer on the occasion of the incident of the spies, when he said: “When the Egyptians shall hear—for Thou broughtest up this people with Thy might from among them—they will say to the inhabitants of this land, who have heard that Thou Lord art in the midst of this people; … now if Thou shalt kill this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of Thee will speak, saying: Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which He swore unto them, therefore He hath slain them in the wilderness.” And God said to him: “I have pardoned according to thy word,” i. e. I will pardon for the reason that you mentioned, namely that My name may not be profaned, but I will take My revenge upon them in some other way, so that My glory will remain intact: “But in very deed, as I live—and all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord—surely all those men that have seen My glory … surely they shall not see the land … neither shall any of them that despised Me see it.”

The hope that is based upon a promise is the most sure of all. If one hopes on the basis of a promise, oral or in writing, and the author of the promise is a man of truth, the person hoping is sure that the other will fulfil his words. Thus David says: “Remember the word unto Thy servant, because Thou hast made me to hope.” The meaning of these words is that an inferior or a servant has no claim against his superior or master except on the basis of a promise if there was such. And hence any hope which is based upon some of the sayings of the prophets—which are undoubtedly true, as we explained above—is sure to be fulfilled. For although the promised things as such pertain to the category of the possible or contingent, nevertheless since they are the result of God’s promise, they are as good as necessary, and the person to whom they were promised may be as sure of them as if they were things which had to be by natural necessity.

Future events pertain to the category of the possible because they are not always in actuality. In some cases the two alternatives of being and not being are equally balanced, as for example to-morrow’s rain, it may either rain or not rain with equal possibility. Similarly the recovery of a sick person may or may not come to pass with equal possibility. But there are things which, though they are future, are not equally situated with reference to the alternatives of being and not being, but are virtually necessary. For example, to-morrow’s rising of the sun is necessary, although it is future. The same is true of all future events whose causes are completed.

Now the hope of a man who trusts in God and waits for the realization of the words of the prophets, must be of the same kind as that of a person who waits for a future event whose coming is necessary. Hence the Psalmist says: “I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in His word do I hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than watchmen for the morning; Yea, more than watchmen for the morning.” The meaning is as follows: Those who guard the walls at night are divided into watches, one keeps guard until the cock crows, and another until the morning. Now he who is on guard until the cock crows waits for the crowing of the cock with some doubt in his mind because the two alternatives of being and not being are equally possible. But the “watchmen for the morning,” i. e. those whose watch lasts until the morning, wait for morning with great certainty of its coming, for it is something that must come. Hence the Psalmist compares his hope in God with the sentinels on the walls who are in the morning watch and says that he waits for God and His word which He promised through the prophets with more assurance than the sentinels in the morning watch feel in the coming of the morning, which is something that must come.

He does not say that he waits for God as the sick man for health. For although the sick man waits for health with great eagerness, nevertheless he is in doubt whether it will come or not, because the two alternatives are equally possible, like the coming of rain, but one who waits for the morning, waits with assurance that it will come because it must, for the going forth of the morning is sure. Hence the prophet says: “Let us know, eagerly strive to know the Lord, His going forth is sure as the morning,” i. e. as something that must necessarily be. “And He shall come unto us as the rain,” i. e. we do not expect reward as of right, but as something which may or may not come, like rain. In the same way we must explain the words: “They shall fear Thee while the sun endureth,” i. e. as a matter of obligation and necessity like the rising of the sun. But the hope of reward is like something that is contingent, viz. rain: “May he come down like rain upon the mown grass.”

Hope like this, which is based upon a promise, is called hope of truth, because a person entertains this hope with the confidence that God is true and His word is true. The hope of mercy is entertained merely on the basis of God’s mercy, the hope of a promise is based upon God’s truth, both of them are for the benefit of the recipient. The hope of glory, on the other hand, has to do with the interest of the giver alone—the Lord is, as it were, constrained [to aid] for His own sake, out of consideration for His glory. Hence the Psalmist says: “Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name give glory,” i. e. we do not ask this of Thee as a reward for our virtues, for wherein can mortal man born of woman be meritorious? Nor as a benefit to us, but for the sake of the glory of Thy name, and besides Thou must do this, “For Thy mercy, and for Thy truth’s sake,” i. e. the hope of mercy and the hope of promise.

CHAPTER 48

Hope and expectation of the kinds we mentioned may be general or particular. General hope means that a person must always hope that God will save His entire people and make their lot pleasant. The Rabbis say concerning this form of hope that the first question a man is asked on the day of judgment is, “Did you hope for salvation?” This means the salvation of the whole nation.

Particular hope means that a man should hope that God in His compassion and abundant mercy will make his way straight, will deliver him from harm and will choose what is good and suitable for him, by putting it in his heart to choose the good and reject the evil. For even in the work of his hands and the things he takes pains in doing a person does not know to reject the evil and choose the good except with the help of God, as Solomon says: “There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death;” also: “A man’s goings are of the Lord; How then can man look to his way?” And he must not despair of hoping in the Lord in all his doings on account of fear of his sins, for God’s providence always comes to those who hope for mercy, not to those who hope for reward, as the Bible says: “Behold, the eye of the Lord is toward them that fear Him, toward them that wait for His mercy.” Then he makes clear that he is referring to particular hope by adding: “To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.”

And when great and severe afflictions come upon him, he retains his integrity, strengthens his hope in God, and thinks and knows and understands that there is no one who can prevent God from granting his request, for His power is infinite and He can give him relief from trouble in His compassion and great mercy, which are infinite. Thus he continues to hope in God.

The prophet Jeremiah explains this in the book of Lamentations, where he speaks of the great suffering which every Israelite endured in exile: “And my soul is removed far off from peace, I forgot prosperity.” The meaning is: The troubles coming upon me are so severe and so many in succession that I have forgotten what peace looks like, and the form of prosperity is no longer known to me, and hence, “I said: ‘My strength is perished, and mine expectation from the Lord.’ ” He goes on to explain the cause of his thinking that his hope had perished, because even to “remember mine affliction and mine anguish is wormwood and gall.” The word zekor is an infinitive like zekor in the passage: “Do not think (zekor) any more of the battle.” Jeremiah continues: “This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope. Surely the Lord’s mercies are not consumed, Surely His compassions fail not.” That is, what I recall to my mind in the midst of my great troubles is that the Lord’s mercies are not consumed and that His compassions fail not, for they are infinite, and therefore, “the Lord will not cast off forever. For though He cause grief, yet will He have compassion according to the multitude of His mercies.” Therefore I do not lose hope that I shall survive my troubles.

David explains the same thing in reference to general hope, when he says: “O Israel, hope in the Lord; for with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous redemption,” i. e. do not give up hoping in the Lord on account of your many sins, for you will not be redeemed for your virtues—there are not enough of them—your redemption from the depths of distress will be due to God’s mercy alone. Therefore you must hope in the Lord alone and in no one else, “for with the Lord there is mercy,” and there is no other being that can do mercy outside of Him, as was explained above. And even if your iniquities are many, “With Him is plenteous redemption,” for the power of the sinner to sin can not be greater than the power of God to forgive, hence, “He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.”

There is a difference, however, between the two kinds of hope. Particular hope is fulfilled through prayer, as David says: “I waited patiently for the Lord; and He inclined unto me, and heard my cry. He brought me up also out of the tumultuous pit, out of the miry clay; and He set my feet upon a rock …” This is because particular hope depends upon the individual alone, therefore if it is of the proper kind, there is no reason why it should not be fulfilled, since there is no niggardliness in the giver, and when one prays for the thing he hopes for he shows that his hope is real, therefore he is prepared to receive the hoped for mercy. It is different with general hope. For though it may be real and genuine on the part of one or a few persons, the thing hoped for may not be realized, since every recipient, the entire nation, has not a genuine and real hope. And if the recipient is not prepared in respect of his hope, the hope can not be fulfilled. Therefore the Rabbis say that the final redemption of Israel is a matter of time or of merit. Commenting on the words: “I, the Lord, will hasten it in its time,” they say: “If they are deserving, I will hasten it, if not, then in its time.” Particular hope is not affected by time, but if the recipient prepares himself to receive mercy through hope, it will be realized by means of prayer.

CHAPTER 49

One might say that hope and expectation are not good for man, because they disturb the power of thought, weaken one’s strength and make the mind sick and stupid. For as a result of hoping and expecting a thing, the mind is busy thinking of obtaining the thing hoped for, and this continual preoccupation with the object desired quenches at length the light of the intellect and the mind remains dimmed, as we read: “Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.” Hence every intelligent person should remove from his mind hope and expectation. If one ceases to hope for something that is hard to get and contents himself with what he can get, his mind is not preoccupied with the thing and he can think of things of knowledge and understanding and of subjects which develop the intellect and illumine it. How then can we say that hope and expectation are good for a believer, so much so that the prophet urges hope above all things? Thus we read: “Therefore turn thou to thy God; keep mercy and justice, and wait for thy God continually,” from which it seems that hope is as essential to a believer as mercy and justice or even more so.

The answer to the question is this: Hope for something about which one is in doubt whether it will come or not, does disturb the soul, preoccupying it with thoughts of how to obtain it, but hope for a thing which one is sure will come as, for example, the hope for the light of the morning, does not disturb the soul but makes it glad, because it conceives the good which is sought and is confident that it will come. This is the kind of hope one must have in God. One must trust implicitly that God will fulfil one’s hope without doubt, since He has the power and there is no one to prevent Him. But one must not have the kind of hope in which one doubts whether the thing will come or not. Such hope as we have described strengthens the heart and makes it glad, as we read: “Be strong, and let your heart take courage, all ye that wait for the Lord.” Hope in God, far from weakening the heart, strengthens it, for if one hopes in God and his heart truly relies upon the Holy One of Israel, trusting that He will grant his request, he gets stronger and more courageous, as we read: “Even the youths shall faint and be weary, … But they that wait for the Lord shall renew their strength.” That is, even the youths, who do not usually become faint and weary, and the young men, who usually renew their strength, will all stumble and faint and be weary, but those that wait for the Lord shall renew their strength, and the more strength they have the more they will be able to hope, and the hope in turn which has God for its object, who is a permanent being, will further increase their strength, the two mutually reacting upon each other, hope causing strength and strength in turn causing hope.

The Psalmist alludes to this when he says: “Wait for the Lord; be strong, and let thy heart take courage; yea, wait thou for the Lord.” This shows that hope is the cause of strength, and that strength in turn is a cause for more hope. The prophet had this hope in mind in his admonition: “Therefore turn thou to thy God; keep mercy and justice, and wait for thy God continually.” For hope and waiting for God are better than all the praises that one can give Him, as the Psalmist says: “But as for me, I will hope continually, and will add to all Thy praises.”

Now this seems a very strange remark indeed. How can he say that he will add to all the praises of God, when we read in the Psalms: “Who can express the mighty acts of the Lord, or make all His praise to be heard?” A person can not even enumerate the infinite praises of God, not to speak of adding to them. But the meaning of the verse is this, that by waiting continually for the Lord he adds to all the praises which a person can give to God. David explains the same thing in another place also, saying that hope and waiting for God are like praising God in the choicest of places and like the most acceptable offering, namely one that is not brought for a sin but as a vow or freewill offering: “Praise waiteth for Thee, O God, in Zion; and unto Thee the vow is performed.” Now it seems to me that the word dumiyah means hope, like the word domu in the expression: “Wait (domu) until we come to you,” and the word dimminu in the verse: “We have waited (dimminu) for Thy loving-kindness, O God.” The meaning of the verse is therefore as follows: Hope and waiting for Thee, O God, are like praising Thee in Zion, which is the best of all places; and it is likewise to be compared to the payment of an offering that is vowed to Thee, which is the best of all offerings, since it is not brought for a sin. And by reason of our hope, “Thou hearest [our] prayer,” for prayer resulting from hope is the best; and because Thou hearest prayer, “unto Thee doth all flesh come,” to pray. And by reason of the prayer that comes from hope, “The tale of iniquities which are too heavy for me,” and even “our transgressions,” i. e. defiant acts, “Thou wilt pardon them.” This shows the great value of hope, as we explained above. The Rabbis indeed explain the word dumiyah as meaning silence, when they say: “The best remedy of all is silence, as we read: ‘To Thee silence (dumiyah) is praise,’ ” nevertheless the sequence and connection of thought suggest rather the meaning of hope.

The value of hope being so great, David urged the people to hope in God continually, without ceasing: “O Israel, hope in the Lord from this time forth and for ever.” As a reward for hope he promises spiritual reward in the world to come: “Wait for the Lord, and keep His way, and He will exalt thee to inherit the land.” He makes it clear that as a reward for hope in particular and for keeping the way of the Lord in general, a person will inherit the land of life. According to the Rabbis, “inheritance of the land,” means the land of life, as they say: “All Israel have a share in the world to come, as is said: ‘Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land for ever.’ ” Habakkuk also urges hope: “Though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not delay.” If it tarries how can he say that it will not delay? The meaning is that though it tarries, one must always wait for redemption and hope that it will come without delay. Isaiah also says: “Happy-are all they that wait for Him.”

CHAPTER 50

The complaint that we find in the Hagiographa concerning the long duration of our exile is not the same as the complaint that we find in the Prophets concerning the adversity of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked. Our complaint about the exile is not that we think it is unjust; but it may be analyzed into three parts, corresponding to the three kinds of hope—1. Complaint of mercy, 2. Complaint of promise, 3. Complaint of glory.

1. In showing mercy it is clear that the less fit the recipient is to receive the mercy shown him, the greater is the degree of the mercy. And since we are in the last stage of lowliness and poverty, having almost reached the end of dissolution, we are in need of the greatest mercy possible. But God’s mercy is the greatest possible, hence now is the time when it should come to us, when we are stripped of all good, like a slave who is in the last degree of lowliness and misery. This is what David had in mind when he said: “Behold, as the eyes of servants unto the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes look unto the Lord our God, until He be gracious unto us.”

Now this verse seems strange. How can he say that we look to God as a servant to his master and a maiden to her mistress? The master is never willing to let his servants go free, nor does the servant look to him to save him from his trouble and let him go free. But the meaning of the verse is as we said before. The Psalmist is complaining to God of His attribute of mercy. The duration of the exile has been so long, he says, that we have been reduced to the position of a servant—not a servant who looks for freedom through his friends or relatives, for whom he is waiting to come and redeem him, but like a servant who is without hope and despairs of ever obtaining his freedom, a slave in the hand of a cruel master, deprived of all good, who is not his own master even to be able to maintain his religion and belief, having neither children nor honor nor wealth—“The possession of the slave is the possession of the master”—nor any other hope at all. He merely looks to the hand of his master to give him a piece of bread to live by, and similarly the maiden looks to the hand of her mistress. We are in a similar position. The exile has lasted so long, troubles have come upon us thick and fast, that we have almost given up hope of redemption (Heaven forbid!) and been reduced to the position of the slave who despairs of obtaining his freedom. All we ask for is to remain in exile with our poverty and humility. This is the meaning of the words: “So our eyes look unto the Lord our God until He be gracious unto us.” And hence he continues: “Be gracious unto us, O Lord, be gracious unto us; for we are full sated with contempt.” The meaning is: If Thy purpose is to make Thy mercy as extraordinary as possible, which will be the case when the recipient is devoid of all good, we are full sated with contempt, we have already been reduced to the last degree of misery, and Thou oughtest to have pity upon us in Thy great mercy.

Heman the Ezrahite also complains of the long exile in the same way: “For my soul is sated with troubles, and my life draweth nigh unto the grave. I am counted with them that go down into the pit.” The meaning is: So many troubles have passed over us that we are accounted like dead, and therefore Thou shouldst have pity upon us in Thy great mercy, before we reach the last degree of destruction. Why should we die before Thine eyes and our name be cut off from the earth? “Wilt Thou work wonders for the dead?… Shall Thy mercy be declared in the grave?” The meaning is, we have already reached the limit where the extraordinary mercy of God should be shown to us, for it is impossible to descend any lower, unless it be the grave, but, “Shall Thy mercy be declared in the grave?” It would not be mercy then, but a new creation. The entire Psalm is expressed in the style of a sick man who is grieved on account of his sickness although he knows that he brought it on himself by his evil conduct.

2. In the eighty-ninth Psalm by Ethan the Ezrahite, we have the two other modes of complaint, viz. the complaints of promise and of glory. An example of the complaint of promise are the words: “Where are Thy former mercies, O Lord, which Thou didst swear unto David …?” 3. Complaint of glory is expressed in the words: “Remember, Lord, the taunt of Thy servants; How I do bear … wherewith Thine enemies have taunted, O Lord …”

In order to explain these two forms of complaint according to the words of the Psalmist, I will interpret the Psalm to show the connection of thought. He begins by saying: “I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever,” as Jeremiah said: “Right wouldest Thou be, O Lord, were I to contend with Thee; Yet will I reason with Thee,” as we explained above. So the Psalmist says: I know that I can not deny the mercies of God which extend continually over His creatures, those above as well as those below, and therefore I will always sing the mercies of God and publish them and make them known to mankind forever: “To all generations will I make known Thy faithfulness with my mouth,” i. e. I will make known their permanence and continuance, for I can not deny it. Nevertheless I can not forbear from complaining, not basing myself on God’s mercy, but upon His faithfulness. My complaint is based upon God’s promise. I see that affirmation and truth are not equal in all things: “For I have said: ‘The world is built with mercy; in the very heavens Thou dost establish Thy faithfulness.’ ” That is, I thought that the whole world exists in its dependence on God, through mercy, the celestial as well as the terrestrial beings. Therefore it follows that as all depends upon God’s mercy, God’s faithfulness and fulfilment should also come to them all alike. But I see that Thy faithfulness, namely the fulfilment of Thy mercy, is in heaven alone, i. e. in the celestial beings, whereas the mercy which extends to the terrestrial beings, for example such as Thou hast expressed in the words: “I have made a covenant with My chosen, I have sworn unto David My servant; For ever will I establish thy seed, and build up thy throne to all generations,” is different. The fulfilment of mercy here is not the same as it is in the celestial beings.

He goes on to explain how the mercy of bringing into being and maintaining them is extended to the celestial beings: “So shall the heavens praise Thy wonders, O Lord,” i. e. the wondrous mercy which Thou hast shown them by bringing them into being in the last degree of perfection; “Thy faithfulness also,” i. e. the permanence which Thou givest to them, they will praise “in the assembly of the holy ones,” i. e. among the Separate Intelligences, which are the causes of the spheres and make them move, for they all acknowledge and recognize that Thou art, “a God dreaded in the great council of the holy ones,” and that there is none like Thee among the celestial beings, who can do mercy like Thee, “For who in the skies can be compared unto the Lord, who among the sons of might can be likened unto the Lord?” for they all know that Thou art God above them all, and that Thou art “Lord God of hosts,” of the heavens and the earth, and that there is none who “is a mighty one like unto Thee, O Lord,” and I see that “Thy faithfulness is round about Thee,” i. e. that permanence exists only among the celestial beings.

This is so not because Thou art the God of heaven alone and not the God of the earth, for, “Thine are the heavens, Thine also the earth; the world and the fulness thereof, Thou hast founded them. The north and the south, Thou hast created them … Thine is an arm with might,” to do whatever Thou desirest and to change nature according to Thy will, for “righteousness and justice are the foundation of Thy throne.” That is, all those things which happen by necessity, like the things of nature which can not change—the things which he calls here “righteousness and justice”—all of them come from heaven, which is the foundation of Thy throne. But those things which take place by way of “mercy and truth,” can not come from any one other than Thee, unless they “go before Thee,” and pray Thee to grant them, for there is no one in the world who can do mercy except Thee, as was explained above.

He then goes on to explain that the mercy which extends to the terrestrial beings should come to the best people, viz. the people who know to praise God: “Happy is the people that know the joyful shout,” i. e. know how to praise Thee. The word teru‘ah (shouting) has the same meaning here as the word nari‘ah (we will shout) in the verse: “Let us shout for joy (nari‘ah) unto Him with psalms.” This people deserve to walk “in the light of Thy countenance,” i. e. to get the mercy and truth which come from the light of Thy countenance, as we said before, because “in Thy name do they rejoice all the day; and through Thy righteousness are they exalted.” They boast of Thy holy name and acknowledge that Thou art the cause of their prosperity, recognizing that “Thou art the glory of their strength, and that in Thy favour our horn is exalted.” Hence they always say: “For of the Lord is our shield …,” i. e. that the king of Israel, who is their shield and the captain of their host, is from God and no one else. For “then Thou spokest in vision to Thy godly ones,” i. e. Samuel and Nathan the prophet, “and saidst: ‘I have laid help upon one that is mighty,’ ” i. e. David, for David was mighty before he was anointed king, as he said of himself: “Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear.”

Then he tells how after He had given him the kingdom in His mercy, a covenant was made with him concerning it through Nathan the prophet, assuring him of its permanence: “My faithfulness and My mercy shall be with him; and through My name shall his horn be exalted … For ever will I keep for him My mercy, and My covenant shall stand fast with him … His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before Me,” i. e. his kingdom will be eternal among terrestrial things, as the sun among the celestial and, “As the moon establishes the world,” i. e. as the moon establishes the sublunar world, so will the kingdom of the house of David establish it.

So far he speaks of the covenant which was made with David and his seed. In the sequel he mentions the complaint. He begins by saying: “And the witness in the sky is faithful,” i. e. the witness which Thou didst place in the sky, viz. the sun and the moon, is, I see, faithful and permanent. But the thing to which it bears witness, viz. the kingdom of the seed of David, is not so, for, “Thou hast cast off and rejected, Thou hast been wroth with Thine anointed. Thou hast abhorred the covenant of Thy servant; Thou hast profaned his crown even to the ground.” He concludes this complaint, which is based upon a promise, speaking as it were in the name of the complainant: “O remember how short my time is; for what vanity hast Thou created all the children of men!” i. e. I do not wonder on my own account, for I bear in mind how short my time is, which is as nothing before Thee. Any individual man’s exile lasts only his life-time which is very little, for, “What man is he that liveth and shall not see death, that shall deliver his soul from the power of the grave?” Hence I am not complaining for myself at all. My complaint is in relation to Thy mercy and Thy faithfulness. “Where are Thy former mercies, O Lord, which Thou didst swear unto David in Thy faithfulness?”

There is possibly a hint here that if He will not fulfil the merciful promise He made to David that the Messiah will come in order that through him the human race may be perfected and attain its purpose, the whole race will have been created in vain, since it will not attain its destiny. Hence he says: “Remember how short my time is; for what vanity hast thou created all the children of men! i. e. their creation will have been in vain, since they will all die in the end, for, “What man is he that liveth and shall not see death?” And if he does not perfect his soul in life, it will not survive after death. “Where, then, are Thy former mercies, O Lord, which Thou didst swear unto David in Thy faithfulness?” This purpose can be attained only through the coming of the Messiah, when the Lord will “turn to the peoples a pure language, That they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him with one consent.” But if the Messiah does not come, the existence of the human race is in vain.

Having concluded the complaint based upon God’s promise, he takes up the other complaint, which is based upon God’s glory: “Remember, Lord, the taunt of Thy servants,” i. e. besides Thy mercy and Thy truth remember what we are enduring from all the nations. Thou shouldst be concerned about the glory of Thy name, which “Thine enemies have taunted, O Lord,” and all the many peoples which “have taunted the footsteps of Thine anointed.” The word ‘ikebot (footsteps) denotes the delay of his coming, as in the expression: “And he stayeth (ye‘akkebem) them not when. His voice is heard.” Or the word may mean the end or fate, the reference being to the kingdom of the house of David which did not have a good end. It is possible also that the words asher herefu oyebeka adonai may be translated, “who taunted Thine enemies, O Lord,” and that the expression is a euphemism for “taunted Thee, O Lord,” like the expression: “The Lord even require it at the hand of David’s enemies,” which is a euphemism for David, to whom he was speaking, as though he had said: “The Lord require it at the hand of David.” So here the meaning is: many nations have taunted Thee, saying that Thou art not able to save Israel. Hence he concludes: “Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen,” meaning, God is exalted far above the taunts of these men, as one should say, God forbid that such a defect should be ascribed to Him! Or the meaning may be simply that God is blessed and the source of good for ever, i. e. infinitely, and we must bless Him for evil as we bless Him for good. The reason is because since God is the source of good, everything which comes from Him is good or for a good purpose.

If we see an agent whose work is ordered in the best possible manner of perfection and good, we must assume that any evil that we find in any work of his must be for a good purpose. For if not, then it must be due either to weakness or inability to correct the evil, or to ignorance of the evil, or it may be that having both the knowledge and the power, he has not the will and caused the evil deliberately. But in a work of God we can not impute anything to weakness or ignorance, for, “Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; His understanding is infinite.” We must assume then that whatever He does is deliberate. But since He is absolutely good and all His works are absolutely good and perfect, we must say that any evil which we see in His works (God forbid!) is for a good purpose, though we do not understand it. Hence the Psalmist says, “Amen, and Amen,” Amen for the evil and Amen for the good, for undoubtedly all is for a good purpose even if we do not understand it.

CHAPTER 51

Perfect good can not change nor receive diminution or increase. For if it can change, it must change either to evil or to good. If it changes to evil, it is not a perfect good if it can so change, and if it changes to good, then it was not a perfect good in the first place. It is clear therefore that it can not receive increase or diminution.

Now all the sublunar existences are continually being affected and changed because they have opposite principles in them, and change and affection come only from the opposite. A thing can not be affected by itself or by its like, but only by its opposite. The opposite may be in the thing itself, as in things composed of the elements, in which the elements are opposed to each other, or it may be outside, like fire and air, which are simple, but each of them is affected by the other if it comes in contact with it, because it is the nature of opposites that each prevails over the other as far as it is able. Hence the sublunar existences change continually because they are composed of opposites. One of the ancients even thought that by reason of the change which takes place in composite things, we can not say about anything that it is the same thing that it was yesterday, as it is impossible to point to the flowing water of a river and say this is the same water that was here yesterday, for it may be that the water of yesterday was sweet and to-day’s is bitter, or vice versa.

In the same way an individual, say Reuben, changes constantly and his temperament to-day may be different from what it was yesterday, his qualities changing accordingly, for qualities follow temperament. A person the temperament of whose heart is warm is undoubtedly susceptible to anger and is irascible; and the same thing is true of the other qualities. Accordingly Reuben to-day is not the same that he was yesterday. Hence perfect good can not exist in any of the composite sublunar things because they are constantly changing, whereas the perfect good can exist only in a thing that is permanent.

Hence all the prophets and the pious men, like Elijah, R. Hanina ben Dosa and others, despised the goods of this world because they are changeable and there is not a permanent thing among them; and they cared only about the spiritual good promised to the soul, which is a permanent thing without any change. They preferred to endure pain in this world in order to obtain the delight of the spiritual world, because they knew that pleasure naturally comes after pain, as one of two opposites naturally comes when the other disappears. Thus genesis comes only after dissolution, and dissolution only after genesis. Similarly gladness comes only after sorrow, elevation only after a low state. Therefore when Israel were in Egypt in the last degree of poverty and humility, God bestowed upon them the state of elevation and honor, as we are told in the Bible: “I have surely seen the affliction of My people that are in Egypt … And I have said: I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt …” It is like genesis which naturally comes after dissolution. The genesis of the bird takes place only after the dissolution of the form of the egg, and the sprouting of the seed comes only after the dissolution of the form of the seed grain. Similarly the salvation and happiness of a nation come only after the nation has reached the last degree of lowliness, which is similar to dissolution.

This is the meaning of the biblical text: “For as the earth bringeth forth her growth …,” i.e. when the form of the seed grain has been decomposed, “so the Lord God will cause victory and glory to spring forth …,” after they have been reduced to the last stage of humility and poverty, which are similar to dissolution. Similarly rest comes only after fatigue. The wise man says: “If one seeks rest through rest, he loses rest and inherits weariness.” This idea is expressed in reference to Issachar: “For he saw a resting-place that it was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and he bowed his shoulder to bear …” The meaning is that Issachar, being desirous of rest and pleasure and seeing that the land was good to enjoy pleasure in, bowed his shoulder to bear, i. e. toiled continually so as to earn money and be able to rest afterwards. In order to be able to have pleasure later, he also leased land to till and paid a tax on it, as we read: “And became a servant under task-work.” The Rabbis say in “Rabbah de Rabbah”: “ ‘For he saw a resting-place that it was good’—‘resting-place’ is nothing else than the world to come, as is said: ‘And there the weary are at rest.’ ‘Land’ means the land of life, as is said: ‘They shall inherit the land for ever.’ ‘And he bowed his shoulder to bear’—the Torah and the commandments.”

It seems to me that they said this because we find that among the men of Issachar there were men of great wisdom, as we read: “And of the children of Issachar, men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do.” Hence they said that the resting-place which Issachar selected for himself as a possession, can refer to nothing else except the rest of the world to come. And since Issachar was very eager to have rest and enjoyment and he saw that there is no true rest except in the world to come and no real enjoyment except in the land of life, and that this rest and enjoyment can not be obtained except by laboring in wisdom and in the Torah and its commandments, as is true of all pleasure that it can be obtained only after labor and pain, he bowed his shoulder to bear—wisdom and Torah and commandments, for this is the labor that brings to that pleasure, the real pleasure and rest which do not change, and the absolute good in which there is no evil whatever.

All the pleasures and goods of this world always have some evil in them, because everything has its opposite in it or near by, as Solomon says: “There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death,” i. e.what seems to a person good is not always so, for sometimes a person thinks that a certain thing is good, and at the end of that good he will find evil immediately following it. He gives an example when he says: “Even in laughter the heart acheth; and the end of mirth is heaviness.” The meaning is: even laughter which every one regards as a good, since every one finds pleasure in it, causes heart-ache, and the end of joy is sorrow, because when one is glad and laughs, the spirits expand and go outside, causing the heart to cool off, which results at once in sorrow.

But the pleasures of the world to come are not followed by any pain or evil or change, because they are spiritual things and have no opposites. Hence there is no dissolution in them nor change nor privation. For dissolution and privation and change and diminution are due to opposites and to things composed of opposites, because every opposite seeks to prevail over and conquer the other, and when it does prevail over it, it does not rest until it destroys it completely. But at the same time the composite is destroyed, for the composite can not maintain itself or receive the form of perfection and life unless it be far from opposition. The spheres have a permanent existence and receive the form of perfection and life because there is no opposition in them. But the elements, being themselves opposites, can not exist permanently, but change into each other and do not receive the form of perfection and life. The things which are composed of the elements maintain themselves and receive the form of perfection and life as long as they are far from opposition. The more the composite approximatese quality, the greater is the degree of the life form it receives. This form persists and remains in the composite as long as it is far from opposition, i. e. when the opposite elements in it neutralize each other by their equality, so that the heat and the cold in the composite are equal. If the heat predominates, it destroys the cold, and vice versa. Similarly the relation of the other opposites must also be such that the one does not predominate over the other, but that each should have as much power to conquer the other as the latter has to conquer it. If they are mutually related in this harmonious way, the composite endures, but when the harmony disappears and the one predominates over the other, the composite is destroyed. We find, therefore, that if the power and strength of one of the opposite elements in a composite to conquer the other is equal to the power of the other to conquer it, the composite endures, while predominance of the one opposite over the other causes destruction and dissolution.

In this way we explain the verse: “I make peace, and create evil.” Harmony of the opposites is called peace, and is the cause of the existence and duration of the composite, as long as that equality exists, as society exists when men of various opinions agree. For if there is harmony between the irascible and the patient, the niggardly and the extravagant, and similarly in the other opposite qualities, there is virtue. This results when each of the extremes has as much power to predominate over the other as the other has to predominate over it. This is the cause of permanence and peace. Hence the Bible says: “The Lord will give strength unto His people; the Lord will bless His people with peace.” The Psalmist is praying that God should give His people strength, but not so much strength to enable one to prevail over the other and destroy him, which would be the cause of quarrel and strife. He prays that God should give them strength so as to bless His people with peace, i. e. that there should be agreement between them, that one of the extremes should not predominate over the other so as to destroy virtue and produce vice. Such agreement is called peace. And the spiritual pleasure of the soul is called peace to indicate that there is no opposition in that pleasure and hence it will not be destroyed, just as peace is a name that is given to agreement among men who do not oppose one another.

The Rabbis say: “When a righteous man departs from the world, three groups of angels come out to meet him, one says: ‘May he come in peace,’ as we read: ‘But thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace.’ ” The meaning is this: As peace is the cause of permanence in things composed of opposites, so when the soul is prepared to cleave to the celestial beings without opposition, the pleasure of the soul is called peace, to indicate eternal existence. We find also that the promise God makes to the righteous to give them continued existence is called peace. Thus God says concerning Phinehas: “Behold, I give unto him My covenant of peace.”

According to the tradition which says that Phinehas is Elijah, peace will mean permanent existence of the soul in the body. This will result if the harmony between the opposite elements continues so that the one does not predominate over the other. If there is such harmony, which is peace, the cause of dissolution disappears. This interpretation is proved by the literal meaning of the words concerning him: “My covenant was with him of life and peace.” And the words: “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet,” show that Elijah still exists in body and soul.

According to those of our Rabbis who have a different opinion and say that Phinehas is not Elijah, the peace that is promised to Phinehas alludes to the peace of the soul’s rest in the world to come, in which there is no opposition. This is proved by the words of the Bible in reference to the punishment of the wicked: “There is no peace, saith my God, concerning the wicked.” Now the life of the wicked in this world is not devoid of quiet and tranquillity any more than is that of the righteous. The reference is undoubtedly to the peace of the soul in the spiritual world, in which there is no opposition, and concerning which we read: “Great peace have they that love Thy law.”

And since the word peace denotes essentially a thing in which there is no opposition, our Rabbis apply it to God, as in the statement: “Great is peace, for it is the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, as is said: ‘And called it “Adonai-shalom” (The Lord is peace).’ ” All existing things outside of God being effects, may have some opposition in them, for example the first effect is both a necessary and a possible existent; it is a necessary existent in relation to its cause, and a contingent or possible existent in relation to itself. Hence it can not be termed peace from every point of view. But God has not in Him any possibility of existence at all, He is a necessary existent from every point of view. Hence He is called peace, because no form of opposition is conceivable in Him. His existence is therefore peace and truth.

Now inasmuch as peace denotes both the spiritual delight in the celestial world which is far from opposition, viz. the world to come, the essential reward of the soul, and the peace of the body in this world, which is the cause of reward in the world to come, the text says at the end of the priestly benediction: “And give thee peace,” alluding to both kinds of peace, in this world and in the world to come. In the beginning it says:

“The Lord bless thee, and keep thee,” referring to material prosperity and material acquisition. Then it says: “The Lord make His face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee,” referring to the happiness of wisdom and the perfection of the Torah, which are called “light:” “For the commandment is a lamp and the Torah is light;” and: “A man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine.” “And be gracious unto thee,” refers to intellectual perfection, as Moses said: “That I may know Thee, to the end that I may find grace in Thy sight.”

But inasmuch as these two kinds of happiness are opposed to each other, i. e. material prosperity is opposed to perfection of wisdom and Torah, which are the causes of the perfection of the soul and of reward in the world to come and of finding grace in the eyes of God, it says at the end: “And give thee peace,” as an indication that peace is necessary in order to obtain spiritual peace. For since man is composed of two opposite powers, a material and a spiritual, human perfection can not be attained unless there be peace and harmony between them, each one being given its proper share. In this way spiritual peace may be attained.

And since eternal spiritual reward of the soul can not be obtained except through absolute mercy, as was said before, it was necessary to mention lifting up of the countenance: “The Lord lift up His countenance upon thee.” Then in order to indicate the spiritual reward which comes from the lifting up of countenance, he adds: “And give thee peace,” to indicate that the final good of all for the human race is the spiritual reward of the soul, which is called peace. David also says: “Mark the man of integrity, and behold the upright; for there is a future for the man of peace.”

We have now completed what we intended to say in this book. Praise be to God, the giver of power and strength, who has helped us until now. He is raised and exalted above all blessing and praise.

FINISH

INDICES

INDEX OF SOURCES

Aaron Halevi

Abraham ben David of Posquières

Abulafia, Meir ben Todros Halevi

Acts of the Apostles

Alfarabi

Algazali

Alkabitius

Treatise on Distances

Aristotle

Physics

De Caelo et Mundo

Meteorologics

De Anima

On Animals

Metaphysics

Ethics

Politics

Averroes

Destructio Destructionis

Avicenna

Canon

Bal‘am, Abu Zakarya Yahya (R. Judah) Ibn

Baraita

Bereshit Rabbah

Bible

Brethren of Purity

Treatise on Animals

Chiquitilla, Moses Ibn

Crescas, Hasdai

Or Adonai

Epicureans

Epicurus

Euclid

Optics

Concerning the Heavy and the Light

Esther Rabbete

Galipapa, Hayim

Epistle of Redemption

Gerondi, Nissim ben Reuben

Hai Gaon

Hippocrates

Book of Chapters (= Aphorisms)

Ibn Ezra, Abraham

Commentary on Pentateuch

Book on Nativities

Ibn Janah

Jerome

Jonathan ben Uzziel

Targum

Judah Halevi

Cusari

Kimhi, David

Book of Roots

Luke, Gospel of

Maimonides

Guide of the Perplexed

Commentary on the Mishnah

Sefer ha-Madda‘, i. e. the first of the 14 books comprising the rabbinical code called Mishneh Torah or Yad ha-Hazakah

Hilkot Teshubah, the last division of the Sefer ha-Madda‘

Hilkot ‘Abodah Zarah, the fourth division of the Sefer ha-Madda‘

Sefer Shofetim, the 14th book of the Yad ha-Hazakah

Shemonah Perakim, the introduction to Maimonides’ commentary on the Mishnah Abot

Pirke Mosheh

Mani

Matthew, Gospel of

Mekilta

Midrash Hazit

Midrash R. Nehunyah ben Hakanah

Midrash Shir ha-Shirim

Mishnah

Abot

Middot

Oholot

Moses ha-Lavi

Nahmanides

Commentary on the Pentateuch

Derashah

Sha‘ar ha-Gemul

Onkelos

Perek Shirah

Pirke de-Rabbi Eliezer

Plato

Rabbah de Rabbah

Rashi

Commentary on Pentateuch

Saadia

Emunot ve-Deot

Seder Eliyahu

Sifra

Sifre

Spanish History

Talmud, Babylonian

‘Abodah Zarah

‘Arakin

Baba Kamma

Baba Mezi‘a

Baba Batra

Berakot

‘Ediyot

‘Erubin

Hagigah

Horayot

Hullin

Ketubot

Kiddushin

Makkot

Megillah

Mo‘ed Katan

Nazir

Nedarim

Niddah

Pesahim

Rosh Hashanah

Sanhedrin

Semahot

Shabbat

Shebu‘ot

Soferim

Sotah

Sukkah

Ta‘anit

Temurah

Yebamot

Yoma

Talmud Jerusalem

Bezah

Tosafot

Tosefta

Vayyikra Rabbah

Yalkut Reubeni

Yalkut Shim‘oni

Yelammedenu

Yezirah, Sefer

Yosippon

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. EDITIONS

1. Soncino 1485, ed. pr.

2. Salonica 1520.

3. Venice 1521.

4. Rimini, Soncino, 1522.

5. Venice 1544.

6. Lublin 1597.

7. ‎‎‬‬ספר עץ שתול … והוא ספר עקרים … עם ביאור מוהר׳ גדליה בן ההר׳ שלמה ליפשיץ, Venice 1618.

8. Frankfort on the Oder 1788. With Gedaliah’s commentary.

9. Sudzilkow 1835. With Gedaliah’s commentary.

10. Pressburg 1853. With Gedaliah’s commentary.

11. Warsaw 1870. With Gedaliah’s commentary.

12. Warsaw 1877. With Gedaliah’s commentary.

13. Berlin 1928. With Gedaliah’s commentary.

II. TRANSLATIONS

LATIN

1. R. Josephi Albonis, R. Davidis Kimhi et alius cujusdam hebraei anonymi argumenta, quibus nonnullos fidei christianae articulos oppugnant. G. Genebrardo Ba. Theologo interprete, ad eorum singulas disputationes ejusdem interpretis responsa ect. Paris 1566.

[Published with corrections by Claudius Mai.]

2. Libri II cap. 2 et 3, profundissima pariter et theologis Philosophisque utilissima de voluntate Dei nova, quam vocant, et antiqua exercitii gratia Latinitate donata a Christoph. von Staemmen. Leipzig 1661.

ENGLISH

3. An English translation of the greater part of the Sefer ‘Ikkarim appeared in the Hebrew Review, Old Series, volumes I–III, London 1834–36.

GERMAN

4. Buch Ikkarim, Grund-und Glaubens-Lehren der Mosaischen Religion … in’s Deutsche übertragen, von Dr. W. Schlessinger und Dr. Ludw. Schlesinger, Frankfurt a. M. 1844.

ITALIAN

5. I Dogmi, Trattato Dogmatico Filosofico di Giuseppe Albo, Versione di Moise Sorani, Roma 1878.

[Translation of part I only.]

III. ABRIDGMENTS

1. נבחר מחרוץ, an abridgment of the ‘Ikkarim, by Elijah ben Moses Gershon, Zolkiew 1772.

2. תוכחת חיים על תהלים ואיוב, taken from Joseph Albo’s ‘Ikkarim, Fürth 1805.

3. הפרק כ״ה ממאמר ג׳ לספר העיקרים, ed. by Giuseppe Jaré, Livorno, 1876.

IV. COMMENTARIES

אהל יעקב והוא פירוש וביאור לספר עקרי האלבו, Jacob Koppelman, Freiburg 1584.—Another edition, Cracow 1599.

V. LITERATURE

1. Samuel Back, Joseph Albo’s Bedeutung in der Geschichte der Jüdischen Religionsphilosophie, Breslau 1869.

2. Phil. Bloch, in Winter und Wünsche, Geschichte der Jüd. Lit., II, 787–790. Berlin 1897.

3. N. Brüll, Jahrbücher, IV, 52, Frankfurt A. M. 1879.

4. Moritz Eisler, Vorlesungen über die Jüdischen Philosophen des Mittelalters, III, 186–234. Wien 1870–83.

5. M. H. Friedlander, in Jeschurun, Halbmonatschrift für Pädagogik, Homiletik und Litteratur IV, 667. Berlin, 1894–97.

6. Genkel, G., Russian Jewish Encyclopedia II, 116–122.

7. Graetz, Gesch. d. Juden, VIII, 167–176. 3rd ed., Leipzig 1890.

8. J. Guttmann, Die Stellung Durans in d. Gesch. d. jüd. Religions-Philosophie, Monatsschrift, 1908, pp. 649 ff.

9. Emil G. Hirsch, in Jewish Encyclopedia, I, 324–327.

10. Isaac Husik, A History of Mediaeval Jewish Philosophy, New York 1916, pp. 406–427.

11. Heinrich Jaulus, Simeon ben Zemach Duran, Monatsschrift f. G. u. W. d. J., 1874, pp. 457–463.

12. M. Joel, Don Chasdai Creskas’ Religionsphilosophische Lehren, Breslau 1866, pp. 76–81.

13. Gustav Karpeles, Geschichte der Jüdischen Literatur, Berlin 1886, pp. 815–818.

14. (a) S. Munk, La Philosophie chez les Juifs, Paris 1848, p. 37.

(b) S. Munk, Mélanges de Philosophie Juive et Arabe, Paris 1859, pp. 506–7.

(c) Philosophie und philosophische Schriftsteller der Juden, aus dem Französischen des S. Munk, von Dr. B. Beer, Leipzig 1852, pp. 35–36.

(d) Philosophy and Philosophical Authors of the Jews, by S. Munk, translated by Dr. Isidor Kalisch, Cincinnati 1881, p. 35.

15. Conspectus Theologiae Judaicae ex Jos. Albo etc., per W. H. F. Pertschium. [Jena] 1720.

16. S. Schechter, Studies in Judaism, Philadelphia, 1896, pp. 171–172; The Dogmas of Judaism, Jewish Quarterly Review, Old Series, I, 120, London 1889.

17. Ludwig Schlesinger, Historische Einleitung zu R Jos. Albo’s Buche Ikkarim, Frankfurt, a. M. 1844.

18. I. Sonne, Albo, Josef, Encyclopaedia Judaica, vol. II, 125–132, Berlin 1928.

19. A. Tänzer, Die Religionsphilosophie Josef Albo’s Ikkarim, I. Theil, Frankfurt a. M. 1896.

20. Weiss, Dor Dor ve-Doreshav, Wilna 1904, V, 212–220.

21. Leop. Wollner, in Populär-Wissenschaftliche Monatblätter zur Belehrung über d. Judenthum, Frankfurt a. M., XV, 134.

22. Biographical Sketch of Rabbi Joseph Albo, Hebrew Review, New Series, London 1859–60, I, 442–445.

VI. REFERENCES

Steinschneider, Catalogus Libr. Hebr. in Bibliotheca Bodleiana, Part II, 1442–1445.

LIST OF BIBLICAL PASSAGES

GENESIS

1, 1: I, 101—1, 2: IV2, 304—1, 4: II, 27, 195—1, 5: II, 112—1, 10: II, 27—1, 12: II, 27—1, 14: II, 113; IV1, 15—1, 17: II, 113—1, 18: II, 27—1, 20: IV1, 197—1, 21: II, 27—1, 24: IV1, 197; IV2, 294—1, 25: II, 19, 21—1, 26: I, 5, 110; IV1, 86—1, 27: I, 111—1, 29: III, 118—1, 31: I, 12; II, 27, 118; IV2, 286—1–6, 8: I, 100.

2, 1: I, 102—2, 4: I, 101, 103, 105—2, 7: III, 294; IV2, 295—2, 16: I, 103, 149; III, 61—2, 17: IV2, 398, 412—2, 19: I, 103—2, 20: IV2, 398.

3, 1: IV1, 266—3, 12: IV1, 238—3, 17: IV1, 238—3, 22: IV2, 400.

4, 1: I, 103, 105—4, 4: III, 132—4, 5: I, 134—4, 6: III, 133—4, 7: I, 108; III, 129; IV1, 253—4, 13: IV1, 188—4, 20: I, 107—4, 21: I, 107—4, 22: I, 107.

5, 1: I, 106, 108, 109, 117, 195; III, 253, 254—5, 3: III, 129, 134.

6, 6: II, 82; IV1, 205—6, 7: II, 83—6, 8: I, 100; II, 83—6, 13: IV2, 355.

8, 21: II, 126; III, 136; IV1, 267; IV2, 382.

9, 3: III, 118, 136—9, 6: I, 114.

11, 6: II, 54.

12, 1: III, 314—12, 1–2: IV1, 94; IV2, 404—12, 11: IV1, 127—12, 17: IV1, 94.

15, 1: I, 31; IV2, 362, 380—15, 6: I, 176; IV2, 363—15, 9–10: IV2, 441—15, 13–14: IV2, 445—15, 14: IV2, 445—15, 15: IV2, 494—15, 17: IV2, 441—15, 18: IV2, 441, 446.

16, 10: II, 181.

17, 7: IV2 447—17, 17: II, 98—17, 23: II, 118.

18, 10: II, 181—18, 21: III, 200.

19, 21: IV1, 102.

20, 3: I, 82; IV1, 94–20, 12: I, 88.

21, 12: III, 332; IV2, 402.

22, 1: IV1, 129—22, 2: III, 155—22, 4: III, 333—22, 12: II, 181; III, 155, 295, 300, 314, 316; IV1, 127—22, 14: II, 177; III, 332.

23: III, 241—23, 1: IV1, 189.

24, 3: I, 115—24, 7: I, 115—24, 10: II, 121.

25, 7: IV1, 190—25, 21: IV1, 180.

26, 8: I, 141.

27, 33: IV1, 168, 176—27, 36: IV1, 168—27, 37: IV1, 168, 177—27, 38: IV1, 177—27, 40: IV1, 177.

28, 15: III, 235.

30, 6: IV2 445—30, 18: IV2, 489.

31, 11: II, 181—31, 13: II, 181; III, 120—31, 44: IV2, 441—31, 48: IV2, 441.

32, 30: II, 182.

34, 8: III, 346.

35, 9: II, 159.

36, 12: III, 221.

37—47: IV1, 36.

39, 5: II, 158.

41, 54: II, 120—41, 57: II, 120.

42, 21: IV1, 107—42, 28: IV1, 107.

44, 3: II, 187—44, 18: III, 240.

46, 8–27: III, 240.

47, 27: III, 240.

49, 10: III, 235; IV2, 421, 423—49, 15: I, 34; IV2, 489.

51, 1:I, 31.

Exodus

1, 5:II, 118—1, 22: IV1, 72.

2, 23—14: IV1, 183.

3, 2: II, 102, 182—3, 3: II, 194; IV1, 186—3, 4: II, 177—3, 6: II, 194—3, 7: II, 177; IV2, 488—3, 7–8: II, 83—3, 13: II, 167—3, 17: IV2, 488.

4, 6: I, 60—4, 17: IV1, 196; IV2, 342—4, 22: III, 349.

5, 6: IV2, 377.

6, 3: III, 174—6, 7: II, 182—6, 26–27: II, 170.

7, 3: I, 29.

9, 22: IV1, 196—9, 23: IV1, 27: IV1, 226, 227.

10, 1: III, 146.

12, 2: III, 142, 143, 146—12, 15: IV2, 401—12, 24: III, 138.

13, 16: III, 146—13, 21: II, 174.

14, 15: I, 156—14, 19: II, 174—14, 19–21: I, 165—14, 25: III, 74—14, 31: I, 157, 158.

15, 1: II, 87, 140, 141—15, 3: II, 141; III, 79—15, 6: II, 84, 141—15, 7: II, 141—15, 8: II, 141—15, 11: II, 140, 141—15, 12–13: II, 140—15, 23ff: IV2 408—15, 25: I, 156; IV2, 408—15, 26: IV2, 409.

16, 7: II, 178; IV1, 78—16, 10: II, 102—16, 29: III, 231.

17, 5: IV1, 195—17, 6: IV1, 195—17, 15: I, 13; 11, 176.

18: III, 164—18, 10: II, 157.

19, 1: III, 142—19, 5: III, 348—19, 9: I, 158, 162; III, 101, 175, 179.

20: III, 164—20, 1: I, 105—20, 2: I, 105, 128; III, 163, 170, 246—20, 3: I, 128, 129; II, 183; III, 164, 247—20, 3–5; I, 58, 125–20, 4: I, 129; III, 164, 247—20, 5: I, 129; III, 164—20, 6: I, 129; IV2, 363—20, 7: III, 168, 247—20, 8: III, 247—20, 11: III, 168, 249—20, 12: III, 251—20, 13: III, 252—20, 19: III, 180—20, 20: IV1, 124, 125—20, 20–23: III, 165—20, 21: III, 166—20, 24: III, 166.

21, 6: III, 140.

22, 2: III, 206, 210.

23, 2: III, 204—23, 2–3: IV2, 364—23, 5: II, 4—23, 16: II, 159; III, 142—23, 20–21: IV2, 364—23, 25: II, 159; III, 229; IV1, 181—23, 26: IV1, 182—23, 27: IV1, 183.

24, 1: II, 179—24, 7: IV1, 125—24, 10: II, 177—24, 11: II, 177; III, 154; IV2, 385—24, 17: II, 102, 178.

25, 21: III, 192.

29, 43: III, 231—29, 45: II, 101.

31, 16–17: II, 65—31, 17: II, 65; III, 138, 249—31, 18: II, 84.

32, 7: III, 107; IV1, 139—32, 13: IV1, 102, 181.

33, 3: I, 31—33, 11: III, 94, 100, 152—33, 13: II, 134, 198; III, 24, 224; IV2, 497—33, 16: I, 20; III, 185—33, 17: III, 185—33, 18: II, 5, 178—33, 20: II, 5, 177, 178; III, 151, 188, 223—33, 23: II, 2, 96; III, 188.

34, 6: I, 60; II, 49, 134—34, 6f.: II, 133—34, 22: III, 142—34, 24: III, 227—34, 28: III, 208—34, 30; II, 195.

35, 1–38, 20: IV2, 338.

38, 8: III, 83.

40, 38: III, 99.

Leviticus

5, 5: IV1, 236.

7, 25; IV2, 401.

8: IV2, 427.

9, 23: II, 178; III, 231—9, 24: III, 231.

11, 43: III, 130.

13: IV2, 337.

16, 1–18, 30: IV2, 390.

17, I: III, 147—17, 7: III, 65.

18, 3: IV2, 390—18, 5: IV2, 390—18, 29: IV2, 401.

19, 8: I, 194—19, 12: II, 4—19, 13: IV1, 5—19, 14: III, 229, 243—19, 17: III, 237—19, 18: III, 229, 243, 253; IV2, 443—19, 19: III, 172—19, 32: III, 295.

20, 17: IV1, 205.

22, 7: IV2, 421—22, 9: III, 172—22, 32: II, 4; III, 333.

23, 14: III, 138—23, 27: III, 142—23, 31: III, 138—23, 40: III, 125.

24, 3: III, 141.

25, 21: III, 227; IV2, 385.

26, 3: IV2, 387–26, 3ff.: IV2, 387–26, 23: IV1, 228–26, 23–24: IV1, 98–26, 31: IV2, 341—26, 40: IV1, 236.

27, 34: III, 108, 191.

Numbers

3, 13: IV2, 433—3, 39: III, 201.

5, 7: IV1, 236.

6, 11: I, 85—6, 23: II, 173—6, 24: IV2, 497—6, 25: IV2, 497—6, 26: IV2, 496, 498—6, 27: II, 173.

7, 89: III, 95.

8, 25: III, 140.

9, 8: III, 95—9, 10: III, 95.

10, 11: III, 142—10, 35—36: II, 175.

11, 7: IV1, 134—11, 15: III, 200—11, 17: III, 103—11, 27: III, 103—11, 29: III, 103.

12, 6: III, 83, 89, 176, 183—12, 6f.: III, 78—12, 6–8: III, 152—12, 8: II, 2; III, 76, 151, 223.

14, 1: II, 119—14, 10: II, 119—14, 13—16: IV2, 459—14, 20: IV1, 213; IV2, 459—14, 21–23: IV2, 459.

15, 31: I, 49; IV2, 307—15, 38: IV1, 146—15, 39: III, 125.

16, 29–32: IV1, 200—16, 33: I, 187.

19: III, 172—19, 2: III, 242—19, 11: III, 261—19, 13: III, 261—19, 15: III, 260.

20, 8: IV1, 195—20, 10: IV1, 193—20, 12: I, 176; IV1, 185, 197—20, 14: IV1, 230—20, 17: IV1, 229—20, 19: IV1, 230—20, 20: IV1, 229, 230—20, 24: IV1, 197.

22, 12: II, 157.

23, 10: III, 226—23, 22: III, 73—23: 23: III, 73.

24, 17: IV2, 424.

25, 3: IV1, 149—25, 12: IV2 494—25, 17: III, 261.

26, 9: II, 170.

27, 5: III, 95—27, 7: III, 95—27, 18: IV1, 171.

28, 8: III, 209—28, 11: IV2, 426.

29, 1: III, 142–29, 7: III, 142.

Deuteronomy

1, 10: III, 214—1, 17: IV1, 247.

2, 28: IV1, 230—2, 30: I, 29; IV1, 228, 229.

3, 23: III, 126—3, 23 ff: I, 27—3, 23–26: IV1, 184—3, 24: IV1, 186, 189—3, 26–28: IV1, 191—3, 29: IV1, 191.

4, 1: IV1, 191—4, 3–7: IV1, 192—4, 4: I, 175—4, 7: I, 176; IV1, 68, 193—4, 15: II, 84; III, 225; IV2, 385—4, 19: III, 161—4, 24: II, 214—4, 30: IV1, 235—4, 33: I, 167.

5, 4: III, 76, 100—5, 7–9: I, 125—5, 8: IV2, 385—5, 10: IV2, 363—5, 12: III, 247—5, 15: III, 249—5, 16: IV2, 414—5, 17: IV1, 5—5, 19: I, 105, 167; III, 100, 156, 208—5, 21: I, 157; III, 102—5, 23: III, 101—5, 26: IV1, 4—5, 27: I, 159, 162—5, 27–28: III, 178.

6, 3: IV1, 130—6, 4: I, 10, 23, 128; II, 58, 81; III, 202—6, 5: III, 229, 243, 319, 325—6, 9: IV1, 146—6, 13: III, 229, 295.

7, 6–7: III, 347—7, 7: I, 24; III, 346—7, 9: IV2, 363—7, 10: IV1, 100; IV2, 361—7, 11: III, 126—7, 12: III, 339; IV1, 130—7, 12ff.: IV2, 388—7, 12–11, 25: IV2, 388—7, 15: IV2, 410.

8, 2: IV1, 124—8, 3: IV2, 386, 411—8, 4: IV2, 386—8, 17: IV2, 449.

9, 5–6: III, 347—9, 7: IV1, 194—9, 10: III, 156—9, 14: IV1, 180.

10, 4: III, 156—10, 12: I, 22; III, 296—10, 16; I, 51; III, 243—10, 17: II, 135—10, 19: III, 237—10, 20: III, 295—10, 22: III, 240.

11, 13: IV1, 177; IV2, 387—11, 21: IV2, 288—11, 26: III, 121—11, 26—16, 17: IV2, 391.

12, 11: II, 101—12, 20: III, 137—12, 25: III, 257—12, 29: III, 121—12, 30: III, 125.

13, 1: III, 120, 126—13, 4: IV1, 119, 125, 126.

14, 1: IV2, 391—14, 12: III, 101—14, 21: III, 237—14, 29: III, 11; IV1, 48, 49, 179—14, 33: III, 102.

15, 10: III, 304; IV2, 389, 394—15, 14: III, 260—15, 16: IV1, 179.

16, 17: III, 121—16, 22: III, 119.

17, 11: III, 204, 252—17, 11–12: I, 168—17, 17: IV1, 247—17, 18: III, 178—17, 20: IV1, 248.

18, 10–11: III, 67—18, 12: III, 67—18, 13: III, 69—18, 14: III, 68—18, 15: III, 68, 169; IV2, 413—18, 18: III, 182—18, 22: I, 160.

20, 5: IV1, 5—20, 16: III, 238—20, 19: IV1, 230—20, 20: IV1, 230.

21, 1–9: IV1, 248—21, 4: IV1, 248—21, 17: IV1, 172.

22, 6–7: I, 124; IV2, 279—22, 7: IV1, 179; IV2, 389, 414—22, 8: IV1, 5, 49.

23, 8: III, 222—23, 17: III, 237—23, 21: III, 219, 238.

24, 7: III, 211—24, 15: III, 260.

26, 1–29, 8: IV2, 387—26, 17: III, 160.

28, 3: II, 157—28, 4: II, 159—28, 9: II, 133; III, 255, 277—28, 36: III, 197; IV2, 387—28, 47–48: III, 305—28, 49: IV2, 387—28, 57: IV2, 421—28, 58: III, 291—28, 63: III, 310.

29, 9: IV1, 221—29, 15–17: IV1, 126—29, 29: III, 201.

30: IV1, 221—30, 2: IV1, 221—30, 6: IV1, 235—30, 9: III, 310—30, 10: IV1, 222—30, 11–14: IV1, 222—30, 14: IV1, 222—30, 15: I, 60; IV2, 386—30, 15–19: I, 95; IV1, 223—30, 15–20: IV1, 221—30, 19: IV2, 386—30, 20: IV1, 163, 221, 224.

31, 12: III, 227—31, 17: II, 146.

32: IV2, 393—32, 5: II, 29—32, 6: III, 342, 344—32, 7: I, 168—32, 15: IV1, 114—32, 37–38: IV1, 155; IV2, 455—32, 39; I, 27; II, 118; IV1, 154, 156; IV2, 345, 352—32, 46–47: IV2, 393—32, 49–50: IV1, 203—32, 51: IV1, 204.

33, 2: I, 78, 169—33, 21: I, 68—33, 19; IV2, 422.

34, 6: IV1, 191—33, 10: I, 20, 183; III, 99, 176, 183—33, 11: III, 99—33, 12: III, 99.

Joshua

3, 11: II, 175.

5, 14: II, 184.

10, 12: IV1, 202—10, 14: IV1, 202.

24, 10: II, 158.

Judges

4, 18: IV2, 421.

5, 28: IV2, 435—5, 29–30: IV2, 435—5, 31: II, 314.

6, 14: II, 177—6, 16: II, 177, 182—6, 24: IV2, 496.

8, 16: IV2, 369.

10, 16: II, 82, 83; IV1, 205.

11, 7: IV1, 151—11, 17: IV1, 230—11, 17–21: IV2. 229.

13, 16: II, 183—13, 18: II, 183.

I Samuel

1, 22: III, 140.

2, 8: IV2, 352—2, 33: IV1, 163.

3, 3: III, 93—3, 8: III, 105—3, 14: IV1. 185—3, 19–20: I, 159; III, 73.

8, 20: IV1, 246.

9–10: IV1, 37.

10, 8: IV1, 243.

13: III, 241—13, 1–2: IV1, 241—13, 14: IV1, 243.

14, 9: IV2, 471—14, 47: IV1, 242.

15, 3: IV1, 243, 248—15, 5: IV1, 248—15, 19: IV1, 240, 249—15, 20: IV1, 240—15, 23: IV1, 240, 243—15, 24: IV1, 240, 249—15, 30: IV1, 241.

16, 6: IV2, 431—16, 7: IV2, 431.

17, 36: IV2, 481.

18, 17: IV1, 69.

20, 16: IV2, 484—20, 31: III, 330.

25, 29: IV2, 310, 333—25, 32: IV1, 95.

26, 10: IV1, 187.

28, 7f.: III, 66–28, 13: IV2, 337–28, 18–19: IV1. 244—28, 19: I, 45.

30, 26: IV1, 249.

31, 4: IV1, 188.

II SAMUEL

2, 10: IV1, 242.

7, 29: II, 160.

8, 15: IV1, 249.

12, 11: IV1, 72—12, 13: I, 29—12, 31: IV1, 249.

21, 1: IV1, 180.

24, 17: IV1, 249.

I Kings

1: IV1, 37.

2, 7: IV1, 249.

5, 11: II, 198.

6, 13: I, 59.

7, 46: I, 88.

8, 27: II, 101—8, 37: IV1, 183—8, 41–42: IV1, 183.

9, 3: II, 84.

10, 24: II, 120.

11, 12: II, 179—11, 13: II, 179—11, 16: II, 122.

13, 1: III, 155—13, 24: III, 155.

17, 1: IV1, 199—17, 22: IV2, 340.

18, 17: I, 125—18, 38: III, 231.

19, 9: II, 213—19, 10: II, 179, 213—19, 11: II, 213—19, 12: I, 14; II, 214, 216—19, 15–16: II, 217—19, 16: III, 102; IV1, 173—19, 17: II, 218.

20, 11: IV1, 124.

21, 19: IV1, 72—21, 25: IV1, 101, 164—19, 29: IV1, 101, 164.

II Kings

1, 10: I, 174; IV1, 199.

2, 9–10: IV1, 172—2, 13–14: IV1, 173.

3, 15: III, 93—3, 27: III, 124.

4, 29: IV2, 342—4, 35: IV2, 340.

5, 11: II, 102.

6, 6: IV1, 199.

7, 1: IV1, 199.

8, 9: II, 121.

13, 20: IV2, 341.

17, 24ff.: I, 126; III, 79, 197.

18, 5: III, 183.

19, 34: IV1, 186.

20, 5: IV1, 180—20, 12: I, 45.

22: III, 196.

23, 25: III, 183.

Isaiah

1, 1: IV1, 206—1, 15–16; IV1, 213.

2, 4: III, 184—2, 5: II, 187.

5, 14: III, 235—5, 16: IV2, 380.

6, 1: II, 85, 90, 177; III, 79, 151—6, 5: I, 18; II, 85; III, 153.

7, 14: III, 235.

10, 5–6: IV1, 103—10, 5–7: II, 19—10, 15: II, 18—10, 19: II, 188.

11, 10: IV1, 207—11, 16: I, 46.

12, 1: IV1, 40, 110.

19, 16: III, 74.

26, 2: IV2, 284—26, 19: IV2, 351.

30, 16: IV1, 74—30, 18: IV2, 473—30, 20: II, 95.

32, 5: III, 184—32, 14–15: III, 140—32, 17: III, 266.

33, 15: III, 283—33, 22: I, 67; III, 344.

34, 2: II, 119—34, 6: II, 119—34, 10: II, 119.

38, 1: IV1, 184—38, 5; IV1, 184.

39, 1: I, 45.

40, 11: IV1, 246—40, 25: II, 58; IV1, 155—40, 25–26: II, 41—40, 26: IV2, 291—40, 27: IV1, 19, 21—40, 28: IV1, 19—40, 30–31: IV2, 395.

41, 8: III, 314; IV1, 113, 128.

42, 5: IV1, 271—42, 13: II, 85—42, 18: III, 18—42, 21: III, 272—42, 21–22: III, 274.

43, 7: III, 344—43, 9: I, 171, 172—34, 10: I, 173—43, 11: I, 11; II, 118; IV1, 155.

44, 2: IV1, 113—44, 6: I, 11; II, 41, 114; III, 344—44, 24: IV1, 153—44, 25: II, 86—44, 26: IV1, 200.

45, 7: IV1, 153; IV2, 493—45, 17: III, 140.

46, 3: IV2, 301.

47, 13: III, 72; IV2, 432.

49, 23: IV2, 416.

50, 8: I, 68.

51, 7: II, 68.

52, 13: III, 189; IV1, 113.

53, 4: IV1, 113—53, 10: IV1, 121.

54, 5: III, 345—54, 9: IV2, 424—54, 12: IV2, 417.

55, 6–7: II, 22—55, 7: IV1, 254, 255—55, 8: I, 8—55, 8–9: II, 22—55, 10–11: II, 25.

57, 15: I, 108; III, 165—57, 16: I, 29; IV1, 271—57, 17: IV1, 271—57, 18: IV1, 272; IV2, 395—57, 21: IV2, 495.

58, 1: IV1, 237—58, 13: III, 45.

59, 20–21: I, 33; IV2, 439.

60, 3: II, 187—60, 7: III, 128—60, 17: IV2, 416—60, 21: I, 98; IV2, 362, 374, 472, 489—60, 22: IV2, 467.

61, 11: IV2, 488.

63, 4: IV2, 419—63, 9–10: III, 140—63, 15: IV1, 210—63, 16: III, 344.

64, 3: IV2, 329—64, 6: IV1, 213—64, 7: III, 343.

65, 4: IV2, 472—65, 6: IV1, 109; IV2, 376—65, 23: IV1, 48—65, 24: IV1, 158.

66, 20: IV2, 417—66, 22: IV2, 424—66, 23: IV2, 417—66, 24: IV2, 417.

Jeremiah

1, 19: I, 164.

2, 19: I, 16; III, 56—2, 20: III, 139.

3, 12: IV1, 205—3, 22: I, 53.

4, 27: II, 119.

5, 4: III, 62—5, 21–22: IV1, 61—5, 23–24: IV1, 67.

7, 7: IV1, 34—7, 22f.: II, 127—7, 22–23: III, 230—7, 31: I, 18; III, 123.

8, 6: IV1, 236—8, 7: III, 62.

9, 22: III, 48—9, 22–23: I, 15—9, 23: I, 144; II, 145; III, 49.

10, 2: IV1, 33—10, 10: II, 169.

11, 19: IV1, 142.

12, 1: IV1, 52, 132, 140; IV2, 477—12, 3: IV1, 54—12, 8: IV2, 212.

13, 15: IV1, 206—13, 16: III, 345—13, 17: IV1, 206.

17, 5: IV2, 454.

19, 5: III, 123.

22, 16–17: III, 51.

23, 6: II, 176—23, 7: III, 147—23, 24: III, 80.

28, 1: IV2, 438—28, 15: I, 160—28, 16: I, 160—28, 17: I, 160.

30, 9: II, 175.

31, 2: III, 351—31, 8: III, 349—31, 15: III, 236—31, 16–18: III, 236—31, 19: III, 350—31, 33: III, 181—31, 35: II, 187—31, 35–36: IV2, 426.

32, 18: IV2, 376—32, 19: I, 134; II, 72, 73.

34, 18: IV2, 441.

44, 18: III, 161.

51, 20: IV1, 103.

Ezekiel

1, 3: III, 107—1, 22: III, 27—1, 27: II, 214—1, 28: I, 14; II, 192, 194.

3, 9: IV1, 234—3, 12: II, 92, 102—3, 12–13: II, 213.

4, 4: III, 239—4, 4–6: IV1, 113.

8, 12: III, 159; IV1, 79.

13, 2: III, 89—13, 6: III, 89.

18, 20: IV1, 116—18, 23: IV1, 112, 228, 270—18, 24: IV1, 263—18, 32: IV1, 113, 228, 270.

21, 5: III, 150, 223.

25, 24: III, 195.

26, 20: IV2, 312.

28, 2: II, 88—28, 9: II, 88.

33, 13: IV1, 263—33, 19: IV1, 225—33, 21: III, 197.

37, 1: IV2, 350—37, 11: IV2, 350—37, 12: IV2, 351—37, 13–14: IV2, 351—37, 22: IV2, 415—37, 24: II, 175—37, 25: II, 175.

38 & 39: IV2, 427.

43, 2: II, 188.

45, 18: IV2, 426.

48: IV2, 427—48, 35: II, 176.

Hosea

2, 4: III, 345—2, 10: IV1, 115—2, 18: III, 345—2, 22: III, 345.

5, 15: IV1, 237.

6, 3: IV2, 462.

7, 15: IV1, 110.

11, 1: III, 349—11, 8: II, 82, 83.

12, 7: IV2, 468, 470.

14, 2: IV1, 225, 231—14, 3: IV1, 223—14, 4: IV1, 236—14, 5: I, 29; IV1, 232, 233—14, 10: III, 46, 262, 268, 280.

Joel

2, 14: IV1, 236—2, 16: III, 29.

3, 1: II, 121.

4, 2: IV2, 355—4, 3: IV1, 74—4, 7: IV1, 74—4, 8: IV1, 74.

Amos

2, 1: IV1, 74.

4, 7: IV1, 67.

6, 6: III, 298.

8, 1: III, 91.

Obadiah

1, 2: III, 310.

Jonah

2, 3: IV1, 151.

3, 8: IV1, 213—3, 10: IV1, 254.

Micah

3, 6–8: IV2, 433.

6, 6–7: IV1, 222—6, 7: IV1, 223—6, 8: I, 91; III, 283.

7, 18: I, 31; IV2, 379—7, 20: IV2, 397, 380.

Nahum

1, 2: II, 81.

Habakkuk

1, 4: IV1, 132, 141, 143—1, 12: IV1, 144—1, 13: II, 17, 129; III, 60; IV1, 132, 142—1, 18: IV1, 143.

2, 3: IV2, 473—2, 4: I, 177; II, 98; IV1, 283.

3, 3: II, 190, 191.

Zephaniah

1, 18: II, 119.

3, 9: IV2, 483.

Haggai

2, 23: IV2, 422.

Zechariah

1, 8: III, 79, 150.

3, 7: III, 52; IV2, 311, 396.

4, 2: III, 150—4, 10: II, 127.

5, 7f.: III, 150—5, 9: III, 91—5, 19: III, 95.

7, 9: I, 91.

9, 9: IV2, 415, 422, 423—9, 14: I, 67.

10, 1: IV1, 68—10, 2: III, 89.

14, 9: II, 119—14, 10: II, 120.

Malachi

1, 2: III, 339, 349—1, 6: III, 344.

2, 2: III, 345—2, 5: IV2 495—2, 17: IV1, 132.

3, 3–4: IV2, 422—3, 4: III, 139—3, 15: IV1, 132—3, 23: IV2, 430, 495.

Psalms

2: II, 100—2, 3: II, 99—2, 4: II, 99, 108—2, 8: IV1, 234—2, 11: III, 307.

3: II, 99—3, 9: IV1, 218.

5, 2: IV1, 212.

7, 6: II, 207.

8: I, 26—8, 2: IV1, 78—8, 3: IV1, 79—8, 4: II, 84; IV1, 79—8, 6: II, 68—8, 6–7: IV1, 80—8, 7: III, 13—8, 10: IV1, 81.

9, 15: I, 12—9, 16: IV1, 73—9, 17: I, 91; IV1, 73.

10, 13: II, 268—10, 17: II, 157.

11, 5: IV1, 129.

12, 7: I, 88.

14, 1: IV1, 267—14, 6: IV2, 455.

15, 1–2: III, 283—15, 2–3: III, 284—15, 2–4: III, 284—15, 3: III, 287—15, 4: III, 287—15, 5: III, 285.

16, 11: II, 151, 205.

18, 31: I, 175.

19: I, 5; III, 26—19, 2: II, 215, 216; III, 9—19, 3: III, 28—19, 4: III, 28—19, 5: III, 28—19, 6: III, 28, 29—19, 7: III, 29—19, 8: I, 21, 81, 83; III, 29, 121, 193, 243—19, 9: I, 83, 87—19, 10: I, 89, 90—19, 11: I, 92—19, 12: I, 92; III, 309.

22: I, 33—22, 2: IV2, 452—22, 6: IV2, 454—22, 7–8: IV2, 454—22, 9: IV2, 454—22, 31: IV2, 283.

24, 3: III, 285—24, 4: III, 285, 286—24, 8: II, 85.

25, 2: IV2, 454—25, 3: IV2, 457—25, 5: I, 42—25, 12: IV2, 394—25, 13: IV2, 395.

27, 4: II, 119—27, 14: IV2, 470—27, 25: II, 117.

28, 2: IV1, 212.

29, 9: II, 89—29, 10: II, 89—29, 11: I, 34; IV2, 493.

31, 20: III, 256, 291: IV2, 314—31, 22: II, 157—31, 25: IV2, 469.

32, 5: IV1, 239—32, 10: IV1, 106; IV2, 456.

33, 5: IV1, 62—33, 7: IV1, 62—33, 8–9: IV1, 62—33, 13–15: IV1, 63—33, 16: IV1, 63—33, 18: II, 127; IV2, 464.

34, 2: II, 161—34, 13: III, 256—34, 13–15: III, 256—34, 18: IV1, 214—34, 19: II, 49; III, 212.

36, 8: II, 95—36, 8–9; I, 11—36, 9: II, 95, 96, 204—36, 10: II, 48, 96—36, 11: II, 97.

37, 4: IV1, 220, 234—37, 5: IV1, 159, 220—37, 14–15: IV1, 73—37, 25: I, 11—37, 32: IV1, 270—37, 33: IV1, 270—37, 34: I, 34; IV2, 472—37, 37: IV2, 498.

40, 2–3: IV2, 466—40, 14: II, 145—40, 17: II, 94.

43, 1: IV2, 445.

44, 2–5: I, 168—44, 4: II, 188—44, 16–17: IV2, 455—44, 18: IV2, 455.

45: I, 33—45, 7: II, 121.

47, 8: III, 344.

48, 10: IV2, 471.

50, 4: IV2, 334—50, 13f.: II, 127.

51, 2: IV1, 250—51, 3: IV1, 251—51, 3–4: IV1, 252—51, 5: IV1, 237, 251—51, 6: IV1, 252—51, 8: I, 142—51, 12: III, 243; IV1, 253—51, 14: IV1, 233—51, 15: IV1, 253, 255—51, 17: IV1, 253.

55, 5: IV1, 226—55, 13: IV2, 444—55, 14: IV2, 444—55, 14–15: I, 33—55, 15: IV2, 444—55, 16: IV2, 444—55, 23: IV1, 220.

61, 5: III, 139.

62, 6: IV1, 219—62, 8: IV1, 225—62, 9: IV2, 450—62, 12: IV2, 376—62, 12–13: IV2, 375—62, 13: IV2, 376—62, 20: I, 31.

63, 9: IV1, 137.

64, 2: IV1, 211.

65, 2: I, 34; II, 141; III, 289; IV2, 471—65, 3: IV2, 471.

68, 17: III, 141—68, 18: II, 68.

71, 14: I, 33—4; IV2, 470.

72, 5: IV2, 462—72, 6: IV2, 462.

72, 11: II, 120—72, 18: IV1, 40, 214.

73: I, 26—73, 1: IV1, 133—73, 2: IV1, 131—73, 2f.: IV1, 133—73, 3: IV1, 131—73, 4: IV1, 133—73, 5–6: IV1, 133—73, 7: IV1, 134—73, 8: IV1, 134—73, 8–9: IV1, 134—73, 10: IV1, 134—73, 13: IV1, 132—73, 16–17: IV1, 135—73, 18: IV1, 136—73, 19: IV1, 136—73, 20: IV1, 136—73, 21: IV1, 137—73, 22: IV1, 137—73, 23: IV1, 137—73, 24: IV1, 137—73, 25: IV1, 135—73, 25–26: IV1, 138—73, 27: IV1, 138—73, 28: IV1, 138.

78: I, 6—78, 1: I, 151—78, 4: I, 152—78, 5: I, 152—78, 36–37: IV1, 211.

79, 8: IV1, 181—79, 9–10: IV2, 458.

80, 4: II, 188.

81, 11: IV1, 234.

83, 2: II, 129.

85, 2: II, 146—85, 4: II, 146—85, 9: IV1, 236.

86, 2: III, 257.

88, 4–5: IV2, 476—88, 11–12: IV2, 476.

89: I, 34—89, 1: IV2, 477—89, 3: IV2, 477—89, 4–5: IV2, 478—89, 6: IV2, 478—89, 7: IV2 479—89, 8: IV2, 479—89, 9: IV2, 478—89, 12–14: IV2, 479—89, 15: IV2, 479—89, 16: IV2, 480—89, 17: IV2, 480—89, 18: IV2, 480—89, 20: IV2, 481—89, 25–27: IV2, 481—89, 38: IV2, 481—89, 39–40: IV2, 482—89, 48: IV2, 482—89, 49: IV2, 482—89, 50: IV2, 476, 482—89, 51: IV2, 483—89, 51–52: IV2, 476—89, 52: IV2, 483—89, 53: IV2, 484.

90: I, 31; IV2, 365—90, 1: II, 102—90, 2: IV2, 366—90, 3: IV2, 367—90, 4: IV2, 367—90, 6: IV2, 367—90, 7–8: IV2, 368—90, 9: IV2, 368—90, 10: IV2, 368—90, 11: IV2, 369—90, 12: IV2, 369—90, 13: IV2, 370—90, 14: IV2, 370—90, 15: IV2, 370—90, 16: I, 41; IV2, 370—90, 17: I, 2, 39, 41.

91: IV1, 198—91, 1: III, 12; IV2, 371—91, 8: IV2, 372—91, 9: IV2, 371—91, 10–13: IV2, 372—91, 11: II, 68—91, 13: IV2, 372, 405—91, 14: IV2, 373—91, 14–15: IV2, 371—91, 15: II, 121; IV2, 373, 446—91, 16: III, 323.

92, 6: IV1, 81—92, 7–8: IV1, 101—92, 16: IV1, 101.

93, 1: II, 82, 87.

94, 8–9: II, 138—94, 9: II, 48—94, 9f.: II, 143—94, 12: IV1, 121.

95, 2: IV2, 480—95, 6: III, 10.

97, 11: II, 180, 196.

99, 4: IV2, 375.

100, 2: III, 305.

103: I, 12, 31; IV2, 380—103, 1: II, 139—103, 2: II, 139; III, 41—103, 3: IV2, 382—103, 3f.: II, 139—103, 4: IV2, 383—103, 6: II, 131—103, 7: II, 139—103, 9: IV2, 380—103, 10: IV2, 380—103, 11: IV2, 380—103, 12: IV2, 381—103, 13: IV2, 381—103, 14: IV2, 381—103, 15–16: IV2 382—103, 17: IV2, 382—103, 17–18: IV2, 383—103, 19: IV2, 383—103, 20: III, 42—103, 21: III, 41.

104: I, 8; II, 6—104, 2: II, 9, 196—104, 4: II, 214—104, 10: II, 9—104, 19: II, 9—104, 24: IV1, 81—104, 24–25: II, 10—104, 29–30: II, 10—104, 31: I, 11; II, 11, 90.

105, 3: II, 93—105, 4: II, 93—105, 7: II, 170—105, 8: IV2, 363.

106, 1: II, 132—106, 2: IV2, 470—106, 3: II, 132—106, 28: IV1, 150.

107, 6: IV1. 151.

111, 10: III, 298.

112, 1–2: III, 315—112, 3: III, 315—112, 5: I, 86—112, 6: I, 87.

115, 1: IV2, 463.

116, 6: IV1, 70.

119, 1: III, 255—119, 2: III, 255—119, 3: III, 255—119, 12: II, 157, 160—119, 14: I, 16; III, 57, 309—119, 49: IV2, 345, 460—119, 59: III, 57—119, 68: II, 143—119, 73: II, 84—119, 85: I, 20; III, 193—119, 86: III, 193—119, 87: III, 193—119, 106: III, 308—119, 111: III, 308—119, 112: III, 309—119, 113: III, 32—119, 160: I, 6, 150—119, 162: III, 309—119, 165: IV2, 495.

121, 2: IV1, 48.

123: I, 34—123, 1: II, 108—123, 2: IV2, 474—123, 3: IV2, 475.

126, 1: IV2, 326—126, 2: IV2, 327.

127, 1: IV1, 49.

128, 2: I, 25.

130, 2: II, 84, 127—130, 4: I, 33; IV1, 255—130, 5: I, 33—130, 5–6: IV2 461—130, 7: IV1, 156; IV2, 466—130, 8: IV2, 466.

131, 3: IV2, 472.

132, 12: III, 192.

135, 6: II, 145.

136, 25: III, 10.

138, 3: IV1, 68.

139: I, 13; II, 153—139, 2: II, 153—139, 13: II, 153—139, 16: II, 153—139, 17: II, 154—139, 18: II, 154—139, 20: III, 160.

144, 1: II, 157.

145: I, 13—145, 1: II, 162—145, 2: II, 162—145, 3: II, 162—145, 4: II, 162—145, 6: II, 164—145, 7: II, 164—145, 9: II, 143—145, 10: II, 164—145, 11—12: II, 85—145, 13: II, 85—145, 18: IV1, 214—145, 19: IV1, 214—145, 20: IV1, 214—145, 21: II, 162.

146, 7: III, 148; IV1, 70—146, 8: III, 339.

147: I, 20; III, 211—147, 1: III, 211—147, 2: III, 212, 215—147, 3: III, 212—147, 4: III, 213—147, 5: III, 213; IV2, 485—147, 6: III, 215—147, 8: III, 215; IV1, 67—147, 10: III, 215—147, 11: III, 215; IV2, 458—147, 12: III, 215—147, 19: III, 215—147, 20: III, 215.

148, 6: III, 294; IV2, 381, 426.

149, 4: II, 145—149, 5: IV1, 207; IV2, 310.

Proverbs

2, 4: I, 23—2, 4–5: III, 312—2, 6: I, 142; II, 86; III, 207—2, 10—12: I, 144, 145—2, 12—13: I, 145.

3, 12: IV1, 121, 122—3, 18: I, 104.

4, 18: III, 268; IV2, 324—4, 19: III, 268—4, 22: III, 117.

6, 6: III, 11—6, 16: III, 286—6, 23: I, 21; II, 187; III, 267; IV2, 497—6, 30: III, 206—6, 31: III, 206—6, 32: III, 206—6, 33–35: III, 207.

8, 17: IV, 235.

9: III, 141.

10, 22: II, 158—10, 27: I, 23; III, 314.

11, 7: I, 177; IV2, 395—11, 28: IV2, 454.

12, 22: IV2, 438—12, 32: IV2, 490.

13, 9: II, 188—13, 12: IV2, 468—13, 22: IV1, 103.

14, 12: IV2, 464—14, 13: IV2, 491—14, 32: I, 177; IV2, 395.

15, 15: IV2, 321—15, 29: II, 49—15, 31: III, 17.

16, 4: II, 118—16, 5: II, 85—16, 15: II, 187—16, 25: IV2, 464.

18, 14: III, 212.

19, 3: IV1, 107—19, 6: IV2, 349—19, 23: III, 315.

20, 12: III, 16—20, 24: IV2, 464—20, 27: IV2, 343.

21, 10: III, 55—21, 15: III, 311.

22, 28: III, 139.

24, 11: II, 88—24, 17: III, 310.

25, 10: IV1, 205—25, 26: IV1, 143.

26, 18: IV1, 73.

28, 13: IV1, 238.

29, 7: IV1, 91.

30, 4: IV2, 339—30, 9: IV1, 217.

31, 6: III, 277—31, 7: III, 184.

JOB

1, 1: IV1, 119—1, 9: IV1, 55, 120—1, 10: IV1, 120.

3, 17: IV2, 489—3, 20: I, 140.

4, 17: III, 42—4, 18: III, 42—4, 19: III, 43.

5, 2: III, 43, 109—5, 8–11: III, 64—5, 12–16: III, 71—5, 17–18: III, 43.

6, 20: IV2, 454.

7, 17: III, 160—7, 17–18: IV1, 86.

9, 4: III, 82—9, 12: III, 89, 154—9, 22–24: III, 51—9, 33: III, 82.

10, 2: III, 48—10, 3: III, 87—10, 22: IV2, 323.

11, 12: III, 325—11, 13–15: IV1, 165.

12, 3: III, 325—12, 6: I, 141—12, 10: III, 325.

13, 7–11: III, 303—13, 12: III, 303.

15, 14: IV1, 185—15, 20: IV1, 106.

21, 7: IV1, 160—21, 15: IV1, 160, 166—21, 16–17: IV1, 161.

22, 13–14: IV1, 166—22, 15–17: IV1, 167—22, 23: IV1, 167—22, 25: IV1, 167—22, 27: IV1, 167—22, 28: IV1, 199.

23, 13: IV1, 82.

26, 12: IV1, 61.

27, 17: IV1, 103.

28, 12: I, 15; III, 22—28, 26: IV1, 65—28, 28: III, 298.

29, 17: IV1, 247.

31, 23: III, 302—31, 33: IV1, 238.

32, 2: III, 54.

33, 15–16: IV1, 75—33, 15–17: IV1, 96—33, 17: IV1, 75—33, 18: IV1, 75—33, 19: IV1, 96—33, 26: IV1, 96—33, 27: IV1, 96.

34: I, 26—34, 10: III, 271; IV1, 82—34, 11: IV1, 83—34, 12: IV1, 83—34, 13: IV1, 84—34, 14: IV1, 84—34, 16–19: IV1, 85—34, 19: IV1, 85—34, 20: IV1, 85—34, 21–22: IV1, 86.

35, 6: IV2, 359—35, 7: IV2, 359, 376—35, 11: I, 14; III, 7.

36, 5: IV1, 87, 193—36, 6–10: IV1, 88—36, 8–10; IV1, 97—36, 11–13: IV1, 97—36, 14: IV1, 98—36, 15: IV1, 98, 110—36, 28: IV1, 64, 68.

37, 4: IV2, 483—37, 18: IV1, 78—37, 27ff.: III, 215.

38, 4: IV1, 58—38, 5: IV1, 59—38, 6: IV1, 60—38, 7: IV1, 60—38, 8: IV1, 60—38, 10: IV1, 60—38, 10–11: IV1, 60—38, 15: IV1, 71—38, 28: IV1, 65—38, 36: I, 6, 141; IV1, 77.

39, 1: IV1, 77—39, 5: IV1, 77—39, 19: IV1, 77.

40, 8: IV1, 55, 89—40, 32: IV2, 465.

41, I, IV1, 89—41, 3: II, 109, 130; IV1, 146—41, 39: IV1, 77.

42, 2: III, 56, 90—42, 6: III, 56—42, 7: III, 54—42, 10: III, 167.

Canticles

1, 2: III, 180.

2, 3: III, 12—2, 14: I, 15; III, 11, 17.

3, 10: IV2, 310.

7, 7: I, 23; III, 328.

8, 7: III, 336—8, 9: IV2, 306.

Ruth

1, 2: IV1, 112—1, 5: IV1, 112.

Lamentations

3, 17ff.: IV2, 465—3, 25: IV2, 457—3, 31–32: IV2, 465—3, 38: II, 74—3, 40: IV1, 47, 120.

4, 21: IV2, 429—4, 22: IV2, 428.

5, 7: IV1, 116.

Ecclesiastes

1, 7: III, 47—1, 10: III, 140.

2, 1: III, 9, 47—2, 3: III, 47—2, 14: II, 188.

3, 9: III, 292—3, 10: III, 292—3, 11: III, 292—3, 12: III, 293—3, 13: III, 293—3, 14: III, 293—3, 15: IV1, 74—3, 19: I, 15; III, 22.

4, 3: IV2, 286—4, 17: III, 334.

5, 1: II, 103; IV1, 210, 217—5, 2: IV1, 210, 217—5, 12: IV1, 106.

7, 1: III, 20—7, 20: III, 270; IV1, 52; IV2, 374.

8, 1: II, 188; IV2, 497—8, 11: IV1, 105—8, 12: IV1, 105—8, 14: IV1, 132.

9, 7: IV1, 265—9, 8: IV1, 265—9, 9: IV1, 265—9, 10: IV1, 266—9, 11: IV1, 266.

11, 7: II, 187.

12, 7: III, 244—12, 12: IV1, 207—12, 13: III, 47.

Esther

1, 1: I, 170—1, 13: I, 78.

8, 16: II, 187—8, 17: IV2, 349.

9, 14: I, 78.

Daniel

2, 21: IV1, 251; IV2, 331—2, 22: II, 195—2, 46: III, 162.

3, 19–30: I, 157.

4, 14: II, 87—4, 22: II, 87—4, 24: IV2, 407.

5, 20: II, 87.

7, 5: IV2, 419—7, 6: IV2, 420—7, 9: III, 79; IV2, 418—7, 10: II, 68—7, 13: IV2, 423—7, 18: IV2, 418—7, 19: IV2, 420—7, 25: IV2, 418.

8, 21: IV2, 420.

9, 13: II, 171—9, 18: IV1, 146—9, 21: II, 68.

10, 3: IV1, 213—10, 5: III, 79—10, 6: III, 75, 79—10, 12: IV1, 158, 214—10, 21: II, 68.

11, 2: IV2, 420—11, 30: IV2, 428.

12, 2: IV2, 348, 350—12, 3: IV2, 301—12, 13: IV2, 354.

Ezra

1, 2: IV2, 420—1, 4: IV2, 417.

6, 4: IV2, 416.

8, 15: III, 158.

I Chronicles

4, 23: IV2, 304.

12, 32: IV2, 490.

16, 10: II, 93—16, 27: II, 92; IV1, 206—16, 35: IV1, 187.

21, 13: IV1, 141—21, 26: III, 231.

29, 11: II, 86—29, 12: II, 86—29, 14: II, 86.

II CHRONICLES

7, 1: III, 231.

20, 20: I, 177.

21, 12: IV1, 174.

26, 23: IV2, 420.

32, 20–21: IV1, 180—32, 25: IV1, 129—32, 31: IV1, 129.

LIST OF RABBINICAL PASSAGES

MISHNAH

Demai IV, 6: IV2, 470.

Sanhedrin IV, 7: III, 143

XI: I, 36, 44, 56, 60, 98; III, 120; IV2, 306.

Ediyot VI, 3: II, 173.

Abot: II, 45.

I, 3: IV2, 273

II: III, 279—II, 1: IV1, 178—II, 5: IV1, 121—II, 6: III, 264; IV1, 72–II, 7: II, 159; IV1, 106.

III: III, 278; IV1, 23—III, 17: I, 6, 144.

IV, 5: I, 164—IV, 15: IV1, 53.

V, 1: II, 26—V, 5: III, 227—V, 16: III, 331.

Middot IV, 2: IV2, 427.

Oholot XI, 7: IV1, 91.

Tosefta

Sanhedrin: III, 143

Talmud Babylonian

Berakot 5a: IV1, 47, 121.

5b: IV1, 44.

7a: II, 195; III, 185; IV1, 100, 131.

8a: IV1, 48, 193.

10a: II, 100; IV1, 185.

10b: IV1, 186.

12b: III, 178.

17a: III, 298, 301; IV2, 289, 328.

18a–b: I, 177.

20a: IV1, 218.

29b: IV1, 217.

30a: IV1, 193.

32a: III, 107.

33a: IV1, 198.

33b: I, 12; II, 135, 137, 152; III, 297.

34b: IV1, 185; IV2, 329

54a: II, 161.

54b: II, 161.

55a: III, 83, 89; IV2, 331.

55b: III, 90.

57b: III, 84.

58b: IV1, 17.

61b: III, 326.

63a: III, 277.

Shabbat 10b: IV2, 495.

25b: IV2, 401.

30a: IV1, 216.

31a: IV2, 463.

32a: IV1, 49

55a: II, 167; IV1, 118.

55b: IV1, 115.

67a: IV2, 406.

86b: II, 65; III, 250.

88b: III, 314.

92a: I, 166; III, 95, 108.

104a: III, 145; IV2, 494.

112b: IV1, 28.

115a: III, 143.

118a–b: III, 45.

119b: IV2, 284.

133b: III, 277.

152b: IV2, 309, 318, 333, 337.

155b: IV1, 91, 92.

156a: IV1, 26, 32.

192b: IV2, 321.

‘Erubin 13a: IV2, 285.

15b: IV1, 188.

22a: IV1, 104.

96a: III, 248.

100b: III, 8, 11.

Pesahim 21b: III, 237.

54a: IV1, 272.

68a: IV2, 345, 352.

88b: IV2, 475.

92a: II, 173.

118a: IV1, 147.

118a–b: II, 71.

Yoma 22b: IV1, 248.

29a: IV1, 269.

39a: III, 130, 227.

69b: II, 135.

86a: IV1, 204, 231.

86b: IV1, 225, 262.

Sukkah 26a: IV2, 303.

45a: I, 165.

52b: IV1, 270.

Bezah 16a: II, 65.

Rosh Hashanah 11a: II, 132.

16a: I, 67.

16b: IV1, 33, 163; IV2, 311.

17a: IV1, 165, 184; IV2, 336, 360, 361, 374, 378.

17b: II, 49, 134; III, 79.

18a: IV1, 165, 184.

21b: II, 67.

Ta‘anit 2a: IV1, 66.

4a: III, 123.

5a: III, 194.

7a: IV1, 67; IV2, 308, 312, 349.

8b: IV1, 158.

11a: II, 68; IV1, 102, 114.

16a: IV1, 254.

21a: III, 282; IV1, 254.

22a: III, 276.

23a: I, 157; III, 98; IV1, 66.

24a: III, 282.

25a: I, 157; III, 98, 282; IV1, 198.

27b: II, 65.

Megillah 2b: III, 177.

18a: II, 141; III, 289; IV2, 472.

25a: II, 137, 152.

26b: IV2, 341.

28a: IV2, 341.

29a: IV2, 446.

Mo‘ed Katan 25a: III, 107.

28a: IV1, 113.

Hagigah 9b: IV1, 114.

11b: II, 112.

12b: IV2, 310, 346.

13b: II, 214.

14b: II, 183, 189.

15a: I, 54; II, 90.

15b: I, 113.

16a: II, 68, 193.

Yebamot 2a: IV2, 401.

16b: II, 62, 117.

20a: IV1, 254.

49b: I, 164; III, 152, 154.

90a–b: III, 126.

105a: IV1, 163.

Ketubot 103a: IV2, 338.

103b: III, 276.

105a: III, 285.

Nedarim 21b: IV1, 261.

22b: IV1, 261.

25a: III, 286.

27a: IV1, 238.

38a: I, 166; II, 67; III, 95, 108.

39b: IV1, 178.

50b: IV1, 101.

Nazir 19a: I, 85.

23a: III, 46, 262, 280.

23b: III, 262, 277.

Sotah 3a: IV1, 267.

8b: IV1, 74.

14a: III, 299.

22b: III, 299.

38a: II, 173.

Gittin 11a: IV2, 393.

Kiddushin 23b: IV2, 475.

30a: III, 199.

30b: III, 117.

31a: III, 266.

37b: III, 138.

39b: I, 134; IV1, 100; IV2, 279, 389, 414.

40a: IV2, 388.

40b: III, 263; IV1, 114, 263.

49b: IV1, 53, 106.

66a: IV2, 416.

96b: III, 198.

Baba Kamma 50a: IV1, 109.

92b: III, 229; IV1, 182.

Baba Mezi‘a 59b: I, 156; III, 205.

60a: IV2, 351.

86a: IV2, 337.

107b: III, 229; IV1, 182.

Baba Batra 4a: IV2, 407.

10b: IV2, 407.

14b: IV1, 56.

16b: IV1, 93.

17a: IV1, 115.

74b: II, 71; IV1, 61.

75a: III, 102.

75b: II, 177, 198.

91a: IV1, 115.

91b: II, 86.

146b: IV2, 321.

161b: IV2, 393.

Sanhedrin 5a: IV2, 416.

21b: III, 144.

37b: IV2, 407.

38a: IV2, 416.

38b: II, 179.

42a: III, 45.

56b: I, 149; III, 60; IV2, 406.

58b: III, 172.

59a: III, 172.

63b: I, 163.

64a: II, 90, 108; IV1, 149.

64b: II, 90, 108.

68a: IV2, 406.

89a: I, 160; III, 84.

90a: I, 98; III, 271; IV2, 306, 311, 362, 374, 472.

90b: II, 90, 108; IV2, 307.

91a: IV2, 334, 342.

91b: IV2, 345.

92a: IV2, 348.

92b: IV2, 351.

94a: IV2, 415.

97b: I, XVII.

98a: IV2, 423, 467.

98b: IV2, 414.

99a: I, 44, 49, 129; IV2, 330, 352, 418.

101b: IV1, 188.

103b: III, 196.

104a: IV1, 103.

106a: III, 254.

110b: IV2, 283, 415.

111a: III, 269; IV1, 104.

113a: IV1, 66, 268.

Makkot 11a: III, 239.

13b: I, 184; III, 248.

23b: III, 258, 272, 278, 283.

24a: III, 239.

End: III, 272.

Shebu‘ot 7b: II, 102.

8b: IV1, 117.

20b: III, 247.

‘Abodah Zarah: I, 7.

2b: I, 170, 171.

3b: II, 68.

4a: IV2, 377.

18a: III, 273, 276.

19b: III, 256.

61b: IV2, 470.

Horayot 8a: I, 125.

10b: III, 46.

11b: IV2, 416.

Abot de Rabbi Natan 5: IV2, 277.

Soferim 4, 1: II, 152.

Semahot VIII: IV2, 298.

Menahot 45a: IV2, 426.

Hullin 7a: I, 157; III, 98, 282; IV1, 198.

7b: IV1, 173.

44b: IV1, 48.

60a: II, 62.

84a: III, 137.

86a: IV1, 175.

92a: IV2, 416.

142a: IV2, 389, 414.

‘Arakin 3a: II, 90.

Temurah 16a: IV2, 309.

Niddah 31a: IV1, 40, 214.

70b: IV2, 348.

TALMUD JERUSALEM

Bezah II, 62b: IV1, 109.

Midrash

Agada: IV2, 424.

Bereshit Rabbah: I, 50, 110, 111, 116; II, 15, 63, 70, 113, 180, 195; III, 72, 79, 111, 208, 332; IV1, 34, 61, 129, 163, 190; IV2, 287, 298, 304, 309, 404, 432, 446, 448.

Esther Rabbete: IV1, 70.

Hazit: III, 12.

Kohelet Rabbah: IV1, 74.

Mekilta: II, 183; III, 164; IV2, 408.

Midrash of R. Nehunyah ben ha-Kanah: IV2, 313.

Shir ha-Shirim: IV2, 310.

Shohar Tob: IV2, 418.

Tanhuma: II, 102; III, 148; IV1, 189.

Tehillim: II, 195; IV2, 298.

Otiyot de R. Akiba: IV2, 312.

Perek Shirah: II, 11.

Pirke de-Rabbi Eliezer I, 50; III, 65.

Seder Eliyahu: III, 11.

Sifra: I, 60; III, 108, 191, 203, 253, 257.

Sifre: II, 133; III, 109, 125, 209, 237, 244, 285; IV1, 48, 177, 192; IV2, 288.

Vayikra Rabbah: II, 204; III, 117, 141; IV1, 74.

Yalkut Reubeni: IV1, 34.

Yalkut Shim‘oni: III, 141, 189, 200, 253, 256, 269; IV1, 100, 146, 194, 267.

Yelammedenu: III, 148.

Cabala

Sefer Yezirah: IV2, 291.

Zohar: IV2, 338.

Zohar Hadash: II, 173a: III, 65.

LIST OF ARISTOTELIAN PASSAGES

CATEGORIES

Ch. 1: II 45, note 3.

5, p. 3a 33ff.: II 36, note 1.

6, p. 4b 20 ff.: III 259, note 1; IV2 368, note 3.

DE INTERPRETATIONE

Ch. 2: III 28, note 3.

4: III 28, note 3.

PRIOR ANALYTICS

I, 1, p. 24a 28ff.: II 78, note 1.

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS

I, 1, p. 71a 29: I 138, note 1.

I, 3, p. 72b 5 ff.: I 139, note 2.

I, 24, p. 86a 24–27: I 138, note 1.

II, 1, p. 89b 24: III 23, note 1.

II, 1, p. 89b 34: III 23, note 1.

PHYSICS

III, 1, p. 201a 11: II 116, note 1.

IV, 4, p. 211b 19—25: II 107, note 2.

IV, 11, p. 219b 16: II 116, note 2.

IV, 14, p. 223b 22: II 114, note 1.

VIII, 1, p. 251b 19: II 111, note 2.

DE CAELO

II, 12: III 37, note 1.

II, 12, p. 291b 35f.: III 37, note 1.

IV, 5, p. 312b: IV1 58, note 1.

DE GENERATIONE ET CORRUPTIONE

II, 6, p. 333b 4: IV1 66, note 1.

METEOROLOGICS

I, 7, p. 344a 5f.: IV1 16, note 1.

De Anima

II, 1, p. 412a 22: III 19, note 1.

II, 1, p. 412a 27: III 19, note 1.

II, 3, p. 414b 18: II 211, note 2.

III, 1, p. 425a 27: IV2 319, note 1.

III, 4, p. 429a 31f.: II 188, note 9; IV2 293, note 2.

III, 5, p. 430a 14f.: II 62, note 1.

III, 5, p. 430a 16: II 188, note 8.

III, 5, p. 430a 17: IV2 320, note 1.

On the History of Animals

I, 1, p. 487b 9: III 5, note 2.

I, 1, p. 488b 24: II 211, note 2.

II, 17, p. 507a 34: IV1 91, note 1.

VIII, 1, p. 588b 4: III 5, note 1.

VIII, 1, p. 588b 12: III 5, note 2.

VIII, 1, p. 588b 20: III 5, note 2.

On the Parts of Animals

I, 5, p. 644b 22: II 7, note 1.

I, 5, p. 645a 4 ff.; II 7, note 1.

III, 10, p. 673a 6ff.: II 100, note 3.

III, 14, p. 674b 7: IV1 91, note 1.

IV, 10, p. 687a 23ff.: III 3, note 1.

IV, 10, p. 687b 2: III 6, note 1.

IV, 10, p. 689b 10: III 6, note 2.

IV, 10, p. 689b 31: III 5, note 3.

On the Generation of Animals

III, 11, p. 762a 8: II 7, note 1.

METAPHYSICS

II, 1, p. 993b 9: II 189, note 2; III 214, note 3.

IV, 4, p. 1006a 8: IV1 77, note 5.

V, 1, p. 1013a 14: I 77, note 1.

V, 9, p. 1018a 7: II 170, note 1.

IX, 8, p. 1049b 24: IV1 26, note 2.

X, 7, p. 1057b 7: II 69, note 1.

XI, 3, p. 1061a 19: II 91, note 1.

XII, 8, p. 1074a 4: IV1 17, note 3.

NICOMACHEAN ETHICS

I, 1, p. 1094a 14: I 77, note 1; III 263, note 2.

I, 1, p. 1094a 27: I 77, note 1.

I, 2ff.: III 14, note 1.

I, 4:1 146, note 3.

I, 5, p. 1095b 28: III 338, note 1.

II, 1, p. 1104b 5—8: III 304, note 1.

II, 2–6: III 58, note 1.

II, 4, p. 1105b 28f.: III 127, note 1.

II, 5, p. 1106b 21: I 84, note 1.

II, 6, p. 1106b 36: III 58, note 1.

II, 6, p. 1107a 16: I 84, note 1.

II, 8, p. 1108b 33: III 336, note 2.

II, 9, p. 1109a 24: III 58, note 2.

II, 9, p. 1109b 4: IV1 254, note 4.

II, 9, p. 1109b 15: I 84, note 1.

II, 9, p. 1109b 20: I 84, note 1.

III, 1ff.: IV1 262, note 1.

III, 1, p. 1110a 26: I 86, note 1.

III, 2:1 146, note 3.

III, 5:1 146, note 3.

III, 5, p. 1113a 10: II 211, note 2.

III, 6, p. 1113a 16: I 95, note 1.

III, 13, p. 1118b 2: I 192, note 1.

III, 13, p. 1118b 4–5: I 192, note 1.

IV, 2, p. 1120a 24–27: III 304, note 1.

VIII, 2, p. 1155b 19: III 318, note 1.

VIII, 3, p. 1156a 7: III 318, note 1.

VIII, 3, p. 1156a 22: III 331, note 2.

VIII, 3, p. 1156a 24: III 323, note 2.

VIII, 4, p. 1156b 7: III 318, note 1.

VIII, 4, p. 1156b 12: III 327 note 1.

VIII, 7, p. 1158a 10: III 320, note 1.

VIII, 8, p. 1158b 1: III 339, note 4; 340, note 1.

VIII, 8, p. 1158b 11: III 340, note 1; 342, note 1.

VIII, 8, p. 1158b 25: III 339, note 4.

VIII, 9, p. 1158b 33: III 338, note 1.

VIII, 9, p. 1159a 22: III 338, note 1.

VIII, 11, p. 1161a 10: III 342, note 1.

VIII, 15, p. 1162b 2: III 339, note 4.

POLITICS

I, 2: I 146, note 3.

I, 2, p. 1253a 2:I 72, note 1.

II, 1ff., p. 1261a ff.: I 82, note 3.

III, 6:I 146, note 3.

VII, 1–3:1 146, note 3.

VII, 13:I 146, note 3.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS1

VOLUME ONE

P. xxiv: That MS. A was written in Venice is the statement of Zotenberg in his Catalogue of the Hebrew MSS. of the Paris National Library. The MS. itself says בלאגונה סירקה ניגריליוש. Professor D. S. Blondheim believes that it was written in Laguna de Negrillos, “a town of ca. 1500 inhabitants in the province of Leon, Spain.”

18 English, l. 14: for n read in.

34 Hebrew, l. 4: for שאי read שאין.

34 Hebrew, n. 1: for אייחל read איחל.

40, Hebrew note 14: read S נותן.

45 Hebrew, l. 6: for ההו read ההו.

52 Hebrew, l. 5: Cf. Sifre, Numbers, 112, ed. Friedmann, 33a. The expression occurs very frequently in the Babylonian Talmud and in the Tannaitic Midrashim, but never in the sense ascribed to it by Albo. As far as is known Judah Ibn Kuraish was the first to use it in this sense. Cf. Bacher, “Die Bibelexegese der jüdischen Religionsphilosophen,” 72 and “Terminologie,” I, 98.

52 Hebrew, l. 5: לשכך האזן: Mekilta Bahodesh, 4, ed. Friedmann, 63a.

54 English, n. 2: for 1914 read 1194.

54 Hebrew, l. 15: In his שער הגמול, several times printed separately, but originally the last section of his תורת האדם. It is entirely devoted to his polemic against Maimonides’ view of the future life.

56 Hebrew, l. 3: Cf. Sanhedrin, 87a.

57 English, n. 2: for 000 read 149.

60 English, n. 3: Cf. Rosh Hashanah 17b and the monograph by Simonsen, “Ein Midrash in IV Ezra”, in Lewy-Festschrift, 370–378.

64 English, l. 6: By the law of Adam are meant the six laws which, according to tradition, were communicated to Adam. Cf. Sanhedrin, 56b.

67 Hebrew, l. 5: The reference is to Saadia. Cf. his טעמי תקיעות (Malter, Saadia, 335). In the same treatise Saadia says that שופרות is intended to remind us of the revelation on Sinai. Cf. Ginzberg’s remarks on this in גנזי שעכטער, II, 479.

71, l. 18: for אגורות read אנודות.

85 Hebrew, l. 4ff.: Cf. the introduction of ראב״ד to his work בעלי הנפש, whose words Albo quotes here.

86 Hebrew, l. 5, כשיתקךש: Cf. Tosafot on Ketubot 33b, catchword אילמלי.

89 Hebrew, l. 11, נחנק: In the Bible there is no reference to execution by strangulation, but according to the Rabbis, in all cases where the form of execution is not stated in Scripture, strangulation is meant; cf. Sanhedrin 84b.

90 Hebrew, l. 12: Cf. Hullin 109b below.

95 Hebrew, l. 15: Cf. Moreh Nebukim, I, 42, on חיים = חיי עוה״ב.

100 Hebrew, l. 4:וזאת התורה וכו׳ is a biblical verse, Deut. 4, 44.

102 Hebrew, l. 8 שתכלית וכו׳: Cf. Midrash Haggadol, I, 51: חותם בריתו של הקב״ה. Midrash Haggadol is very likely quoting a version of Midrash Tanhuma different from ours.

105 Hebrew, l. 11, להורות: Cf. Nahmanides on Exodus 19, 20 and 20, 2.

106 Hebrew, l. 17 כוונתו רצויה: Cf. Zohar Hadash 24a and Ginzberg, Legends, V, 136, n. 12.

107 Hebrew, l. 5, נהרג קין: On the violent death of Cain, compare the sources quoted in Ginzberg, Legends, V, 144, n. 37 and 146–7, n. 44.

107 Hebrew, l. 6 תולדותיו: On the death of the Cainites in the flood, cf. Ginzberg, Legends, V, 172, n. 14.

110, Hebrew, l. 11, ב׳ יצירות: a philosophical interpretation of Genesis Rabbah, 12, 3 and the parallel passages given by Theodor. Cf. further Zohar, III, 219b.

114 Hebrew, l. 7, שני טעמים: This is a widely spread haggadah; cf. Gen. Rabbah, 56, 5 and the numerous parallel passages given by Theodor.

117 Hebrew, l. 11, שחשבו … החכמים: compare Nahmanides on Gen. 1, 1.

121 Hebrew, l. 5, last word: read בעקר.

123 Hebrew, l. 10, for בשלשד read בשלשת.

126 Hebrew, l. 10, לשון הרע: Cf. ‘Arakin 15b. Albo seems to take שכבר כרתו in the sense of שאין לו חלק לעוה״ב .

126 Hebrew, l. 11, והפורשין: Cf. Rosh Hashanah, 117a; on ומלבין פני חבירו ברבים, cf. Baba Mezi‘a 59a; on מינין, etc., cf. Rosh Hashanah, l. c.

128 Hebrew, l. 16, שאין אנכי: Cf. Ibn Ezra on Exodus 20, 2: והאומרים כי דבור אנכי אינו מעשרת הדברים ונוי.

130, English, l. 13: for “eternal” read “primordial”, as eternal in English denotes infinity in both directions. Cf. also Albo’s discussion of this point in vol. II, 108–109.

141 Hebrew, l. 4, מלשון ואםתכי: Cf. Rashi and Ibn Ezra to whom Albo refers as גדולי המפרשים.

141, l. 11, שאמרו: Cf. Rashi on Deut. 1, 13, who very likely had this sentence in his text of Sifre, and Albo might have had a similar text of Sifre.

147, l. 12: On the magnet, see the illuminating note, dealing with the word as well as the theory of magnetic attraction in mediaeval discussion, in Wolfson, “Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle”, 562–563, 563–564, 565–568, as well as pp. 90–92 and 121 of his introduction. Note that Albo uses also קלאמיטא = Sp. calamita, for magnet, though MS. A reads in most cases מגניטס.

150, l. 3, התר וכו׳: Cf. Sanhedrin 59b.

158, l. 16, שכולם היו נביאים: Cf. Zohar II, 82a and Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 30, n. 177.

159, l. 10: Cf. Yebamot 90b, top.

159, l. 10 חוץ מעבודת אלילים: Sanhedrin 90b.

164, l. 4, אהוב וגו׳: Cf. Kiddushin, 71a bottom.

165, l. 5, הכל וגו׳: a paraphrase of the saying אין קיום השטר (הגט) אלא בחותמיו; cf. Bereshit Rabbah 67, 3 and 12; cf. also I Corinth. 4, 6, μὴ ὑπὲρ ἃ γέγραπται, which seems to be a variant of the Mishnaic legal phrase.

168, l. 12, וחייבה מיתה: Cf. Sanhedrin 88b (Mishnah!)

168, l. 15: in margin for 10 read 15.

169, l. 13: פרצופים is a cabalistic term and denotes the modifications of the human mind. Cf. Zohar, beginning of Numbers.

176, l. 15, אברהם: Cf. Mekilta, Beshallah, 6, ed. Friedmann 33b.

183, l. 6, שלא קם: Cf. Lekah Tob ad loc.

186, l. 16, והיות ונוי: This is directed against Crescas, who counts the miracle of the אורים ותומים as an article of faith.

192, l. 13, חוש המשוש: Cf. Nahmanides, אגרת הקדש, beginning of ch. 2, who criticizes Maimonides for agreeing with Aristotle on this point. His words are: החבור הוא קדוש ונקי כשיהיה הדבר כפי מה שראוי ובזמן הראוי ובדעת הראויה וכל אדם שיאמר כי בחבור יש גנאי וכעור חלילה וחס שהחבור נקרא ידיעה כאמור וידע אלקנה את חנה אשתו … וידוע שאלו לא יהיה הדבר קדושה גדולה לא יהיו קורין לחבור ידיעה שאין הדבר כאשר חשב הרב המורה זכרונו לברכה במורה בהיותו משבח לארסטו מה (II, 36, 40; III, 8, 49) הנבוכים שאמר כי חוש המשוש הוא חרפה לנו חלילה אין הדבר כמו שאמר היוני לפי שבזה היוני יש שמץ מינות שאינו מרגיש שאלו היה מאמין שהעולם מחודש בדעת לא היה אומר זה היוני הבליעל.

Malter, J.Q.R., N.S., I, 480, n. 79, enumerates many philosophical and cabalistic writers who discuss this alleged view of Aristotle, but one could add many more, for ex., Reccanati, Introduction to his commentary; Shoaib, תזריע, 60d, editio princeps; Hinnuch, negative commandment 126; Abravanel, משמיע ישועה 9a, ed. Amsterdam. The passage quoted by Malter from Ibn Sabba is identical with that of Nahmanides, from whom Ibn Sabba undoubtedly took it.

VOLUME TWO

P. 2, l. 4, שהרי כתב: Cf. Efodi ad loc., who calls attention to these seemingly contradictory statements of Maimonides.

4, l. 8, והמכשלה: Cf. Isaiah, 3, 6.

14, l. 19, ונמצא: Cf. Maimonides, Guide, II, 29.

23, l. 8, אמר: Cf. Moreh Nebukim, III, 20.

38, ll. 2ff.: On the question of the composition of body, see Wolfson, “Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle”, 257ff., 569, n. 4ff.

63, l. 10–11, חכמי הקבלה: Cf. Cordovero, פרדס, xxxiii, 10 (ימים) and 21 (שבת) on the cabalistic theories concerning the correspondence between the days of creation and the Sefirot.

67, l. 6, עשרה: Cf. Yad ha-Hazakah, Yesode ha-Torah, 2, 7 and Ginzberg, Legends, V, 23, n. 64.

68, n. 2: ‘Abodah Zarah 3b speaks of the multitude of worlds (cf. Ginzberg, Legends, V, 11, l. 5 and 12, n. 30) and not of the multitude of angels. Albo’s reference is to Tanhuma, Buber, II, 76 (parallel passages by Buber), III, 20 and IV, 13.

74, l. 13, מינים: The explanation of מינים as coming from Mani (מאני), though erroneous, was accepted by many authors. Cf., for example, Elias Levita, Tishbi, s. v. מין, and many others. Whether this etymology is original with Albo it is difficult to tell, but it is quite certain that Levita, Messer Leon (in Buxtorf) and Heilprin (סדר הדורות) have taken it, directly or indirectly, from Albo.

90, l. 16, אנשי כנםת הנדולה: They are said to have composed all the benedictions and prayers. Cf. Berakot 33a and the following notes.

91, l. 20, English: Marriage ceremony is not correct, as this blessing is not recited at the marriage ceremony, but at the wedding banquet, when the one who recites the grace after meals begins with the words נברך שהשמחה במעונו instead of saying simply נברך, as on ordinary occasions. Albo is not quite correct in speaking of it as a blessing established by the Men of the Great Synagogue, since, as can be seen from Ketubot 8a, it was established by one of the late Amoraim.

102, n. 5: The expression ברוך המקום, etc. occurs literally in Eliyahu Rabbah, XVI, 79, ed. Friedmann.

102, l. 12, וכן: The use of מקום as an epithet of God is not biblical. The Rabbis nevertheless explain, in haggadic fashion, some phrases in the Bible where מקום occurs as having the later meaning. Cf., for example, Aggadat Esther, ed. Buber, 44, n. 50.

103, top, כי כבוד וכו׳: a paraphrase of Moreh Nebukim, I, 8.

110, l. 15, רבותינו: Bereshit Rabbah 2; cf. p. 113, top.

116, l. 11, בימי אברהם: Cf. Sanhedrin 97a bottom, where ב׳ אלפים = עד ימי אברהם of Albo. Cf. Rashi ad loc.

119, top: Cf. Horayyot 3b, הגוי כלו ורובא ככולא.

120, top, בבית שני: Attention should be called to the fact that Albo refers the prophecy in Zechariah 14 to the events that took place during the Second Commonwealth, while not only the Talmud and Midrashim (cf. for ex. Pesahim 50a, Mekilta, Amalek II, 56a, ed. Friedmann) but also all later commentators see therein the Messianic time described, and even a rationalist like Ibn Ezra remarks on Zech. 14, 21: והנה כל אלה הפרשיות שהם בסוף הספר הן לעתיד. However, the words והאומר כי כבר עבר show that there were some who had the same opinion as Albo.

120, l. 13, הסמוכות וכו׳: Cf. Bereshit Rabbah, end of 90, בכל הארצות בפנקיא ובערביא ובפליסטיני, and hence Albo’s statement.

122, top: Albo’s view contradicts the statement found in II Abot de R. Nathan, ed. Schechter, 43, 120 על כל בשר … לרבות בני אדם חייה ועוף!

132, l. 10, שאלו על דדך משל היו נשאלין: Cf. Rashi ad loc.: שאלם, which Albo rationalizes by שאלו … היו נשאלין. Cf. however the Geonic responsum in Responsa, ed. Harkavy, p. 199, which was known to many authors of the Middle Ages.

132, l. 17, נקרא: Cf. Ps. 103, 6: עושה צדקות ה׳.

134, n. 3. The reading of Albo is that of the MSS. and old authorities. Cf. Var. Lect. ad loc.

147, l. 19, note מה]: the blurred letters should read: A במה.

168, l. 7, אני הוה: a paraphrase of Moreh Nebukim, I, 63.

170, l. 2, כי מה שיאמר בו הוא: There is no doubt in my mind (writes Dr. Ginzberg) that Albo attempts to explain Aristotle’s remarks on ταὐτά in the light of the talmudic remarks on הוא. Cf. Megillah 11a, according to which Scripture uses הוא to denote the unchangeableness of a person.

173, l. 4, בספרי: Prof. Ginzberg suggests that since in both Sifre and Sotah the statement is made that שם המפורש is the same as שם המיוחד, the words ובתלמוד סזטה are a continuation of בטפרי and should not begin a new paragraph.

173, l. 8, הנה בארו: This explanation of שם המפורש goes back to Moreh Nebukim I, 61, end. Bacher, Terminologie, I, 159, gives the same explanation as something very new, without knowing that Maimonides and Albo had said it before him.

176, l. 14, שם המשיח: Cf. Kimhi ad loc.

180, top, כי האמצעי: Albo follows Rashi in taking זהו מטטדון to mean that it was Metatron who said it to Moses. The more probable meaning of the Talmud is that ה׳ in this verse stands for Metatron. Cf. רמב״ן on Exodus 24, 1.

184, l. 16, הרמב״ן: Cf. his commentary on Exodus 22, 19.

185, l. 7, קבלה: On this term, compare Harkavy in his notes to the Hebrew Graetz, V, 47.

185, l. 11, מצפ״ץ: On this mysterious ‘name’, cf. Zohar, I, 20a, חזקוני on Exodus 3, 14 and A. Chorin in כרם חמד I, 38–39.

185, l. 14, כוז״ו: These letters are written on the outside of the Mezuzah.

189, n. 1: Albo follows Yerushalmi, Hagigah II, 77b, top; cf. also Bereshit Rabbah II, end.

190, l. 18, עם כ״ף הדמיון: It is an old haggadic rule that whenever the comparative כ is used, the two things compared are not entirely equal; cf. Ekah Rabbah, ed. Buber, I, 45.

211, l. 10: for יברצונו read וברצונו.

VOLUME THREE

P. 1, l. 10, English: for would read it would.

2, l. 9, צל: Cf. Is. 4, 5.

6, l. 17: for חמגן read המגן.

7, l. 12: Cf. Job 30, 6.

9, note: רבותינו does not necessarily mean the masters of the Talmud.

10, bottom, ברכת: Cf. Prov. 10, 22.

22, l. 7, דכר … חלוש: This refers to the old cabalistic theory according to which the sefirot (or some of them) which are not entirely to be conceived by the human mind are designated as אין. Cf. Cordovero, Pardes, ch. 23, s. v. אין.

36, l. 7, נפש משכלת: Cf. More Nebukim, II, 5.

42, l. 7, כי אם לעשות: The interpretation is given by Ibn Ezra ad loc.

45, l. 5, אנשי כנסת הגדולה: According to a talmudic statement (Berakot 33a) the Men of the Great Assembly composed the benedictions, prayers, etc., and hence Albo in referring to the benediction on the new moon speaks of it as the work of the אנשי כנסת הגדולה. Cf. above, note on II, 90, l. 16.

63, l. 12, מנחה פחותה: Cf. Bereshit Rabbah, 22, 5, ויבא קין … מן הפסולת, and further references in Ginzberg, Legends, V, 136, n. 12.

65, n. 1: Zohar Hadash is taken from Shemot Rabbah, 25, 2; cf. also Bereshit Rabbah, 21, 9.

70, n. 1: Cf. also Diesendruck, “Maimonides’ Lehre von der Prophetie”, in Israel Abrahams Memorial Volume, pp. 74–134, and particularly note 30, p. 83, where the quotation from Husik gives a wrong impression and should have been supplemented by the other statement on the same page of Husik’s “History”, viz. 276, 3, giving the opinion of Judaism, which is that of Maimonides, viz. “that a man may have all the qualifications and yet be prevented from prophesying if God … does not desire that he should.”

72, l. 10: The reference is to Bereshit Rabbah, 85. The statement in the note is due to a regrettable misunderstanding of Prof. Ginzberg’s remark. Prof. Ginzberg doubted whether the Rabbis meant what Albo makes them say.

73, l. 5, וזהו שאמר: The explanation is taken from Nahmanides ad loc.

79, n. 9: In the passage quoted from Bereshit Rabbah 12, 4, כותי means Samaritan, as evidenced by the MSS. and the uncensored editions.

93, l. 2, ושעור הכתוב: This explanation is taken from Kiddushin, 78b, top, where the reason is given; compare also XXXII מדות of R. Eliezer b. R. Jose ha-Gelili.

105, l. 15, מתן תזרה: At the revelation all Israel were prophets. Cf. Midrash Haggadol, II, 237: זירא העם, מה ראו כבוד גדול, ר׳ אליעזר אומר מניין שראתה שפחה בישראל מה שלא ראה גדול שבנביאים שנ׳ וידא העם מה ראו כבוד גדול ראו.

105, l. 16, לאהרון ומרים: At that moment they were unfit for a divine revelation; cf. Ginzberg, Legends, III, 257, l. 5 and references in VI, n. 491, p. 91.

106, l. 9, לברוך: That Baruch was worthy of prophecy but because of the exile did not become a prophet, is a statement taken from Mekilta, ed. Friedmann, 2b.

118, l. 6, דבותינו: Cf. Bereshit Rabbah 16, 6 and the numerous parallel passages given by Theodor.

118, l. 8, לא התיר: Bereshit Rabbah 34, 13 and Sanhedrin 59b.

121, l. 8, and 204, ll. 7–8: The talmudic expression is הלכה and not קבלה (Cf. Yebamot 76b), and it is beyond any doubt that Albo had no other reading, since קבלה in the talmudic sources stands for Prophets and Hagiographa. Cf. Bacher, Terminologie, I, s. v. קבלה. On the use of קבלה in the sense of tradition, compare Ginzberg’s note in Efros, “Philosophical Terms in the Moreh Nebukim”, p. 142. Albo, however, is not responsible for the change of הלכה into קבלה. Ibn Ezra (end of נח) writes ואם קבלה נקבל, which shows that the change antedates Albo.

126, l. 13, וכן שלמה: Cf. ‘Erubin 21b and parallel passages.

127, l. 16, נאסר: Cf. remarks on 118, l. 8.

133, l. 14, התנשאות: Cf. Bereshit Rabbah, 24, 6, אין הראשונים תולדות, and Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer 22: שלא היה קין … מדמותו ולא מצלמו של אדם … עד שנולד שת וכו׳.

140, l. 6, שזהו חמשים: Cf. Yerushalmi Berakot IV, 7b and Midrash Shemuel 50 and 52.

141, l. 16: ויקרא רבה is either a copyist’s mistake or an inaccurate quotation. Read במדדש משלי, where it is found in chapter 9, ed. Buber, 61. Ibn Adret in his Responsa, I, 92, quotes this statement from מדרש משלי, and it is not likely that Albo had it before him in Leviticus Rabbah; cf. following note.

141, l. 18, נראה: This explanation hardly differs from that given by Ibn Adret, Responsa, I, 93.

143. l. 15: Albo refers to the statement found Shabbat 115a and 115b about כתב עברי as a script different from that in use, i. e. the old Hebrew script.

143, l. 16: בלי ספק modifies the entire sentence, and the meaning is that the passage in Shabbat proves beyond doubt (בלי ספק) that the script used now is not the Hebrew.

146, l. 11, רבותינו: Bereshit Rabbah 48, 9 and parallel passage in Theodor.

148, n. 1: This is not quite correct, as Yelammedenu and Tanhuma often describe the very same Midrash, and as a matter of fact the title page of the first edition of Tanhuma reads מדרש תנחומא הנקרא ילמדנו. Whether the ‘old’ Yelammedenu antedates the ‘old’ Tanhuma is a very mooted question (cf. Ginzberg’s essay on the Yelammedenu in גנזי שעכטער), but with later authors like Albo, ילמדנו = תנחומא and his reference is to Tanhuma = Yelammedenu, Shemini 8, ed. Buber, III, 29, bottom, where our texts have not the sentence mentioned by Albo, but the parallel passage, Vayyikra Rabbah, 22, 7, has ה׳ מתיר אסורים מה שאסרתי לך התרתי לך; cf. also Midrash Tehillim, ed. Buber 535 and the note by the editor.

160, l. 7, מה אנוש: The explanation is given by Gersonides in his commentary.

162, l. 6, last word: for שעשד read שעשה.

171, l. 20: for ובדבריים שאפשר שפול read ובדברים שאפשר שיפול.

177, n. 2: The Ritba (ריטב״א) in his commentary on Megillah quotes likewise the statement of the Tosafists.

184, l. 16, לבעל דין לחלוק: This statement is directed against Sifre, Deut. end, where the view is expressed: אבל באומות קם.

189, l. 6, דבותינו: Cf. Tanhuma, ed. Buber, I, 139.

192, l. 12: Cf. Baba Mezi‘a (Mishnah) 33a, ורבו שלמדו חכמה מביאו לחיי ע״ה.

200, top, רבותינו: The oldest source for the ‘emendations of the scribes’ is Mekilta, Shirah, ed. Friedmann, 39a–39b. Albo, however, seems to have made use of Tanhuma, Beshallah, 16.

203, l. 4: for שלמד read שלמה.

203. l. 6, רבותינו: Cf. Gittin 60b.

204, l. 5, פעמים הרבה: This is not a literal quotation. A question זו מנין לך to which the answer is הלכה למשה מסיני (writes Dr. Ginzberg) is not known to me, but Albo no doubt is paraphrasing the talmudic terms, מנלן and מנא הני מילי, to which the answer sometimes is הלכתא, i. e. הלכה למשה מסיני; cf. Shabbat 132a, Pesahim 82b, Sukkah 28a and 34a.

204, l. 7, אם קבלה וכו׳: Cf. note on 121, l. 8.

204. l. 15, אחרי רבים: Cf. Baba Mezi‘a 59b.

208, n. 3: The reading נחת רוח וכו׳ is found in none of the numerous places where the haggadah is given (Cf. Theodor on Bereshit Rabbah 44, 1), nor can Albo have had a different reading, since this haggadah is based upon אמרת ה׳ צרופה, which requires לצרף of our texts.

210. l. 12, גדול: Cf. Baba Kamma 79b: שור שביטלו ממלאכתו ה׳.

221, note: It is more likely (writes Prof. Ginzberg) that Albo made use of the source of R. Behai, which is the commentary of Nahmanides. There is no trace of R. Behai in the ‘Ikkarim, but of Nahmanides’ commentary there are many.

227, l. 5, בכת קול: Cf. Sotah 48b: משמתו חגי זכריה ומלאכי … היו משתמשים בבת קול.

227, l. 12, ולא יחמוד: Albo had very likely in his mind the stories given in Yerushalmi, Peah, III, 17d.

231, top, לקשר וכו׳: Cf. Zohar, I, 206b.

237, bottom: The passage Baba Mezi‘a 71a, bottom, seems to have escaped Albo, since according to the Talmud it is permitted to take interest from a גר תוב, while Albo prohibits it.

246, ll. 5–6, נגד השם … כנגד האדם: Cf. Mekilta Bahodesh 8, ed. Friedmann, 70b on the five commandments concerning God which were written on one of the tablets and the five concerning man on the other tablet.

248, l. 16, יש מי שאומר: Tosafot on the Pentateuch in הדר זקנים and in דעת זקנים on Exodus 20; cf. also Rashbam and חזקוני ad loc.

250, n. 1: Albo’s objection (writes Prof. Ginzberg) is quite clear. He says: The rest on the seventh and not on any other day can be explained only as a memorial of the creation of the world; but if so, the other reason, viz. to remember the exodus, is not at all necessary, since it would not explain why one must rest on the seventh and not on any other day.

255, bottom, רבותינו: Cf. Kiddushin 39b, bottom.

256, n. 2: The source is of course (writes Prof. Ginzberg) ‘Abodah Zarah and not Yalkut, which was hardly known to Albo. אחגרה and not אגרה is also the reading of Yalkut Machiri, Ps. 34, 13.

268, l. 9, רבוחינו: Cf. Nazir 23b.

273, l. 15, חא—עלה: a talmudic expression; cf. Berakot 30b.

282, l. 5, שאין—בריה: Cf. Mekilta, Mishpatim, 20, ed. Friedmann, 98a.

286, n. 5: The story of the staff is widely spread in the literature of the East and West; cf. Benfey, Pantschatantra, Einleitung, 604, Steinschneider, ZDMG., 27, 563 and Wünsche, Zeitschrift für vergleichende Literaturgeschichte, 11, 48–59.

290, note: In the lengthy form of the story, the wise man who gave the advice is Saadia.

233, l. 3, רבוחינו: Cf. Seder ‘Olam, 6 and Bereshit Rabbah, 55, 5.

333, l. 9, ר׳ עקיבא: Cf. Baba Batra, 10b, middle of page.

VOLUME FOUR, PART I

P. 4, l. 17: צוח, to proclaim, in reference to the Bible, is a favorite expression of Tanhuma; cf. Bacher, Terminologie, II, s. v.

16, n. 1: The Aristotelian theory concerning comets is first quoted by R. Hai in his commentary on Berakot; cf. אוצר הגאונים, I, 91.

19, l. 11, ידעח: Cf. Kimhi ad loc., with whose commentary Albo was certainly familiar.

23, l. 15, סתמית: There can be no doubt, however, that R. Akiba, who is mentioned shortly before, is the author of this mishnah. The second chapter of Abot does not contain any anonymous mishnayyot.

31, l. 4, להתפלל: Cf. II Sam., 15, 31, which is rather too short to be described as a prayer. The Haggadah, however, finds in many Psalms references to David’s prayer for help against Ahithophel; cf. Abot 6, Bereshit Rabbah, 32, 1 and 38, 1.

34, l. 2: Prof. Ginzberg writes: I do not find this statement either in Yalkut Reubeni or anywhere else, though the relation between Isaac and Mars is quite intelligible from the point of view of the Cabalists, for whom Isaac represents justice and strength, דין and גבורה in cabalistic terminology. Cf. Zohar II, 266a and b. And hence the statement that while Isaac was bound on the earthly altar, Mars was bound on the celestial one. Cf. Yalkut Hadash, s. v. Isaac, 22.

36, n. 2: Prof. Ginzberg thinks that הפילוסוף is here opposed to תורני and does not refer to any specific person.

42, l. 9, איוב: The very profuse interpretation of Job’s discussion with Eliphaz is taken from Gersonides’ commentary on Job 3, end and 5 end.

42, n. 2: Cf. Gersonides ad loc., לא ישינו האמתות והקיום מעצמותם, and cf. previous note.

50, l. 5, הפילוסוף: Aristotle. Cf. Moreh Nebukim, III, 17.

52, l. 16, אם מעט: Cf. Eccl. 5, 11.

53, top: The main passage on the results of הרהור ע״ז is Kiddushin 39b, but Albo quotes a shorter reference to it from a halakic passage, which thus gives it a more authoritative character.

53, ll. 5–6, שהאדם—ללבב: Cf. I Sam. 16, 7.

55, l. 8, עובד מאהבה: Job was only עובד מיראה and hence his trials. Cf. note on p. 95, l. 16.

56, n. 3: Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, V, 384, end, note 14.

61, n. 2: Prof. Ginzberg writes: I am inclined to believe that Albo quotes here בראשית רבתי of R. Moses ha-Darshan and not Baba Batra. The sentence עתיד הקב״ה ובו׳ could never have formed a part of the Haggadah in Baba Batra, but it fits well the character of בראשית רבתי.

68, l. 5, שאמרו: Cf. Ta‘anit, 7a, top.

68, n. 2: Albo follows the Targum, who translates מטול עלתוא וכו׳; cf. following note.

68, l. 10, בתפלת הרבים: This contradicts Ta‘anit, 9a, בשביל יחיד מטר. Albo, however, speaks here of rain in the sense of פרנסה, concerning which it is said there, פרנסה בשביל רבים, and consequently he explains רבים = אדם רב against the Targum (cf. previous note) דבר נש דב.

74, l. 8, מדה: Cf. Nedarim 32a and Sanhedrin, 90a, bottom, as well as the numerous references in Ginzberg, Legends, V, 427, n. 172.

75, n. 2: This rendersing of גוה is taken from Gersonides ad loc.

95, l. 16, ירא אלהים: Cf. the controversy on this point in Sotah, 27b, bottom (Mishnah), where Rabban Johanan ben Zakkai maintains שלא עבד איוב את המקום אלא מיראה, and cf. Ginzberg, Legends, V, 382, n. 4.

98, n. 4. This interpretation is not original with Albo, who drew on Ibn Ezra, Lev. 26, 21, where the reason for the identification of קרי with מקרה is given.

100, l. 15, בשכר: The source of Yalkut to which reference is made in the note is Eliyahu Rabbah XXII (XXIV), 125, ed. Friedmann, where the reading is שתי דמעות (as דמעה is fem., שני of our text is a copyist’s error), while Yalkut (already in the first edition) has שלש, but Yalkut agrees with our text of Eliyahu Rabbah in reading נתנו לו הד שעיר instead of זכה ויצאו ממנו האלופים of Albo.

104, l. 6, מונע דרכי התשובה: Cf. Yoma (Mishnah) 85b and 87a; cf. also Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 222, top.

110, l. 12, אודך וכו׳: The reading of A seems to go back to a different reading of Niddah 31a, which is quoted by Albo above, p. 40, in conformity with our texts of the Talmud.

113, l. 16, אין צדיק: Cf. Eccl. 7, 20.

114, n. 4: In the English, line before last, read “the Jews” instead of “Israel”, so as to conform to the Hebrew text. The reading of A agrees with the popular way of quoting this saying, which has לישדאל very likely because the saying is given in the Talmud in connection with the statement שחזר הקב״ה על כל מדות טובות ליתן לישראל וכו׳. That ברזא is the correct reading and not ורדא is evident from Lev. Rab. 35, 5 end, where this proverb reads: יאה מסכניתא לברתיה דיעקב כערקא םומקא וכו׳, and ערקא, of course, = ברזא.

115, l. 13, בחטא: Albo follows Rashi’s explanation of בעטיו, but very likely it is = בהטיו. It is true, however, that Targum Ruth, end and Koheleth 7, 29, take עטיו like Rashi.

116, l. 16, יחזקאל: Cf. Mekilta R. Simon, 106 and Shabbat, 32b on the question under what circumstances children suffer for the sins of their parents. See also Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 40, n. 217 and 48, n. 251.

117, l. 4, יסורין של אהבה: Cf. Berakot, 5b.

117, l. 5, נסינן: Cf. Abot, 5, 1.

118, l. 7, הגמול: In editio princeps (last chapter of תורת האדם), p. 93a.

119, top: In the parallel passage, p. 128, l. 11, S has likewise הגאונים and not הגאון, and hence it is very doubtful whether the reference is to Saadia’s אמונות ודעות.

127, l. 18, שלא וכו׳: Berakot, 25b.

128, l. 4, מאהבה: Cf. Sotah 31a and cf. notes on pp. 55, 8 and 95, 16.

129, l. 15, ר׳ עקיבא וחבריו: I. e. the so-called ten slain by the government, who were distinguished for their piety and learning. Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, V, 30, and note 85.

134, ll. 2–4: Both explanations are taken from Ibn Ezra ad. loc.

134, l. 15, הלומים: The fanciful explanation is found in Targum and Ibn Ezra ad. loc.

135, ll. 13–14, כסא הכבוד: Cf. Shabbat 152b (middle of page).

140, ll. 5–6, הנראה—הנשמע: Cf. Mekilta Bahodesh, II, end, ed. Friedmann, 63b.

142, l. 5, צדיק ממנו: Cf. Berakot, 7b, towards the end: צדיק ממנו וכו׳.

146, l. 5, רבותינו: Cf. Tanhuma, ed. Buber, III, 89ff., whence Yalkut.

147, top, להשמיד: Cf. Esther, 8, 11.

147 (English, l. 14): For Yurkemi read Yorakmi, as it is a theophorous name composed of יו (= יהוה) and רקמי, in Syriac, hail. Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 417 beginning of note 87.

149, n. 1: The data in Jastrow (writes Prof. Ginzberg) are not correct. For the exact identification of these plants, cf. Löw, “Flora der Juden”.

150, l. 2, כלומר: Cf. the commentary מצודת דוד ad loc.: זבחי עבודת גלולים שהוא בר שאין בו חיות כמת. Prof. Ginzberg does not think that this commentator made use of Albo, but that both made use of a common source.

155, l. 17, בלתי משתנה: Cf. Ibn Ezra on Deut. 32, 39.

169, l. 3, והרבה דברים: Cf. Ibn Ezra on Gen. 27, 40, whose words Albo uses here without giving him credit.

169, ll. 11–12, תפלט וכו׳: Cf. Job, 21, 10.

172, l. 13, המפרשים: Joseph Kimhi and Gersonides. Cf. רד״ק and רלב״ג ad loc.

173, l. 9, נראה: Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, IV, 202–226 and the corresponding notes in vol. VI.

174, l. 5, שאחר הלקיחה: Cf. Rashi and Kimhi ad loc., both of whom (Kimhi with a rationalistic interpretation!) maintain that Elijah sent the letter after his translation. Their source for this strange statement is Seder ‘Olam XVIII, end, ed. Ratner, 73.

179, l. 6, במצוה: Cf. Abot, 2, 1.

184, l. 8, שוא: Cf. Malachi 3, 14.

185, l. 3, רבותינו: Cf. Rosh Hashanah, 18.

186, l. 10, בספרי: Prof. Ginzberg writes: This haggadah is not found either in Sifre or in any other source. The nearest to it is Debarim Rabbah 2, 8: אתה התחלת לבוא אצלי שנאמר … הסנה.

187, l. 9, שלש: Cf. Gersonides’ commentary on I Sam. 26, 10.

189, l. 10: The passage in Tanhuma referred to is taken literally from the Talmud, Kiddushin, 38a (cf. also the numerous parallels in margin) where יוב is found as given by Albo; and as for the variant סופר instead of ממלא, cf. Variae Lect., Rosh Hashanah, 11a, where several witnesses are quoted who have not ממלא but חושב, which is almost identical with סופר of Albo.

193, l. 14: Yalkut in I, 764 has culled from different sources (Yelammedenu, Tanhuma, etc.) a number of haggadot concerning the sin which caused the doom of Moses and Aaron, but none of them is quoted by Albo, whose words המזלזל וכו׳ are not found either in the sources quoted in Yalkut or anywhere else, as far as I am aware (writes Prof. Ginzberg). That the expression ‘rebels’ used by Moses was his grave sin is stated in many sources. Cf., for example, Tanhuma, ed. Buber, V, 11, Tanhuma Vaëthanan, 6, Midrash Petirat Mosheh in Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, I, 117, and in many other places.

199, ll. 6–7, והמדברים ברוח הקדש: On the expression ברוח הקדש cf. Malter, J.Q.R., N.S., 482, n. 82, who gives a long list of authors who make use of this expression, but does not include Albo. As to the origin of the phrase, Malter traces it back to Maimonides, Moreh Nebukim, II, 45, which is perhaps correct as far as the post-Maimonidean writers are concerned, who might have followed their great master. It is, however, certain that Maimonides did not coin the phrase. In the Arabic text Maimonides uses the phrase in Hebrew, which shows that it was a current expression. It was found in מדרש שכל טוב (p. 321), which was composed before Maimonides was born. We are dealing therefore with a midrashic expression, though it is no longer found in the Midrashim now extant. Note that מדרש שכל טוב, like Albo, has: אליפז היה מדבר ברוח ברוח הקדש.

202, ll. 14–15: The great miracle was not the standing still of the sun—this happened several times in the time of Moses, cf. Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 245—but that it took place at Joshua’s bidding; cf. Kimhi on Josh. 10, 14.

217, l. 9, החכם: Is it a pure coincidence (writes Prof. Ginzberg) that Albo chose as an ideal prayer the Jewish parallel to the Lord’s Prayer?

222, l. 9, הרמב״ן: Cf. his commentary on Deut. 30, 11.

228, n. 1: Cf. remarks above on p. 98, n. 4.

238, n. 2: This translation is found in as early a source as Targum! Cf. also Ps. 82, 7, where Rashi has for כאדם of the text כאדם הראשון.

241, l. 6 to end of page: Literally taken from the commentary of R. Isaiah di Trani on I Sam. 13, 1.

248, ll. 8–9, קל וחומר של שטות: I know only one other passage (writes Prof. Ginzberg) where this expression occurs. Cf. Rashi on Gen. 4, 24, who quotes it from Bereshit Rabbah, 23, 4, while our texts and MSS. (with exception of one) have קל והומר של חוך in Bereshit Rabbah.

254, n. 4: I do not think (writes Prof. Ginzberg) that Albo thought of the Aristotelian Ethics in this connection. The Jewish moralists have created a special term for this mode of repentance: תשובת הגדר. Cf., for example, רוקח, Hilkot Teshubah, 5. Maimonides, Yad ha-Hazakah, Hilkot Deot, 2, is very likely dependent on Aristotle. There is no doubt at all that Maimonides, Shemonah Perakim, ch. 4, is based on Aristotle’s Ethics.

255, l. 3, שהמחטיא וכו׳: A rationalization of the statement in Abot 5, 18.

265, l. 1, שיצרו—יום: Cf. Kiddushin, 30b: יצרו … יום ומבקש המיתו; the two last words are paraphrased by Albo ומפתה אותו לחטוא.

266, l. 2, לית: A very favorite phrase in the later rabbinic literature to describe the atheist. It is first found in Targum Jonathan on Gen. 4, 8, where it is given as the slogan of Cain!

267, l. 4, רבותינו: The source of Yalkut is Bereshit Rabbah, 34, 10; cf. the very numerous parallel passages in ed. Theodor.

271, top: The explanation of Isaiah 56, 16–17 seems to be based upon that given by R. Abraham bar Hiyyah in הגינן הנפש, 11a.

VOLUME FOUR, PART II

285, l. 7, מצטער: Cf. Sotah, 14a, אמר משה הרבה וכו׳.

288, l. 11, במקומות רבים: Cf., for example, Berakot, 13b, 47a; Baba Kamma, 92b; Shebu‘ot, 18b.

289, l. 11, רבותינו: It is worth noting that Albo, against our texts and MSS. (with the exception of one, cf. Dikduke Soferim, ad loc.), does not read לא פריה ורביה, though Maimonides, Yad ha-Hazakah, Hilkot Teshubah, 8, 2, R. Meir Abulafia כתאב אלרסאייל, 53 and Nahmanides, שער הגמול, ed. princeps, 104b, agree with our texts. That this is not an abbreviated text can be seen from the remarks of the Tosafist R. Simson ben Abraham who, in his polemic against Maimonides, writes (כתאב, 108): ומתוך דבריו נכד שלא עיין בספר שכתב זלא תשמיש ח״ו לא הזכירו תשמיש. He objects not merely to Maimonides’ substitution of תשמיש for פריה ורביה but to the assumption that the Talmud would at all mention פריה ורביה in this connection; and in quoting the text he offers one identical with that of Albo. The note of the editor of the כתאב to p. 53 is to be corrected accordingly.

291, l. 13, במלת הלשון: A combination of Yezirah I, 2 with 6, 10.

297, l. 13, מזומנים: Cf., for ex., Ketubot 103b and ‘Abodah Zarah, 17a, bottom.

298, top: The text of the editions has אבדך, which can hardly be correct, as nobody—not even the patriarch—would address the high priest: young man! but רבי of Albo is not a great improvement. The patriarch surely did not say to R. Ishmael: Rabbi. Nahmanides, שער הגמול, 90a, has: והיה ר׳ ישמעאל בוכה אמר לו רבן שמעון בן גמליאל … לשתי פסיעות וכו׳. I take (writes Prof. Ginzberg) לשעה עלה of Albo as an erroneous explanation of the abbreviation לש״פ, misread as לש״ק, and בגן עדן as an explanation of חלקן של צדיקים, and hence the tautology בגן עדן בחלקן של צדיקים, as if there were others than צדיקים in Paradise.

298, l. 4, במסכת נדה: The story occurs neither in the treatise Niddah nor anywhere else in our texts of the Talmud and Midrashim! A story about the transportation of the corpse of Rabbah b. R. Huna and of that of his friend is given in Mo‘ed Katan 25a–25b, but it is entirely different from that given by Albo.

299, n. 1: The exposition of R. Aaron Halevi was known before the recent edition of his work by Bamberger, as it was given in full by R. Jacob ibn Habib in his עין יעקב, Berakot (Yerushalmi) II, end.

303, l. 7, מרבותינו: Cf. Sanhedrin 92a, bottom; on the reading גמורים—not in our texts!—see the remarks of R. Simson b. Abraham in כתאב אלדסאייל, 109–110. Cf. also Ta‘anit, 7a, top and Bereshit Rabbah 13, 6. According to the last source צדיקים is to be taken in the sense of Israel, in opposition to רשעים—the other nations.

304, bottom: The expression is found in the responsa collection of Nahmanides (תשובות שאילות לר׳ משה בר נחמן), no. 284. He also refers in his other writings to this view; cf. שעד הגמזל, 97a, seq.

310, top, במדדש ויר השירים: The reference is doubly wrong (writes Prof. Ginzberg). In the first place there is no 9, 3 in Midrash Shir ha-Shirim, as the biblical book consists of eight chapters only, and secondly, this haggadic statement is not found there at all! The source of Albo—or perhaps of Nahmanides’ שער הגמזל, of the data of which Albo made free use!—is אגדת שיר, ed. Schechter, 34 = Buber, מדרש זוטא, 29. Schechter, p. 98, enumerates a number of mediaeval authors who quote the haggadah, but he does not mention Albo.

310, n. 4: The quotation is from ch. 30, where our texts agree literally with Albo and Nahmanides (cf. preceding note) שער הגמול.

312, top: The reference in the note should be corrected thus: Otiyot R. Akiba, letter ט׳, ed. Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, IV, 31. The statement of the Midrash is taken from Ketubot, 111a. I doubt (writes Prof. Ginzberg) whether Albo quotes directly; the quotation is abbreviated as in שער הגמול, and there is good reason to assume that Albo quotes from Nahmanides.

312, l. 13: Albo added גמורים. Cf. note on p. 303.

314, l. 12, בשער הגמול: Cf. editio princeps, 106b.

315, l. 11, הרשעים: Cf. Bereshit Rabbah, 33, 1; see a full discussion of this point by Nahmanides, שער הגמול, 90d.

316, top, ופידשו: The reference is to Abudrahim, יוצר לשבת, towards the beginning.

321, Hebrew n. 11: for קצ״ב read קנ״ב.

322, l. 2, יצטערו על המות: Cf. note on p. 285, l. 7.

323, l. 10, גיהנם: The identification of עיפתה with גיהנם goes back to Shemot Rabbah, 38, 3; cf. also Pesikta, XXIII, 120, ed. Friedmann.

323, l. 12, ולא כמות עצמו: Cf. Sanhedrin 104a (the remark on כאלמנה) and Ekah Rabbete, I, 45, ed. Buber. Albo makes use of this hermeneutical rule also in other places. Cf. the note on vol. II, 190, l. 18.

326, l. 2, יחלום: Cf. Is. 29, 8.

327, l. 1: Albo follows the traditional explanation of the Psalm as messianic; cf., for ex., Ta‘anit 8b and Mekilta Beshallah, Shirah I, beginning.

330, bottom: The Talmud and the Midrashim do not know of גן עדן של מעלה, which is first met with in the apocryphal Midrashim and in the cabalistic literature; cf., for ex., סדר נן עדן, Jellinek, III, 137, bottom and Nahmanides, שער הגמול, passim.

334, note 2: On this parable—of Hindu origin!—cf. Malter, J.Q.R., N.S., III, 454–456, who, however, failed to refer to the oldest rabbinic source in which it occurs; cf. Mekilta, Shirah, V, end; Mekilta R. Simon 59 and—a slight allusion—Midrash Tannaim, 183. Cf. also the pseudo-Philonic writing, Biblic. Antiquit. 3 A: quosque iudicem inter animam et carnem.

336, l. 2, לשכח: I believe (writes Prof. Ginzberg) that it means to efface the effects of habits to which one was addicted in life. Albo would never have stated such an absurdity as that after death one must be punished that he give up his bad habits.

336, l. 3, דבותינו: The reference is very likely to the Mishnah, Eduyyot, 2, end.

338, ll. 12–13, לקצת החסידים: Such legends about saints who visited their homes after death are referred to in Ziyyoni, ויחי, toward the beginning, Maasehbuch, ed. Rödelheim, 63b and Shebet Musar, XXXVIII, 114d. I am inclined to the assumption (writes Prof. Ginzberg) that the mediaeval authors had these stories before them in some of the lost Midrashim.

344, l. 4, אנשי כנסת הנדולה: Albo is in the habit of speaking of the prayers as the work of the men of the Great Assembly, and his justification is Berakot 33a; cf. above, notes on Vol. II, 90, l. 16; III, 45, l. 5.

346, top: This division of man’s life is very popular with the Jewish authors of the middle ages, philosophers as well as Cabalists; cf. מלמד התלמידים, 57b and R. Behai, commentary, חיי שדה. For a large collection of the passages in which it occurs, see Löw, “Lebensalter,” 27–29.

346, l. 3, שתקן: Cf. Berakot, 48b.

347, l. 13, והר׳ מאיר: The reading of D והרא״ה = ר׳ אהרן הלוי is not very likely, since Albo would not have placed the pupil before the master.

349, l. 16, קצת הפייטנים: Ibn Ezra mentions ר׳ ישועה as one who takes the awakening figuratively to signify the rise of Israel to power.

350, l. 7, קצת האחרוגים: Very likely Galipapa; cf. ch. 42.

361, l. 5, אנקלום: On this interpretation of Onkelos, cf. Nahmanides, שער הגמול, 90b, where the difficulty raised by Albo is discussed.

362, l. 13, רב—כלפי חסד: The attributes of God are here mentioned in accordance with Rosh Hashanah, 17a.

363, l. 3, שנתנכו: Cf. Bereshit Rabbah 44, 4 and the parallel passages given by Theodor.

363, n. 1. This explanation of Gen. 15, 6 is not original with Albo; cf. חזקוני ad loc.

372, l. 4, הצרות המתרגשות וכו׳: A favorite phrase in the later liturgy. In the Talmud: פורעניות המתרגשות; cf. Baba Kamma, 80b.

384, l. 6: Cf. Ibn Ezra, Deut. 32, 39.

385, l. 5, ויחזו: Cf. Ibn Ezra and Nahmanides ad loc. as well as Moreh Nebukim I, 5.

391, l. 7, איך: This argument against the literal explanation of this verse is found already in Sifra ad loc., which is also the source of Onkelos.

392, l. 7, פירוש: Is taken from Nahmanides ad loc.

395, l. 4, אחר המות: Cf. Ibn Ezra and Rashi ad loc.

399, l. 7, והמיתה הכפולה: Cf. Tikkune Zohar, 69b, 87b and Midrash Haggadol ad loc.: מות בעוה״ז תמות בעוה״ב. Albo either quoted directly from Tikkune Zohar or from the midrashic source used by the latter; cf. also Berakot 10b: מת בעוה״ז ולא תחיה לעוה״ב.

401, l. 4, לנפש; Albo speaks of those passages in the Bible where the phrase הכרת תכדת הנפש or ונכרתה הנפש are used and he finds in the expression the punishment after death. Nahmanides in his commentary came to the same conclusion by the same argument and it is almost sure that Albo is dependent on Nahmanides.

404, l. 3, כל זרע: Cf. Abot, 5, 1–2, and see Ginzberg’s remarks in גנזי שעכטער, I, 26, top.

404, l. 4: The haggadah often speaks of these two pious men in the pre-Abrahamic time; cf. Ginzberg, Legends, V, 225, n. 102 and Seder ‘Olam Rabba, ch. 2.

421, l. 5, שיתפרש: Cf. Ibn Ezra ad loc.

421, l. 12, ובשליתה: Cf. Ibn Ezra ad loc.

424, l. 6. The reference to Midrash Aggadah is a mistake, as there is nothing there that corresponds to the quotation by Albo. The first part ומחץ—דוד is found in Rashi ad loc., but Albo is undoubtedly quoting a Midrash and not Rashi. R. Behai ad loc. has אראנו ולא עתה זה דוד אשורנו ולא קרנב זה מלך המשיח. Albo agrees literally with R. Behai except that the latter has the haggadah in connection with the first part of the verse, while Albo has it as a comment on the second part.

428, l. 10, שכתים: That כתים stands for Rome is an old tradition found in as early a source as Onkelos, Num. 24, 24. What Albo says about the fourth beast standing for Greece and Rome is taken from Ibn Ezra, Dan. 2, 24.

430, l. 2, חותם הנביאים: This epithet applied to Malachi is often met with in Maimonides, and it is generally assumed that it is an Arabism, as the Mohammedans call Mohammed by this name. I am, however, (writes Prof. Ginzberg) sceptical about this view since it is also found in רמוי הפטרות by R. Eleazar Rokeah (haftarah of Shabbat ha-Gadol), who was far removed from being influenced by Arabisms.

435, l. 2, הקסס: On the mother of Sisera as a witch, cf. Ginzberg, Legends, IV, 38–39, and it seems as if Albo was acquainted with the legend given there, the source of which is Jerahmeel; cf. Legends, VI, 198, note 88.

436, l. 12: Cf. I Kings, 18, 44.

443. l. 6, לאחד: An allusion to the well known saying attributed to Aristotle about the true friend being an “alter ego.” Cf. Ginzberg, Rev. d. Etudes Juives, 1914, pp. 137–138.

444, l. 5, אחיתופל: Cf. Midrash Tehillim, 55, 110–111, ed. Buber and Talmud Kallah, VIII, 108b, ed. Wilna.

446, l. 12, שהשכינה מצטערת: On this point see Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 25, bottom, to 26.

447. l. 13, כנסת הגדולה: Cf. above, note on 344, l. 4.

449, l. 6, שלו וכו׳: A Hebrew translation of Dan. 4, 1.

449, l. 7, פשתנו: A talmudic phrase; cf. Sanhedrin 101a.

459, l. 7, כלומר: Cf. Rashi ad loc.

463, l. 5, מה: Cf. Job, 25, 4.

464, l. 15, וכי תמצאן: Cf. Deut. 32, 21.

465, l. 12, זכור מקור: Cf. Ibn Ezra ad loc. זכר ום הפועל, while Targum: אזכר.

465, l. 14, מה וכו׳: This is Rashi’s explanation ad loc.

472, l. 13, רבותינו: Cf. below 489, l. 10, quotation from Rabbah de Rabbah: ואין ארץ אלא ארץ החיים.

475, n. 1. This resemblance between Jewish and Roman law has been noticed by many; cf., for ex., Zadoc Kahn, “L’Esclavage,” 40 (Hebrew translation by Fuchs), but it is only a resemblance, as the two systems differ on this very essential point. According to Jewish law a slave can acquire but not possess, while according to the Roman law he can not acquire, he can only act as a medium and hence a slave can acquire possession for his master but not for any body else (L 34 § 2, D 41, 2: nam et servus alienus … sive a me sive a nemini possideatur potest mihi adquirere possessionem, si nomine meo eam adipiscatur), while according to Jewish law a slave can represent any body else; cf. also Rubin, “Das talmudische Recht,” Wien, 1920, pp. 53–54.

478, top, כל העולם: In Ps. 89, 3 עולם is taken to mean world, and the translation of the words of the Psalmist is: By (not ‘with’) mercy was the world built; cf. Sifra, 20, 17; Yerushalmi Yebamot 11, 11d; Sanhedrin, 58b. This explanation of the biblical verse was accepted by the church father Aphraates; cf. Ginzberg in Jew. Encyc. I, 665, note.

483, l. 17, אחור: Cf. Targum and Ibn Ezra ad loc.

484, l. 10, בר מינן: Albo undoubtedly refers to the Jewish custom of using this expression when mentioning something evil; cf. Levita, תשבי, s. v. בר 2: כשזוכרין איזה חולי רע או מיתה משונה וכדומה לזה אומרים בד מנן פידוש חוץ ממנו. In modern times the Hebrew equivalent לא עלינו (cf. Lam. 1, 12, לא אליכם, and the remark thereupon in Sanhedrin 104b, where Rashi has עליכם!) is used in that sense, while בר מינן means a corpse. As far as I am aware (writes Prof. Ginzberg) Albo is the first author to refer to the phrase בר מינן, which is perhaps modelled after the Latin “absit.”

487, l. 11, חנינא: The Talmud has many stories about this saint who lived on a measure of carobs from one week’s end to the other; cf. Ta‘anit 24b–25a.

489, l. 10, ואין ארץ: Cf. above, p. 427, l. 13: ידושת הארץ היא ארץ החיים.

490, l. 2, חכמים גדולים: On the tribe of Issachar as the tribe of scholars, cf. Ginzberg, Legends, II, 144, 198, 221; III, 193, 197 and the notes referring to these passages.

494, l. 18, אליהו: Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 316, n. 3.

495, l. 9, איננו אליהו: Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, VI, 316, n. 3.

497, top, הקנינים: Cf. Sifre, Numbers, 40: וישמרך בנכסים.

497, l. 3, התורה: Sifre, Num., 41: יאר זה מאור תורה.

497, l. 5, השלמות השכלי: Sifre, Num., 41: ויחנך בדעת בבינה ובהשכל.

GENERAL INDEX

AARON, II, 170; III, 78; prophecy came to—through mediation of Moses, III, 105, 106, 183, 200, 201; IV1, 195; sin of—, IV1, 201, 203; IV2 312, 313, 352.

Aaron Halevi,—on human intellect, IV2, 299;—on resurrection, IV2, 300, 302, 353.

Abarbanel,—criticizes Albo, III, 163, n. 3; IV2, 428, n. 4.

Abarim, mountain, IV1, 203.

Abaye, IV2, 284, 285, 307.

Abel, I, 87, 106, 107, 108; III, 61, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136.

Abel-Meholah, II, 217, 218; III, 102; IV1, 172.

Abigail, IV1, 94.

Abimelech, I, 82, 87; III, 61; IV1, 94.

Abin, Rabbi, the Levite, II, 195, 196.

Abinoam, IV1, 94.

Abiram, II, 170.

Abner, IV1, 250.

Abraham, I, 7, 18, 31, 64, 78, 87, 114;—preached the unity of God, I, 115; 131, 170; complete Torah not given to—, I, 171; II, 98, 116, 118, 177, 181; III, 61, 120, 124, 155, 174, 189, 200, 240, 295, 300, 314, 316, 332, 333, 344; IV1, 34, 94, 102, 127, 128, 129, 181, 190, 214; IV2, 345, n. 1, 362, 363, 379, 380, 382, 402, 403, 404, 405, 412, 441, 444, 446, 447, 448;—additional commandments given to, III, 118;—called friend of God, I, 23; III, 316, 332;—faith of, I, 176;—law of, see law.

Abraham, ibn Hisdai, III, 54, n. 1.

Abrahams, I., III, 238, n. 2, 290, n. 1.

Abram, see Abraham.

Absalom, II, 99; IV1, 217.

Abtalyon, IV2, 423.

Abulafia, Meir ben Todros Halevi, IV2, 298, 347;—an opponent of Maimonides, IV2, 298, n. 4.

Acts, classification of, I, 25; IV1, 38–41; voluntary, compulsory and mixed, IV1, 257–262; perfection attained by, III, 34 ff.; man must do many—to attain perfection, III, 38;—must be done with intention to serve God, III, 40 ff.; not all human—lead to the realization of the purpose of man, III, 52 ff.; good acts determined not by reason but by divine command, III, 58 ff.; some—known to be good or bad by reason, III, 61 ff.

Acts of the Apostles, III, 240, 241, n. 2.

Adam, I, 18, 78, 104, 106, 108, 109, 149, 150, 194; III, 61, 120; flesh forbidden to—, III, 127, 128, 130; 131, 134, 174, 254; punishment of—’s sin inflicted upon all his descendants, IV1, 115; 238; IV2, 304; the righteous punished for—’s sin, according to Christians, IV2, 306;—knew immortality of soul, IV2, 398, 400; 402, 404, 412;—law of, see law.

Adam, Book of, IV2, 338.

Adam, editor, IV1, 248, n. 2.

Adamite law, the, see law.

Adler, Cyrus, I, xxviii.

Adler, Elkan, I, xxv, 192, n. 1.

Adonai-nissi, I, 13; II, 176.

Adonijah, IV1, 37.

Adversity of the righteous and prosperity of the wicked, IV1, 51–57, 107–144; IV2, 473. See Providence, Prosperity of the wicked.

Agag, IV1, 245, 248.

Ahab, I, 125; III, 159, 207; IV1, 72, 95, 101, 164, 244.

Ahasuerus, II, 170.

Ahaz, I, 163; III, 235, 236;—’s days lengthened, IV1, 103.

Aher, see Elisha ben Abuyah.

Ahimelekh, IV1, 115.

Ahithophel, IV1, 31.

Akiba, Rabbi, I, 194; III, 253, 333; IV1, 53, 129.

‘Akko, III, 144.

Albo, Joseph, I, 37, 53, n. 2, 61, n. 2, 79, n. 1, 126, n. 2, 138, n. 1, 139, n. 2, 192, n. 1, 196, n. 1; II, 7, n. 1, 8, n., 44, n. 1, 45, n. 2, 63, n. 2, 74, n. 3, 80, n. 1, 106, n. 3, 107, n. 2, 118, n. 5, 131, n. 1, 133, n. 2, 154, n. 3, 162, n. 4, 170, n. 1, 183, n. 5, 193, n. 2; III, 19, n. 1, 28, n. 3, 37, n. 1, 45, n. 1, 65, n. 1, 130, n. 3, 133, n. 2, 153, n. 3, 160, n. 2, 163, n. 3, 240, n. 3, 247, n. 4, 256, n. 2, 316, n. 2, 323, n. 2; IV1, 2, n. 1, 15, n. 1, 16, n. 1, 21, n. 2, 28, n. 1, 58, n. 1, 74, n. 1, 75, n. 2, 83, n. 1, 91, n. 1, 114, n. 2, 124, n. 2, 126, n. 2, 134, n. 2, 163, n. 3, 175, n. 2, 179, n. 2, 188, n. 2, 209, n. 1, 230, n. 1, 249, n., 262, n. 1; IV2, 275, n. 1, 281, n. 1, 291, n. 4, 296, n. 2, 298, n. 1, 327, n. 1, 363, n. 1, 377, n. 2, 387, n. 1, 393, n. 3, 428, n. 3, 489, n. 3.

Alchemy, I, 88.

Alcuin, III, 242, n. 1.

Alexander, the Great, III, 228; IV1, 159; IV2, 420.

Alexander, of Aphrodisias, IV2, 276, n. 2.

Alfarabi, holds that the first mover is dependent upon the First Cause, III, 31.

Alfasi, Halakot of, IV2, 299, n. 1.

Algazali, II, 80, n. 1; III, 54, n. 1;—criticizes philosophic explanation of origin of plurality, II, 73.

Al-Harizi, IV1, 30, n. 1.

Alkabitius, IV1, 10, n. 1.

Aluphim, the, IV1, 100.

Amalek, I, 29, 156; III, 221; IV1, 239, 243, 244, 245, 248, n. 5.

Amalekite nation, the, IV2, 425.

Ammi, Rabbi, I, 116; IV1, 118; IV2, 407.

Ammon, children of, IV1, 241.

Ammonite nation, the, IV2, 425.

Amon, III, 196.

Amoraim, the, III, 144.

Amos, IV1, 67.

Amoz, IV1, 180.

Anathoth, men of, IV1, 142.

Angels, II, 66 ff.; see also Separate Intelligences.

Antiochus, IV2, 418, 420, 427.

Antipope, Benedict, I, xv.

Antoninus, IV2, 334.

Aphrodisias, Alexander of, IV2, 276, n. 2.

Apostles, the, III, 240, 241.

Aquinas, Thomas, I, xix; II, 75, n. 2, 126, n. 1; III, 218, n. 2;—classification of law of, I, 2, n. 1, 79, n. 1;—’s classification of biblical laws, III, 218, n. 2; see also law.

Arab,—s, I, 193; II, 55, 67, n. 1;—philosophers, on origin of plurality, II, 73; IV2, 496, n. 3.

Arabah, II, 120.

Arabot, IV2, 310.

Aragon, king of, I, xv.

Aram, king of, II, 217.

Aramaic, language, III, 144;—translation of Pentateuch, I, 52, n. 1.

Aristotelians, Jewish, II, 44, n. 1; IV2, 281, n. 2.

Aristotle, I, xxii, 1, 11, 72, n. 1, 79, n. 2:—on architectonic arts, I, 77, n. 1; III, 263, n. 2:—criticizes Plato, I, 82; 117, 119:—on the possibility of knowledge, I, 138, n. 1, 139, n. 1:—on the sense of touch, I, 192, n. 1:—on hexagonal cells of bees, I, 204:—on spontaneous generation, II, 7, 8, 30, 31:—on the composition of body, II, 38:—on homonym and synonym, II, 45, n. 3:—on active intellect, II, 62, n. 1; IV2, 320, n. 1;—on color, II, 69, n. 1;—on dialectical and apodictic propositions, II, 78, n. 1; 100, n. 3:—on time, I, 11; II, 110–114, 111, n. 2; time continuous quantity, III, 259, n. 1:—on eternity of the world, I, 117, 119; II, 113;—on motion, II, 116, n. 1; IV1, 9, n. 2; II, 118, n. 5:—on privation, II, 143, n. 2:—on meaning of ‘same,’ II, 170, n. 1:—on light II, 188, n. 8:—’s simile of the bat, II, 189, n. 2; III, 214, n. 3:—holds that man alone has will, II, 211, n. 2:—holds that the elements are not in their purity, II, 214, n. 3:—on the transition between plant, animal and man, III, 5, nn. 1 and 2:—on human purpose, III, 14, n. 1:—on entelechy, III, 19, n. 1; 23, n. 1, 28, n. 3:—on relation of first mover to First Cause, III, 31:—on the doctrine of the mean, III, 58, n. 1, 127, n. 1:—on the axioms, III, 87, n. 1:—on the four causes, III, 217, n. 2:—on difference between sublunar and superlunar world, III, 294, n. 1:—on liberality, III, 304, n. 1:—on love or friendship, III, 316, n. 2, 323, n. 2, 327, n. 1, 331, n. 2, 338, n. 1, 339, n. 4, 340, n. 1, 342, n. 1:—on contraries, III, 336, n. 2, 347, n. 2:—on comets, IV1, 16, n. 1, 17, n. 3:—on freedom, IV1, 36, n. 2:—on God’s knowledge of particulars, IV1, 50:—on the natural places of the elements, IV1, 58, n. 1:—on chance, IV1, 66, n. 1:—on proof, IV1, 77, n. 5:—on rumination, IV1, 91, n. 1:—on the survival of the functions of the soul, IV1, 138, n. 3:—on acts voluntary and involuntary, IV1, 262, n. 1:—on difference between human and animal soul, IV2, 275, n. 1; 293, n. 2:—on the common sense, IV2, 319, n. 1:—on continuous and discrete quantity, IV2, 368, n. 3; 496, n. 3:—’s definition of place criticized by Crescas II, 107, n. 2:—’s definition of space criticized by Albo, II, 104–106:—’s objection to the identification of space with vacuum answered, II, 106, 107:—maintained immortality of soul, IV2, 281:—on virtue, I, 84–85:—holds that soul is a hylic power, IV2, 286.

Asaph, I, 26, 151; IV1, 131, 133, 139, 141, 144, 181.

Asheri, Judah, testament of, III, 290, n. 1.

Ashi, Rab, III, 202; IV2, 414, 415, 426.

Ashkenazi, Eliezer, I, 36, n. 2.

Aspasius, I, 192, n. 1.

Assembly, the Great, IV2, 447; see Synagogue men of the Great.

Asshur, II, 18; IV1, 103.

Assyria, I, 46; III, 143, 144, 146, 197; IV2, 419;—king of, II, 18; III, 79, n. 9; IV1, 180, 183; IV2, 419;—land of, III, 198;—names of the Hebrew months came from, III, 146, 147.

Assyrian, exile, III, 143;—script adopted by the Hebrews, III, 143, 144.

Astrology, III, 65; IV1, 148 ff.; discussion of, IV1, 24 ff.; criticism of, IV2, 432 ff.

Attributes, the, applied to God, I, 9, 10, 12, 13; II, 40–206; God cannot have either essential or accidental—, II, 40; no corporeal emotions in God, II, 40; nor equality or similarity to other things, II, 40; nor defects, II, 40; doctrine of attributes derived from the four secondary dogmas of the first fundamental principle, II, 42–43:—denoting activity do not denote plurality of agent, II, 43:—different kinds, II, 47–51:—nature of, II, 51 ff.; view denying all attributes criticized, II, 53; in what manner corporeal affections are attributed to God, II, 81 ff.; joy as an attribute, II, 90 ff.; laughter as an attribute, II, 98 ff.; place as attribute, II, 101 ff.; position as attribute, II, 103 ff.; eternal as an attribute, II, 108 ff.; independence of time as an attribute, I, 130; II, 108–109; all divine—eternal in both directions, II, 115 ff.; in what sense positive—are ascribed to God, II, 122 ff.; discussion of view of Maimonides on, II, 129 ff.; how to understand certain attributes of doubtful meaning, II, 142 ff.; all divine attributes infinite in time and in worth, II, 149 ff.; ‘blessed’ as an attribute, II, 157 ff.; ‘truth’ as an attribute, II, 165 ff.; ‘light’ as an attribute, II, 187 ff.; wise men differ in degree according to their comprehension of the divine—, II, 197 ff.; the thirteen attributes revealed to Moses derived from acts of God, II, 134, 139–140.

Augustine, St., II, 14, n. 2.

Avarna, the Jebusite, III, 231.

Averroes (Ibn Roshd), I, 10, 154, n. 1, 192, n. 1; II, 8, n. 1, 35, n. 1, 77, 193, n. 2; IV1, 16, n. 1:—on the motion of the spheres, II, 66, 79 f.:—identifies the diurnal sphere with the sphere of the fixed stars, II, 59, n. 1; IV1, 14, n. 1:—holds that the First Cause is the immediate mover of the sphere, III, 31.

Avicenna (Ibn Sina), I, 10, 96; Canon of—, I, 154, n. 1; IV2, 399, n. 1:—on chain of causation from First Cause, II, 66; on origin of plurality from First Cause, II, 73, 80; on rainbow, II, 193; first mover an effect of First Cause, III, 31:—on number of celestial spheres, II, 59, n. 1; IV1, 14, n. 1.

Azariah, I, 86, 157, 163, 174; II, 15; IV1, 147.

BAAL, II, 218; IV1, 115, 244.

Baal Peor, IV1, 149, 150, 192.

Babel, IV2, 432.

Babylon, I, 45, 147, 151; III, 197, 198; IV1, 144; IV2, 350, 419, 428, 440.

Bacon, Roger, I, 204; IV2, 436, n. 1.

Baer, II, 11, n. 2; III, 9, n. 1, 10, n. 1, 11, n. 5, 12, n. 2.

Bahya, Ibn Pakuda, I, xvii; II, 57, n. 2; III, 54, n. 1.

Balaam, III, 73, 186, 226:—ass of, I, 52:—prophetic power of, III, 186.

Baladan, king, I, 45.

Balak, III, 73.

Bamberger, N., IV2, 299, n. 1.

Bamberger, S., IV2, 299, n. 1.

Baraita, the, IV2, 378.

Barak, IV1, 94.

Baruch, son of Neriyah, III, 106.

Barzillai, the Gileadite, IV1, 249.

Bathsheba, I, 29; III, 257; IV1, 72, 233, 242, 250, 251.

Bedersi, Jedaiah ben Abraham, II, 206, n. 3.

Beer-Sheba, I, 159; III, 73.

Behai, R., III, 221, n. 1.

Belief, defined, I, 165;—leads to eternal happiness, I, 173 ff.;—in the impossible does not lead to happiness, I, 178 ff.; six specific—s essential to existence of Torah, I, 181 ff.; permission to investigate foundation of religious—, I, 187 ff.

Ben Azzai, I, 194; II, 189; III, 254.

Ben Jacob, IV2, 339, n. 2.

Ben Jehudah, III, 5, n. 1.

Ben Zoma, II, 189, n. 1.

Benieto, Abraham, son of Jacob, I, xxiv.

Benjamin, tribe of, IV1, 244.

Benveniste, Abraham, I, xviii, n. 2.

Berechiah, R., IV2, 313.

Bessarion, I, xviii.

Bethel, II, 181; III, 120, 155.

Beth-Peor, IV1, 191.

Bible, the, I, 9, 13, 114, 126, 160, 167, 170, 176, 177, 180; II, 18, 24, 29, 48, 49, 58, 68, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87, 90, 93, 101, 102, 103, 108, 109, 113, 114, 117, 121, 130, 133, 143, 146, 170, 173, 175, 176, 178, 180, 182, 189, 190, 192, 195, 198, 209, 213, 214; III, 13, 16, 19, 22, 24, 41, 43, 60, 72, 76, 83, 94, 95, 99, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 137, 152, 156, 164, 174, 175, 195, 223, 227, 235, 236, 237, 241, 252, 266, 267, 291, 296, 304, 305, 309, 314, 322, 325, 332, 344, 346, 347, 349, 350, 351; IV1, 48, 94, 98, 103, 113, 119, 127, 128, 129, 146, 150, 153, 154, 157, 162, 164, 167, 173, 189, 197, 201, 202, 203, 205, 209, n. 1, 222, 227, 228, 229, 232, 241, 246, 247, 248, 249, 251, 267; IV2, 286, 288, 294, 326, 336, 341, 343, 348, 351, 355, 375, 376, 378, 396, 408, 428, 431, 441, 454, 456, 464, 473, 488, 493, 495.

Blessed, as an attribute of God, II, 157 ff.

Blessing,—s composed by men of Great Synagogue, I, 65; II, 90, 161; III, 45; IV2, 344;—s conferred by pious men, meaning of, IV1, 168 ff.

Boethus, IV2, 276, n. 3.

Boethusians, IV2, 276;—held that the human soul is composed of various faculties, IV2, 277;—maintained that reward and punishment is corporeal, IV2, 276–7, 279;—denied the immortality of the soul, IV2, 277.

Bonitz, II, 91, n. 1.

Bouché-Leclercq, IV1, 16, n. 1.

Bozrah, II, 119.

Brav, Aaron, Dr., II, 193, n. 1.

Brethren of Purity, a Mohammedan Order, III, 15.

Brüll, I, 188, n. 1; III, 233, n. 1, 298, n. 5; IV2, 298, n. 4.

Buber, II, 195, n. 2; IV2, 424, n. 2.

Burke, I, 204, n.; IV2, 436, n. 1.

Burnet, J., IV2, 486, n. 2.

Buxtorf, IV2, 428, n. 4.

CAIN, I, 16, 18, 87, 106, 107, 108; III, 61, 63, 127, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136; IV1, 188, 253;—sin of, III, 128, 129.

Calendar, change of, III, 142, 146, 169, 171, 177, 198.

Canaan, land of, I, 27; IV2, 390, 402.

Carmel, Mount, I, 159; III, 231; IV1, 172, 241.

Carneades, I, 138, n. 1.

Caro, Joseph, I, 53, n. 2.

Ceres, III, 218, n. 1.

Chaldeans, land of, III, 107.

Chebar, river, III, 107.

Chilion, IV1, 112.

Christian, criticism of the Torah by, III, 217 ff.

Christianity, Messiah a fundamental dogma of, I, 135–136, 201; resurrection a fundamental dogma of, I, 136, 201.

Cohen, Solomon Solis, I, xxvii.

Constantine, emperor, III, 242, n. 1.

Constantinople, IV2, 489, n. 3.

Conventional law, see law.

Coral, III, 5, n. 1.

Covenant, meaning of, IV2, 440 ff.;—of circumcision, purpose of, IV2, 447 ff.

Creation, ex nihilo, I, 50, 51, 55;—not a fundamental principle, I, 55, 117, 181;—not included by Maimonides among the principles, I, 58, 59, 69, 119.

Crescas, Hasdai, I, xviii, xix, xxii, xxvii, 2, n. 2, 36, n. 3, 117, n. 2, 200; II, 106, n. 2, 107, n. 2, 108, n. 5; III, 31, n. 3, 148, 163, n. 3; IV1, 6, n. 2; IV2, 282, n. 1, 3, 316, n. 1; his list of fundamental principles criticized, I, 26, 61, 62–63.

Cush, I, 46.

Cyrus, king, IV2, 416, 417, 419, 440.

DAMASCUS, II, 121, 217.

Dan, I, 159; III, 73.

Daniel, I, 163; II, 171; III, 162, 197; IV1, 111, 158, 183, 213; IV2, 348, 349, 351, 354, 407, 418, 419, 429.

Darius, the Mede, IV2, 419.

Daroça, I, xvi.

Dat, I, 2, n. 1; see Law.

Dathan, II, 170.

Daud, Abraham ibn, I, xvii, 53.

David, king, I, 22, 29, 81, 142, 175; II, 6, 9, 85, 86, 109, 116, 117, 120, 121, 138, 141, 153, 159, 162, 175; III, 26, 32, 160, 184, 193, 201, 212, 231, 234, 236, 243, 278, 283, 284, 285, 286, 294, 298, 307, 308, 309, 315, 330; IV1, 31, 37, 68, 69, 70, 72, 78, 94, 106, 141, 180, 182, 185, 187, 211, 212, 214, 216, 217, 218, 233, 237, 241, 242, 244, 249, 251, 253, 255; IV2, 381, 394, 421, 424, 425, 431, 443, 452, 454, 457, 459, 466, 471, 472, 474, 476, 478, 481, 482, 483, 484, 498; qualities of—, IV1, 250; David and Saul contrasted, IV1, 248 ff.

David, of Tivoli, I, xxv.

David, bar Yom Tob ben Bila or Bilia, I, 36, n. 2.

Davidson, Israel, I, xxvii.

Day of Atonement, III, 141, 227.

Deborah, IV1, 94; IV2, 435.

Decalogue, I, 18, 19; III, 171, 208, 242, 253; revealed by God directly, III, 245; embraces two classes of commandments, III, 246 ff.; fourth commandment in Exodus and Deuteronomy compared, III, 247 ff.

Delambre, III, 314, n. 1.

Dieterici, III, 15, n. 1.

Divine law, see law.

Duran, Simon b. Zemach, I, xxii, 39, n. 1, 40, n. 1, 45, n. 1, 49, n. 1, 57, n. 1, 99, n. 1, 124, n. 3, 128, n. 3; II, 8, n., 44, n. 1, 193, n. 2; III, 5, n. 1, 54, n. 1, 72, n. 2, 214, n. 1, 217, n. 1; IV1, 49, n. 5, 52, n. 1, 53, n. 4, 57, n. 1, 60, n. 5, 63, n. 3, 70, n. 4, 71, n. 3, 75, n. 3, 81, n. 4, 90, n. 3, 91, n. 1, 92, n. 2, 93, n. 3, 99, n. 1, 100, n. 1, 102, n. 2, 103, n. 4, 104, n. 1, 105, n. 1, 106, n. 2, 108, n. 1, 109, n. 4, 110, n. 1, 111, n. 1, 112, n. 1, 114, n. 1, 115, n. 2, 119, n. 2, 197, n. 4; IV2, 287, n. 1, 288, n. 2, 304, n. 5.

EBER, IV2, 402, 404:—school of, III, 96.

Ecclesiastes, book of, III, 292, 334; IV1, 132, 210, 265.

Eden, garden of, I, 104, 204; III, 194; IV2, 297, 298, 299, 309, 312, 316.

Edom, I, 170; II, 119, 122; IV2, 428, 429:—king of, IV1, 74, 229, 230, 231, 241.

Edomite, nation, III, 222; IV2, 429.

Efros, I. I., II, 45, n. 3, 48, n. 1, 106, n. 2; IV1, 152, n. 2.

Egypt, I, 46, 128, 129, 150, 151, 163; II, 83, 120, 126, 177, 182; III, 73, 74, 100, 142, 147, 240, 248, 249; IV1, 183; IV2, 410, 425, 488;—bondage of, III, 247;—exodus from, III, 142, 146, 147, 148, 199; IV1, 13;—king of, II, 170;—land of, III, 99, 163, 170, 230; IV1, 126; IV2, 390;—magicians of, III, 173, 177;—people of, III, 74.

Egyptian,—s, II, 83; IV1, 70;—house of, IV1, 102.

Eldad, III, 103.

Eleazar, Rabbi, II, 204; IV1, 40.

Eli, III, 105; IV1, 94, 115, 117, 163, 185.

Eliab, IV2, 431.

Eliezer, Rabbi, I, 156; II, 205; IV2, 333.

Eliezer, R., the Great, same as R. Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, I, 50; IV2, 406.

Eliezer, R., son of R. Jose, IV2, 307.

Elihu, I, 25, 26; III, 215; IV1, 54, 55, 63, 64, 68, 75, 82, 86, 87, 88, 95, 97, 110; IV2, 359.

Elijah, I, 159, 174; II, 109, 178, 179, 212, 213; III, 96, 98, 102, 231, 276; IV1, 66, 101, 164, 172, 173, 174, 199; IV2, 300, 301, 305, 338, 339, 340, 347, 348, 426, 430, 436, 487, 495:—oath of, I, 125;—vision of, I, 14; II, 213, 217, 218.

Elijah, of Gennazano, I, xxii, n. 1.

Elimelech, IV1, 112.

Eliphaz, I, 25, 27; III, 221; IV1, 54, 63, 64, 70, 106, 109, 166, 167, 185, 199;—held that all acts are free, IV1, 42–43.

Elisha, I, 17, 163, 174, 180; II, 121, 217, 218; III, 93, 96, 98, 102, 283; IV1, 171, 172, 173, 174, 199; IV2, 340, 341, 342.

Elisha, ben Abuya, I, 53, 113; II, 183, n. 3.

Enoch, II, 49, 109, 180, n. 1.

Ephraim, III, 236, 349, 350; IV1, 174.

Ephron, the Hittite, III, 241.

Epicurean,—s, I, 96, 98, 99, 126; II, 74; IV2, 378, n. 3;—believed that God is the soul of the spheres, III, 159, 165;—sect of, I, 101; III, 247, n. 5.

Epicurus, I, 99; II, 74; III, 165; IV2, 378, n. 3.

Epstein, IV2, 489, n. 3.

‘Erub, III, 126.

Esau, III, 221, 349; IV1, 100, 168, 169, 170, 177, 190.

Eternal law, I, xx, 2, n. 1.

Eternity of world, see Creation;—of God, see Time, independence of;—of the Torah, see Immutability; biblical terms denoting—, III, 139–141.

Ethan, the Ezrahite, IV2, 476.

Ethiopia,—ns, II, 55, 170.

Euclid, II, 105; IV2, 430.

Eudoxus, IV1, 17, n. 3.

Eve, I, 104, 105, 106, 149; III, 128; IV1, 266.

Existence, II, 4; different modes of, I, 32; IV2, 430–436;—as applied to God, II, 4 ff.

Existence of God, as a principle, I, xix, 38, 56, 64, 96–100, 106, 120, 121, 122, 149, 199, 202; II, 1, et seq.; III, 157–158, 159, 170, 208; IV1, 20, 22, 267;—denied by Epicurus, I, 99;—derivatives of, I, 64–65, 121, 122, 129–131, 134, 200, 202; II, 37–39, 40; III, 260;—Maimonides on, II, 29–35;—symbolized by “kingdoms,” I, 66.

Exodus, from Egypt, III, 163, 178, 199; IV1, 13.

Ezekiel, II, 192; III, 106, 107, 150, 195, 197, 223, 239; IV1, 113, 116, 270; IV2, 347, 350, 415, 425, 426, 427;—vision of, III, 92.

Ezra, I, 20: IV1, 183; IV2, 422, 427;—change of calendar by, III, 142, 198;—changed mode of writing, III, 143, 144, 177, 198.

FEAR, of God, III, 298 ff.; joy and—not incompatible, III, 305–315.

Ferdinand, king of Aragon, I, xv.

First Cause, II, 59–66, 73, 188;—needs no acts of its own or of another to acquire perfection, III, 35–36;—the immediate mover, III, 31;—precedes the prime mover, according to ancient philosophers, III, 31.

Form, see soul, matter.

Freedom of will, I, 70;—a principle of conventional law, I, 5, 93–96;—Crescas criticized, I, 63;—discussion of, IV1, 34–45;—not a principle of divine law, I, 24, 94, 95, 136, 137; IV1, 1.

Freytag, IV1, 178, n. 3.

Friedlander, G., I, 50, n. 2.

Friedmann, III, 11, n. 1, 119, n. 3, 125, n. 2; IV1, 177, n. 4, 192, n. 2; IV2, 288, n. 3, 408, n. 2.

GABRIEL, II, 68; IV1, 147.

Gad, the seer, IV1, 250.

Galipapa, Hayim, R., on prophecies of Daniel, IV2, 418.

Gazzali, see Algazali.

Geba, II, 120.

Gedaliah, b. Solomon, IV1, 24, n. 1.

Gehazi, IV2, 342.

Gehenna, I, 33.

Gemara, the, I, 44, 47, 99; III, 143; IV1, 261; IV2, 306, 307, 311, 351, 414.

Genebrardus, G., III, 217, n. 1. 218, n. 1.

Geomancy, IV2, 435.

Gerona, Jewish community of, I, xv.

Gerondi, Rabbenu Nissim, IV2, 408.

Gershon, ben Solomon, IV1, 16, n. 1.

Gersonides, I, xviii, 52, n. 3; III, 5, n. 1, 70, n. 1; IV1, 24, n. 1; IV2, 281, n. 2, 398, n. 1.

Gesenius, IV1, 149, n. 1.

Gibeon, IV1, 202.

Gideon, II, 177, 182.

Gilgal, IV1, 243, 245.

Ginzberg, Louis, I, xxv, 36, n. 2, 170, n. 2; II, 62, n. 1, 183, n. 5; III, 65, n. 1, 72, n. 2, 197, n. 1, 290, n. 1; IV1, 61, n. 2, 70, n. 3, 107, n. 1; IV2, 298, n. 2, 339, n. 2.

Glaucoma, II, 193, n. 1.

God, attributes applied to, see Attributes;—existence of, see Existence of God;—incorporeality of, see Incorporeality of God;—unity of, see Unity of God; see also Abraham, Job, Law, Maimonides.

Gog, II, 100; IV2, 427, 428; see also Magog.

Goliath, IV1, 249.

Good, the perfect, IV2, 485 ff.

Gospel, law of, see law.

Gospels, the, III, 222, 234, 235, 236.

Goths, the, IV2, 427, 428.

Greece, IV2, 420:—king of, IV2, 427:—kingdom of, IV2, 419, 420.

Grodinsky, Julius, I, xxvii.

Grotius, Hugo, I, xxiii.

Guttmann, J., I, xxii, n. 1, 57, n. 1; III, 217, n. 1; IV1, 52, n. 1; IV2, 287, n. 1, 288, n. 2.

HABAKKUK, I, 22. 26; II, 190; III, 283, 289; IV1, 132, 141, 143, 144; IV2, 472.

Hagar, II, 181.

Haggai, III, 98, 106.

Hagiographa, the, IV2, 394.

Hai, R., III, 65.

Halevi, Aaron, on reward after death, I, 30; IV2, 299.

Halevi, Judah, see Judah Halevi.

Halevi, Zerachiah, II, 80, n. 1.

Hammer-Purgstall, II, 172, n. 1.

Hamor, sons of, III, 240, 241.

Hanania, Rabbi, son of Akashia, III, 272.

Hananiah, I, 86, 157, 163, 174; II, 15; IV1, 147.

Hananiah, son of Azzur, I, 160, 161; IV2, 438.

Hanina, Rabbi, II, 137, 152.

Hanina, Rabbi, son of Dosa, I, 157, 163, 174; III, 98, 275, 282; IV1, 198; IV2, 487.

Hanina, Rabbi, son of Teradyon, III, 273, 276, 282.

Hannah, III, 140; IV1, 180, 182.

Happiness, eternal,—attained by belief rather than philosophical knowledge, I, 173 ff.; belief in the impossible does not lead to—, I, 178 ff.

Hashmal, meaning of, I, 14; II, 214, 215.

Hasmoneans, the, IV2, 349, 350, 416, 418, 427, 429.

Hazael, II, 121, 217, 218.

Hebron, III, 240; IV1, 242.

Heliodorus, I, 192, n. 1.

Heman, the Ezrachite, IV2, 475.

Heraclitus, IV2, 486.

Heresy, defined, I, 49 ff.

Herod, III, 236:—temple of, IV2, 416.

Hezekiah, king, I, 44, 45, 46, 163; III, 183; IV1, 103, 128, 129, 150, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185; IV2, 414, 415;—cure of, III, 98.

Higger, Michael, I, xxvi.

Hilkiah, priest, III, 196.

Hillel, Rabbi, I, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 52, n. 2;—school of, IV2, 285.

Hippocrates, III, 306.

Hiram, king, III, 162.

Hirschfeld, I, 105, n. 1; IV1, 6, n. 1; IV2, 398, n. 1.

Hisda, Rab, III, 144, 145.

Hiyya, R., III, 8.

Honein, III, 306, n. 1.

Honi ha-Me‘aggel, I, 157; III, 98; IV1, 66.

Hope, IV2, 457; three kinds of, IV2, 457 ff.; general and particular—, IV2, 463 ff.; difficulty raised and answered, IV2, 467 ff.

Horeb, Mount, I, 14; II, 213; III, 102; IV1, 195, 203.

Horovitz, II, 142.

Horten, III, 31, n. 1, 4.

Hosea, IV1, 232.

Human law, see law.

Husik, I., I, xviii, n. 1., xx, n. 2, 36, n. 1, 3, 61, n. 2, 72, n. 2, 200, n. 1; II, 14, n. 2, 45, n. 3, 61, n. 2, 67, n. 1, 118, n. 5, 196, n. 3; III, 24, n. 1, 42, n. 2, 70, n. 1, 148, n. 3; IV1, 6, n. 2; IV2, 276, n. 2, 281, n. 2, 288, n. 1, 319, n. 1, 384, n. 1, 386, n. 3, 496, n. 3.

IBN Adret, Solomon, see Solomon, ibn Adret.

Ibn Bal‘am, Abu Zakarya Yahya, I, 46.

Ibn Daud, Abraham, see Abraham, ibn Daud.

Ibn Ezra, Abraham, IV1, 14, n. 1, 152, n. 2, 201, 210; IV2, 422;—on the motion of the spheres, IV1, 15;—on astrology, IV1, 33.

Ibn Gabirol, Solomon, see Solomon, ibn Gabirol.

Ibn Hisdai, Abraham, see Abraham, ibn Hisdai.

Ibn Janah, IV1, 370.

Ibn Kaspi, III, 238, n. 2.

Ibn Roshd, see Averroes.

Ibn Sabba, IV2, 489, n. 3.

Ibn Sina, see Avicenna.

Ibn Tibbon, Moses, IV1, 16, n. 1.

Ibn Tibbon, Samuel, I, 79, n. 2; IV1, 16, n. 1.

Iddo, the prophet, III, 155, 180.

Immortality of Soul, see Soul, immortality of.

Immutability of Torah, See Torah, immutability of.

Impossible, the,—of two kinds, I, 178 ff.; belief in—does not lead to happiness, I, 178 ff.

Incorporeality of God, II, 26 ff., 81 ff.

Independence of time, as a divine attribute, I, 130; II, 108–109.

India, II, 170.

Intelligences, see Separate Intelligences.

Isaac, I, 7, 18, 171; II, 182; III, 124, 155, 174, 333; IV1, 34, 102, 123, 127, 168, 169, 170, 176, 177, 180, 190; IV2, 345, n. 1, 402, 412;—sacrifice of, I, 67; III, 332.

Isaac, b. Joseph, III, 163, n. 3.

Isaiah, I, 164; II, 18, 22; III, 98, 152, 154, 278, 283, 287; IV1, 19, 212, 271; IV2, 439.

Ish-bosheth, IV1, 242.

Ishmael, I, 170; II, 118; IV2, 429.

Ishmael, Rabbi, I, 60, n. 4; III, 203; IV2, 298.

Israel, I, 17, 19, 20, 23, 98, 125, 129, 150, 159, 161, 166, 168, 170, 173, 180, 183, 184, 186, 198; II, 65, 81, 82, 83, 100, n. 1, 102, 122, 134, 170, 188, 213, 217, 218; III, 8, 13, 56, 62, 73, 74, 76, 99, 100, 105, 107, 108, 124, 128, 130, 140, 143, 154, 155, 156, 157, 165, 167, 168, 171, 172, 175, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 202, 203, 204, 206, 211, 212, 216, 226, 227, 228, 231, 235, 237, 239, 245, 248, 249, 250, 254, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 277, 278, 282, 291, 296, 309, 314, 319, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350; IV1, 19, 26, 32, 69, 70, 72, 95, 102, 103, 113, 114, 130, 133, 137, 141, 144, 155, 156, 170, 175, 180, 183, 191, 193, 194, 199, 202, 203, 205, 206, 209, 212, 228, 229, 230, 231, 241, 242, 245, 248, n. 5; IV2, 307, 308, 311, 313, 346, 350, 351, 355, 362, 378, 411, 414, 415, 424, 425, 426, 428, 429, 440, 446, 450, 453, 456, 466, 467, 469, 472, 480, 484, 488, 490;—camp of, II, 174;—children of, I, 59, 100; II, 101, 173, 178; III, 108, 138, 147, 211, 333;—congregation of, II, 63, 64;—community of, I, 44, 47;—families of, II, 175;—kings of, I, 68; III, 159;—kingdom of, III, 79, n. 7;—land of, II, 119, 120; IV1, 184;—nation of, II, 135;—people of, III, 104;—religion of, III, 79, n. 7;—sages of, I, 30, 50;—temple of, II, 119;—Torah given to, II, 65; III, 136, 144;—tribes of, III, 119; IV2, 422;—wise men of, III, 197.

Issachar, IV2, 488, 489, 490.

Italy, I, xviii, 50; IV2, 428.

JACOB, I, 7, 114, 152, 168, 171; II, 49, 118, 146, 159, 181, 182; III, 73, 120, 174, 215, 240, 349; IV1, 19, 102, 113, 168, 170; IV2, 345, n. 1, 379, 380, 402, 412, 424.

Jacob, ben Machir, II, 8, n.

Jael, IV2, 435.

Jaré, Giuseppe, III, 217, n. 1.

Jastrow, Marcus, I, 41, n. 1; III, 126, n. 3, 131, n. 1; IV1, 114, n. 4, 149, n. 1; IV2, 408, n. 2.

Jaulus, I, xxii, n. 1, 45, n. 1, 49, n. 1, 99, n. 1, 124, n. 3; IV1, 49, n. 5.

Jehoiachin, III, 197; IV1, 111.

Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, IV1, 174.

Jehoshaphat, valley of, IV2, 355.

Jehu, son of Nimshi, II, 217, 218; IV1, 244.

Jellinek, III, 66, n. 1; IV1, 107, n. 1.

Jephthah, the Gileadite, IV2, 229;—daughter of, III, 124.

Jeremiah, I, 26; III, 56, 98, 106, 169, 171, 178, 196, 199; IV1, 61, 111, 142, 144, 209, n. 1, 236; IV2, 465.

Jericho, II, 184.

Jerome, III, 244.

Jerome, de Sancta Fide, I, xv, xvi, xvii.

Jerusalem, I, 13, 46, 53, n. 3, 147; II, 119, 120, 176, III, 139, 194, 195, 197; 212, 213, 227; IV1, 111, 114, 142, 151; IV2, 310, 422, 440.

Jesse, I, 45; III, 330.

Jesus, III, 217, 219, 222, 234, 235, 236, 239, 242, 244; IV2, 428;—body of, III, 232;—brothers of, III, 235;—teaching of, compared with Torah, III, 217 ff.

Jevons, III, 87, n. 1.

Jewish, dogma, I, xix;—faith, I, xvii, xix;—literature, II, 180, n. 1;—philosophers, I, xviii;—philosophic writings, I, xix;—sages, I, 44;—scholars, I, 49.

Jezebel, II, 213.

Joab, II, 122.

Job, I, 25, 27, 140, 141; III, 160, 298, 302, 303; IV1, 54, 58, 59, 65, 76, 82, 86, 88, 90, 95, 98, 119, 120, 128, 131, 142, 144, 146, 160, 161, 162, 164, 166, 167, 199, 238; IV2, 323, 454;—Moses author of the book of, IV1, 56;—held that fortunes of man are determined by the heavenly bodies, IV1, 42–43;—held that God pays no attention to the individual man, IV1, 51;—purpose of the book of, IV1, 56;—sin of, IV1, 55.

Joel, I, xxii, n. 1; IV1, 74, 236; IV2, 282, n. 3.

Johanan, Rabbi, II, 134; III, 8, 269, 272; IV2, 426.

John Hyrcanus, IV2, 416, n. 7.

Jonah, I, 163; IV1, 151, 180, 216.

Jonathan, III, 330.

Jonathan, ben Uzziel, I, 52; III, 52.

Jose, ben Joezer, IV2, 309.

Jose, Rabbi, son of Kisma, III, 273.

Joseph, III, 240; IV1, 36, 37, 69, 107.

Joseph, ben Gorion, IV2, 427.

Joseph, son of Samuel, the Spaniard, I, xxv.

Joseph, ibn Zaddik, II, 14, n. 2.

Joseph, husband of Miriam, III, 234, 235.

Josephus, IV2, 427, n. 5.

Joshua, I, 13; II, 175, 184, 198; III, 102, 103, 202; IV1, 171, 191, 202; IV2, 309.

Joshua, Rabbi, III, 205.

Joshua, R., son of Hanania, IV1, 70; IV2, 348.

Joshua, son of Jehozadak, III, 52; IV2, 396.

Joshua, ben Joseph ibn Vives ha-Lorki, I, xv.

Joshua, Rabbi, son of Levi, I, 110, 112; IV2, 330.

Josiah, III, 183, 196.

Josippon, or Yosippon, IV2, 427, n. 5.

Joy, as applied to God, II, 90 ff.;—gives completeness to performance of commandment, III, 304 ff.

Judah, III, 139, 235, 236, 310; IV1, 94, 242; IV2, 421, 422, 423;—children of, IV1, 74;—house of, IV1, 113;—kings of, I, 44, 45, 163; II, 122; III, 159, 189; IV1, 150, 174; IV2, 414;—land of, II, 120;—tribe of, IV1, 244.

Judah, Al-Harizi, IV1, 30, n. 1.

Judah, Rab, IV1, 262; IV2, 309, 351.

Judah, R., III, 144, n. 2, 180, 237, n. 6, 299.

Judah, Rabbi, ha-Nasi, II, 215; III, 276, n. 2; IV2, 338.

Judah, Rabbi, son of Rabbi Simon, II, 113, 195, 196.

Judah, Gedaliah, IV2, 489, n. 3.

Judah, Halevi, I, xvii, xviii, 105, n. 1; IV2, 398, n. 1, 428, n. 4.

Judeo-Christians, IV2, 378, n. 3.

KALONYMUS, ben David ben Todros, II, 80, n. 1; III, 45, n. 1.

Kalonymus, b. Kalonymus, III, 15, n. 1.

Kaufmann, III, 85, n. 1; IV2, 409, n. 2.

Kimhi, David, IV2, 369.

King, must have six qualities, IV1, 245.

“Kingdoms,” I, 65;—refers to the principle existence of God, I, 66.

Kish, the Benjaminite, III, 241.

Kittim, IV2, 428, 429.

Klatzkin, J., I, 139, n. 1.

Knowledge, denied by an ancient philosopher, I, 137;—of God, I, 24;—character of unknown, IV1, 18, 23;—denied by the philosophers, IV1, 11;—does not embrace particulars, according to Aristotle, IV1, 50;—infinity of, IV1, 19, 23;—Maimonides on, IV1, 22;—Saadia Gaon on, IV1, 5–6.

Korah, I, 117, 119, 187;—rebellion of, I, 55;—sons of, IV2, 450.

LABAN, IV1, 102; IV2, 440.

Landau, L., I, 188, n. 1.

Laughter, applied to God, II, 98 ff.

Lauterbach, J. Z., I, xxvii.

Law,—s, classification of, I, xix, 2, n. 1, 4, 78; Thomas Aquinas on, I, 2, n. 1;—conventional, I, xix, 20, 73, 78, 146; III, 264, 265; IV2, 274; explanation of, I, 76; defects of, I, 5, 80–91; inferior to divine—, I, 5, 79–80, 81–92; its existence depends only on a ruler, or king, or judge, I, 73; its superiority to natural—, I, 79; ordered by wise men, I, 78; principles of, I, 5, 63, 93–96; purpose of, I, 79; does not include any one of the three parts of the Torah, III, 209, 211, 216;—divine, I, xix, 2, n. 1, 6, 17, 19, 43 ff., 63, 78, 94, 95, 103, 117, 121, 127, 136, 146, 168, 181, 183, 185, 188, 191, 192, 193, 194, 199, 201, 202; II, 30; III, 147, 171, 174; bases of in law of Moses, I, 5, 100 ff.; content of, I, 121; whether one or more, I, 195, 196; whether it is subject to change, III, 112, 113, 118; the—which existed before Moses underwent changes, III, 120; defined, I, 77; difference between genuine divine—and spurious, I, 7, 153 ff.; necessity of, I, 77; not fulfilled by idolatrous nations, I, 172; ordered by God, I, 78; principles of, I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 24, 35, 37, 38, 43, 44, 64, 96–100, 108, 120, 134, 199; II, 5; IV1, 268; IV2, 273; perfection of, I, 81, 86, 88, 91;—purpose of, I, 79; IV2, 274; qualities of alluded to in Psalm 19, I, 5, 80–92; roots of, I, 5, 96 ff.; superiority of over coventional and natural—, I, 5, 79–80, 92; number of principles of according to Crescas, I, 36, 61; according to Maimonides, I, 33, 56;—eternal, I, 2, n. 1;—of the Gospels (lex nova), I, 2, n. 1;—human, I, 2, n. 1;—natural, I, xix, 2, n. 1, 72–73, 78, 118; IV1, 65; does not control fertility (childbirth), rain or resurrection, IV1, 66; its inferiority to conventional—, I, 79; necessity of, I, 4, 70 ff. purpose of, I, 79;—of Abraham, I, 64, 78; IV2, 405;—of Adam, I, 18, 64, 149; III, 118; IV2, 398;—of Moses, I, xv, xxi, 4, 5, 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 32, 36, 37, 44, 47, 49, 55, 57, 59, 64, 65, 79, 100, 132, 135, 136, 172, 181, 183, 184, 186, 198, 200, 201; II, 4; III, 120, 126, 138, 171, 173, 189, 190, 196, 218, 219, 221, 222, 224, 228, 234, 236, 237, 240, 242, 243, 277, 278; IV2, 277, 279, 308, 402, 404, 405, 413, 414;—oral, see Oral law, Talmud;—written, see Torah;—of Noah, I, 18, 19, 69, 82, 184, 198; III, 118, 119, n. 2, 120, 127, 128, 135, 171, 179, 238, 243; IV2, 398, 400, 402, 404, 412, 424.

Levi, II, 165;—sons of, IV2, 422;—tribe of III, 198.

Levi, ben Gerson, see Gersonides.

Lewes, G. H., II, 7, n. 1.

Lex, see Law.

Lex aeterna, see Eternal Law.

Lex divina, see Law, divine.

Lex humana, see Law, human.

Lex naturalis, see Law, natural.

Light, applied to God, II, 187 ff.

Logos, the, II, 180, n. 1.

Lorki, Joshua, I, 188, n. 1.

Lot, III, 293; IV1, 102.

Love, of God, III, 316, 318 ff., 326 ff., 328 ff.;—of three kinds, III, 316;—of the good, of the useful, of the agreeable, III, 316 ff.; human love changes with advance in years, III, 321 ff.; three kinds of—between friends, III, 339 ff.;—of equality, III, 339; natural—, III, 339 ff.; proportional love, III, 340 ff.; God’s love of man, 336 ff.; is proportional—, III, 343; denominated heshek, III, 347; sufferings of—, IV1, 118 ff.

Luke, gospel of, III, 234.

Lulab, III, 125.

Luna, Pedro da, I, xv.

MACCABEAN, revolt, IV2, 298, n. 2;—coin, III, 144–5.

Magnet, I, 147, 148, 149, 180; IV1, 18; IV2, 340.

Magog, II, 100.

Mahli, sons of, III, 198.

Mahlon, IV1, 112.

Maier, I, 138, n. 1, 139, n. 2.

Maimonides, Moses, I, xviii, xix, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 14, 18, 19, 36, n. 1, 44, 71, n. 1, 79, n. 2, 122, 135, 184, n. 1, 192, 193, 202; II, 2, 32, n. 1, 48, 59, 67, n. 4, 89, 95, 96, n. 1, 196, n. 3, 206, n. 2, 209, n. 1, 211, 213, 214; III, 27, n. 1, 70, n. 1, 92, 116, 119, 157, 158, 159, 202, 213, 224, n. 2, 324, n. 1; IV1, 9, n. 1, 10, 14, n. 1, 15, 58, n. 1, 136, 196; IV2, 282, n. 1, 298, n. 4, 316, 323, 453;—’s fundamental principles criticized, I, 4, 17, 36, 47, 56, 58, 60, 69, 94, 95, 119, 120, 124, 127, 130, 132; III, 190:—criticized by Abraham ben David, I, 53:—on divine attributes II, 130–131, 148; attributes of activity may be used in prayer, II, 135; essential attributes not to be taken in positive sense, II, 137:—’s opinion on knowledge of God accepted, I, 24; IV1, 18, 23; contingency vs. God’s foreknowledge, IV1, 18, 22; knowledge and Providence two separate dogmas, I, 136; the tetragrammaton, II; 174; his opinion that the first two commandments were heard by reason criticized, III, 157; immutability of the Torah, III, 120, 121, 190, 191; the opinion criticized, III, 126, 148, 190–91;—’s opinion concerning reward after death accepted, I, 30; IV2, 281, 297, 354, 412;—on resurrection, IV2, 290, 347;—on chain of causation from First Cause, II, 66;—on existence of God, II, 29–35;—on creation, I, 51; on Messiah, I, 44, 65; on freedom, I, 59; belief in Moses not due to miracles, I, 162; voluntary agent acts at one time and not at another, I, 182; one must investigate one’s religion, I, 191; God’s essence unknown, II, 5; many activities may come from one agent, II, 45; plurality due to intermediate beings, II, 80:—on time, II, 111;—on difference between righteous men, II, 199; knowledge only finds favor in God’s sight, III, 24;—on prophecy of Moses, III, 94; performance of a single commandment may bestow eternal life, III, 272, 273; Providence varies with intellectual power, IV1, 78; theodicy, IV1, 110; on meaning of ‘trial,’ IV1, 124; on Moses’ sin at Meribah, IV1, 194; soul is a homonym, IV2, 278.

Malachi, III, 98, 106; IV1, 132; IV2, 422, 430.

Malkuyyot, I, 4.

Malter, I, 157, n. 3, 4, 5; II, 65, n. 4, 68, n. 5; III, 276, n. 4, 282, n. 1, 2; IV1, 66, n. 1, 2, 67, n. 4, 102, n. 1, 114, n. 2, 158, n. 2, 198, n. 3, 199, n. 1, 254, n. 2; IV2, 308, n. 3, 312, n. 2.

Mamla, I, 18; IV1, 163.

Manasseh, see Menasseh.

Mani, II, 74.

Mani, R., IV1, 248, n. 5.

Manichaeans, II, 74; IV2, 378, n. 3.

Manichaeism, II, 74, n. 2.

Manoah, II, 182.

Marah, I, 156; IV2, 408, 410, 411.

Martini, Raymond, I, xvi; IV2, 489, n. 3.

Marx, Alexander, I, xxvi.

Masorah, the, III, 199, 286.

Mattathias, IV2, 418.

Matter, active intellect free from, IV2, 320;—of man is thicker and coarser than that of the spheres, III, 38;—of the spheres is permanent, IV2, 303.

Matthew, gospel of, I, xxiii; III, 234, 235, 236.

Meat, permission and prohibition of to Adam, Noah, Moses, I, 150; III, 128 ff.

Medad, III, 103.

Media, IV2, 416, 419, 420.

Medigo, Joseph Solomon del, I, 40, n. 1.

Meir, Rabbi, III, 79, 80, 81, 84; IV2, 283.

“Memorials,” I, 65, 67;—refers to the principle of reward and punishment, I, 66.

Menasseh, I, 18; III, 154, 196, 207; IV1, 150, 151, 174.

Meribah, waters of, I, 28; IV1, 193; Moses’ sin at—, IV1, 194, 197.

Merodach-baladan, I, 45.

Mesha, king of Moab, III, 124.

Messiah, I, xvi, xvii, 4, 13, 32, 55; II, 121; III, 232, 233; IV2, 288, 329, 350, 352, 421, 423, 482, 483;—a principle of Mosaic law according to Maimonides, I, 44, 47, 59, 65; not a principle according to Albo, I, 47, 65, 136, 186; Rabbi Hillel on—I, 44, 45, 46, 47;—called by name of God, II, 175, 176; Jesus as the—, III, 234; reward in time of—IV2, 290, 315, 316;—represents all kinds of reward, I, 98; Hezekiah as the—, I, 44–47; IV2, 415; discussion of doctrine of—, IV2, 413 ff.; belief in—obligatory, I, 186; IV2, 413 ff.;—a fundamental dogma of Christianity, I, 135–136, 201;—implied in reward and punishment, I, 200, IV1, 2; belief in eternity of world leads to denial of—, I, 117.

Messianic, era, II, 100, n. 1;—king, III, 183; IV2, 424;—period, IV2, 327, n. 1, 352, 354, 355, 426—prophecies, IV2, 414.

Metatron, II, 180.

Mezuzah, IV1, 146.

Micah, III, 283, 288; IV2, 379.

Michael, II, 68.

Midrash, the, III, 9, n. 1, 143, n. 2, 144, n. 2; IV2, 310, 314, 448.

Mill, J. S., III, 87, n. 1.

Miriam, III, 78, 105, 106, 183.

Miriam, wife of Joseph, III, 234, 235.

Mishael, I, 86, 157, 163, 174; II, 15.

Mishnah, the, III, 202, 203, 271; IV1, 147; IV2, 306, 308, 311, 378;—commentary on by Maimonides, III, 272.

Mistarim, weeping place of God, I, 28; IV1, 206, 207, 208.

Mithra, II, 180, n. 1.

Moab, IV1, 74, 229, 231, 241; IV2, 424;—king of, III, 124;—land of, IV1, 191;—plains of, III, 119, 120.

Moabite nation, IV2, 425.

Mohammed, addicted to sexual indulgence, I, 193.

Mohammedan, I, 201; II, 55;—faith, IV2, 429;—law, III, 228;—Order, see Brethren of Purity;—writers, II, 66.

Moore, G. F., I, 184, n. 1.

Moriah, land of, III, 155.

Moses, I, 19, 20, 31, 39, 68, 105, 111, 114, 116, 118, 119, 124, 157, 158, 159, 161, 162, 165, 167, 169, 170, 173, 175, 180; II, 21, 68, 96, 102, 134, 139, 141, 167, 168, 170, 175, 176, 178, 179, 182, 194, 195, 198; III, 24, 78, 80, 102, 103, 105, 111, 118, 119, 120, 152, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 187, 188, 190, 191, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 207, 223, 231, 258, 274, 278, 283, 296, 297, 319, 325; IV1, 68, 102, 126, 131, 139, 156, 171, 180, 181, 184, 185, 186, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 204, 213, 216, 229, 230, 268; IV2, 276, 285, 297, 305, 309, 312, 313, 322, 346, 348, 352, 364, 372, 373, 382, 391, 393, 408, 410, 411, 427, 459, 497:—attributes used by, II, 134, 135, 136, 140;—author of the Book of Job, IV1, 56;—law of, to be used as a criterion of divine law, I, 100; belief in—not due to miracles, I, 156 ff.; see also law:—miracles of, I, 17; III, 98–99; mission of, I, 65; III, 182;—prayer of, I, 12, 27, 28, 41, 156; II, 134; IV1, 184; IV2, 365;—prophecy of, I, 16, 17, 20, 44, 162; III, 75, 94–5, 99, 100–107, 108, 151, 154, 222, 223;—superiority of, I, 132, 135, 183; III, 174, 176, 184, 190;—rod of, IV2, 342;—sin of, I, 28; IV1, 193 ff.;—Song of, IV1, 154; Torah given to—same as we have now, I, 20; III, 195.

Moses, ha-Darshan, IV2, 489, n. 3.

Moses, ha-Kohen, I, 46.

Moses, ha-Lavi, III, 31.

Moses, ibn Chiquitilla, I, 46.

Moses, ben Nahman, Rabbi, see Nahmanides.

Motion, according to physics, IV1, 9;—per accidens, IV1, 13, 14, 15;—per se, IV1, 14, 15;—of the spheres, IV1, 14, 15, 17; see also time, spheres.

Munk, S., I, 71, n. 1, 79, n. 2; II, 32, n. 1, 45, n. 3, 48, n. 1, 59, n. 1, 67, n. 1, 196, n. 3, 211, n. 1; III, 24, n. 1, 27, n. 1, 31, n. 2; IV1, 9, n. 1, 2, 10, n. 1, 14, n. 1, 58, n. 1; IV2, 282, n. 1.

Music, IV1, 211.

NAAMAN, I, 163, 174.

Nabal, IV1, 241.

Naboth, IV1, 72, 95.

Nahmanides, I, 30; II, 183, n. 5, 184; III, 125, 145, n. 2, 160, n. 2, 164; IV1, 222; IV2, 304, 316, 387, n. 1, 401, n. 3:—on resurrection, I, 54; on Cabala, II, 186; on demons, III, 65, n. 1; on sorcery and divination, III, 66; on Christian custom of burying dead in churches, III, 67; on ancient Hebrew coin, III, 144; on calendar, III, 146; on sufferings of love, IV1, 118; on Moses’ sin, IV1, 195; on reward and punishment, IV2, 298, 347, 412; on ‘olam haba, IV2, 314.

Nahum, of Gamzo, III, 283; IV1, 199.

Nakdimon, son of Gorion, I, 157.

Naphtali, II, 49.

Nasi, the, IV2, 416.

Nathan, I, 29; IV2, 481.

Nathan, prophet, IV1, 250.

Nathan, son of David, III, 234.

Natural law, see Law, natural.

Nazirite, III, 137.

Nebayoth, III, 128.

Nebuchadnezzar, II, 87; III, 88, 162, 228; IV1, 103, 141, 142, 144, 147; IV2, 407, 419.

Nehemiah, IV2, 415.

Neo-Platonism, I, xviii.

Neubauer, III, 31, n. 3.

New Testament, III, 240, n. 3, 242, n. 1.

New-Year, blowing of the ram’s horn on, I, 67:—ritual of, I, 4, 65.

Nineveh, IV1, 213, 216; IV2, 419.

Nissim, R., b. Reuben, Derashot of, III, 298, n. 5.

Noachian law, see Law, of Noah.

Noah, I, 18, 78, 150; II, 83, 89, 109; III, 127, 128, 174, 243; IV2, 400, 402, 404, 412, 424, 441;—law of, see Law, of Noah.

Nob, IV1, 115, 249.

ONKELOS, I, 52; II, 87, 98; IV1, 100; IV2, 361, 391, 422, 423.

Onkeneira, III, 290, n. 1.

Opium, I, 147.

Oral Law, necessity of, III, 201 ff.; see also Talmud, Law, oral.

PABLO, I, 188, n. 1.

Paddan-Aram, II, 159.

Palestine, different from other lands, I, 198;—seat of prophecy, III, 104, 106–107;—place of resurrection, IV2, 312.

Papa, Rab, IV2, 284, 307.

Pappenheim, Solomon, II, 111, n. 1.

Paran, I, 169, 170; II, 190.

Passover, III, 138, 141, 199, 262, 268, 280; IV2, 401;—Haggadah of, II, 102, n. 5.

Pathros, I, 46.

Paul, III, 241.

Peace, IV2, 493.

Peor, IV1, 192.

Perez, son of Nathaniel Elijah Traboti, of France, I, xxv.

Perez, IV1, 94.

Perfection,—attained through acts done with intelligence and with intention to serve God, III, 40, 41 ff.; human—attained not through knowledge alone, but through acts agreeable to God, III, 41 ff.;—embraces entire race or greater part thereof, III, 46; acts leading to human—, III, 52 ff.;—of Torah, III, 243; negative commandments confer—equally with positive, III, 245 ff.;—may be acquired through any of the three parts into which the Torah is divided, III, 260 ff.;—acquired by the doing of a single act in the proper spirit, III, 269 ff.; different degrees of—attained through the Torah, III, 279.

Persia, IV2, 416, 417, 420;—symbolized by third beast in Daniel, IV2, 419.

Pharaoh, II, 170; III, 61, 88, 99, 162, 177; IV1, 94, 226, 227, 231.

Pharisees, the, seven kinds of, III, 299; IV2, 298, n. 2; John Hyrcanus and—, IV2, 416.

Philistine, nation, IV2, 425.

Philosopher, the, see Aristotle.

Phineas Rabbi, son of Yair, I, 157, 163, 174; III, 98, 282; IV1, 198.

Phinehas, IV2, 494, 495.

Place, identified with vacuum, II, 106–107;—definition of, II, 101;—an incorporeal thing cannot be in, II, 101; substance of a thing is called—, II, 102; God called—, II, 102;—Aristotle on, II, 104; Aristotle’s idea of—criticized, II, 104–105; Aristotle’s arguments against the identification of—with vacuum answered, II, 106–107.

Plato, I, xviii, 138, n. 1; II, 44, n. 1, 69, n. 1, 77, n. 1, 196, n. 3; III, 25;—’s community of wives criticized, I, 82.

Platonic psychology, III, 324, n. 1.

Pletho, Georgius Gemisthus, I, xviii.

Plotinus, IV2, 496, n. 3.

Porphyry, III, 347, n. 2.

Possible, category of the, IV1, 4–5.

Poznanski, Adolph, I, xvii, n. 1.

Poznanski, S., I, 46, n. 1.

Prayer, I, 27, 28;—not a fundamental principle, IV1, 145; derived from dogma of Providence, IV1, 145; efficacy of—an obligatory dogma, IV1, 145; discussion of, IV1, 145 ff.; God alone to receive—, IV1, 150, 157; helps even the undeserving, IV1, 150 ff.; 164 ff.;—due to reason, not desire, IV1, 157 ff.; reasons leading to doubt in efficacy of stated and refuted, IV1, 160 ff.;—and immutability of divine will, IV1, 165;—and blessing, IV1, 168 ff.;—superior to all other commandments, IV1, 179 ff.;—a universal balm, IV1, 181–183;—of individual and of community, IV1, 185, 192;—sometimes not heard, IV1, 215 ff.;—should be in general terms, IV1, 217 ff.

Principle, I, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 ff.; definition of—, I, 55 f.; the thirteen principles of Maimonides discussed, I, 56 ff.;—s of Crescas discussed, I, 61 ff.; difficulty of investigation, I, 35 ff.; general and special—s, I, 43 ff.; belief in Messiah not a—, I, 44, 50; IV2, 413 ff.; creation not a—, I, 47 ff., 51; when is denial of a—heresy, I, 49 ff.; common—s of divine law three, I, 64 ff.; derivative—s, I, 64 ff.; benedictions in ritual of New Year allude to the three—s, I, 65 ff.;—s of conventional law, I, 93 ff.; freedom of will not a—of divine law as such, I, 94, 95 ff.; the three—s of divine law laid down in beginning of Genesis, I, 100 ff.; denial of a derivative—same as denial of a fundamental—, I, 121 ff.; a commandment not a—, I, 123 ff.; belief in tradition not a—, I, 127 ff.; unity of God a—, I, 127; why—s not stated in Decalogue, I, 128; first commandment not a—, I, 128 ff.; enumeration of derivative—s, I, 129 ff., meaning of distinction I; 135 ff.;—s of the sciences discussed, I, 145 ff.; whence does the Torah derive its—s, I, 146 ff.; dogmas connected with fundamental—s listed, I, 181 ff.; summary of—s, I, 199 ff.

Prophecy, I, 7; test of a prophet, I, 155 ff.; difference between a legislating and a non-legislating prophet, I, 159 ff.; superiority of Moses’—, I, 183; III, 75 ff., 98 ff., 108 ff.;—a divine inspiration influencing rational faculty, III, 70 ff.; main purpose of—admonition and not prognostication, III, 69, 107 ff.; prognostication secondary, III, 70; definition of—, III, 74; kinds and degrees of—, III, 74 ff., 85 ff.; difference in prophetic expressions vs. God’s unity, III, 76 ff.; four requisites for—, III, 95 ff.; difference in prophetic powers, III, 96 ff.;—may come to an undeserving person through mediation of a prophet, III, 100 ff.; meaning of mediation, III, 104; why—arose in Palestine and not elsewhere, III, 104 ff.;—derived from revelation, III, 110; degree of prophet determines strength of belief in his message, III, 149 ff.; a message received by a prophet from God cannot be annulled by another prophet, III, 155.

Prosperity of the wicked, discussion of, IV1, 50–57, 99–107, 131 ff., 144, 161; see also Adversity of the righteous, Providence.

Providence, IV1, 49 ff.; compatibility of with God’s knowledge, IV1, 50 ff.; motives leading to denial of—, IV1, 50 ff.; Job denied—, IV1, 51 ff.; proof of—, IV1, 57–90; different kinds of—for human individuals, IV1, 90, 92 ff.; greater in a community than in an individual, III, 275;—in animal species, IV1, 90ff.

Pseudo-Josephus, IV2, 427, n. 5.

Ptolemaic, system of astronomy, IV1, 9, n. 1.

Ptolemy, Catalogue of, III, 214, n. 1.

Ptolemy, the astronomer, IV1, 17.

Punishment, see Reward and Punishment.

Purim, III, 141.

Purpose, I, 70;—a principle of conventional law, I, 5, 93–96; general—not a principle of divine law as such, I, 24, 94–95, 136–137; special—a principle of divine law, I, 137; IV1, 1;—included by Crescas among the principles of divine law, I, 63; special—of man, III, 14 ff.; not the attainment of theoretical knowledge, but sincere service and love of God, III, 23–57; IV1, 221; not all human acts lead to realization of—of man, III, 52 ff.

RAB, III, 299; IV1, 206, 263; IV2, 289.

Raba, III, 89; IV2, 285:—staff of, III, 286.

Rabba, IV1, 163.

Rabbah, bar Rab Huna, IV2, 298.

Rabbah, bar Nahamani, IV2, 337.

Rabbah, bar Shela, IV2, 298.

Rabbi, IV2, 334.

Rachel, III, 236.

Rainbow, II, 192; Avicenna on colors of, II, 193.

Raphall, Morris J., I, xxiii, n. 2.

Rashi, I, 165, n. 1; III, 126, 155, n. 3, 200, n. 3, 285, n. 1, 299; IV1, 32, 175, n. 2; IV2, 401, n. 3.

Rebekah, IV1, 180.

Red Sea, I, 157, 186; II, 15; III, 220; IV1, 72.

Religion, principles of, whether one is permitted to investigate, I, 189 ff.; see also Law, divine.

Renan, II, 35, n. 1.

Repentance, a commandment of the Torah, IV1, 220–223; perfect—motived by love, not by fear or desire of reward, IV1, 225, 255; two kinds of—from fear, IV1, 226 ff.;—a matter of grace, not justice, IV1, 232; nevertheless this grace a matter of necessity, IV1, 264; elements of—, IV1, 235 ff.; things that prevent—, IV1, 236–239;—of Saul, IV1, 242–245;—of David, IV1, 251; a difficulty raised and answered, IV1, 257 ff.;—precedes creation of the world, IV1, 272.

Resh Lakish, IV1, 225, 231.

Resurrection, I, 30, 31, 54; IV2, 290, 297, 301, 315, 413;—in Judaism a dogma, not a principle, fundamental or derived, I, 184;—a dogma essential to Christianity, I, 136, 201;—implied in reward and punishment, I, 200;—not demanded by logic, IV2, 339; not impossible for God, I, 179; IV2, 339; explanation of—, IV2, 342; rabbinic explanation of manner of—, IV2, 346 ff.; Maimonides on—, IV2, 347; Nahmanides and Rabbi Meir Halevi on—, IV2, 347; who merits—IV2, 348 ff.; purpose of—, IV2, 352, 354; Aaron Halevi on—, IV2, 300; is— mentioned in the Torah, IV2, 307–308. See also Reward and Punishment.

Reuben, II, 49, 54, 55, 165; III, 32, 192; IV2, 319, 353, 401, 487.

Revelation of the Torah, a principle of divine law, I, xix, 3, 4, 5, 14, 17, 38, 64, 96–100, 120, 149, 151, 173, 183, 199, 202; III, 1 et seq.; IV1, 4, 268;—derivatives of, I, 121, 131–133, 134, 200, 202; III, 1, 110.

Reward and Punishment, a fundamental principle of divine law, I, xix, 3, 4, 5, 17, 38, 64, 93, 96, 100, 115, 120, 123, 149, 150, 199, 202; II, 26; III, 110; IV1, 1 et seq.; IV2, 273 et seq.;—derivatives of, I, 64–5, 110, 121, 200, 202; IV1, 1, 2; four opinions respecting—, IV2, 274; this difference due to different conceptions of the soul, IV2, 274 ff.; 1st opinion, IV2, 274 ff.; 2nd opinion, IV2, 276 ff.; 3rd opinion, IV2, 279; 4th opinion, IV2, 288 ff.; spiritual reward after death, IV2, 289 ff.; two schools, IV2, 289 ff.; 1st school, IV2, 289 ff.; 2nd school, IV2, 297 ff.; four periods of reward, IV2, 315; Maimonides on, IV2, 290; Nahmanides on, IV2, 298; R. Meir Halevi on, IV2, 298; R. Aaron Halevi on, IV2, 299; arguments of Nahmanides and his school, IV2, 306 ff.; form of—in world to come, IV2, 322 ff.; degrees of punishment in world to come, IV2, 335 ff.;—temporary or eternal, IV2, 356 ff.; reward in strict justice temporary, made eternal by grace, IV2, 358 ff.; punishment in strict justice eternal, made temporary by grace, IV2, 364 ff.; why Torah does not mention spiritual reward discussed, IV2, 384 ff.; corporeal reward in Torah for nation as a whole, IV2, 387 ff.; spiritual reward for individual mentioned in Torah by allusion, III, 225 ff.; IV2, 389 ff.; Zadokites and Boethusians on—, IV2, 276–278, 279. See also Resurrection.

Rhubarb, III, 33; IV1, 178.

Rivkind, I, xxiv.

Roman exile, IV2, 428.

Rome, I, 147; IV2, 428.

Rosin, III, 324, n. 1; IV1, 14, n. 1, 152, n. 2.

SAADIA, Gaon, I, xvii, xviii, 24; II, 206, n. 1;—on God’s knowledge, IV1, 5;—on suffering of love, IV1, 103, n. 3, 119, n. 1.

Sacrifices, institution of, III, 229–231.

Sadducees, the, denied the immortality of the soul, IV2, 307.

Sakanjabin, II, 30.

Samaria, III, 197, 198.

Samaritans, the, III, 79, n. 9;—denied the immortality of the soul, IV2, 307.

Samuel, prophet, I, 45, 104, 114, 159; III, 73, 92, 93, 98, 241; IV1, 94, 239, 240, 241, 243, 245, 250; IV2, 337, 431, 481;—prophecy of, III, 105.

Samuel, amora, IV1, 17; IV2, 309, 321.

Samuel, Rab, son of Unya, IV1, 206.

San Mateo, I, xvi.

Sarah, III, 61; IV1, 189, 190.

Sarai, see Sarah.

Saranjun, IV1, 178.

Saul, king, I, 45; III, 66, 330; IV1, 37, 69, 94, 187, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 248, 249, 251; IV2, 421;—’s sin IV1, 242 ff.;—’s repentance, IV1, 239 ff.;—’s qualities, IV1, 248 ff.;—’s punishment, IV1, 242.

Scammonia, I, 147; III, 33.

Schechter, S., I, xix, n. 2, 36, n. 2, 54, n. 2; IV1, 266, n. 3; IV2, 413, n. 1.

Scheyer, III, 324, n. 1.

Schlesinger, L., I, xxiii, n. 1, xxvi; III, 316, n. 2.

Schlessinger, W., I, xxiii, n. 1, 2.

Scholem, G., IV2, 313, n. 1.

Schulman, Samuel, I, xxvii.

Schürer, IV2, 416, n. 2.

Science, principles of, I, 145 ff.; IV1, 8 ff.

Scripture, see Bible.

Sefirot, II, 63–65.

“Seforno,” III, 160, n. 2.

Seir, Mount, I, 169, 170; IV2, 429.

Sennacherib, I, 46; III, 98, 140, 228; IV1, 103, 183; IV2, 439.

Senses, III, 85; IV2, 319; sense perception defective, IV2, 430;—perceive accidents only, IV2, 430;—of the lower animals stronger than those of man, IV1, 28.

Separate Intelligences, as the causes of the motions of the spheres, IV2, 478;—free from matter, III, 36;—exist by themselves, IV2, 304;—identified with angels, II, 67; III, 42; the principle of the human soul comes from—, IV2, 294.

Septuagint, II, 131, n. 1.

Seth, III, 129, 134, 135; IV2, 424.

Shammai, school of, IV2, 285.

Shealtiel, IV2, 422.

Shechem, III, 119, 346;—cave of, III, 240;—father of Hamor, III, 240, 241;—inhabitants of, III, 119.

Shem, IV2, 402, 404, 429.

Shem ha-Meforash, I, 13; II, 172;—use of, II, 173, 174.

Shemayah, IV2, 423.

Shiloh, III, 105, 235; IV2, 421.

Shofarot, I, 4.

Shunammite woman, the, IV2, 340.

Sihon, I, 29; IV1, 228, 229, 230, 231.

Simeon, II, 55, 165; III, 32, 192; IV2, 319.

Simeon, Rabbi, son of Lakish, III, 269.

Simlai, Rabbi, III, 258, 278, 283.

Simon, II, 49.

Simon, Rabban, ben Gamaliel, IV2, 298.

Simon, Richard, I, xxiii.

Simplicius, II, 107, n. 2.

Sin,—of Adam, IV1, 115; punishment for Adam’s—inflicted upon all his descendants, IV1, 115; righteous punished for—of Adam according to Christians, IV2, 306;—of Cain, III, 128 ff.;—of Moses, IV1, 193 ff.;—of Saul, IV1, 242 ff.

Sinai, Mount, I, 17, 20, 66, 124, 128, 156, 157, 158, 161, 162, 165, 166, 169, 170; II, 179; III, 100, 141, 204, 205, 247, n. 4, 258.

Sinaitic revelation, III, 76, 100, 105, 119, 120, 165, 348.

Singer, Prayer Book of, III, 45, n. 2; IV2, 315, n. 1.

Sisera, IV2, 434, 435, 439.

Socrates, I, 138, n. 1; III, 25.

Sodom, IV1, 142:—men of, III, 61.

Soferim, the, III, 199, 200.

Solomon, king, I, 142, 144; II, 120, 158, 159, 198; III, 11, 16, 17, 20, 22, 47, 55, 126, 159, 206, 212, 231, 234, 244, 268, 291, 292, 310, 311, 312, 315, 328, 335; IV1, 37, 48, 105, 106, 107, 143, 183, 207, 216, 217, 238, 244, 265; IV2, 286, 324, 395, 417, 438, 464, 490.

Solomon, ibn Adret, III, 177, n. 2; IV2, 299, n. 1.

Solomon, ibn Gabirol, IV1, 248, n. 2.

Sorani, Moise, I, xxiii, n. 2.

Soria, I, 37.

Soul, IV2, 277; a divine substance, III, 55;—classes of, III, 324–325;—immortality of, III, 52, 266, 294, 322, 323; IV1, 209, 264; alluded to in the Bible, IV2, 386, 390, 393, 396, 397; known to Adam and Noah, IV2, 400, 403, 412;—feels pain in death, IV2, 321; not all functions of—survive, IV1, 138, n. 3; immortality of—denied by the Sadducees, IV2, 307;—though one, is cause of different activities, III, 77;—has location, though incorporeal, II, 103;—is a spiritual substance according to Crescas, IV2, 282, 283, 284, 285, 287;—is a hylic power according to Aristotle, IV2, 286; different opinions on nature of—, IV2, 274 ff.;—not in place, IV2, 333;—not a material power, IV2, 304;—not possessed by irrational animals, III, 39;—pain of, IV2, 331–332;—perfection of, IV2, 283, 284;—requires a corporeal act, III, 51;—resides in a body, III, 36, 41;—powers of, III, 97;—same as form, to which actuality is due, IV1, 209, n. 1; God is—of the sphere according to the Epicureans, III, 159, 163;—of animals is called ruah, IV1, 271; human—is called neshamah, IV1, 271;—transmigration of, IV2, 287, 288, 297; whether human—is superior to the animal—, IV2, 175—176, 276, 279; reward and punishment of—, see Reward and Punishment.

Spain, IV2, 427.

Spheres, the, animal soul comes from the power of—, IV2, 294;—are intellects joined with bodies that exist forever, IV2, 298;—are moved by the Separate Intelligences, IV2, 478;—are possessed of matter, III, 40; the diurnal sphere the noblest and most perfect, III, 36;—govern the lower world according to some, III, 160, 165;—motion of to carry out the will of God, and to attain their perfection, III, 36, 41–45; IV1, 14, 15, 16, 17;—moved by the angels, III, 41;—are rational animals, III, 43;—souls of, III, 36, 159; IV1, 26.

Stars, influence of, see Astrology.

Steinschneider, I, xv, n. 1; II, 105, n. 3, 172, n. 1; III, 3, n. 1, 15, n. 1, 31, n. 3, 45, n. 1, 54, n. 1, 306, n. 1; IV2, 430, n. 2.

Stephen, the Apostle, III, 240.

Stern, II, 206, n. 3.

Succoth, men of, IV2, 369.

Synagogue, men of the Great, II, 135; composed benedictions, I, 65; II, 90, 161; III, 45; IV2, 344, 447.

Syria, kingdom of, III, 235.

TABERNACLES, feast of, III, 125, n. 3, 141, 227.

Tables, the, III, 143, 145, 146, 156, 208.

Talmud, the, I, xvi, xvii, 52; II, 74, n. 3, 135, n. 5, 173, 215; III, 7, n. 1, 89, n. 1. 45, n. 2, 79, n. 9, 202, 203, 204, 262, 273, 289; IV1, 147, 173, 209, n. 1, 248, n. 2; IV2, 276, n. 3, 348, 378, n. 3;—bête noire of, I, 53, n. 3;—Jerusalem, III, 197.

Tamar, IV1, 94.

Tanna, III, 299.

Tänzer, A., I, 91, n. 1.

Targum, the Babylonian, I, 52, n. 1.

Teman, II, 190.

Temple, the second, I, 18.

Testament, the New, I, xxi.

Tetragrammaton, II, 174; see Shem ha-Meforash.

Thales, III, 54, n. 1.

Theodor, IV1, 163, n. 4.

Theriaca, I, 27, 154; IV1, 181.

Time, meaning of, II, 110;—has no origin, II, 111; ‘order of time,’ II, 111;—not an actual existence, III, 259, 260;—not subject to measure, II, 111;—Maimonides on, II, 111;—measures motion according to Aristotle, II, 110–111;—two kinds of, II, 110; independence of—a divine attribute derived from existence of God, I, 130; II, 108–109.

Timna, III, 221.

Titus, IV1, 103; IV2, 428.

Topheth, III, 123.

Torah, the, I, 4, 5, 7, 12, 14, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 29, 32, 51, 52, 55, 82, 89, 90, 92, 95, 98, 105, 109, 110, 112, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 128, 131, 146, 150, 158, 159, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 175, 183, 187, 194, 198, 203; II, 12, 26, 35, 58, 64, 66, 68, 71, 90, 98, 102, 161, 175, 187; III, 8, 13, 62, 67, 68, 69, 70, 76, 98, 104, 107, 109, 110, 111, 113, 115, 117, 120, 121, 127, 136, 142, 143, 144, 154, 162, 172, 176, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 187, 191, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 206, 207, 210, 211, 217, 220, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 229, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 250, 251, 255, 256, 258, 260, 261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 274, 277, 284, 289, 294, 295, 299, 300, 301, 305, 308, 310, 338, 348, 351; IV1, 4, 5, 33, 34, 52, 100, 120, 121, 127, 130, 141, 145, 163, 177, 179, 195, 197, 200, 201, 203, 209, 220, 221, 223, 224, 230, 233, 235, 236, 242, 248, 250, 258, 268, 269, 272; IV2, 276, 280, 281, 283, 286, 287, 288, 290, 294, 296, 306, 307, 308, 313, 345, 359, 363, 371, 376, 377, 378, 384, 385, 387, 388, 389, 390, 391, 393, 394, 396, 399, 401, 403, 405, 406, 408, 410, 411, 413, 421, 424, 425, 443, 489, 490, 497;—belief in, brings man to eternal happiness, I, 173, 176; dogmas connected with the belief in—, I, 181–186;—called testimony, III, 192–195;—commandments of, I, 6, 18, 19, 28, 32, 123, 124, 126, 127; III, 125, 254, 273, 283, 285, 288, 290, 291, 294, 297, 308;—devotees of, were able to change laws of nature, I, 174;—immutability of, implied in genuineness of messenger, I, 127; discussion of, III, 118 ff., 183 ff.;—given on the Sabbath, II, 65;—on attributes, II, 51;—miracles of, I, 50, 55, 117, 118, 119; II, 17;—principles of, I, 48, 49, 53, 55, 125, 148; known by experience, I, 149, 151; II, 16; IV1, 35; IV2, 336; purpose of—reward and punishment, IV1, 1;—revelation of, see Revelation of the Torah;—criticized by Christians, III, 217 ff.

Tortosa, I, xv, xvi, xxi.

Tosafot, the, I, 165; III, 177; IV2, 401, n. 1.

Tradition, belief in not a principle, I, 127; prophetic—true, IV2, 437 ff.

Transmigration, see Soul, transmigration of.

Transubstantiation, I, 119; III, 231 ff.

Trendelenburg, III, 19, n. 1.

“Trumpets,” refers to the principle of Revelation, I, 66.

Trust, in God, IV2, 449 ff.

Truth (emet), applied to God, II, 165 ff.

Tyre, king of, III, 162:—prince of, II, 87.

UEBERWEG, III, 159, n. 1.

Ukba, Mar, III, 144.

Unity of God, II, 54–58; see also Existence of God, Attributes.

Urim and Thummim, III, 231.

Uz, land of, IV2, 429.

VACUUM, see place.

Virtue, Aristotle’s idea of criticized, I, 84 ff.

Voisin, Joseph de, I, xxiii.

Vulgate, the III, 244; IV2, 428.

WEISS, I, 194, n. 1; III, 253, n. 2, 257, n. 2.

Weitzel, Baruch, I, xxvii.

Will, of God, II, 12 ff., 16 ff.

Wistinetzki, III, 290, n. 1.

Wolff, M., II, 44, n. 1, 45, n. 2; III, 324, n. 1.

Wolfson, H. A., I, xxvii; II, 63, n. 2, 104, n. 1, 105, n. 2, 106, n. 1, 107, n. 1, 2, 111, n. 1, 112, n. 1; III, 31, n. 1; IV2, 397, n. 1.

YANNAI, IV2, 416.

“Yezer Ha-Ra‘,” IV1, 266, n. 3.

Yorkis, of zereda, IV2, 309.

Yosippon, see Josippon.

“Yuhasin,” I, xviii, n. 2; III, 241, n. 3.

Yurkemi, the spirit of hail, IV1, 147.

ZACUTO, I, xviii, n. 2.

Zadok, IV2, 276, n. 3.

Zadokites, the, believed that reward and punishment are corporeal, IV2, 276–277, 279;—said that the human soul is composed of various faculties, IV2, 277;—maintained the mortality of the soul, IV2, 277.

Zarephath, widow of, IV2, 340.

Zechariah, III, 98, 106, 150, 222; IV2, 396, 415, 422.

Zedekiah, captivity of, IV1, 111.

Zeitlin, S., IV2, 427, n. 5.

Zeller, I, 138, n. 1; II, 143, n. 2, 209, n. 1, 214, n. 3; III, 19, n. 1, 87, n. 1, 217, n. 2; IV1, 17, n. 3, 26, n. 1, 58, n. 1, 138, n. 3; IV2, 275, n. 1, 319, n. 1, 486, n. 1.

Zelophehad, daughters of, III, 95.

Zerach, IV1, 94.

Zerubbabel, IV2, 415, 416, 422.

Zikronot, I, 4.

Zinjar, IV2, 397.

Zion, IV2, 326, 422, 428, 429, 439, 471.

Ziph, wilderness of, IV1, 241.

Ziyyoni, IV2, 489, n. 3.

Zizit, III, 125, 260; IV1, 146.

Zoar, IV1, 102.

Zobah, kings of, IV1, 241.

Zophar, IV1, 164.

Zotenberg, I, xxiv.

Zuckermandel, III, 143, n. 3.