The SCHIFF LIBRARY of JEWISH CLASSICS

This Series of JEWISH CLASSICS was made possible through a fund given to the Jewish Publication Society of America by Jacob H. Schiff, and it is named in his honor, the Schiff Library of JEWISH CLASSICS.

SEFER HA-‘IKKARIM

BOOK OF PRINCIPLES

BY

JOSEPH ALBO

CRITICALLY EDITED ON THE BASIS OF MANUSCRIPTS AND OLD EDITIONS AND PROVIDED WITH A TRANSLATION AND NOTES

BY

ISAAC HUSIK, LL.B., M.A., Ph.D.

Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania

VOLUME TWO

PHILADELPHIA

The Jewish Publication Society of America

5706–1946

Copyright, 1929, by

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

Second Impression, 1946

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher: except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PRESS OF THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY PHILADELPHIA, PENNA.

CONTENTS

PAGE

Facsimile Frontispiece

Book Two, Text and Translation 1

BOOK TWO

Wherein is explained the first principle, the existence of God, and the derived principles based upon it and following from it, which every one professing a religion should believe. As we said in the first book, the secondary principles which are based upon the existence of God are four: unity, incorporeality, independence of time, freedom from defect. In order that these derivative principles may be made clear, we must first explain the fundamental principle from which they are derived, namely the existence of God. Then we shall explain the derived principles one by one, that we may know how many there are.

Before doing this, however, I shall preface an Observation which is essential for every one who reads this book.

OBSERVATION

The reader of this book must bear in mind that there are many statements made in certain parts of this book representing not the true view but the views of the person quoted, while in another part of the book the statements are made in accordance with the true view. Or expressions are used in one place with one meaning and in another place with a different meaning. Maimonides does this often in the Guide of the Perplexed. Thus in the third chapter of the first part he says that the meaning of the biblical expression “And the similitude of the Lord doth he behold,” is that he comprehends the true essence of God, whereas in the thirty-seventh chapter he writes that the expression, “But My face shall not be seen,” means: My real essence as it is cannot be comprehended. And he calls attention to this in the fifty-fourth chapter and in other passages of the first part, viz. that God’s real essence can not be understood by any one else.

For this reason the reader of a book must be careful, and not be too hasty to criticize the words of the author, until he becomes familiar with the style and method of the book, and has read all that is said on the topic in question in other parts of the book. For sometimes a premise is left out in a given place because it seems obvious, or because it is explained elsewhere, or the omission is intentional, in order to conceal the idea from the reader, whereas the latter thinks that the author has made a mistake, and hastens to criticize him and thinks him a fool or an ignoramus.

We find frequent examples of this in logical arguments. Thus if one were to say: Every man ought to know his creator, because every rational being ought to know his creator, a person might object to the argument as fallacious because it does not say that man is a rational being, and as long as the minor premise of the syllogism is not given, the point at issue can not be proved. This is true, but logicians know that a speaker or an author frequently suppresses the minor premise, as when one says: Every man is a sensitive being, because every animal is a sensitive being. Here the minor premise, every man is an animal, is suppressed, and without it the thing desired is not proved. But one should not therefore be called a fool or an ignoramus.

For this reason the reader of a book must not be too hasty to criticize as things occur to him at first sight, but he must bear in mind that the author was not a light-minded person who failed to comprehend after long study what occurred to the reader at first sight. The reader should rather suspect his own understanding and say to himself that it is impossible that the author should have made such an obvious mistake. He should rather ascribe the error to his own thinking, and study carefully the words of the author until his real meaning becomes clear to him. For the author is often so engrossed in the profound theoretical problems that he does not think it necessary to explain a certain matter at length. This makes it hard for the reader to understand it. The reader must be very careful in this matter, or he will be in the position of those who criticize the Law of Moses on the ground that it permits the profanation of the holy name, for it says, “And thou shalt profane the name of thy God;” or that it forbids one to do good to his enemy, for it says, “If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee under its burden, thou shalt refrain from helping him.” The fault is their own, because they do not take pains to understand the rules of the language or to read what is said in another place, which may serve as a commentary on the passage in question, for example, “And ye shall not profane My holy name,” and many others.

CHAPTER 1

The term “existence” which is applied to all existing things is a subject of dispute among philosophers, whether it denotes an accident of the existing thing or whether it is something essential. However, the term existence as applied to God can not denote an accident, because God is not receptive of accidents, as we shall explain. Nor can it be an essential element added to God’s quiddity. For then God’s essence would be composed of two things, which is impossible, as we shall see. It follows therefore that the term existence when applied to God denotes nothing else but His quiddity. But His quiddity is absolutely unknown, as Maimonides explains. For he says that this is what Moses desired to know when he said to God, “Show me, I pray Thee, Thy glory.” And the answer came to him, “Thou canst not see My face, for man shall not see Me and live.” The Rabbis in Sifre, commenting on this, say, “Not even the angels, who are living beings.” The meaning is that His quiddity is known to none beside Him. It follows, therefore, that His existence also is absolutely unknown, even to the angels. This being so, one may ask, How can that be a principle of divine law which no one can comprehend except God Himself?

The answer is that the existence of God is not a principle of the Torah from that side which is impossible of comprehension, namely from the side of God’s quiddity, but from the side which is possible of comprehension, namely from a consideration that all existing things are due to His influence, that He is their cause and their maker. From this point of view we can estimate God’s excellence as the one who made existing things to be with extreme perfection and splendor. From this aspect one may speak of God and estimate His excellence. But we can not speak of God’s essence because it is altogether ineffable. David alludes to this in the Psalm beginning, “Bless the Lord, O my soul.” Alluding to the first aspect, he says, “O Lord my God, Thou art very great,” i. e. from the side of Thy quiddity Thou art very great, so that man can not speak about Thee, and with all this, “Thou art clothed with glory and majesty,” i. e. from the side concerning which it is possible to speak about Thee, namely from the visible activities which come from Thee. They show Thy glory and Thy majesty. Therefore he describes in the sequel the creations which come from God, and which point to God’s excellence and perfection by the perfection which is visible in them.

The excellence of an artificer can be seen in his work in two ways. It may show that he has made a wonderful piece of work out of excellent material. Everybody can see then that this excellent piece of work was made by an excellent and accomplished workman. For example, if one sees beautiful vessels made of gold and precious stones, these vessels no doubt point to the great excellence of him who made them. Or the artificer may have made beautiful vessels with fine engravings out of inferior material. A goldsmith, for example, made beautiful vessels with beautiful engravings out of iron. This surely shows the artificer’s great skill and perfection, since he was able to make such beautiful figures and engravings on iron, which is an unyielding material that resists the work of the engraver. Surely he can do wonderful work on more promising material.

So Aristotle, in the eleventh book of his work On Animals, criticizes the ancient scientists who refused to treat of the nature of the inferior animals arising from putrefaction, and studied only those born of the union of male and female. Aristotle says that there is more reason for studying the inferior animals produced by putrefaction than the others, not because of the animals themselves, for they are very low and composed of very inferior material, being produced from putrefaction, but by reason of the divine power contained in them. For it shows the excellence and perfection of the producer, who infused the power of life into such inferior material, so that from putrefaction and without the union of male and female there arises an animal being similar to that which is born of the union of male and female. It thus redounds to the credit of the artificer.

Similarly David praised God in both ways because of the creations of both kinds which emanate from Him. Referring to the first kind he says, “Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment.” This alludes to the creation of the world of the Separate Intelligences, which are called light, as we shall see when we speak of the homonymous use of the word light. Then he alludes to the world of the spheres when he says, “Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain.” Then he describes the enduring and great and awsome creations which are visible to all, like light and the heaven and the dry land and the creations upon the earth. He describes also the visible order imposed by God in perfection upon the works of creation, so that the animal beings may live and endure, “Who sendest forth springs into the valleys; they run between the mountains; They give drink to every beast of the field …” Then he speaks of the renewal of the moon every month, and of the order of day and night, which is the cause of the continued existence of the sublunar world and of all the animals according to their different degrees, pointing to the wisdom and excellence of the Creator, who appointed “the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down.” This is, the cause of day and night, for the maintenance of existing things, of the appearance of the land and the existence of the other awsome creations.

After having completed the praise of God by reason of the great and important creations, he recounts His praises from the other side, namely from the aspect of the inferior creations, produced by putrefaction, “How manifold are Thy works, O Lord. In wisdom hast Thou made them all; … Yonder sea, great and wide, Therein are creeping things innumerable, living creatures.” The Psalmist mentions here the creatures formed in the sea and those which are produced through putrefaction, which have not the power to reproduce their species, as is clear from the closing words, “Thou withdrawest their breath, they perish, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth Thy spirit, they are created; and Thou renewest the face of the earth.” Such expressions do not apply to creatures which are born of the union of male and female. To be created after returning to their dust can refer only to those which are produced through putrefaction. The reason he says in the beginning, “How manifold are Thy works, O Lord. In wisdom hast Thou made them all …” is to indicate that the wisdom and excellence of an agent are shown when he endows with perfection a very inferior material, such as the material of those animal creatures arising from putrefaction, which God has endowed with the perfection of life. This shows the wisdom of the Maker. This is the reason why he adds, “May the glory of the Lord endure forever; let the Lord rejoice in His works …”, to indicate that even these low creatures arising from putrefaction are the cause of God’s joy. He rejoices in them because they are His work and make known His wisdom.

The Rabbis, too, allude to the same thing in “Perek Shirah” when they ask, “What do the creeping things say?” and reply, “May the glory of the Lord endure forever; Let the Lord rejoice in His works.” The meaning is that though it might not be becoming to God’s dignity and His excellence and perfection to rejoice in such inferior creatures, nevertheless we may speak metaphorically of His rejoicing in them because they are His work. And the meaning of “May the glory of the Lord endure forever” is that without slighting in any way God’s glory, which is eternal, we may say nevertheless that these creatures, born of putrefaction, low and insignificant as they are, having no permanence either as species or as individuals, give God cause for rejoicing because His wisdom is seen in them, which are His work, as we have explained. Thus the Psalmist praises God in this Psalm as the Maker of existing things in the two ways in which the excellence of the maker is seen. And it is in this way alone that we know the existence of God, i. e. as the Maker of existing things, not from His quiddity. This is why the Torah begins with the account of creation, showing the existence of God, the author of existing things, as we explained in Book One. This is the way we must understand the existence of God as a fundamental principle.

CHAPTER 2

There are two kinds of agents. There is one kind that does primarily and essentially only one thing, like the heat of fire, which heats, and the cold of snow, which cools. This kind is called natural agent, not voluntary or intentional. Then there is a kind which does contrary things. This is a voluntary agent, which acts from choice. It does a thing when it wants to, and then does the opposite when it wants to.

Now it is clearly absurd to suppose that the work of God comes from Him as from the first kind of agent, for a natural agent is not separated from the act. Thus light is not separated from the lamp, heat is not separated from fire, but God is something different from the act. Moreover, a natural agent is defective, doing a thing not with consciousness and understanding, but by necessity, when there is a recipient ready at hand; as fire burns if it find an object capable of burning. But that which must necessarily act when the occasion presents itself is defective, since it has no power to refrain from the act or to do the opposite. But God can not have any defect, therefore His activity can not be of this kind.

But it seems inappropriate that God’s work should proceed from Him as from an agent of the second class. For the term voluntary applies where the agent desires and does a given thing at a given time, which he did not desire before. The term voluntary does not apply to a thing which is always in the same condition. It follows therefore that the one who has will changes from a condition of not willing to a condition of willing. If so he is affected by, and receives change from another, for a thing can not be active and passive at the same time in the same relation. But God can not change, nor be affected by another. Nor can He be affected by Himself, for He would then be composed of two elements, an element by virtue of which He acts, and an element by virtue of which He is acted upon. But there can not be any composition in God at all, as we shall see. Nor can God be active and passive at the same time. It follows therefore that God’s activity can not be voluntary, since He can not change. Moreover, an agent possessed of will lacks the thing which he desires. But God does not lack anything which He desires at any time and did not have before. Similarly one who exercises a choice chooses one of two things because that thing is more suitable to him than the other. He therefore lacks the thing which he chooses before he has chosen it. It follows, therefore, that God’s activity can not be due to choice or will. But if He does not act with choice and will, nor like a natural agent, as light comes from the sun, as we explained, how can God be called an agent?

I have seen some authorities say that God does act with choice and will, but these do not arise in Him in time as they do in us, but are eternal. Accordingly they say, God created the world when He did and not before, by an eternal will which decreed that the world should come into being when it did. We also find statements of the Rabbis indicating that they entertained a similar view. Thus they say, God stipulated with the works of creation that the Red Sea should divide, that the fire should not burn Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah. From this it seems that their purpose was not to attribute to God a newly originated will at the time of the occurrence of the miracle. Therefore they say that the miracle occurred when it did through an eternal will, which determined that the miracle should take place when it did.

But this opinion is far from intelligible. For if we examine the expression eternal will, we find that it is a spurious conception, and points to necessity rather than will. For the question remains as it was originally. When the world was created or when the miracle occurred through His eternal will, was it possible for God to postpone it to another time, or not? If He could postpone it, then the eternal will was nullified. For the reason He did not postpone it was not because of the eternal will, but because He did not desire at that moment to postpone it. If He had desired to do so, He would have postponed it. And if it was not possible for Him to postpone it because so the eternal will had decreed, then there is no such thing as will any more, and He becomes an agent acting by necessity and not with will, since He could not postpone the act if He would. We should have to say the same thing about all miracles and all acts proceeding from Him at any time, that they happen by necessity, and that the thing could not help being when it is, for so it has been determined by God’s eternal will, which can not be changed. If this were so, man would be more perfect in his acts than God. For man can do either of two opposites equally, for example, he can paint the board black or white as he chooses whenever he chooses; whereas God can do only one of two opposites, the one that is determined by His eternal will; Heaven forbid that this should be the case!

CHAPTER 3

Since we understand by will the origination of a new state in the agent which leads him to do something that he did not do before the volition originated, the philosophers have said unseemly things about God, maintaining that His activity can not be voluntary. This opinion not only upsets all the principles of the Torah completely (for if God does not act with will, He can not act at one time rather than another, a supposition which leads to the doctrine of eternity in the absolute sense, and to the rejection of all the miracles in the Torah. Prayer ceases to be of any avail in time of distress, and right conduct and repentance are useless, and so on), it is also opposed to the demands of rational speculation. For it is an axiom that God must have ail perfections and be free from all defects. This is the meaning of the prophet when he says, “Thou that art of eyes too pure to behold evil, and that canst not look on mischief.” Seeing that it would be a defect in God to look on mischief, the prophet says that He can not do so, meaning that nothing should be attributed to God which looks like a defect.

But it is clear that one who can not act voluntarily is deficient and can be called an agent only in a loose and figurative manner. Thus when we say, the fire burns, the sword kills, the lamp shines, these expressions are figurative. For the act of killing with the sword and of illuminating a house with a lamp can properly be attributed only to a free agent, namely the human being who killed with the sword and lit the lamp in the house. Similarly if one throws a garment into the fire and it is burned, though it is the fire that did the burning, nevertheless we attribute the burning of the garment to the man who threw it into the fire, and say, so and so burned the garment. The reason is because man is a true agent, since he acts from choice and voluntarily; therefore the act is attributed to him. But the other agencies, like the lamp, the sword and the fire, are deficient, for they have not the power to do or not to do, except according to the will of the man who acts by means of them. They are like instruments in his hands, like an axe or a saw, of which the Bible says, “Should the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? Should the saw magnify itself against him that moveth it?” The meaning is, It is not proper that the axe which is an instrument should boast itself of being called agent against the one that heweth therewith, for the latter is the agent; nor is it right that the saw should magnify itself against him that lifts it up easily, as one lifts a rod, or magnify itself against those who lift it up easily, as one lifts a light staff, not as one lifts a heavy log. Isaiah says this about the king of Assyria, who thought that he was the agent who ruled over nations with wrath as he desired. But the prophet points out that he is nothing more than an instrument, that God acts through him, and sends him to execute judgment against a godless nation and the people of His indignation. Therefore he says in the beginning, “O Asshur, the rod of Mine anger, … I do send him against an ungodly nation, and against the people of My wrath do I give him a charge … Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so …”

All this shows that the instrument is not the true agent, but he is the agent who wields the instrument with his will. Therefore when we say of God that He is the maker of existing things, or that He does a particular thing, it can not be that He does them in the manner of the defective agents who have not the choice to do or not to do. For then man would be superior to God, seeing that a human being can either burn a garment or not burn it, whereas God has not this power. But how is it possible that He who has infinite power can not do what man can? It is clear therefore that the work of God must be like the work of perfect agents, i. e. those who act from choice and with will, whom we consider perfect agents.

The solution of the great difficulty which results from the assumption that God’s activity is voluntary, is as follows: If the will and the choice which God exercises in His activity were of the same kind as the will and the choice of man, the difficulty above mentioned would be real, the difficulty, namely, that they would produce change in the agent. But as God’s will is not of the same kind as ours, no absurdity results. For God’s will follows His wisdom and His power, and as His wisdom and His power are infinite and not of the same kind as our wisdom and power, so His will is not of the same kind as our will. And as the wisdom and knowledge of God are not something added to His essence, as we shall see later, but are of His very essence, and His essence is absolutely unknown, His wisdom is also absolutely unknown. And when we attribute wisdom to God, all that we understand is that we deny the attribute of ignorance, which is the opposite.

In the same way we attribute will to God in the sense that we deny that He acts by necessity like the defective agents of finite power, God’s activity being with infinite power. This being so, it follows that God’s activity must be voluntary, as it is in perfect agents, but not that we understand the nature of His will. For His will is essential in Him, and as His essence is absolutely unknown, so is His will absolutely unknown. We say that He acts with will only that we may convey the idea that He does not act from necessity without intention and will. If you ask, how does He change from a condition of not willing to a condition of willing, we reply with another question, how does He change from the condition of knowing man before he comes into being to the condition of knowing him after he has come into existence? For there is no doubt that these are different states of knowledge.

There is no way out of this difficulty except by saying either that His knowledge is not of the same kind as our knowledge, and that it does not cause change in Him as our knowledge causes change in us, or to commit the grievous heresy of attributing ignorance to God and saying that He does not know any particular thing that originates in the world, but the universal only, that He did not know Moses while he was in existence any more than He knew him before he existed and after he ceased to exist and that God does not know opposites, else He would have different kinds of knowledge. The best solution is to say that His knowledge follows His wisdom, and as His wisdom is of His very essence and not something added to His essence, and is absolutely unknown, so His knowledge and His will and His power, which follow His wisdom, are absolutely unknown. And the only understanding we have of them is that His activity is like that of the best agent. Now since we find that he who acts with power and intention and will is a better agent than one who has not these, we say that God acts with power and intention and will, though we have not the ability to understand the nature of the intention and will. But we do know that the will does not cause any change in Him, for change would be a defect.

As this matter of the will is an obvious difficulty, which occurs at first sight, the difficulty, namely, that will implies change from not willing to willing, we find that the prophets solve it in the manner we have indicated. Isaiah says, “Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, call ye upon Him while He is near; Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord and He will have compassion upon him, and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon.” And he continues, “For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts.”

The meaning is as follows: The people of Isaiah’s day were in doubt about this matter. They said, How is it possible that after it has been determined that a certain wicked person shall die, he should, by repenting, annul the divine determination? If this is so, then God would change from a condition of willing to a condition of not willing, but it is impossible that God should first desire to punish the wicked person and then change His mind and no longer desire to punish him. Because of this difficulty they made up their minds that repentance is of no benefit to the wicked person. This difficulty Isaiah solved by saying, “For My thoughts are not your thoughts …” Because at first sight it might seem that there is a change in God’s will, he says, “For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways …,” i. e. as there is a difference between His knowledge and our knowledge, the two not belonging to the same class at all, so there is a difference between His will and our will, and between His ways and our ways, there being no similarity between them at all. This he indicates by the expression, “For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways …” For it is well known that we can not say about two things that the one is higher than the other unless they are both high and one is higher than the other, their difference being one of degree. For example, we say fire is higher than air, for the term high applies to both of them, but fire is higher than air. But if the one is the extreme of height, like the heaven, and the other the extreme of lowness, like the earth, to which the name high does not apply at all in any degree, we can not say that the one is higher than the other. And if we do use this expression, we mean that there is no relation or similarity between them at all, for the term high applies to the one, the heaven, but it does not apply at all to the other, the earth, which is the extreme of lowness.

The relation is the same, the Bible says, between God’s thoughts and ways and our thoughts and ways. As the term height does not include heaven and earth, for the term applies absolutely to the heaven, but does not apply to the earth at all, so is the relation of God’s thoughts and ways and knowledge to our thoughts and ways and knowledge. That is, there is no relation between them at all, and they do not come under the same genus. For God’s knowledge is called knowledge in the absolute sense, while ours is not called knowledge at all. Therefore the word knowledge can apply to the two figuratively only, for they do not differ merely in degree, they are not at all of the same genus, like the word height applied to heaven and earth. Height applies to heaven, but it does not apply to earth at all, rather the term low, and hence the two do not come under the same genus, height. And as we can not compare our knowledge to God’s knowledge, so we can not compare our will to His will. And though our will necessitates change in us, God’s will does not necessitate change in Him. This is the meaning of the sequel in Isaiah, “For as the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven, … so shall My word be that goeth forth out of My mouth: It shall not return unto Me void, Except it accomplish that which I please.” The meaning is that the divine desire is not like the human desire, which is sometimes not fulfilled. The divine desire is always realized, and there is no one to prevent Him from carrying out His will. This shows that the example is intended to explain the matter of the will, namely that His will and desire are not of the same class as our will and desire. Therefore they do not cause change in God though they do cause change in us.

The upshot of all this is that God’s work is done with will and desire, and yet it does not cause any change or defect in God’s nature. Therefore we can apply to Him the word agent with intention and will, which is the best kind of agent.

CHAPTER 4

We have already explained in the First Book that the Torah begins with the story of creation to prove the existence of the Maker. The account of the way in which the things passed from potentiality to actuality proves the existence of an agent who brought them into actuality. And the fact that they passed into actuality at different times, namely in the six days of creation, shows that the agent is one who acts with intention and will, and does things at different times as His wisdom dictates, though they could have all come into being at the same time. The reason they were produced at different times is to indicate intention and will. For these are at the basis of the Torah as a whole and of the reward and punishment mentioned therein, as we said before. And the Rabbis say also, “The world could have been created with one word. And the reason there were ten is in order to exact punishment from the wicked … and to give reward to the righteous.” The order in which the different things came into being denotes the natural priority of some creatures over others, and shows that every one of them came into being at the time that was suitable and appropriate to its nature, so that it may realize the utmost perfection of which it is capable, as the wisdom and will of the Maker had decreed. The expression, “And God saw that it was good,” which concludes the account of every work of creation points to the idea just mentioned.

From the testimony of the senses in regard to the passing of things from potentiality to actuality, we can find a rational proof of the existence of God, as follows: We see things which are potential and then become actual. Now every thing that passes from potentiality to actuality must have a cause outside of it. For if the cause were within and there is no obstacle, the thing would never be potential at all, but always actual. And if, the cause being within, there was an obstacle preventing its actualization, which was removed, then that which removed the obstacle is the cause of the thing’s passing from potentiality to actuality. Now that cause, which was itself potential before it became actual, was in this condition either because of an obstacle in itself, or because of the absence of a certain relation between the agent and the thing acted upon; and as soon as the relation appeared, the cause became actual. Whichever of these alternatives we adopt, there must be something that removes the obstacle, or that produces the required relation. But the same thing applies to this thing that removed the obstacle or brought about the relation, and this can not go on ad infinitum. We must therefore finally reach a cause actualizing the potential, which has no potentiality at all. For if it had it would be subject to possibility. This means to have the possibility of existing or not existing. But if so it would need another actualizing cause which would determine one of the alternative possibilities in preference to the other. This other therefore would be an actualizing cause without potentiality or obstacles, but one that does whatever it desires with its simple will, and it is a necessary existent.

It can not be material, for a material thing is subject to possibility and can not be a necessary existent. It is clear also from this that it is abstract or separate. But an abstract cause without possibility that causes things to pass from potentiality to actuality is God. It is clear that He is not body, and it is also clear that He is one, for the abstract is not susceptible of numerical quantity, except in so far as the one may be the cause and the other the effect. But the abstract without possibility is necessarily a cause and not an effect, for the effect is a possible existent, since its existence is dependent on another. It follows therefore that He is one. It is also clear that He is independent of time, for if He were dependent upon time, He would exist at a particular time and not at another, and then He would be subject to possibility. It is also clear that He is free from defects, for if He were defective, His work could not be absolutely perfect, whereas we see that all His works are as perfect as they can be, as the Bible says, “The Rock, His work is perfect.” It is clear therefore that He is free from defect.

This proof of the existence of God is equivalent to the fourth proof mentioned by Maimonides in the Guide, where he treats of the existence of God and the principles which follow from it. It is a biblical proof which is in agreement with philosophy, and is alluded to in the creation story in Genesis, as we have seen.

CHAPTER 5

There are other philosophical proofs of the existence of God mentioned by Maimonides in the beginning of the second part of the Guide, which I will mention briefly to call the attention of the reader to those which are valid and those which are not. The first proof of Maimonides is based upon the existence of continuous and eternal motion, as is assumed by the Philosopher. But this is not admitted by any of those who profess a divine law and believe in creation. Nor can our senses testify to such a doctrine. We did not therefore trouble to mention that proof.

But the second proof given by Maimonides is very weak, because it is based on a premise cited in the name of Aristotle which is not proven to be true. The proposition is that if of a thing composed of two elements one element is found to exist also by itself apart from the composite thing, then it follows that the other element must also be found to exist by itself apart from the compound. For if their nature compelled them to exist in combination only, like matter and natural form, neither could exist without the other. The fact therefore that one element does exist by itself shows that there is no such necessity, and therefore the other too must exist by itself. An example of this is sakanjabin, a drink composed of vinegar and honey. Since honey is found by itself also, it follows necessarily that vinegar also is found by itself.

Then the argument proceeds as follows: We find many things composed of a mover and a moved. That is, they both move others and are themselves moved by others while they move the others. We also find a thing which is moved, but does not move another, viz. the last moved thing. It follows therefore that there must be a thing that moves another, but is not itself moved by another. This is the First Mover.

This proof is based upon the proposition above mentioned, which Maimonides cites in the name of Aristotle, but it is not true. For it does not follow that because one of the two elements of a composite thing exists alone, the other must exist alone also. Thus man is composed of animal and rational, and animal also exists by itself without rational. But rational does not exist by itself without animal, unless we say that angel is rational alone, i. e. actually intelligent without being body, nutritive and sentient, which is the definition of animal. To be sure, it is possible to object to this example by saying that animal does not exist alone, but in combination with some specific form, thus neighing animal, braying animal, roaring animal, but animal in the abstract does not exist by itself. And therefore it is not necessary that rational should exist by itself without any other form. But this is not the case in mover and moved. Still, inasmuch as the opponent may dispute the proposition in a way by citing animal or plant which is composed of body and soul, and yet body exists alone, whereas animality or the vegetative force does not exist alone, Maimonides did not rely on this proof and cited a third philosophical proof which is very strong and can not be disputed, as Maimonides says.

The argument is as follows: Existences must belong to one of three classes. (1) They are all without origination and destruction, (2) they are all subject to origination and destruction, (3) some are subject to origination and destruction and some are not. There is no escape from this classification.

Now they can not all be without genesis and destruction, for we see with our senses many things coming into being and ceasing to be. They can not all be subject to generation and destruction, because if all existing things were subject to generation and destruction, all existing things would be possible existents, and they would all have been destroyed, and there would be no cause to compel their existence in preference to their non-existence. Nothing would therefore exist, since there is no cause to produce or maintain them or to compel their existence in preference to their non-existence. And yet we see that they exist. It follows therefore that there is an existent, not subject to generation and destruction, one that has not the possibility of being destroyed, and that this being compels the existence of those things which are subject to generation and destruction, in preference to their non-existence. This being is a necessary existent, not a possible existent. For this being is determined to exist either by virtue of itself or by virtue of its cause. If by virtue of itself, then it is God. And if by virtue of its cause, then its cause is a necessary existent by virtue of itself, and it is God, who produces all things that are subject to generation and decay. Without Him a thing can not exist, and He is not subject to generation and decay.

This is a very strong proof of the matter, because it shows the existence of God through a necessary classification, and not because existing things require a Maker, which is the essence of the first proof, as we have seen. Therefore Maimonides says that it can not be rejected or disputed except by one who does not know the methods of proof. He points out also that it follows from this that He is not corporeal. For we have made clear that God is a necessary existent by virtue of Himself, and such a being is incorporeal. For all body is composed of two things, and the composition is the cause of its existence. Hence it can not be a necessary existent through itself, because its existence is dependent upon the existence of its parts and their composition. It is clear therefore that He is not body, nor a force residing in a body. It is easily proved also that He is one. For it is impossible that there should be two necessary existents equally, without any composition. For there must necessarily be in each one of them the element of necessary existence and another element by which it is differentiated from the other. The necessary existent would therefore be composed of two elements. But we have seen that the necessary existent can not have any composition in it at all. It is also clear that He is not subject to time. For everything that is subject to time is subject to change, and everything that is subject to change has a cause that makes it change. But the necessary existent through itself has no cause which makes it change. Nor can He be the cause and the subject of the change at the same time, for then He would consist of two elements, the element which causes the change and the element which undergoes the change, and He would be composite. It is also clear that He is free from defects. For if He had a defect He would have need of another to make good the defect, and He would not be a necessary existent through Himself but through another.

Though this proof is valid and reliable, as we have seen, nevertheless Maimonides cites a fourth proof, which is the first one that we mentioned in the preceding chapter, because it agrees with the statements of the Torah in the account of creation. We gave it here first because it is biblical and at the same time is in agreement with philosophy. We find also that Ibn Roshd relies upon this proof in the fourth question of his book, Destructio Destructionis. We followed it by this second proof, because it is a philosophical proof which Maimonides believes in, saying that it can not be objected to or disputed. We have proved therefore the principle of the existence of God by means of two valid demonstrations.

CHAPTER 6

Every one professing a religion who believes in the principle of the existence of God, as we have just proved it, must believe that there is in the world a Being, a necessary existent through Himself, having no cause, nor any one similar to Him. He is the cause of all existing things, whose continuity of existence is dependent upon Him, but His existence is not dependent upon them or upon any one else. This is God.

This statement gives a formal or conceptual understanding of that which was proved demonstratively in the preceding chapters. It is well to understand that as a definition or description gives a formal or conceptual understanding of the thing defined or described, so the word “existent” here is like the genus, which embraces all existing things, and the expression, “necessary existent through Himself,” is the essential difference between it and the other existing things. The other words, namely that He has no cause, that there is nothing similar to Him, and so on, are merely the explanation of “necessary existent through Himself,” for the purpose of giving us as complete a formal or conceptual understanding as can be had of God’s existence.

In reality, however, it is neither a definition nor a description, God having no definition. For a definition is composed of genus and difference, but the word existent is not a genus which is predicated of all its subjects synonymously, as a genus is. For there is no genus in the world which includes God and another. The word existent is not applied synonymously to God and to other things. God’s existence is real (absolute), whereas the existence of other existing things is acquired from His existence. But if existent is not a genus which includes God and other things, He has no difference. The expressions, there is no one similar to God, there is no one equal to Him, are words indicating otherness merely, i. e. that God is not the other existing things, for all of them acquire their existence from Him and have no existence without Him, but His existence does not depend upon their existence.

From this principle follow the four secondary dogmas which we mentioned in the First Book, denial of which constitutes heresy. They are: unity, incorporeality, independence of time, and freedom from defect.

It is clear from the meaning of unity that it is an essential element in the principle of the existence of God and follows from it, as we have demonstrated. For if He were not one, but two or more, every one of them would necessarily have two elements, the element of necessary existence and an element by which he is differentiated from the other. He would then be composite, the composition would be the cause of his existence, and he would not be a necessary existent through himself.

It is also clear that incorporeality is an essential element of the principle of the existence of God and follows from it in the same way. All body is composed of matter and form. In every composite the composition is the cause of its existence. We thus get back to the proof of the unity. But even if we say that body qua body is not necessarily composed of matter and form, that body qua body has no composition at all, but is one by definition, and that the true view is that of the ancients; (in fact Ibn Roshd writes in the eleventh book of the Metaphysics that this is the opinion of Aristotle, and that there is no necessary composition in all bodies, the heavenly body being one in every respect and without any composition. The composition which we perceive in bodies, he says, comes merely from the specific form which is imposed upon body)—in which case we might say that God may be corporeal though He is one—nevertheless He must be incorporeal, because if He were corporeal, He would necessarily have to be finite, and He would then be similar to other bodies, and His power would be finite. But there is nothing similar to God, as we said before. Besides, one body can not move another body without itself being in motion while moving the other. But if so it needs another mover outside of it which is not body. This mover then and not the body is the necessary existent.

It is also clear that independence of time is an essential element of the principle of the existence of God and follows from it. For if He were subject to time He would not be the cause of all existing things, for time would be prior to Him. He would then have come into existence after a state of non-existence, and would require a cause to bring Him into existence, and would not be the cause of all things. And if He existed always with time, He would not be a necessary existent through Himself, but through another, viz. time, unless time is an immeasurable duration without which we can not think at all. Similarly if He is not everlasting He has the possibility of not-being, and that which has the possibility of not-being is not a necessary existent. In general if He is dependent upon time and His existence is dependent upon the existence of time, He is not a necessary existent through Himself.

It is also easy to see that freedom from defect is an essential element of the dogma of the existence of God. For if He were defective, He would stand in need of another, and would not be a necessary existent through Himself, but through another.

CHAPTER 7

From these four secondary dogmas which follow, as we have seen, from the first principle, the existence of God, there issue many branches. Thus from the first derivative dogma, unity, it follows that we must reject such divine attributes as wisdom, strength, generosity, etc., because they are all attributes added to the essence. But since God is one in every way, He can not have either essential or accidental attributes, for they all involve multiplicity and are inconsistent with unity.

From the second derivative dogma, incorporeality, it follows that we must not ascribe to God any corporeal emotions, such as anger and sorrow and joy and grudge, for all these are emotions associated with body or corporeal force.

From the third derivative dogma, independence of time, it follows that His power is infinite, and that He has infinite ability and infinite perfection. Therefore there can not be in Him any equality or similarity to other things. For since they all emanate from Him, their power must necessarily be finite, and having a finite power, they are dependent upon time. But God who produced them, since He is their creator, is eternal and infinite. This is the meaning of the biblical text, “I am the first and I am the last, and beside Me there is no God, i. e. since I am eternal there is no God that can be equal to Me. In the same strain is the following passage, “To whom then will ye liken Me, that I should be equal? Saith the Holy One. Lift up your eyes on high, and see; who hath created these?”

From the fourth derivative dogma, freedom from defect, it follows that we must not ascribe to God anything that looks like a defect, such as ignorance, weariness, etc.

Now there is no need of asking why we named these four dogmas as derived from the first fundamental principle, and did not mention the dogmas that God is wise, possessing will, powerful, living, and so on, in the same way as we mentioned unity. Or why we did not mention such dogmas as that God has no genus or difference, or one similar to Him, or opposition, or change, and so on, in the same way as we mentioned incorporeality. Or why we did not mention such dogmas as that God is infinitely perfect, that He is true and blessed, just as we mentioned independence of time. For the answer to all this is plain from what we have just said. They are all branches issuing from the derivative dogmas above mentioned. Thus that God is wise, and living, and possessing will, and powerful, and so on, is all included in the fourth derivative dogma, freedom from defect. From the same source are derived such attributes as righteous, upright, faithful, kind, strong, merciful, gracious, and similar attributes which signify perfection. That God has no genus, species, or accident, that He is not in place, and so on, is all included in the dogma of incorporeality. That God does not change, that He is infinitely perfect, and so on, is all included in the dogma of independence of time. For everything that is subject to time is liable to change and is finite. That God has no one equal or similar to Him, and so on, is all included in the dogma of unity. That God is true is included in the first fundamental principle, the existence of God. For the word true (real) means nothing else except that His existence depends upon Himself and not upon another, as we shall make clear when we explain the word true. Blessed means nothing else except that He bestows upon all existing things all the perfection of which they are capable, as we shall explain later. In short, from these four dogmas issue like branches all those things which have relation to God, those which are attributed to Him as well as those which should not be ascribed to Him. We will now explain every one of these four derivative dogmas by itself. But we must first explain the subject of attributes, namely what attributes are to be ascribed to God and in what way.

CHAPTER 8

It is clear without much reflection that an attribute ascribed to a thing to denote its activities does not imply plurality in the essence of the active thing. For many different acts may proceed from one agent. And this is true of both kinds of agents, the natural as well as the voluntary.

Thus take a natural agent, like fire. Fire melts certain things, while it hardens others. It boils and it burns, and it makes black and it makes white. One who does not know the nature of fire might think that it has six different forces, from which the six different results follow, which we have mentioned. He might think that there is an element by which it boils, an element by which it burns, an element by which it makes black, an element by which it causes the opposite of blackness, namely it makes white, an element by which it melts, and another element by which it does the opposite, viz. it hardens. For he would say, it is not possible that one and the same agent should produce opposite effects. But he who knows the nature of fire, understands that with one and the same force which it has, namely heat, it does all those things, and that the results are different because of the difference in the recipients, without there being any multiplicity in the essence of fire.

The very same thing applies to a voluntary agent. Thus the rational faculty in man, who is a voluntary agent, does many different things though the agent is one. He acquires the sciences and the arts, he governs states, he rips and he sews, he destroys and he builds, and does a great many different and opposite acts, though he is one and simple. For there is no one who holds that the rational faculty in man is composite. Similarly the human soul as a whole is the author of many different natural activities, like nutrition, growth, sensation, and of voluntary acts, like the activities of the conative and the rational faculties. And yet there is no philosopher who maintains that the human soul is composite. But since we find the function of growth by itself in plants, the function of sensation in animals, and the function of ratiocination by itself in the Separate Intelligences, some have been led to think that the human soul is composite, as some physicians have written that man has three souls. But it is not so. The various functions and activities come from one and the same human soul.

Maimonides has explained this matter in the introduction to his commentary on the treatise “Abot.” He cites as an example three dark places, one of which is illuminated by the lighting of a lamp, the second by the rising of the moon, and the third by the rising of the sun. Every one of these three places has in it light, a substance which causes sight to pass from potentiality to actuality, and the word illumination is applied to them all synonymously and not by way of priority and posteriority, and yet since the causes are not the same, they are different with respect to their causes. Similarly the faculties of growth and sensation in man are not the same as the faculties of growth and sensation in animals and plants, but the activities come from the human soul as they come from the souls of the ass and the eagle, though their causes are different. He also says there that they have nothing in common except the name. In conclusion he says: This is a matter of great importance and deserving of notice. Many of those who philosophize go astray in relation to it and derive theories and opinions which are far-fetched and untrue.

From these words of his it appears that from one existent there may come many different acts, some natural, some voluntary. He who does not understand the nature of the human soul will think that the many acts must come from so many different powers or faculties. But he who reflects upon the rational faculty and considers that though it is one and simple and without multiplicity, yet we say about a person, he built that house or that city, he destroyed it, he conquered a certain land, he invented a certain science, without all this necessitating multiplicity in the essence of the rational power, will understand that many acts may come from one agent. And if we find this to be the case in the sensible and inferior agents of our experience, how much more is this likely to be true in the First Agent, who is the cause of all acts, natural and voluntary. This is why we say that though we perceive that many different acts come from God, they do not necessitate any plurality in Him.

This is the reason why philosophers are permitted to ascribe attributes to God, different because of different acts, whether in different recipients, like the power of growth in the plant and the power of animality in the animal, or in one recipient, as for example that He is now gracious and merciful and now bearing grudge against one and the same person or one and the same people, and other attributes of the same kind which denote acts coming from Him. For this reason we say that even though we characterize Him essentially by a given attribute because of a certain act we perceive to come from Him, this does not necessitate plurality in Him. Thus if we characterize Him as living, by reason of an act which comes from Him, namely life for all living beings, this does not necessitate multiplicity in His essence. For our meaning is that since we see life coming from Him, we judge that He is the source of life which He bestows upon all living things. This is why we describe Him as living, in the words of Scripture, “For with Thee is the fountain of life.”

In the same way we judge that light is with Him, because we see that “in His light we see light,” that He it is who gives us the power to see light, and causes sight to pass from potentiality to actuality. Similarly we judge that all perfections are found in Him, because they come from Him. In the words of the Psalmist, “He that planted the ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the eye, shall He not see?”

In the same way we describe Him as wise, by reason of the acts which we see coming from Him with wonderful wisdom and admirable order, indicating that He has wisdom. He may therefore be characterized by different attributes by reason of all the various acts which we see emanating from Him, without this necessitating any plurality in Him. In the same way He may be characterized by different attributes by reason of various relations, reciprocal and otherwise. For example, we say God is near to man or far from him, or in the words of the Bible, “The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart,” “The Lord is far from the wicked.” The nearness and the farness are on man’s side, according as he comes near to God or keeps far away from Him, as the Rabbis say, in commenting on the expression, “The Lord, the Lord,” “I am He before man sins, and I am the same after he has sinned,” i. e. the change is not in God, but in man. Before he sins, he stands in a certain relation to God, after he has sinned, he stands in a different relation, he departs from Him, like a tree, which is now near to Reuben, now far from him, now east of Reuben, now west of him, not because of any change in the tree, but because of a change in Reuben. Or when the Bible speaks of God as Creator, and Maker, and King, and Lord, and uses other similar appellations. This does not necessitate any plurality or change in God, as it does not necessitate any plurality in Reuben when we say of him that he is the son of Jacob and the brother of Simon and the father of Enoch and the partner of Naphtali and the owner of an ox and of a pit. All these attributes do not by any means necessitate any plurality in Reuben, for the plurality is not in the essence of Reuben, but the attributes are due to the things with which he stands in various relations.

In the same way God may be characterized by different attributes from different aspects. Thus when we say of God that He is possessed of will, or is wise, or powerful, we do not mean that He has one attribute by which He has power to create, another attribute with which He exercises will, another with which He creates, another with which He knows that which He has created, any more than we say that He has one attribute with which He created the elements, another with which He created the spheres, another with which He created the angels, and another with which He created man, all of which are different acts emanating from one agent, as we said before. But since a perfect agent can not do anything without having the power, the knowledge and the desire to do it, we say that God has will and power and knowledge, these being different aspects of the agent which do not necessitate plurality in Him.

In these various ways God is characterized by various attributes by reason of acts different because of the recipients, or differing in their essence, or by reason of the relations and connections between Him and them, or because of difference in aspect. All these things do not necessitate any plurality in God, and are all permissible. This is the method of the Torah and the Prophets in relation to the attributes which are ascribed to God. The question whether God can be characterized by different attributes in respect to His own essence, will be left for later discussion.

CHAPTER 9

An attribute by which a thing is characterized is not the essence of the thing characterized, but something attaching to the essence. For an attribute must be either something essential or something accidental. If it is something essential, as when we say man is rational animal, it is not an attribute added to the essence, but it is like saying man is man, for man is nothing else except animality and rationality. It is merely an explanation of the name, since [by hypothesis] the attribute is the essence of the thing characterized and not something pertaining to the essence. There is no objection to ascribing to God an attribute of this sort, since it is not something added to the essence. For a plurality of words does not necessarily represent a plurality of things, but is merely used to explain the nature of the essence. Thus if we say, body nutritive sensitive, these words do not add any plurality to the meaning of the word animal.

But we must know that God can not be characterized by two things as denoting His essence, in the way in which animality and rationality denote the essence of man. Nor can God be characterized by one word as denoting a part of His essence, for in either case God would be composed of two things. But we have already proved that God is absolutely simple. But He may be characterized by an attribute which is an explanation of the name by which He is called. This can be the case only if the attribute is something essential which explains the essence of the thing characterized. For example, if we say that the First Cause is a necessary existent and the absolute truth. Here the words are an explanation of the term necessary existent, as we shall see when we deal with the word truth.

If an attribute is something accidental, it is clear that it can not be ascribed to God. For an accident requires a subject, an accident not being able to exist by itself. God would therefore be a substance bearing accidents. Now if the existence of the substance and the necessity of its essence are independent of the accidents, then the accident may exist or not exist, whereas the substance exists by necessity. God would therefore be composed of two things, necessary existence and possible existence. As necessary existent He would be cause, as possible existent, effect. He would therefore be cause and effect at the same time, while being a substance depending upon itself. This is a contradiction, which is impossible. On the other hand if His existence and the necessity of His essence are not independent of the accident, then the accident is a necessary existent, and the substance bearing the accident a necessary existent likewise, and there would be two necessary existents, or else one that is composed of two elements, substance and accident. But all this has been shown to be absurd. It is clear therefore that God can not be characterized by any attribute, essential or accidental. This would make it necessary to reject all divine attributes except those which are explanatory of God’s necessary existence, as we said before.

On the other hand it can be shown that God must have attributes, as follows: It follows from the above mentioned proofs that if God is a necessary existent, He must be one, else He would not be a necessary existent. It is clear, on the other hand, that unity is in every thing an attribute added to the essence. For if Reuben were one qua man, a horse and a tree could not have unity, since unity is [by hypothesis] the quiddity of Reuben. Nor could whiteness or wisdom be characterized as one. Without doubt, then, unity is something added to the essence. Now since unity is something added to the essence, and God, as we have seen, can not be characterized by any attribute except such as is explanatory of His name, we must explain in what way it can be said that God is one. For unity is not, like the other attributes ascribed to God, named after God’s acts. Having explained the meaning of unity, we will then discuss the same question concerning the other attributes, viz. in what way they can be ascribed to God.

CHAPTER 10

The term one applies to that which gives specialization and separation to an existing thing by which it is distinguished from another. Thus, the term one is applied to a collection of many different individuals, because they agree in a certain matter which singles them out and distinguishes them from others. This common element may be an accidental thing, as in the expression, “One people and one language.” Because they have one accidental element in common, such as religion among the Ishmaelites (Arabs, Mohammedans), or blackness among Ethiopians, which separates them from others, we say that they are one people. Or the common element may be an essential thing, as when we say that Reuben and Simeon are one in humanity, or that man and horse are one in animality. These are called one because they have in common one essential thing which separates them from others. And the more this specializing thing singles them out from others, the more truly does the term one apply. Thus the term one applies more truly to an individual, say Reuben, though he is composed of many visible members different in kind, than to a people.

A still more proper use of the term one is when it is applied to flesh, bone or a member composed of homogeneous parts. For though it is composed of different elements, the term one is applicable because it is hard to separate them and they are not perceptible to the senses.

Still more proper is the application of the term one to a simple element, which can not be divided into the matter and form of which it is composed except mentally, and neither of them is perceptible to the senses by itself. A surface is one in a truer sense still, and a line even more so, since it has only one dimension, and is not composed of elements into which it may be resolved, actually or mentally, as a simple element is resolved into matter and form and a surface into length and breadth. A line is one simple dimension, by which attribute it is distinguished from all other existing things, and does not share it with any other thing. And yet the unity of a line is not perfect, because it may be divided into curved and straight. Moreover every line you can point to may be divided into small parts, each one of which is a line. A point is more truly one than a line. For a point can not be divided actually or mentally; it is different from all other existing things, with which it has nothing in common except position. But the unity of point is not perfect because it has position in common with other things. A truer unity is the numerical one, which has no position and has nothing in common with other things. But it has no real actual existence, only a mental one. And for this reason the mind may conceive of a large aggregation of numerical units, constituting number, which may be defined as an aggregation of units. Therefore it is clear that the numerical one is not a perfect unit either, since it does not single out and separate an actual existent from other existents, seeing that we can conceive many ones of the same kind.

Absolute unity is that which singles out and separates from others a thing existing actually, which can not be conceived as having others like it. Now since there is not among existing things any thing which has nothing in common with others, and to which there is nothing equal, except God, it follows that there is nothing in the world to which the term one applies in the sense that it is really different from every thing else, except God. For He alone is a necessary existent, while all other things are possible existents, and share this attribute in common. But there is no one that shares with God in the attribute of necessary existence or in anything else, including the word existent. For we have explained that there can not be two necessary existents, since the mind can not conceive of them as being equal in all respects, and that the term existence as applied to God and to other things is used in a purely homonymous sense. God’s unity, therefore, is absolute, for no existing thing has anything in common with Him, or is like unto Him in any respect.

We have now shown that one in the true sense is applied to an existent to which there is nothing equal or similar. We have also shown that the Necessary Existent, whose existence has been proved demonstratively, has no like, nor anything in common with any existing thing. Hence it is clear that the term one which is applied to God is, as it were, a negative concept and not a positive, and therefore does not necessitate multiplicity in God’s essence. The Torah expresses this idea clearly in the words, “Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.” The meaning is as follows: As being “our God,” i. e. as the cause of all existing things—in allusion to our first proof—He must be a necessary existent, being alone the cause of all things and having none like Him, as the Bible says, “To whom then will ye liken Me, that I should be equal?” for all things outside of Him are effects. Similarly in Himself he is “one,” having no second similar to Him, and there is no other necessary existent—this being an allusion to our second proof above. This explains, so to speak, that the concept of unity which is predicated of God is negative and not positive, and therefore does not require plurality in God’s essence, since it is not an attribute added to the essence.

CHAPTER 11

Existing things are divided first into two classes, those which have independent existence and those which are dependent on others. Examples of the latter class are accidents which reside in bodies, and forms which exist in matters. The first class of existents, the independent ones, are again divided into three classes: First, bodies, which are the lowest class of the three. Second, Separate Intelligences, having no dependence upon bodies. Third, souls, which are intermediate between the other two. They have a sort of dependence upon bodies, receiving impressions and influences from the Separate Intelligences and then influencing and producing impressions upon bodies. Thus they are, as it were, intermediate between bodies and the Separate Intelligences.

Since plurality in existing things is perceived both by our intellect and by our senses, we must show how plurality can arise from the First Cause, which is one and of absolute simplicity. The explanation is this. There are ten or at least nine kinds of body. Nine of them are celestial, while the tenth consists of the matter which is within the concavity of the lunar sphere. The nine celestial bodies are living, and consist of bodies and souls, the latter exerting influence and producing impressions upon the world of nature. Thus we see that by their motions and inclinations to the north and the south, they order the affairs of living beings, and arrange their life in a manner suitable to the permanence of their species. But none can order the affairs of the living, who is not himself living. Therefore we say that they are living and intelligent, and comprehend the things which are ordered by them.

Now this plurality can not come from simple unity, unless we say that the first principle caused to emanate from its absolutely simple existence one intellect, which is the first effect, and is a being existing independently, being neither body nor resident in body. And this intellect is the beginning of plurality, for since it is a caused thing we conceive a certain element of plurality in it. For it has two modes of understanding: It understands itself and its principle. By virtue of its understanding its principle as being simple, there emanates from it an intellect, and by virtue of its understanding itself as necessarily having two elements, a simple intellect and a possible existent in its essence (since its existence is dependent upon another), there emanates from it the soul of a sphere and its body. By virtue of understanding itself as a simple intellect, which is a noble concept, it causes to emanate from itself the soul of a sphere, and by the act of understanding itself as a possible existent, it causes to emanate from it the body of the smooth sphere which produces the diurnal motion.

In the same way from the second intellect there emanates a third intellect, and the soul of the sphere of the fixed stars, and the body of the sphere. Similarly from the third there emanates a fourth intellect, the soul of the sphere of Saturn and its body. From the fourth there emanates a fifth intellect, the soul of the sphere of Jupiter and its body. From the fifth intellect there emanates a sixth intellect, the soul of the sphere of Mars, and its body. From the sixth there emanates a seventh intellect, the soul of the sphere of the sun, and its body. From the seventh there emanates an eighth intellect, the soul of the sphere of Venus, and its body. From the eighth there emanates a ninth intellect, the soul of the sphere of Mercury, and its body. From the ninth there emanates a tenth intellect, the soul of the ninth sphere, which is that of the moon, and its body. From the tenth there emanates the matter of all that is beneath the lunar sphere and all the souls of that region. This tenth intellect is called the Active Intellect.

Now it is clear that all these spheral bodies are necessarily different in kind, since their causes differ from each other as cause from effect. And as the matter of all which is beneath the lunar sphere is different from the matter of the lunar sphere, because their respective causes are different, the one being the cause and the other the effect, so all the spheres differ from each other, and have nothing in common except spherical form and circular motion. All that is above the lunar sphere is permanent individually and not subject to dissolution, while those things which are beneath the lunar sphere are subject to dissolution and have no individual permanence, but only as species. The moon, however, is intermediate, as it were, between those things which are subject to genesis and destruction and the things which have individual permanence and are not subject to dissolution, and for this reason the moon’s light waxes and wanes.

Inasmuch as this chain of cause and effect can not continue ad infinitum, it stops with the tenth intellect which moulds the matter of the things below the lunar sphere. Therefore it is called the Active (moulding) Intellect. The Rabbis call it, the Prince of the World.

It will be seen that according to the order of the causal chain just described, every one of the caused intellects produces an effect, which is an intellect existing independently, and the soul of a sphere, while the tenth, the Active Intellect, does not produce an intellect existing independently, but only a soul which resides in matter, like the soul of a sphere, and thus is in the position of a female, receiving influence, but not exerting any. This is the meaning of the statement of the Rabbis, “The Sabbath said to the Lord, blessed be He, ‘O Master of the world, to every one Thou hast given a mate, but to me Thou hast not given a mate.’ God replied, ‘My daughter, the congregation of Israel shall be thy mate’.” The word Sabbath, which is feminine, alludes to the quality of being passive and not active, which is that of the tenth intellect. They call it Sabbath because the sages of the Cabala refer every one of the seven days of creation to one of the seven last intellects, calling them sefirot. The first three, they say, are spiritual, and they call them the incomprehensible light. The last seven they refer respectively to the seven days of creation, and call the tenth Sabbath because it is the last of the effects, with which the chain comes to an end. The meaning then is that the last intellect, namely the tenth, which is the Active Intellect, the same as the tenth sefirah, which they call Sabbath, complained before God because with it the chain of causation comes to an end, and it has no mate, viz. another intellect having independent existence to emanate from it as in the other intellects, with the result that it is in the position of a female, passive and not active. Then God replied, “My daughter, the congregation of Israel shall be thy mate.” The meaning is, the intellect acquired through the Torah will be a separate intellect existing independently, permanently and controlling all material things, as the prophets and pious men produced signs and miracles by means of the intellect which they acquired through the Torah. This intellect is, as it were, a separate intellect, produced by the Active Intellect or by the sefirah called Sabbath.

According to some of the sages of the Cabala, who say that the sefirah yesod is called Sabbath, because they begin to count the days from the third sefirah, which is binah, the complaint is because the Active Intellect, which is malkut, the tenth sefirah, and caused by yesod, can not produce another separate intellect like all the other separate intellects which are produced by the sefirot. It is then like a female mate to Sabbath, i. e. passive, and not a male mate, i. e. active, like the others.

It is in allusion to what we have just said that the Rabbis say, “All agree that the Torah was given to Israel on the Sabbath.” The meaning is, it was given on the Sabbath as an indication that by means of it a person can acquire an intellect produced by the quality called Sabbath, which has independent existence. This is the additional soul or oversoul of which the Rabbis say that it is given to man on the Sabbath and taken away from him at the close of Sabbath, in accordance with the expression, “Ceased from work and rested,” which they interpret, by a play upon the Hebrew words, “Alas! the soul has gone.”

For this reason the Sabbath became a covenant and an everlasting sign between God and Israel, as the Bible says, “Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath … It is a sign between Me and the children of Israel forever …” The meaning is that the Sabbath is a sign that there is some divine bond remaining attached to the nation, which can not be denied—a bond through which the nation will attain eternal happiness for the soul and union with God, so that the pious men who observe the Sabbath will be able to produce changes in nature. This is the meaning of the expression, “sign of a covenant.”

This is the opinion about the chain of causation from the First Cause, according to Ibn Sina, Maimonides and some of the other Mohammedan writers. Ibn Roshd has a different opinion in this matter, which follows the ancient philosophers, and which I shall state after I have treated of the existence of angels, in order to afford the believer a true picture of the manner in which the chain of causation continues and how the plurality of different existences proceeds from the First Cause, though He is one and of absolute simplicity.

CHAPTER 12

There is a dispute concerning the existence of angels between the philosophers and the sages of the Torah. All agree that angels exist, but they differ about their quiddity. The philosophers say that as their essence is simple intellect, we can not conceive that there should be plurality among them. For plurality in things agreeing in form can only be due to the matter, seeing that plurality everywhere is due to matter and unity to form, unity being therefore superior to duality. Now since angels, as being separate intellects, are not material, it is inconceivable how they can differ from each other except by one being the cause and the other the effect. For this reason they say that the number of the separate intellects is ten, the same as the number of the spheres, which is nine, or ten if we include the matter which is beneath the lunar sphere, as we said in the preceding chapter.

A group of theologians who follow this idea say that the number of angels is the same as the number of spheres having different motions, each one of them having a special intellectual mover which gives it its special motion. Now since the number of spheres which it is necessary to assume in order to explain all the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies is forty-nine or fifty, the number of angels is forty-nine or fifty, the same as the number of movers. They say that this is the opinion of the Rabbis, expressed in the following statement: “Fifty gates of understanding were created in the world, all of which were given over to Moses except one, as is said, ‘Thou hast made him but little lower than the angels.’ ” They are called gates of understanding because every one of them has a special mode of comprehension.

But all this is in opposition to the opinion of the Torah. For it would follow from the doctrine above mentioned that the angels sent down with messages to men are imaginary things and not real. But the Bible says that there are many angels, self-existent, who are not sent down to men, as the Rabbis say by way of comment on the verses, “The chariots of God are myriads, even thousands upon thousands,” and, “Thousand thousands ministered unto him;” and that there are real angels who are sent down to mankind, as is said, “For He will give His angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways;” “The man Gabriel whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, approached close to me about the time of the evening offering;” also, “And there is none that holdeth with me against these, except Michael your prince.” All of this shows that there are self-existent angels who are sent with messages to mankind, an opinion agreed upon by all theologians.

It seems therefore that the difference between the separate intellects is due to the difference in their intellectual contents, and depends upon the degree of understanding which they have of the attributes of divine perfection, but has nothing to do with one being a cause and the other an effect. The word intellect would then represent, as it were, the genus embracing them all, while the difference would be represented by their respective degrees of comprehension. And yet this would not necessitate plurality in the essence of any one of them. For some things are composed of genus and difference in reality, like man, who is composed of animality and rationality, which are the genus and the difference, having real existence. Therefore man is necessarily composite. Some things again are composed of genus and difference by logical definition only, but not in reality, as for example, blackness is a color contracting the sight. “Color” is the genus, “contracting the sight” is the difference. But this does not induce plurality in the essence of blackness at all, because blackness is not really composed of two things but only by logical definition.

The same is true of the separate intellects. They are composite by logical definition, which does not induce plurality in their essence. Just as the advocates of the opinion mentioned before admit that there may be a difference among the separate intellects that is due to their different activities, as giving different motions to their respective spheres, without the one being a cause and the other an effect, so they may differ by reason of their degrees of comprehension. Thus the one which comprehends one or two of the attributes of divine perfection, is different from the one that comprehends more attributes or other ideas, without this inducing any plurality in the essence of any one of them. And their power and influence in the world are different according to the difference in their respective intellectual contents. Just as a political head appoints certain persons to a given position of influence in accordance with their ability and intelligence, and gives other persons a higher position in accordance with their greater ability and understanding, so God assigns every one of the angels to a specific charge according to his power and understanding. This is what the Rabbis mean when they say, “An angel can not perform two missions.” From this it appears that every angel is charged with a specific mission and power according to his understanding. Thus the Rabbis speak of the prince of fire, and the prince of water.

Now since the attributes of divine perfection are many, or rather infinite, as we shall see later, it follows that there are a great many separate intellects, as many as there are different degrees of understanding God, and of power of action bestowed by God upon them, without the one being cause and the other effect, and this too despite the fact that they are absolutely simple and that God is absolutely one. This opinion is true and correct, in agreement with the Torah and with philosophy, as we shall explain in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 13

Difference and number of functions are due to one of three causes. They may be due to a difference in the active faculties. Thus the activity of the faculty of desire is different from that of the faculty of anger. The difference may be due to a difference in the matter. Thus fire melts pitch and hardens salt. Finally the difference may be due to a difference in the instruments. Thus a tailor sews with a needle, and cuts with scissors. But the activity of God can not be multiplied through any one of these causes, because He is one and simple, in whom there is no plurality of faculties or difference of matters or variety of instruments. The multiplicity can therefore only be due to something else beside these things, namely the intermediate. That is, there emanates from Him first a single being; from this one there emanates another, from this other a third, as we explained in chapter eleven, so that the intermediate beings increase and plurality arises through them. Outside of this way, they say, it is impossible to conceive real plurality coming from God, who is absolutely one, for from the one only one thing can come.

But a difficulty arises against this explanation. It necessarily follows that there can not be a thing composed of different elements, but all existing things must be units, each produced by the one above it, which is its cause. But we do find that body is composed of matter and form, and man is composed of body and soul, the one not being the cause of the other (else one would not exist without the other), but the two of them being due to a third cause. Plurality can not therefore arise in this way.

Ibn Sina and other Arab philosophers have elaborated a way of producing plurality out of the series of intermediate beings, in the manner suggested above, saying that there is some plurality in every one of the emanations. Thus, understanding oneself is something different from understanding one’s cause, and understanding oneself and one’s cause is different from the conception of oneself as a possible existent qua one’s self, since one’s existence is dependent upon another. In this way they say plurality can come in, as we said in chapter eleven.

But Algazali knocked this idea on the head when he said that these are merely intellectual conceptions and not separate things able to produce other separate existents. Moreover, if plurality can arise from such conceptions, there is no need of many emanations, for we can conceive of multiplicity arising from the First Cause without the need of the others. Thus the knowledge of Himself is something different from His necessary existence and from the knowledge that He is a principle of other things. Now if these conceptions exist in the First Cause without inducing plurality in Him, why can not the beings which emanate from Him be in the same case? Then the question arises again, whence does plurality come?

The truth is that the conceptions mentioned do not induce plurality either in the First Principle or in the beings which emanate from it, so as to account for the different existences which are caused by them. And if so, we ask again, how does plurality come from simple unity? This is the reason why among the ancients there were some who thought that there are two original principles, one good and one evil. For they said, “Out of the mouth of the Most High proceedeth not evil and good,” meaning that it is impossible that the contradictory principles should be combined in one. And seeing that the most general contradictories, including all the species of contradiction, are good and evil, they said that there were two principles, one the principle of good, the other, the principle of evil. This was the opinion of a person whose name was Mani. His followers are called Manichaeans in the same way as those who follow the opinions of the philosopher Epicurus, who thought that the world has no ruler and denied the existence of God, are called Epicureans.

The philosophers have disputed this view in many ways. The best and clearest of the arguments against this dualism, so far as concerns the purpose of this book, is this: If we reflect upon the existing things of the world, we find that they all together tend to one end, namely the order which exists in the world, like the order existing in a camp, which emanates from the military commander, and the order existing in states, which emanates from the rulers. Now in these cases though there is multiplicity of various kinds, namely many different arts and activities and different offices, nevertheless we regard the state or the camp as one because the end to which they all tend is one, namely the stability and order of the state or camp, so we say that the world has in it good and evil so that existence as a whole may be good. Evil is not intended for its own sake, it arises by accident, like punishment or chastisement inflicted by the father upon the son, which is evil for the sake of good and not intended for its own sake. For since good things exist, it is imperative that a little evil should be mixed with the good. Thus man is composed of a rational and an animal soul, which are the good and the evil inclinations. The good inclination was placed in man to secure the survival of the individual, so far as possible, in the immortality of the soul, while the evil inclination was implanted in him to secure the survival of the species without which man can not exist. The wisdom of the Most High decreed that it is fitting there should be great good even though a little evil must be mixed with it, for it stands to reason that it is better to have a great good plus a little evil than to lose the great good in order to avoid the little evil.

It does not follow therefore from the existence of good and evil that they come from different principles. For it is quite possible that from one principle good comes for its own sake and evil per accidens. Thus fire is the cause of good to all sublunar existence in the genesis of all things, and yet evil comes from it sometimes when by accident it burns the garment of a good man.

In the same way there are things which, though in themselves bad, are tolerated for the sake of the good which may come from them, like penalties enacted by the founders of good codes of law which, though bad in themselves, are enacted for the sake of the general good which will follow for the nation or state as a whole, that men may be guided to happiness by uniting with one another in a perfect manner, and establish a perfect society, consisting of different kinds of people; like the human body, which has different members and different controlling organs and qualities opposed to one another, and yet all of them are intended for one purpose, namely the duration and unity of the body. It has also things injurious to the body which are due to the matter and can not be avoided.

The ancient philosophers were therefore all agreed, as Ibn Roshd says, that there is one principle in the absolute sense of the word one, and that by it all the various things of existence were ordered first for one purpose, viz. the permanence of all existence and the complete union of its parts so that existence may be unified into a complete unit; as the head of a state assigns certain people to do a given work and no other, that it may be done in a perfect manner, and assigns other people to do another kind of work exclusively, and so on with the different kinds of work. Thus he makes some to be tailors, some to be weavers, some to be builders, and in this way are completed all the arts needed in the state, and the order of the state is perfected. And yet all the many arts come from the one first head, though he is absolutely one.

In the same way though God is absolutely one, He is the cause of plurality, without this necessitating plurality in His essence. They say that the proposition, “from one can come only one,” is a dialectical judgment, which is applicable indeed to a particular and concrete agent, whereas in the case of God who is the universal and general agent—the term agent as applied to Him and to others is a homonym—(for He can not be identified with one act rather than another, seeing that His relation is the same to all acts) we say that He does many different specific acts for the sake of perfect unity, i. e. in order that all the parts of nature may be combined into one, and that all the many existences may tend to one purpose, viz. the permanence of existence, in the same way as the rational soul in man, though one, does different acts for one purpose, the permanent existence of man. In this way God orders only one act, viz. the universal order, which contains a plurality of elements so as to unite all the parts of existence together.

These philosophers also say that though the simple existents which are independent of matter are related to each other as cause and effect, the series going back to one simple cause, the plurality of bodies arises from the plurality of these principles in order to unite all the parts of existence one to the other. If this plurality did not exist, existence would be defective and there would not be that one perfect end which is actually realized. So we find different motions in the spheres because of the different principles from which they come. At the same time they all have the one general motion embracing everything, viz. the diurnal motion, to show that they have one principle, that they all go back to one cause, and that all the different motions are for one end.

Ibn Roshd says that God commanded the principles to give an order to the spheres to make the motions that we see in them; and that the heaven and the earth were established by the command of God in the same way as by the command of the first ruler of a country the subjects of the king’s commands and arrangements are controlled by those whom the king appoints to take charge of some political matter or some classes of men. This command and belief is a principle of command and belief which it behooves a man to hold, by virtue of his being a rational animal. This is the substance of the words of Ibn Roshd concerning this matter in his book, Destructio Destructionis.

It will be seen that after all that has been said, we must admit that the persistence of heaven and earth is due to command and admonition, and not to necessity. For it is inconceivable that a material thing should come from an absolutely simple immaterial intellect through necessity. It can come only through a command, which necessarily indicates creation in time; and this means that the world came to be and endures through the will of a being possessing a will, as we said in the third chapter of this Book. It almost seems as if the truth compelled him to make this admission.

The result we have reached, whether according to Ibn Sina and Maimonides or according to the opinion of Ibn Roshd, who writes in the name of the ancient philosophers, is that the plurality of things existing in the world is due to the series of intermediate beings and not to a plurality existing in the First Principle, whose unity is simple in the absolute sense of the word. This is the reason we are told in the Bible, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.” The meaning is that we should believe that though He is our God, i. e. the cause of plurality, He is nevertheless one in the absolute meaning of the word. This will suffice in explanation of the dogma of unity and the other matters depending upon it, so as not to induce plurality in the essence of God. We will now begin to treat of the second dogma, incorporeality.

CHAPTER 14

It has already been proved demonstratively that God is neither body nor a force residing in body. It follows that we must deny God all bodily accidents and corporeal affections. It is necessary therefore to give a reason for the expressions found in all the Prophets that God is jealous, wrathful, vengeful and bearing grudge. Thus Nahum says, “The Lord is a jealous and avenging God. The Lord avengeth and is full of wrath, The Lord taketh vengeance on His adversaries, and He reserveth wrath for His enemies.” All these descriptions denote corporeal affections. Moreover, they are ignoble qualities which should not be attributed to any excellent person, not to speak of God. The Bible also attributes to Him pride, “The Lord reigneth; He is clothed in majesty”; also the emotion of pity, “My compassions are kindled together”; as well as sorrow, “And it grieved Him at His heart”; and grief, “And His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.”

The explanation is this. The purpose of the prophets is to lead all mankind to worship God and to love Him. But the masses of the people can not be made to humble themselves for service except from fear of punishment. Therefore it was necessary for the prophets to speak in a language understood by the generality of the people. Now since, in human phraseology, when a king punishes those who have rebelled against him and given his kingdom to another, he is said to be jealous and revengeful and full of wrath, so the prophets say of God when He punishes those who violate His will that He is a jealous and avenging God and is full of wrath, because the act which emanates from Him against those who transgress His will is the act of a revengeful, grudging and jealous person.

The attribution of sorrow to God must be explained in the same way. Just as human beings feel sorrow when necessity compels their works to be destroyed, so the Bible says, “And it grieved Him at His heart,” and in the immediate sequel we read, “And the Lord said, ‘I will blot out man whom I have created … for it repenteth Me that I have made them.’ ” God is said to repent because He does the act of a person who repents of what he has made and desires to destroy it. And just as when a human being finds himself compelled by the requirements of justice to destroy what he has made, he looks about for a way which will enable him to save some of it from destruction, so God sought a way to prevent the destruction of all things. Therefore the narrative concludes, “But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.” The meaning is that God brought it about that the world should be continued through Noah and his sons.

The expression, “And His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel,” is to be explained in the same way. God did the act of a person who is in sorrow, whose soul grieves for the misery of his neighbor, and who puts himself to inconvenience in order to help him. So here, though Israel had sinned and were not deserving at that time of such great deliverance, nevertheless God saved them of His own accord as if He was affected by their trouble and misery, as we read, “I have surely seen the affliction of My people that are in Egypt … and I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians.” Similarly is to be explained the expression, “My compassions are kindled together.”

The other expressions of corporeal affections must be understood in the same way, as a mode of bringing to the human understanding the nature of the act which emanates from Him, in a manner consonant with human habits of perception. Thus the Bible says expressly, “Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves, for ye saw no manner of form,” and yet it attributes corporeal members to God, speaking of the Tables of Stone, as “written with the finger of God”; and in the following expressions, “When I behold Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers”; “Thy right hand, O Lord, glorious in power”; “Thy hands have made me and fashioned me”; and many others of the same kind. The explanation is that as a human person writes with the finger, finger is attributed to God; as strength in man comes from the right hand, right hand is ascribed to Him; as human acts are done with hands and fingers, hands and fingers are attributed to God; and as the acceptation of words in man is attributed to the hearing of the ears, the Bible says, “Let thine ears be attentive.”

In the same way must be explained the saying of God in relation to the Temple, “And Mine eyes and Mine heart shall be there perpetually.” The meaning is, My providence and My good will, indicating that God desires its permanent existence. Similarly when the prophets picture God as a king sitting on a throne, as in Isaiah, “And I saw the Lord sitting on a throne”; “For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts”; or when they describe Him as a strong man, “The Lord will go forth as a mighty man”; “The Lord mighty in battle”;—all this is done in order to bring before human understanding a picture of His mighty glory and majesty. Thus David says, “They shall speak of the glory of Thy kingdom.… To make known to the sons of men His mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of His kingdom.” The meaning is that the only reason why they speak of Thee thus is in order to make known to the sons of men, but not in order to compare Thy kingdom with a human kingdom, for Thy kingdom is eternal, “a kingdom for all ages.” It is done merely to bring the matter before the human understanding and for no other reason.

When the Bible attributes to Him pride, which is an ignoble quality in man, as is said, “Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord,” the meaning is that man should not boast of any excellence or good quality, for all comes from God, and a man should not boast of that which does not belong to him. As regards wisdom, the Bible says, “For the Lord giveth wisdom”; also, “That turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish.” This explains that human wisdom is worth nothing, and that wisdom comes from God and from no one else. Nor should a man boast of wealth, for that is not his either, as David says, “For all things come of Thee, and of Thine own have we given Thee.”

Similarly kingdom and all exalted station and excellence come from God, as the Bible says, “Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and Thou art exalted as head above all.” And the Rabbis say, “Even the overseer of wells is appointed from heaven.” The blessing concludes, “Both riches and honour come of Thee, and Thou rulest over all.” That is, since everything comes from God, and man alone has nothing which is not due to the will of God, for in His “hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all,” he should not boast of that which does not belong to him and is not in his power. Therefore pride is becoming only to God from whom everything comes. Hence the Bible attributes pride to God when it says, “The Lord reigneth; He is clothed in majesty,” and in the words of Moses, “I will sing unto the Lord, for He is highly exalted”; which Onkelos translates, “Because He is exalted above the proud, and pride is His.”

Therefore if a person boasts of some quality which is not his, it is proper that the quality should be taken away from him, as an indication that the honor and the excellence which he enjoys do not come to him from himself, but from God and by the divine will. Thus we find in the case of Nebuchadnezzar who boasted of glory and royal status, that the Bible expresses itself as follows: “But when his heart was lifted up, and his spirit was hardened that he dealt proudly, he was deposed from his kingly throne and his glory was taken from him … till thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will … and setteth up over it the lowest of men.”

The same is true of the prince of Tyre, who boasted of being a god. The Bible says about him, “Because thy heart is lifted up, and thou hast said: I am a god.… Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee: I am God? But thou art man and not God, In the hand of them that defile thee.” This shows that God punishes all those who boast of that which is not theirs. If one boasts of royalty God takes his kingdom away from him and gives it to the lowest of men, so that all may know that royalty does not belong to man and is not in his power. Similarly if one boasts of divine power and makes himself a god, God punishes him and delivers him up to be killed. This is an appropriate punishment for one who boasts of being a god, as it exposes him to shame, since he can not save himself. For it is the way of God to revive the dead, “To deliver them that are drawn unto death and to rescue those that are ready to be slain.” God is also eternal. But here it is the opposite. God hands him over into the hand of a slayer to show that he is no god since man can prevail over him to kill him and he has no power to save himself from death. But as to God, in whose hand is the soul of every living thing—He puts to death and brings back to life, He gives perfection to every existing thing, but He does not get any perfection from any one else, like kings, whose perfection comes from some one else. For the royalty of kings is exalted because of the honor which is shown them by others. If not for the honor shown him no one would know that he is a king and that he is superior to others. It is therefore as if honor ruled over them. But not so God, He rules over honor, therefore He is called, “King of glory.”

The majesty of the king is dependent upon the multitude of the people, the more people the greater the glory. But God, being king over glory, is not exalted because of any one else nor does His kingship change or diminish as those subject to Him are diminished or changed. Thus the Psalmist says, “The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to calve, and strippeth the forests bare, and in His temple all say: ‘Glory.’ ” The meaning is that even when God executes judgment and destroys the forests and the animals, His royalty and His glory are not diminished thereby, for in His palace, i. e. in His degree of existence, all is glory. And the proof of this is that “The Lord sat enthroned at the flood; Yea, the Lord sitteth as King forever.” That is, God existed in the time of the flood, and though of the world before the flood, which was full of men and animals, all things were destroyed, Noah alone and those with him in the ark remaining, nevertheless God’s kingdom did not change in extent, hence “the Lord sitteth as King forever.” The reason it says “sitteth” and not “is,” is because sitting better expresses the idea of permanence, as Maimonides says where he discusses the scriptural homonym yashab (=to sit). For this reason the prophet, too, ascribes to God the attribute of sitting more frequently than other attributes. Thus he says, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up,” and not simply: “I saw the Lord upon a throne high and lifted up.” The explanation is that since sitting implies permanence, without change, it is attributed to God, though neither standing nor sitting applies to Him, as the Rabbis say in the treatise Hagigah, that up above there is neither sitting nor standing, etc. A similar interpretation must be given to all the expressions of corporeal affections ascribed to God in the Bible. They are used in order to bring the matter before human understanding, but not to indicate that it is so in reality. The Rabbis have a general maxim in this connection, “The Torah uses human expressions.”

CHAPTER 15

Joy is the perception of the agreeableness of a pleasant and appropriate thing. It is without doubt an affection. The Bible attributes it to God, when it says, “Let the Lord rejoice in His works.” And the men of the Great Synagogue established a blessing containing the words, “in whose habitation there is joy.” Joy is attributed to God to indicate a condition opposed to that denoted by the attribution of sorrow. If sorrow, which expresses a defect, is ascribed to Him, surely joy, which is a noble attribute, should be ascribed to Him, for the same kind of knowledge deals with the two opposites. As the word sorrow is applied in human language to the emotion which results when a thing happens contrary to desire, so joy is applied to the pleasure resulting from carrying out one’s desires and realizing one’s intentions in the accomplishment of work. Thus, by way of metaphor, joy is applied to God to describe a condition opposed to that denoted by the attribute sorrow, as we explained above. The expression, “The Lord rejoiceth in His works,” indicates that He desires their endurance. Similarly the expression, “in whose habitation is joy,” means that real, i. e. individual permanence, is found among the celestial beings and not among the terrestrial, where the species alone are permanent. For this reason this blessing is used in the marriage ceremony because joy in every case is the result of duration and permanence, while sorrow is due to destruction and privation.

It is possible, too, that the expression, “in whose habitation is joy,” alludes to something more profound, namely, as the philosophers say, that God rejoices with His own essence, because He has beauty and majesty and perfection in Himself and needs no one else, while all things are influenced by Him and need Him, having no duration except through Him. The meaning is therefore: God’s joy does not depend upon other existents, the temporary or the permanent, it resides in His own essence alone, hence “joy is in His habitation,” which is similar to the expression, “Strength and gladness are in His place,” i. e. on His own level of being; or in His essence, as in the expression, “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place,” which we will explain later.

The following is a good illustration: as a wise man rejoices when he feels that he has perfect wisdom so that all other wise men have need of him and his influence, while he has no need of them, so God rejoices because His existence is not dependent upon another, while the existence of all things is dependent upon Him. To be sure, there is no relation at all between the two kinds of joy, for the joy of the wise man is due to something which he gets from another, namely from God and from other existents emanating from God, whereas the joy of God is inherent in His own essence without regard to another. Also the joy of the wise man is necessarily finite because his understanding is finite. The joy is therefore limited, though it may continually increase. When a person desires to attain anything, the eagerness to attain it and the joy consequent upon attainment are proportional to the value of the thing sought. If the thing sought is finite, the desire will cease when it is attained and the joy comes to a standstill or disappears. But if the thing desired is infinite, the desire can never cease, nor the understanding be interrupted, and therefore the joy continues, though it is always limited, as the comprehension is limited.

This is why the Bible says, “Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.” The meaning is that since God and His perfection are infinite, the eagerness and the joy of all those who seek the Lord, though their comprehension increases continually, will always remain, will never cease, but will increase as the understanding increases. Therefore the Psalmist says, “Seek ye the Lord and His strength; Seek His face continually.” The meaning is that your joy in what understanding you attain of Him will never be interrupted, but will always increase, because God is infinite, and as one attains a certain degree of understanding, he finds something else that he is eager to know but which he does not yet understand, a point alluded to in the expression, “And His strength.” Similarly must be interpreted the verse, “Let all those that seek Thee rejoice and be glad in Thee.” The meaning is that because God is infinite, the joy will be continual and will ever increase, and “Let such as love Thy salvation say continually: ‘The Lord be magnified.’ ” For the more they understand, the better they will know that He is still greater; they will continually realize that He is infinite and will always say, “The Lord be magnified,” and their joy will increase still further, though the content of their comprehension be always limited.

But the joy of God in His own essence is unlimited and continuous, because every kind of perfection that He appreciates in Himself is infinite, and because in His essence are contained an infinite number of perfections, permanent and unchangeable, and unlike any kind of perfection that we can have an idea of. And yet by divine grace a person may comprehend a certain degree of their excellence, a point referred to in the biblical passage, “How precious is Thy lovingkindness, O God! And the children of men take refuge in the shadow of Thy wings.” The meaning is, How great and precious is Thy lovingkindness, which can not be attained by the understanding, and yet despite this preciousness and nobility it is a wonderful thing that men take refuge in the shadow of Thy wings. “Wing” here denotes mystery and concealment, as Maimonides explains where he deals with the homonym “wing” (Heb. Kanaf), and is related to the expression, “Yet shall not thy Teacher hide Himself (yikanef) any more.” The meaning therefore is that that which is infinite can not be attained, but remains hidden and concealed, and yet men find refuge in that hidden shadow, containing the mystery of God’s essence and lovingkindness and the other attributes emanating from Him. The Psalmist also says that by reason of the understanding they acquire of that mystery, the understanding, namely, that all existing things emanate from Him by a chain of causation, and by comprehending the activities which flow from His lovingkindness and from the other attributes ascribed to Him, they derive wonderful pleasure and satisfaction in the spiritual world. Hence he uses the future tense when he says, “They will be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Thy house; And Thou wilt make them drink of the river of Thy pleasures.” The meaning is that they will be fat and prosperous and filled with all good things as a result of the understanding they will acquire through the existing things emanating from God, which are called “back,” as when God says to Moses, “And thou shalt see My back.” Here they are called “the fatness of Thy house.” But as regards “the river of Thy pleasures,” namely the flowing river which causes Thy own delight, i. e. Thy essence, and the infinite attributes and perfections in which Thou takest pleasure,—this they have no possibility of understanding and enjoying through their unaided mind alone, but Thou must make them drink of it by way of grace. This is why it says, “Thou will make them drink,” and not “they will drink,” to indicate that man can not attain them except as a matter of grace. He says “pleasures,” in the plural, to indicate that the perfections in God are many, nay infinite, as will be explained later.

Then he continues, “For with Thee is the fountain of life; In Thy light do we see light,” by which he means to say that there is no obstacle in the way of attaining this wonderful pleasure from the fact that the divine attributes and perfections are eternal, while human beings are not, for “with Thee is the fountain of life,” and it is in Thy power to give them eternal life. Nor is there any hindrance in the fact that they have not the capacity to receive such mighty pleasure, for Thy great power is able to endow them with capacity and force to receive it, for “In Thy light do we see light,” i. e. even the things perceived by our senses we can not know except through the lovingkindness which comes from Thee. For light itself we can not see, our vision is dimmed by it. It is the divine light which gives us the power to perceive light partially and enables our vision to pass from potentiality to actuality. This is why he says, “do we see light,” and not “do we see the light,” because we can see only a part of it and not the whole.

It may be that the expression, “In Thy light do we see light,” alludes to intellectual comprehension and that the meaning is: From the intellect emanating from Thee, which is Thy light, we acquire a certain comprehension, which serves us as a light to give us illumination in the light of eternal life, and therefore we ask of Thee to bestow from the fountain of perfection which is in Thee some delight upon us by way of grace. The expression in the sequel, “O continue Thy lovingkindness unto them that know Thee,” indicates that the grace of understanding, of which we spoke, is more properly bestowed upon those who know God than upon others, but as regards the upright in heart, viz. the mass of believers, they are entitled as of right to the reward promised in the Torah, hence the continuation of the verse reads, “And Thy righteousness to the upright in heart.” Divine righteousness decrees that those who believe should obtain that degree of eternal life which is promised in the Torah, because they trust in God and believe in His Torah, though they are not able to acquire an intellectual comprehension. Thus the prophet says, “But the righteous shall live by his faith,” which shows that the promise of eternal life is made as compensation for faith. It can not refer to life in the body, which the righteous believers enjoy no more than the wicked unbelievers. The prophet no doubt refers to eternal life, as we shall explain with the help of God.

CHAPTER 16

“Laughter” (Heb. sehok) is a homonymous term. It applies to joy, as in the expression, “Then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed.” Here “laughed” means “was glad,” as is also the interpretation of Onkelos.

Laughter may also denote scorn, as in the expression, “I am as one that is a laughing-stock to his neighbour.” And sometimes laughter and scorn are combined, and the words are used synonymously, as in the expression, “He that sitteth in heaven laugheth, the Lord hath them in derision,” for laughter is often due to the feeling of contempt for that which deserves it, as when a person observes a defect in the words or deeds of another, while being conscious of superiority in himself, as not likely to err in word or deed as his neighbor has done. Thus laughter arises from the feeling of contempt when he observes his neighbor doing or saying something that is unbecoming to human nature or the person’s dignity.

In the same way, laughter and derision are ascribed to God in the expression, “He that sitteth in heaven laugheth, the Lord hath them in derision.” The reason is because He hears them saying, “Let us break their bands asunder,” words a human being should not use; as our Rabbis say: The reason that the Psalm of Absalom stands next to that dealing with Gog and Magog, is that if any one should say, Is it possible that a servant should rebel against his master? you say to him, Is it possible that a son should rebel against his father? And yet the latter actually happened, so the former will happen. It is clear from this that it is an unusual thing for a man to say, and that he who says it deserves derision and contempt. In such cases, then, laughter is attributed to God or man.

Sometimes a person laughs when he deceives another in a matter about which the latter should have taken caution and did not. Accordingly the cause of laughter in all cases is a feeling of superiority in the person laughing, when he sees another commit a folly or exhibit ignorance or foolishness. When the scientists say that laughter is a human property, i. e. the cause of laughter is not known, they mean to say that we do not know why laughter is accompanied by certain bodily motions or why laughter is caused by touching the armpits or feeling other sensitive places in the body. But derision as a cause of laughter is well known, as we have shown in explaining the verse, “He that sitteth in heaven laugheth.”

CHAPTER 17

“Place” (Heb. makom) is a term applied to the thing which surrounds bodies and bounds them. An incorporeal thing can not be said to be in place, because the name place applies only to a thing which is filled by another body having dimensions, which enters place and is surrounded by it. Hence it can not be said of God or of the separate intellects that they are in place, for they are not bodies having dimensions which place can surround.

The Bible says in reference to this, “Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens can not contain Thee,” meaning that God does not need place to stand in. Such expressions as, “And I will dwell among the children of Israel”; “Then it shall come to pass that the place which the Lord your God shall choose to cause His name to dwell there”; do not mean that God needs a place to dwell in. The explanation is this. The revelation of God’s glory takes place by means of a body that is visible to the senses, like a fire or a pillar of cloud. Thus we read: “And the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount”; “And behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud”; “And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush.” The sudden appearance of the pillar of cloud or of a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, the bush not being consumed, was an indication that the glory of the Lord, which could not be seen with the senses, was there. This is why the Bible assigns a particular place to the presence of the divine glory, not that the glory has need of a place or of a body to stay in. And inasmuch as place holds a thing in permanency, God is called “dwelling-place” (Heb. ma‘on), as Moses says, “Thou hast been our dwelling-place,” meaning that God contains the world and holds it in permanency as a place holds an object. For this reason the Rabbis call Him “place,” as in “Blessed be the Place (God) who gave the Torah to Israel,” also, “And wave his hand to the Place (God), that He remove the leper.”

The substance of a thing is also called place, as the Rabbis say, “From its own place the matter is proved,” also, “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place.” The last expression means that the glory of the Lord which appeared to the prophets emanated from God’s own essence without a mediator, and not that the glory has a place.

There is a question, however, worth noting, whether it is possible to attribute to God location. For though God is not in place, a specific location may be applied to Him, like above, as we read in the Bible, “For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth”; and all authorities agree that heaven is the dwelling of the spiritual beings, though they have no need of place. It would appear, therefore, from this that even though He is not corporeal, it is possible to attribute to Him location, without this necessitating corporeality in Him. The same is true of the soul; though she is incorporeal, nevertheless she has a certain location, viz. in the body. For since she is not outside of the body, she is identified with a certain locality, though she is not in place. Similarly we say that the soul of the wicked is judged in Gehenna. Here again though she is not body so as to be in place, place nevertheless bounds her, and she is there to receive her punishment, in the same way as she was in the body when she sinned, though she is not corporeal. In this way it is possible to say of God that though He is not in place, He is in a certain locality, above or below or some special locality.

On the other hand one may argue against it and say that locality necessarily implies place, for locality is either above or below, and these are without doubt place. To this, however, it may be said that above in the absolute sense is not a place, for the uppermost sphere is above absolutely, and it is clear that it is not in place, since there is no other body outside of it that can surround it. Therefore we may attribute to Him location above, since it is not place. But this is based upon the opinion of Aristotle that place is the limit which bounds a body on the outside, and hence he says that the world as a whole is not in place because there is nothing outside of it to surround it.

But this opinion is clearly unsound, for according to him it would follow that the part has a different place from the whole. For the parts of fire have no other external surrounding limit except other parts of fire or air, whereas the natural place of the element fire is the concavity of the lunar sphere, which is different from the place of the parts of fire. The same thing applies to the other elements. Moreover, it would follow according to him that the elements remain in their places by force. For the natural place of the element fire is the concave surface of the lunar sphere, which is above. Hence all the parts of fire outside of those which are adjacent to the inner surface of the sphere remain where they are by force; and similarly in the case of the other elements. Again, if the place of the element earth is the surface of the element water which bounds it on the outside, the place of earth would not be below in the absolute sense, as he maintains, since below in the absolute sense is the center. Furthermore, it follows according to him that the place of the part is greater than the place of the whole. For if you remove part of the inside of a sphere, it will require a greater surface to bound it outside and inside than when it is solid. Besides, it would follow according to him that one and the same body will have many places differing in magnitude. For if you divide a body into parts, each of the latter will require a greater place than before the division, and the same is true if you divide the parts into other parts, and those again into parts. But this is contrary to the statement of Euclid in his book Concerning the Heavy and the Light, where he says that equal bodies occupy equal places. But according to the Aristotelian hypothesis this is not true. For of two equal bodies the one that is divided will require a greater place than the other.

All these difficulties follow from the opinion that place is an external bounding surface. But if place is defined as being the vacuum into which the body enters, none of the difficulties results. Aristotle objects to this definition on the ground that if there are such things as self-existent distances, and these distances are place, two absurdities will follow. One is that one and the same thing will have an infinite number of places all at once. The other is that places would be subject to motion, and that place, which is in the basin of water, would in turn require a place. This absurd result, however, follows only if the distances are subject to motion, but if we say that they are not subject to motion, and that it is the body and its parts that move from distances to other distances, no absurdity will follow at all. For the basin and the water have each special distances which they fill and which are not changed when they move. According to this opinion the uppermost sphere and the world as a whole are in place. And therefore it is impossible to attribute to God locality any more than place.

And as to the fact that the Bible does attribute to God location above, in the expressions, “O Thou that art enthroned in the heavens,” “He that sitteth in heaven laugheth,” and others, it may be that because the divine power appears more clearly in the motion of the spheres by reason of the intensity and continuity of their motions, and because they are made of a nobler material than the other bodies, and because location above is superior, it says that the heavens are the dwelling-place of the spiritual beings. And it may be that the Bible attributes to God location as it attributes place and the other corporeal attributes, because, as the Rabbis say, “The Torah speaks in human language.” We shall now conclude the discussion of the dogma of incorporeality. What we have said on this topic, may be used to throw light on analogous topics.

CHAPTER 18

The third dogma is that God is independent of time. This means that God existed before time and will exist after time ceases, therefore His power is infinite. For every one who is dependent upon time is necessarily limited in power, which ends with time. Since therefore God is not dependent upon time, His power is infinite. It must be understood therefore that when we say, God is prior, the expression is used figuratively and loosely. For the word prior is predicated of a thing in relation to something else, thus we say, Noah was prior to David, Enoch was prior to Elijah, because the one existed at a time which was prior to the time at which the other existed. But it is clear that the term prior as applied to God is not predicated in relation to anything else, as if to say that He existed a certain length of time before something else. If this were the case, time would limit His existence; and if so, time would necessarily be prior to Him, and He would exist at a certain time and not at another, and would be preceded by privation or non-existence. But whatever is preceded by non-existence is a possible and not a necessary existent, as we explained before. Moreover, the Bible, too, says, “Who hath preceded Me, that I should repay Him?” which means that He is prior to all existing things, and nothing is prior to Him. Therefore the term priority which is predicated of God must be understood in a negative manner, in the sense that nothing was prior to Him, not even non-existence, but that He always existed in the same way without change.

Similarly the term perpetual, applied to God, means that nothing is posterior to Him. For just as time can not be prior to Him, as we have explained, so nothing can come after Him, nor can time outlast Him in the direction of the end, as it can not be prior to Him in the direction of the beginning. For if time could outlast Him in the direction of the end, He would exist at one time and not at another, and would not be a necessary existent, as we explained in relation to the term prior. Therefore the concepts of priority and perpetuity predicated of God are negative in meaning, they deny non-existence a parte ante as well as a parte post.

That time is not prior or posterior to God is true even if by time we mean unmeasured duration conceived only in thought, existing always, both before the creation of the world and after its cessation, but without the order apparent from the motion of the sphere, since the sphere was then neither in motion nor existent. Our Rabbis are of the opinion that time in the abstract is such a duration. Time measured or numbered through the motion of the sphere they call “order of times,” not simply time. According to this there are two species of time, the one is numbered and measured by the motion of the sphere, to which are applicable the terms prior and posterior, equal and unequal. The other is not numbered or measured, but is a duration existing prior to the sphere, to which the words equal and unequal do not apply. This is what Maimonides calls imagination of time. This latter kind may be perpetual. The kind that has an origin is the “order of time,” not time simply. In this way all the doubts and difficulties disappear, which are raised concerning the quiddity of time, namely whether time originates in time or not. The solution is that though time has no origin, the order of time originates in time.

We can also answer the other question in relation to the now. The now, it is said, divides the past from the future. There is therefore a time before the first now, and hence time and the sphere are eternal. The answer to this on the basis of our analysis is not difficult. Time in which there is motion has in it the elements prior and posterior, but time in which there is no motion has not the elements prior and posterior, and it is not subject to measure because measure can not apply to time without motion. The terms prior and posterior apply to it only figuratively and loosely. The same thing is illustrated in the saying that outside of the world there is neither a plenum nor a vacuum. To the objection that if there is an outside there must necessarily be a plenum or a vacuum, the answer is that the word outside is used figuratively and loosely. The same is true of the words prior and posterior as applying to the imaginary duration before the creation of the world.

The difficulty of understanding how the world can end with something which is neither a plenum nor a vacuum, or how there can be a duration before the creation of the world which has in it neither prior nor posterior, such as are contained in the order of time as it exists at present, accounts for the statement of the Rabbis that one must not ask what is above, what is below, what is before and what is behind. Above and below refer to what is outside of the world, before and behind refer to the duration which is prior to the creation of the world and posterior to its cessation, in reference to which the Rabbis say that one must not ask whether the words prior and posterior apply to it or not.

One may object here on the basis of a statement of Rabbi Judah son of Rabbi Simon. From the expression in Genesis, “and there was evening and there was morning, one day,” he infers that the order of time existed before creation. From this statement it would seem that his opinion was either that the sphere is eternal, as Aristotle thought, or that the unmeasured duration is called order of time. The answer is that this is not the meaning of Rabbi Judah. The purpose of his statement is to obviate the notion suggested at first sight that the order of day and night did not begin until the fourth day when the luminaries were suspended in the sky. Having this in view, he says that from the first day when the sphere was created it was in motion, resulting in the order of day and night before the fourth day. Thus the appearance of evening and morning mentioned at the beginning is true. The reason why the Bible mentions the suspension of the luminaries and the stars on the fourth day is to show that their different motions by which they serve “for signs and for seasons, and for days and years,” are for the purpose of exerting an influence upon the lower world by the different position of their light in relation to the earth. This is explained in the statement, “And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth.” It is clear therefore from the words of Rabbi Judah son of Rabbi Simon that the time that is measured by the motion of the sphere is called order of time and not time simply, and that time simply is the duration which has no prior and posterior, nor order of time, since there is no motion in it.

If, however, time is not a conceptual duration but one that is measured by the motion of the sphere, according to Aristotle’s view, the meaning of divine priority and perpetuity would be that God is prior to all existing things and to time which is numbered by the motion of the sphere. The essential meaning of priority and perpetuity, though they are different, would thus be the same, namely that God always exists in the same way before time and after time will cease.

Therefore we make independence of time one dogma, in order to include priority and perpetuity, whether time is a conceptual duration, as the Rabbis maintain, or one that is numbered by the motion of the sphere, according to the opinion of Aristotle. Thus we find that wherever the Bible describes God as first it also characterizes Him as last, to indicate that He has one attribute, independence of time, which embraces both. Isaiah says, “Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of hosts: I am the first, and I am the last, and beside Me there is no God.” The meaning is, there is no existing thing outside of Me that can be characterized as first and last, for all other existing things have time before them or after them and therefore are possible existents, whereas I, being independent of time, am not a possible but a necessary existent. This is why Isaiah concludes, “And beside Me there is no God,” i. e. among all existing things there is no necessary existent, i. e. one who is all-powerful, outside of Me, for there is no one to whom the names first and last apply outside of Me, and therefore it is clear that I alone am God, i. e. a necessary existent.

CHAPTER 19

From our discussion proving that God is not subject to time, it follows that every attribute applied to God, whether it be positive or negative, must be prior and perpetual like Him, i. e. must be infinite on both sides, a parte ante and a parte post. For it is impossible that any of His attributes should come into being, not having been before, else God would be composed of things having origin. But whatever is composed of things having origin, itself has origin and is not prior in the general sense of the term. Similarly it is impossible that any attribute should be in Him at one time and not at another, for then God would be subject to change, which is impossible. For change is motion and the realization of the potential. Moreover all motion takes place in time. God would therefore have need of time to change in, and if He is subject to change He would be subject to genesis and would not be eternal, but we have already proved that He is absolutely eternal. It is clear therefore that no change can apply to Him.

The other existing things, however, are subject to time, therefore time causes them to change. Even the Separate Intelligences, which are not composed of opposites, and thus are not subject to qualitative or quantitative change which are due to the presence of opposites, may nevertheless be subject to change in time. Thus the first effect, having come into being in time, was, let us say, two thousand years old in the time of Abraham, whereas now it is five thousand years old or more. Similarly everything that was created is necessarily older to-day than it was in the time of David, and hence is subject to time. But we can not say of God that He is older to-day than He was in the time of David, or when He created the world, because He has always existed in the same way before the world was created, will continue the same after the world comes to an end, and time will not change Him.

This is the meaning of the statement of the Rabbis in their comment on the verse, “I have been young, and now am old …” Who is the author of this observation? they ask. It can not be David, for he was not old enough to be warranted in making such a statement, in other words, the three-score and ten years that David lived are not sufficient to warrant a person in stating a universal proposition, such as, “Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken.” It can not be God who is responsible for the statement, for there is no old age in God. The author of the statement must, therefore, be the prince of the world. Here we see an explicit statement that God can not be described as old, while the Active Intellect, who is the prince of the world, is described as young and old. Being created, he is subject to time, and the terms youth and old age apply to him in respect to time, though not in respect to strength and weakness. For it necessarily follows that we can count the number of his days and years in so far as he is a created being, a fact which does not apply to God, for being prior to time, He is not changed by time. Therefore there is no other being who can say about himself, “I, I am He,” using the first personal pronoun twice, except God, who exists always in the same way. Therefore the Bible says, “See now that I, even I, am He,” “I, even I, am the Lord; and beside Me there is no saviour.” The meaning of the latter expression is, I can save because I exist always in the same way without change, but no other being can save, because he is subject to change.

CHAPTER 20

The word kol (=all, every) denotes primarily the totality of a thing, as, “The Lord hath made all things for His own purpose”; “And God saw every thing that He had made, and behold, it was generally good.” The last expression means that in all existing things, the good prevails and predominates.

The word is also applied to all the particulars that are included in the general, as, “And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls,” which without doubt applies to every one of the individuals. The same is true of the expression, “And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house … and circumcised …”

Sometimes the word denotes the greater part of a thing, as, “That I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,” “And all the congregation lifted up their voice and cried,” “But all the congregation bade stone them with stones.” And similarly in many other passages.

Sometimes again the word denotes a part of the whole, though not the greater part, provided it is a large part. Thus Isaiah says, “For the Lord hath indignation against all the nations, and fury against all their host,” though he means only a small part of the nations, as he explains at the end, “For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Edom,” and it is in reference to Edom that he says, “From generation to generation it shall lie waste; None shall pass through it for ever and ever.” Similarly Jeremiah says, in reference to the destruction of Jerusalem, “The whole land shall be desolate.” Zephaniah also says, “But the whole earth shall be devoured by the fire of His jealousy; for He will make an end, yea, a terrible end, of all them that dwell in the earth,” though he refers to the land of Israel alone. Similarly Zechariah says, “And the Lord shall be King over all the earth.” During the time of the first temple Israel worshipped idols and did not acknowledge God’s kingdom through all the land of Israel. Therefore the prophet says that during the time of the second temple, He will be King over all the earth, meaning that God’s kingdom will be acknowledged over all the land of Israel, which will be under the rule of a prince descended from the seed of David, and will not any more be divided into two kingdoms. That this is the correct interpretation is shown from the sequel, which says, “All the land shall be turned as the Arabah, from Geba to Rimmon,” which without doubt refers to Jerusalem and a small part of the land of Judah, for he says, “From Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem.”

Sometimes the word kol denotes a small part of the whole, and “all” means “some of all,” as, “And all countries came into Egypt,” which means, from some countries they came. Before this it says, “And there was famine in all lands,” meaning that part of the world containing the lands near to the land of Egypt, to a small part of which lands he then refers in the words, “And all countries came into Egypt.” In the same way should be interpreted, “And all the earth sought the presence of Solomon.” It means, “and some of all the earth sought …” Similarly, “All nations shall serve him,” referring to Solomon, denotes a small part of the earth and of the nations. It is in the last sense of the word that we must understand such expressions, referring to God, as, “That I may tell of all Thy praise.” It does not mean that a man is able to enumerate every one of God’s praises, far from it! The meaning is that he will tell a small part of God’s praises. The Bible frequently omits the partitive mem, as in the expression, “Thy throne, God, is for ever and ever,” which means, “Thy throne given of God is forever and ever,” alluding to David, concerning whose throne it was decreed by God that it shall be forever and ever, because “The sceptre of his kingdom was a sceptre of equity.” Or it may allude to the Messiah. Similarly, “Having all goodly things of his master’s in his hand,” means, “of all goodly things of his master’s in his hand.” So the Bible says about Hazael when he went to meet Elisha, “And took a present with him, even every good thing of Damascus.” Here too the meaning is, “of every good thing of Damascus.”

We also find instances in which the word “all” does not mean “of all,” and yet it denotes a small part of the whole, as in “I will pour out My spirit upon all flesh,” in Joel. This refers to a small part of all Israel, not to all of them, and surely not to the Gentiles. The phrase, “upon all flesh,” means upon any one at all of all flesh, even though he is not prepared for prophetic inspiration. There are many other such passages besides.

The various uses of this word must be carefully borne in mind, for they are very peculiar, and the distinction enables us in many cases to explain the character of certain prophecies, as to whether they are universal in meaning or not. Thus we read, “For Joab and all Israel remained there six months, until he had cut off every male in Edom,” whereas later we find a king of Edom in the time of the kings of Judah. In the same way we can find out as to certain prophecies whether they were fulfilled in the past or whether they are still awaiting fulfilment in the future.

CHAPTER 21

We will now explain the fourth dogma mentioned above, that God is free from defects. If we reflect very carefully and deeply upon the matter of attributes, we shall find that God must necessarily be characterized by many attributes, and not merely from the point of view of His acts alone and for the reason mentioned in chapter eight of this Book, but from the point of view of Himself.

The affirmative and the negative always divide between them the true and the false in all modes of predication, the necessary, the impossible and the possible. Taking the possible mode as an instance, it is clear that we can not escape the disjunction that God is either wise or not wise, possessing power or not possessing power, having a will or not having a will. But it can not be true that God is not wise, or does not possess power, for there can not be any defect in God. It follows therefore that the other part of the disjunction is true, namely that He is wise, possesses power, has a will, is kind, upright, reliable. The same thing holds of all perfections, viz. that He must have the perfection because He can not have the defect. This is a necessary conclusion without regard to the acts which emanate from God, as when we say He is living because life emanates from Him, or He is wise because wisdom emanates from Him, and so with the other attributes. No, He is living and wise because He can not be dead or ignorant. But since perfections are of different kinds, knowledge being different from power, power different from life, life different from will and from wisdom, it follows that He has many different attributes. Approaching the problem in this way, therefore, we come to the conclusion that God has many attributes, while from the discussion in the tenth chapter of this book we concluded that He has no attribute except Himself. The problem therefore is how God can have many attributes without introducing plurality in His essence.

Our solution is this: The attributes ascribed to God are of two kinds. There is one class of attributes which we ascribe to Him because He is a necessary existent and the cause of all existing things, neither of which He can be conceived to be unless He has the attributes in question. Such attributes are, one, eternal, perpetual, wise, having will, possessing power, and others besides, which God must have in order to be the author of all existing things. There is another class of attributes which we ascribe to Him because we imagine that they constitute perfection. Thus we ascribe to Him riches because we imagine that riches constitute perfection in God as they constitute perfection in us, the opposite being a defect. We also ascribe hearing and seeing to God, because they are perfections in us, though we can exercise those powers only by means of corporeal organs.

Now every attribute ascribed to any subject has in it two aspects. One aspect is that of the perfection inherent in the attribute. The other is the defect which supervenes as a result of the attribute. Accordingly the attribute is, so to speak, composed mentally of two elements, one being a perfection, the other a defect. Thus if we attribute wisdom to a subject, the attribute is in itself a mark of perfection in the subject. But on the other hand, from the fact that it is acquired by the subject and accidental in him, there results a defect in the subject, because the attribute is not essential in him, and thus induces plurality.

Now when we attribute wisdom to God we do so only with a view to the perfection that is involved and not the defect. The defect involved in the perfection exists only if we view wisdom in relation to ourselves who acquire it gradually through one conclusion after another as each is derived from its premises. It is therefore something that originates in us from a state of not being, and is an attribute added to our essence. But when we attribute knowledge to God we do not think of it as derived from premises or as coming into being in Him as it comes into being in us. We rather think of it as inherent in God Himself, in the same way as the axioms exist in man, requiring neither learning nor teaching, except that knowledge is in God in a more perfect manner. When we attribute wisdom to God, therefore, our purpose is to indicate that He has this perfection without any defect, though the only way we can conceive of attaining wisdom is that in which man acquires it. Similarly we say concerning power, will and the other attributes, that they are ascribed to God with a view to the perfection attaching to the attribute in question and not with a view to the defect.

In this way we can ascribe to Him attributes of the second class also, which involve corporeal perceptions. Thus we attribute to Him the sense of smell, which is a sensuous perception, as we read, “And the Lord smelled the sweet savour.” But we do not attribute it to God as being a corporeal perception, but with a view to the perfection which it involves, namely that God accepts favorably the offering of a person who brings it with a worthy purpose; we do not think of God as deriving pleasure from the offering, which would be a defect.

This is what the prophet means when he says, “For I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices; but this thing I commanded them, saying: ‘Hearken unto My voice.’ ” Here we are told that the purpose of the institution of sacrifices was that the heart of the sinner may be humbled so that he may return to God and hearken to His voice, but not to give God sensuous satisfaction, Heaven forbid! The following passage makes it clear, “Do I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? Offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving … and call upon Me in the day of trouble …” All this shows that the purpose of the institution of sacrifices was to direct the heart of the sinner to the worship of God, and nothing else.

For this reason we do not attribute to Him the sense of taste and the sense of touch, because though they constitute a perfection in us, as corporeal animals, in that they enable us to pursue what is beneficial and to avoid that which is injurious, there is no spiritual perfection involved in them which we can attribute to God. Hearing is attributed to God, in the expression, “Let Thine ears be attentive …,” and so is sight, “Behold, the eye of the Lord is toward them that fear Him,” “The eyes of the Lord, that run to and fro through the whole earth,” because people imagine there is spiritual perfection in these senses. Therefore they are attributed to God, though taste and touch are not. This shows that the attributes are ascribed to God by reason of the perfection that is in them, and not by reason of the defect. Therefore we say that the attributes ascribed to God must be conceived as unified in Him, though in us they are separate and distinct. We conceive of them as separate because we acquire them one after the other. Similarly we think of them as adventitious because we acquire them, not having had them before. But in the case of God we must conceive them as unified and not as acquired, else they would induce plurality in His essence, which is a defect.

We have thus made it clear that the attributes are ascribed to God with a view to the perfection they involve and not the defect, for God is free from defects. Our fourth dogma, therefore, that God is free from defects, signifies that all attributes of imperfection, such as ignorance, poverty, sleep, fatigue, and so on, must be rejected, and also that all attributes of perfection which are ascribed to God are conceived as being in Him so far as they involve perfection, but not so far as they involve or are the source of a defect, such as plurality or change, which are defects in God, since He endures forever in the same manner and without any change.

This is the meaning of the Psalmist when he says, “O God, keep not Thou silence; hold not Thy peace, and be not still, O God.” That is, since Thou art not silent either because of sleep or ignorance or fatigue, since there is no defect in Thee and Thou art not subject to change, then, “Wherefore lookest Thou, when they deal treacherously, and holdest Thy peace, when the wicked swalloweth up the man that is more righteous than he?” “Hold not Thy peace, and be not still, O God.” According to our explanation those positive attributes which we can not but attribute to God, like living, wise, possessing will, having power, and so on, must be conceived in a manner not to necessitate a defect. This explanation deserves careful attention because it is the true and correct one, and has been adopted by ancient and modern theological authorities. It is worthy of acceptance and the reader is so urged.

CHAPTER 22

All the philosophers think that it is impossible to ascribe to God any attribute, essential or accidental, which expresses God Himself, but only those which are expressive of His acts, as

we explained in chapter nine of this Book. The theological authorities who follow the view of the philosophers are of the same opinion. Thus Maimonides says that he who maintains that God has essential attributes, which yet do not induce plurality in His essence, is unconsciously combining the affirmative and the negative. Maimonides, therefore, follows a view of his own, namely that no positive attribute can be ascribed to God, but only a negative; that all negative attributes can be truly predicated of Him, but no positive attribute, except those expressive of His acts. Accordingly he says that as God is called ground, cause, principle because he is the ground, cause and principle of all things, which are His effects; and as he is called fashioner, worker, creator, maker, renewer, because He brings all things into being with His simple will and without any compulsion, so He is called wise because He brings forth all existing things with great wisdom which is evident in their formation, and He is called merciful and gracious and kind because He guides all existing things and treats them graciously, mercifully and kindly, not by way of recompense, for, as the Bible says, “Who hath given Me anything beforehand, that I should repay him?” and He is called generous or a “doer of charity” because He bestows blessings and perfection upon all existing things without the expectation of any benefit or reward, just as a generous and noble person is in the habit of doing. For generosity involves two elements, one touching the recipient and the other concerning the giver.

With regard to the recipient it is necessary that he be given something that is useful to him. There is no generosity in giving a sword to a boy, a book to a woman, or a spindle to a man, gifts which are of no benefit to them. The proper thing is to give the spindle to the woman, the sword to the man, and the book to the boy to study from. With regard to the giver, it is necessary that the act be not done in expectation of something in return which he desires. For if the giver finds it expedient to make the gift, he is not a generous person, but a business man, who gives away a certain thing in order to receive in return money or the equivalent of money or honor. It is not generosity even if he gives away twice the value of the thing desired in exchange. For this simply means that he estimates his need of the object at that price. He is still no more than a business man who buys a thing for more than its worth because he needs it. Another requisite is that the author of the act should not be in need of appreciation or praise for that act. For a person who does a thing that he may receive praise or congratulation or fame, or be saved from disgrace, is in want of that praise, which he gets as a kind of reward, though he is not in the same category as the first.

Now God bestowed upon all things those qualities that were appropriate and agreeable and beneficial to them, as the Rabbis say concerning the works of creation, that they were made with their consent, with their beauty and their stature. The meaning is that when God created those things, He granted to them the beauty and form and excellence which were good and appropriate for them. This is the meaning of the expression, “with their beauty and their stature.” “With their consent,” means that if, for example, they had been asked whether they desired to have the form, i. e. the beauty, the stature and the excellence which was given to them, they would have said, yes. It implies also that God did not make these things in order to receive reward or to be saved from disgrace. It is clear therefore that He is truly generous. And inasmuch as generosity without the expectation of reward is charity, God is called the “doer of charity,” which is the noblest act of generosity. He is called so not merely because of what He did at the time of creation, but because of His continued activity in maintaining the existence of things and in sending forth an influence which keeps them in being, for continued goodness is true generosity.

Thus the Bible says, “O give thanks unto the Lord; for He is good,” and concludes that the essence of His goodness is that “His mercy endureth forever,” i. e. it continues. For this reason God is spoken of as “He who does charity at all times,” as in the verse, “Happy are they that keep the justice of Him that doeth righteousness at all times.” The word ‘oseh, being singular, must refer to God, and the meaning is, Happy are they that keep the justice of God, who does righteousness at all times, and that imitate His conduct, as the Rabbis say, by way of comment on the text: “And walk in His ways,” “As He is merciful, be thou merciful; as He is gracious, be thou gracious.” So God is called, “Long-suffering and abundant in goodness … visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children …,” by reason of the acts which emanate from Him in the government of mankind. Such attributes and their like may be ascribed to Him, though there are contradictory ones among them, like “merciful” and “visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children.”

This was the information given to Moses in answer to his request, “Show me now Thy ways.” Moses’ question was, how can a person ask God to do contradictory things, since God is an absolutely simple unity and free from corporeal affections? In reply God showed him that He governs His creatures by means of the thirteen attributes, and petitions should be made in accordance with them. So the Rabbis say, commenting on the text, “And the Lord passed by before him …,” “Said Rabbi Johanan, If it were not for the explicit statement in the text, we should not think of saying it. But from the text we infer that God wrapped Himself up in His prayer-garment like a precentor and gave Moses an object lesson, saying to him, ‘Whenever Israel sin, they should do as I am doing now and I will forgive them.’ ” The meaning of this statement is that God informed Moses through prophetic inspiration that it is. proper to use the thirteen attributes in praying to Him, because they are derived from the modes of His activity in governing His creatures, and attributes of this sort, Maimonides says, may be used in praising God and in making supplication to Him.

But those attributes which denote God Himself must not be used in praise or in prayer. Thus the Rabbis say, commenting on the words, “The great God, the mighty, and the awful,” that even though Moses used these attributes, we should not have permitted ourselves to use them in our prayers—they thought that these attributes refer to God Himself and not to His acts—if it were not that the men of the Great Synagogue explained that these attributes also have reference to the modes of activity in which God governs His creatures, and hence may be used in praising Him. Concerning these men the Rabbis say: They are called the men of the Great Synagogue because they restored the Crown to its original position. They said, God’s strength is shown in being long-suffering as against those who transgress His will. His awfulness is obvious, for if not for that quality of His, a single nation like that of Israel could not exist among the other nations. In the same way they interpreted the rest of the attributes, pointing out that they are named after the modes of God’s conduct toward His creatures. And therefore it is proper to embody them in prayer, in the same way as Moses used the thirteen attributes in praying to God, because they are derived from God’s acts.

But even the attributes of this class (i. e. those taken from God’s acts) must be taken in the sense involving perfection, not in the sense involving defect. Thus, although these attributes cause emotion in us and make us change from one of the contraries to the other, they do not necessitate any change or emotion in God, for His ways are not our ways, nor are His thoughts our thoughts.

CHAPTER 23

Those attributes which are ascribed to God and are not based upon His acts, like one, eternal, true, and so on, can not, according to the philosophic view, be ascribed to Him except in a negative way, as we have explained in relation to the attributes one and eternal. The same thing applies to the attribute true. The meaning of this attribute is, as we shall see, one whose existence does not depend upon anything not himself. But these attributes can not be applied to God in a positive sense, because those attributes which are predicated of God as He is in Himself, if taken in a positive sense, far from being appreciative are rather derogatory in relation to God, and are not of the class of attributes which are becoming to Him, as Maimonides says.

He cites in this connection the words of Rabbi Hanina who, hearing a person employ many attributes in his prayer, used the following comparison. A king who had thousands upon thousands of gold denars was praised for his wealth, which was estimated at thousands upon thousands of silver denars. This praise was surely, in the king’s estimation, derogatory.

It will be noticed that he does not say that they estimated his wealth at a thousand gold denars. In that case the derogation would be due to the fact that the amount attributed to him was less than the actual amount. But he says that they attributed to the king silver denars, indicating that the difference between the praise and the reality was not one of degree but of kind, as silver, though valuable, does not belong to the same species as gold.

This is the reason why Maimonides says that all those attributes which are not derived from God’s acts must be understood as negative and not positive, as we explained in chapter ten of this Book in relation to the attribute one. For this reason we must refrain from using attributes of our own invention, not employed by Moses and the prophets. And even those that are used by them, we must understand, are merely metaphorical when used positively, in reality they can only have a negative sense.

Accordingly the attributes applied to God are of two kinds. First, those which describe His own nature, which is absolutely unknown even to the wise. These can not be understood in a positive sense, not to speak of being expatiated upon. The other kind are those attributes which are derived from the acts of God. This meaning of the attributes is known to all, even to fools and ignoramuses, as the Psalmist says, “Consider, ye brutish among the people; and ye fools, when will ye understand? He that planted the ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the eye, shall He not see? …” The same is true of the manner in which God governs His creatures. These aspects of God we may expatiate upon.

David, in the one hundred and third Psalm, alludes to both kinds of divine praise. He says twice, “Bless the Lord, O my soul,” in allusion to the two kinds of praise that we mentioned. Referring to the praise which attaches to God as He is in Himself, the Psalmist says, “Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy name.” The meaning is, My soul, bless the Lord with the brevity of praise that befits Him, in view of the excellence of His nature and of His holy name, i. e. Himself. As to this, one must not multiply words, nay, one must not even pronounce them with his lips unless he understands them in a negative sense. Hence the Psalmist expresses himself briefly and without any explanations. The expression, “All that is within me, bless His holy name,” signifies the praise which is becoming to Him in view of the excellence of His holy name, which is ineffable.

In allusion to the second mode of praise, which is derived from His acts, from the goodness which emanates from Him, and from the manner in which He governs His creatures, he says a second time, “Bless the Lord, O my soul,” ending up with the words, “And forget not all His benefits.” Here he enumerates at length the kindnesses received from God, “Who forgiveth all thine iniquity, who redeemeth thy life from the pit,” and so on. Among the divine benefits he mentions, “He made known His ways unto Moses,” in allusion to the attributes with which He governs His creatures. For the thirteen attributes which were revealed to Moses are derived from the acts of God by which He governs His creatures, as was said in the preceding chapter. These are attributes of mercy.

Moses also describes God with the two kinds of attributes that we mentioned, and praises Him in the manner we described. Alluding to the attributes which denote God as He is in Himself, he says that he hesitates to use them in God’s praise. But he uses freely and at length those attributes which represent God’s acts. This is why he says twice, “Who is like unto Thee among the mighty?” in allusion, namely, to the two modes of praise. Referring to the first, he says, “Fearful in praises”; in reference to the second, he says, “Doing wonders.” Then he expatiates at length upon the second, “Thou stretchedst out Thy right hand … Thou hast guided them in Thy strength …”

To obviate the notion that those attributes which it is permitted to ascribe to God and with which He may be praised on the basis of His acts, are to be understood in the same way as when they are ascribed to man, he says in the beginning of the song, “I will sing unto the Lord,” as if to say, all the praises which I shall mention are to be understood as an expression of the poetic style, which is an exercise of the imagination and does not describe reality. By way of poetic license, I will describe God with attributes to afford the senses a point of support. Therefore he says, “A man of war”; “And in the greatness of Thine excellency”; “And with the blast of Thy nostrils”; “Thou sendest forth Thy wrath”; “Thy right hand, O Lord, dasheth in pieces the enemy.”

In reality, however, it is impossible to ascribe any attribute to Him, even one that is based upon His acts, in the manner in which we ascribe it to a human being, “For He is highly exalted.” The meaning is, I speak of Him in poetic style, but in reality He is highly exalted above all kinds of praise. The most fitting praise, therefore, in the case of God is silence, as David says, “For Thee silence is praise.” The Rabbis understand it in the same way, when they say, the most wholesome recipe of all is silence, as is said, “For Thee silence is praise,” and therefore Moses called Him, “Fearful in praises.”

CHAPTER 24

We have seen that there are two kinds of attributes by which God is characterized, attributes which describe Himself and attributes which are derived from His activities. In each of these classes there are attributes in respect to which it is perfectly clear that they describe God in respect to His activities or that they describe Himself, as the case may be. Thus the attributes, “Merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness,” are obviously drawn from God’s activities, while such attributes as “one” and “eternal” clearly describe God Himself, and, as we have seen, must be understood in a negative sense and not as really characterizing God’s essence.

But there are certain attributes as to which it is doubtful whether they describe God’s essence or the activities which come from Him. We must therefore explain the manner of understanding these attributes. We will explain a few as an example of the rest.

When we say that God is good, the attribute must be understood in both of the ways mentioned above. God is good because of His actions, for all good things come from Him, and the good can only come from the good, as we read in the Psalms, “The Lord is good to all.” But when the same attribute is applied to God to describe His essence, it must be understood in a negative sense. God is called good because His essence is free from defect, since there is no potentiality in Him, as we explained before. Therefore no change or privation attaches to Him, for all privation is evil.

We find that the Bible too has these two modes of characterizing God as good: “Thou art good, and doest good; Teach me Thy statutes.” “Thou art good” is intended as a description of God’s essence, while “doest good” has reference to the good things which come from God.

Similarly when we say that God is wise, the attribute may be understood as referring to God’s acts. Since God is the author of existence, which is perfect and wonderful in its order and arrangement, it follows that He is wise and understands all the things of which He is the author, as is said in the Bible, “He that planted the ear, shall He not hear?… He that instructeth nations, shall not He correct, even He that teacheth man knowledge?” Here we see the Psalmist inferring God’s understanding and knowledge from the fact that all understanding and knowledge come from God. But when the attribute wise is applied to God to describe His essence, it must be understood in a negative sense, meaning that nothing is concealed from Him. For since God is pure intellect and separate from matter, as we proved before, nothing can be hidden from Him.

It is matter that obstructs and prevents us from apprehending the sensible and intelligible things. Thus water flowing from the eye or other diseases of the eye prevent it from seeing what it desires to see. The same is true of diseases of the nose and the ear. In general it is true that matter prevents us from apprehending sensible things as they really are. In the same way the vapors rising from the stomach confuse the powers of the brain, preventing them from apprehending their objects, as is the case with persons who are drunk. Similarly excessive moisture hinders one from apprehending intelligible things, as we see in young people. During the period of growth, when the moisture is abundant, they do not attain the degree of comprehension which their intellect is able to attain. It is clear therefore that one who is pure intellect is called wise because nothing is hidden from Him, and He is not ignorant of anything which it is in His nature to understand, because there are no causes in Him which obstruct understanding.

When we say that God has will, the statement may have reference to God’s activities. Then the meaning is that all things which exist in heaven and earth were made by His simple will,

as we read, “Whatever the Lord pleased, that hath He done, in heaven and in earth.” This expression is constantly used in relation to God. When we see a certain act coming from God, being realized and completed like the act of a voluntary agent, we say that the agent no doubt willed the act, else it would not have been realized. So we read, “Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me”; “For the Lord taketh pleasure in His people; He adorneth the humble with salvation.” The coming of salvation indicates will, as the prophet says, “That he understandeth, and knoweth Me, that I am the Lord who exercise mercy, justice and righteousness, in the earth; for these things I desire, saith the Lord.” Here we see that the prophet infers God’s desire from His doings, for in a person of intellect and reason the doing of a thing is an indication of the will and desire to do it.

It is clear therefore that since we see acts emanating from God which are similar to those acts which emanate from a voluntary agent, we speak of God as desiring and willing; though we can not understand how will and desire reside in God without causing change and affection. This is unknown to us, as the nature of His knowledge is unknown to us. We ascribe knowledge to Him because it is a perfection which it is inconceivable that God should be without. The same is true of will, as we explained in chapter three of this Book.

If we wish to explain this attribute in a negative sense, the meaning is that God does not reject or abandon or forget to bestow goodness and perfection, as we read in the Bible, “Lord, Thou hast shown good will unto Thy land, Thou hast turned the captivity of Jacob.” “Good will” in this case means that God did not reject or abandon them, and did not forget to show them mercy, unlike the sentiment expressed in the passage, “Then My anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide My face from them, and they shall be devoured.” Hence the Psalmist adds, “Thou hast withdrawn all Thy wrath; Thou hast turned from the fierceness of Thine anger.”

When we say that God is powerful or strong, we may likewise have reference to God’s acts, in which case the meaning is that He can carry out His wish in relation to all existing things without any hindrance, as a strong man does whatever he desires. And if we use the word to describe God’s essence, we must understand it in a negative sense as indicating that God is not infirm and unable to do what He desires. It follows therefore that He has infinite power. For if His power were finite, there would be some infirmity. But the meaning of the attribute powerful is that He has no infirmity.

The attribute living if applied to God with reference to His acts, means that life flows from Him. He must therefore necessarily be living, else life could not issue from Him. If applied to describe God’s essence, it must be understood in a negative sense. In this sense our meaning is that the influences which emanate from Him do not come in the manner of light from a lamp or heat from fire, both of which flow from their sources without any knowledge or will on the part of the latter. Not so with God, for He exerts His influence in the best manner possible, namely with knowledge and will, like a living being. He knows what He bestows, He has the power to bestow, and He desires to bestow, else the object would not receive His influence. The meaning is that the influence which comes from God is accompanied by knowledge, will and power, like the influence which comes from a living being.

The matter is very subtle and difficult to expatiate upon. The important thing is to understand what is meant, namely that God has infinite power, i. e. is not unable to bestow, and is willing to bestow, viz. does not reject or abandon or forget the idea of bestowing. And He knows what He bestows, i. e. He is not ignorant and not unaware of the content of His bestowal or of the object which receives favors

from Him. This is why we say that He is living, for a living being understands what it does and wills it, i. e. it does not act by nature like the radiation of heat from fire.

Thus the four attributes, living, wise, willing, powerful, all come to one negative idea, as we have explained. All the attributes applied to describe God’s essence must be understood in this way, namely in a negative sense, no matter how many there are, for all negative attributes can be truly predicated of God. And there is no harm if one enumerates more than those we mentioned, or if one says that there is an infinite number of them, as long as they are understood in a negative sense, so that no defect is implied in the nature of God. This is the reason why we lay down, as a fourth derivative principle, that God is free from defects, following the opinion of Maimonides, that positive attributes can not be ascribed to the nature of God, and must be excluded because they would imply a defect.

CHAPTER 25

There are certain corollaries which follow from the fourth derivative dogma, freedom from defects, whether we understand it in the philosophical or in the theological sense mentioned in the second chapter of this Book. One of these corollaries is that if we ascribe to God one of the applicable attributes, whether it be negative or positive, the attribute in question must be understood as being infinite in two respects, in time and in worth. For example, since we have shown that God is eternal and perpetual, i. e. that He exists in infinite time a parte ante as well as a parte post, it follows that any attribute characterizing Him must be eternal and perpetual like God Himself. For as God has existed and will exist an infinite time, so the attributes exist in God an infinite time, for they can not have arisen in Him at a given moment or be limited in their existence to a given time, as we explained before.

When I say an infinite time, I am using an inaccurate and loose expression. For we cannot say of God that He exists an infinite time, since He is prior to time, unless duration is time. But the meaning is that He has no limit either in the past or in the future. Hence every attribute of His is infinite in time.

Similarly every attribute is infinite in worth. When we say that God is wise, there is no doubt that we mean to say that His wisdom is infinite in perfection. For since His essence is infinite in perfection, He must know His essence. But the infinitely perfect can only be known by infinitely perfect knowledge, for the finite can not embrace the infinite. Similarly if we say that God is powerful, we must understand that His power is infinite. For if it were finite, we can imagine a greater power, and He would then be infirm, as not having the greater power imagined. So when we say that God is good, we must understand that He is infinitely good. For if His goodness were limited, there might be a greater good than He, and He would not be absolutely good.

In the same way every attribute that is applied to God must be understood as being infinite in worth, without any defect. Thus the attribute existence, which is ascribed to God, must be understood as being in God by virtue of Himself and not acquired from another. But when we ascribe existence to something other than God, it can not be infinite in worth, for the existence is acquired from another. There is no other being, every one of whose attributes is infinite in worth, except God. Every one of His attributes is infinite in time, as we have explained, and also infinite in worth and goodness. This is the meaning of the biblical expression, “In Thy right hand bliss for evermore,” as will be explained in the thirtieth chapter of this Book.

We must also understand that the perfections existing in God are infinite in number. For since God must have all the kinds of perfection that can be conceived, and must be free from all kinds of defect, and since we can conceive of His having an in finite number of perfections, He must really have them, else He would not be absolutely perfect, if there are more perfections than He possesses. It is clear therefore that He must have an infinite number of perfections, such as we cannot conceive.

This is the reason why the name Zebaot (hosts) is one of those divine names that it is forbidden to erase. It is an allusion to this kind of perfection. It is also this kind of perfection to which the pious Rabbi Hanina alluded when he remarked to one who enumerated a great many attributes in his prayer, “Have you completed all the praises of your Lord?” The meaning is that since they are infinite it is not proper to use a definite number, indicating as it were that there is a number which completes them, for this would be a defect in God, whereas He is free from defects.

David alludes to these three kinds of infinity in the Psalm beginning, “O Lord, Thou hast searched me, and known me.” In this Psalm he undertakes to praise God’s knowledge, pointing out its infinite character embracing as it does every one of His movements and acts, many and scattered as they are. “O Lord, Thou hast searched me and known me,” indicates that God’s knowledge is not like man’s knowledge. Man searches without attaining his quest, but God searches the heart, tries the veins, and finds and knows our thoughts. Hence the words, “Thou understandest my thought (re‘i) afar off.” Re‘i is derived from ra‘ayon. He then proceeds to explain this at length, using creation to illustrate his point. “For Thou hast made my reins Thou hast knit me together in my mother’s womb.” And he ends up the same way in the words, “Thine eyes did see my unformed substance, etc.” He means to say that God knew him not only after he was formed, but when he was still a crude mass of stuff without form, God’s knowledge already embraced him. And not merely dost Thou know my unformed substance, who am a king and equal in worth to all the people put together, but “in Thy book they were all written,” all the unformed substances, small and great, and Thou knowest the days when the forms will come down and give shape to the substances, before any one of them has been in existence. This is the meaning of the expression, “Even the days that were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them,” reading lo with an aleph according to the ketib, as a negative. If we follow the masorah, where lo is written with a vav and is not a negative, the meaning is that the plurality of the objects of knowledge does not make the knowledge itself plural, but God’s knowledge of them is one. Then he says, “How weighty also are Thy thoughts unto me, O God! How great is the sum of them!” The meaning is, “Thou understandest my thought afar off,” but I can not understand Thy thoughts, i. e. Thy knowledge and Thy ideas, for they are very precious to me, and I can not comprehend them by reason of their superior excellence.

Besides, they are infinite in time. This is expressed in the words, “How great is the sum of them!”

Moreover, they are infinite in number, “If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand.” And with all that they form in Thee a perfect unity, as the Psalmist says, “and He has one in them,” and they are not something added to Thy essence, for when I awaken from my contemplation of this matter, I find that I am still with Thee, and that they are not something distinct from Thee.

It is also possible to say that the word re‘eka refers to the attributes of perfection which are in God. He calls them re‘eka (friends) to indicate that as God is infinite in worth and in time, so every one of the attributes is infinite in worth and in time.

Then he says, “If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand,” to point out that the attributes of perfection in God are infinite. Thereby he intends to explain that we need not wonder how it is that the multiplicity of the objects of knowledge does not multiply the knowledge. For we find likewise that the attributes of God are infinite in the three respects mentioned, and yet God’s essence is not multiplied thereby at all.

He calls the essential attributes re‘eka (friends) to point to what we said in the beginning of the chapter, that the attributes of God are necessarily eternal like Him. “How weighty” alludes to the fact that every one of them is infinite in quality and worth. “How mighty are their heads” alludes to the fact that the attributes existing in God were there an infinite time before the world existed and will be there after the world has come to an end, referring to the two heads which time has, one in the direction of the beginning, and the other in the direction of the end. Hence the expression, “their heads,” i. e. the two heads or ends which time has.

Then he praises the multiplicity of the attributes, the fact, namely, that God’s perfections are infinite and can not be bounded by any number, “If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand.” And to prevent the thought that there is plurality in God by reason of the plurality of attributes, he says, “When I awaken, I am still with Thee.” The meaning is, when I reflect on the attributes and find that they are necessarily many, because they denote perfections different from one another—for knowledge denotes something different from power and from will; and all these attributes denote something other than the quiddity—and this reflection suggests that the attributes necessitate a kind of plurality in Thee, “I awaken and am still with Thee.” The meaning is, when I awaken from my reflection upon the plurality of attributes, I see that all these attributes are merely intellectual conceptions indicating that those perfections are found in Thy essence, but in reality they are not anything outside of Thee. “I am still with Thee,” means that the attributes are not something other than Thou and do not necessitate plurality in Thy essence. For just as the attribute unity is not something added to the quiddity, but is an intellectual conception denoting the absence of plurality, so wisdom and knowledge are not anything other than the quiddity, but are intellectual conceptions denoting the absence of ignorance.

Similarly concerning all the infinite number of attributes existing in God, we can say that they are intellectual conceptions denoting that God is free from defects, and denoting nothing else. When the Cabalists call God the endless (En Sof), it is precisely this that they mean to indicate, namely that the perfections existing in Him are infinite in the three respects mentioned.

CHAPTER 26

The word baruk, blessed, is a homonymous term. It is applied to one who receives benefits and favors from another, as in the expressions, “Thou shalt not curse the people; for they are blessed”; “Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field”; and in many other cases. It is also applied to one who bestows favors and benefits upon another, as in the expressions, “Blessed be the Lord my Rock, who traineth my hands for war”; “Blessed be the Lord, For He hath shown me His wondrous lovingkindness in an entrenched city”; “Blessed art Thou, O Lord; Teach me Thy statutes”; “Blessed be the Lord, who hath delivered you.”

Blessing is a term applied to addition and increase of benefit and favor. Hence when the word baruk is applied to the recipient, it is a passive participle. We find the infinitive absolute of the Kal of the root barak in the expression, “Therefore he even blessed (barok) you.” Hence the other forms of the Kal are based upon it, and baruk is a passive participle, meaning receiving abundance of benefits. When the word is applied to the giver, it is an adjective, like merciful and gracious, which are adjectives applied to God, indicating that the act which emanates from Him is a blessing, i. e. an increase of influence and of goodness. Just as curse means lack of goodness, as all commentators agree, so blessing means an increase of goodness. The word baruk, therefore, is an attribute descriptive of the one who bestows an abundance of goodness.

The term blessing (berakah) is applied to abundance of various kinds of prosperity and success. We find it used to denote wealth of various kinds. Thus, “And the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had, in the house and in the field”; while Solomon says, “The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and He doth not add sorrow thereto.” Ordinarily manifold wealth is a cause of great sorrow and trouble, as we are told, “He who increases property, increases sorrow.” Hence Solomon says that wealth which comes with the blessing of God, even if it be manifold in its sources, is not accompanied with an increase of sorrow, as is usually the case.

The word blessing is also applied to good fortune in respect to children, as in the expressions, “Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body”; “And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came from Paddan-Aram, and blessed him.” It is also applied to good health—“And He will bless thy bread and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.” For when the Lord’s blessing is upon the food, a person is not afflicted even with those diseases to which one is naturally liable. This is the meaning of the expression, “And I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.” Much more is it true that he will not suffer from unnatural diseases, hence he says, “None shall miscarry, nor be barren in thy land,” and no one will die prematurely, hence he says, “The number of thy days I will fulfil.” The word blessing is also applied to honor. Thus David says, “Now, therefore, let it please Thee to bless the house of Thy servant, that it may continue forever before Thee.” It is also applied to wisdom, “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Teach me Thy statutes.”

Now all increase of benefits and abundance of goodness causing various kinds of good fortune, can not come to a man except through an agent who is living, possessed of will, wise and powerful. An agency which acts by nature, like fire emanating from a lamp, or heat radiating from a fire, can not, while remaining the same, increase its light at one time and diminish it at another time, but it is always the same, as due to the agent. It is not the same with a voluntary agent, who can increase or diminish the act at will. Now every voluntary agent is necessarily living, for we can not conceive of will except as coming from a living being. A voluntary agent also knows what he bestows, and has the power to bestow. He therefore who bestows blessings and an abundance of good things is necessarily living, wise, possessed of will and powerful. The reason therefore why the expression “blessed” has been chosen with which to praise God is because it is a word denoting all kinds of good fortune, and indicates that it can come only from one who is an agent, living, wise, having will, and powerful. Thus the word blessed is, as it were, a term inclusive of all perfections. For this reason it alludes to the fourth dogma, God’s freedom from defects, since the expression blessing is the opposite of curse, which denotes absence of goodness, as we have seen. The word blessing is also applied to praise and laudation generally. Thus we read, “I will bless the Lord at all times,” where bless means the same as praise, hence the verse concludes, “His praise shall continually be in my mouth.”

This is the reason why the men of the Great Synagogue ordained that the expression of blessing shall be used in praising God for the manifold benefits which man receives from God, benefits of body of all kinds and benefits of soul. The benediction of grace after meals is an example of praise for physical blessings, while praise for spiritual blessings is illustrated in the blessings over the Torah, the blessings introductory to the performance of certain commandments, and other blessings besides, like those which praise God, indicating that He is the source of all blessings, and that all benefits and good fortune of every kind come from Him.

This is why the Rabbis say, “Four classes of persons are obliged to give thanks, etc.” To prevent the thought that God is the author of good only, and that there is another power which is the author of evil, the Rabbis say that one is obliged to bless God for evil as well as for good, in order to show that everything comes from God. And as the word baruk embraces praise for all kinds of benefits and good fortune which are included in the term blessing, as we said before, David says, “And let all flesh bless His holy name for ever and ever.” “All flesh” means every recipient of any kind of blessing whatsoever. For the word baruk denotes thanksgiving for all of them, i. e. for all kinds of perfection. For this reason he begins with the words, “I will extol Thee, my God, O King.” Then he explains that extolling God means, “And I will bless Thy name for ever and ever,” which is the same as praise. Therefore in the next verse, which begins, “Every day will I bless Thee,” he concludes with the words, “And I will praise Thy name for ever and ever,” using the word praise instead of bless, as in the first verse. Summing it all up, he says, “Great is the Lord, and superior to all praise.” He is referring here to God’s own being, for He cannot be praised except for His deeds. Therefore he adds immediately, “One generation shall laud Thy works to another.”

We can not praise God in respect of His own essence, this being impossible for three reasons. First, because man’s life is finite, and it is impossible in a finite time to give adequate praise which ought to last an infinite time. Secondly, because God’s praiseworthy qualities are infinite in number, as we explained in the preceding chapter. And thirdly, because every one of the qualities is infinite in worth and intensity. This is why he begins with the words, “I will extol Thee, my God, O King; and I will bless Thy name for ever and ever.” He does not mean to say that man can praise God for ever and ever, which is an infinite time, for this is impossible for human nature to do. What he means to say is that even if human life were infinite, and I were to extol Thy name for ever and ever, and the praise continued every day without any cessation in time and in praise (This is the meaning of the repetition: “Every day will I bless Thee; and I will praise Thy name for ever and ever”), even then, he says, he could not praise Him, because of the other two hindrances: (1) by reason of the infinite number of perfections in God—“The Lord is great, and superior to all praise” that any man could give by enumerating His qualities and excellences. And the other reason why this can not be done is (2) because every perfection of God is infinite in worth—“And His greatness” (i. e. any single quality) “is unsearchable,” i. e. it is infinite in worth and therefore can not be bounded or embraced in a finite word. Therefore to praise Thee as Thou art in Thyself is impossible for the three reasons we mentioned.

The proper way to praise Thee is with reference to the deeds and activities which emanate from Thee. They show that Thou art wise, possessed of will and powerful, as the Psalmist says, “One generation shall laud Thy works to another.” The order of the acts and their perfection show that they emanate from a wise agent. Then he says, “And men shall speak of the might of Thy tremendous acts,” which is an allusion to God’s power. He continues, “They shall utter the fame of Thy great goodness,” which is a reference to God’s will, as we said before, for abundance of goodness indicates will.

The entire eulogy in the Psalm proceeds after the manner indicated. Then comes the verse, “All Thy works shall praise Thee, O Lord; and Thy saints shall bless Thee.” Not everybody knows to discern God’s excellence and perfection, but only the wise and the pious, who have some slight knowledge of God’s excellence. Therefore he says, ‘All Thy works shall praise Thee, O Lord,” i. e. praise Thee in a general way. But “Thy saints,” i. e. the wise believers (for wisdom leads to saintliness), who know something of Thy greatness,—they will not merely praise Thee in a general way, but will

“bless Thee,” which is more adequate praise, for the word “bless,” as we have explained, indicates that God embraces all kinds of perfection, which He bestows upon the world, and that He is free from defects.

CHAPTER 27

“True” is a term used to indicate that that which is expressed is in agreement with that which is in the mind and with that which exists in reality outside of the mind. But if the expression is in disagreement with the thing as it exists in reality outside of the mind, though it agrees with the thing as it is in the mind, we call it untrue. Take an instance. Reuben saw Levi commit a homicide. Thinking that Levi was Simeon, he testified that Simeon committed homicide. His testimony is untrue, though there is no difference between his expression and his thought, the two being in agreement. On the other hand if he were to testify that Levi committed homicide, thinking that Simeon was the guilty party, he would not be saying an untruth, since the fact is as he stated it, nevertheless he would be guilty of lying, since his expression and his thought are not in agreement and his words belie his thoughts. In short, a lie (kazab) is an expression used in relation to the speaker. A lie exists when the expression and the thought are not in agreement. Untruth (sheker) is an expression used in relation to the thing itself. An untruth exists when the expression is in disagreement with the thing as it is in reality outside of the mind. If the expression is in disagreement alike with the thought and with the thing as it is in reality outside of the mind, we call it a lie and an untruth. And when all the three agree, we call it true.

It is clear therefore that the word “existent” (nimza) can not truly be predicated of any existing thing except God. For existing things other than God can not have the term existent truly applicable to them at all times, but only at the time when they exist, not after and not before. But God, being in existence all the time in the same way, has a true existence, and the meaning of the word existent in the mind, as applied to Him, is in agreement with the reality outside the mind and with the expression. Therefore the word existent applies to Him more truly than to any other existing thing.

Also the word existent applies truly to one whose existence is not dependent upon any other, but upon his own essence. For since his existence depends upon his own essence only, he has no potentiality in him. If we say, for example, that the heavens are in continuous motion, the statement is true as long as the mover is in existence who causes them to move. But when the mover ceases to exist, the statement is no longer true. In the same way, if we say the Separate Intelligences are existent, the statement is true as long as the author of their existence, who maintains them in being, is there. Per se their existence is not absolute, since they are dependent upon another, and their existence is determined for them by their cause. Hence there is none among existing things to which the word existent applies truly except God, whose existence depends upon His own essence and not upon another, hence His existence is true.

This is what the Rabbis meant when they said, “The seal of the Holy One, blessed be He, is truth.” The meaning is that there is none among existing things to whom the term existent applies at all times and from all aspects, i. e. whether we view it with reference to itself or with reference to another, except God.

This is the conception that was conveyed to Moses at the burning bush in answer to his question, “And they shall say to me: What is His name? what shall I say unto them?” Moses thought that the being who appeared to him might perhaps be one of the Separate Intelligences, whose existence depends upon another. He was therefore afraid that he might not obtain his request. For since the existence and the power of this being are dependent upon another, if this other chose to nullify the will of the former, it would no doubt become null and void, and the object of his desire would not be realized. Therefore God answered that His name is “I am that I am,” i. e. the Existent whose existence depends upon His own essence and not upon another. Moses might therefore feel assured that he can realize whatever he desires. The expression “that I am” is in the first person, as if to say I am because I am, and not because another than I is. My existence and power are not dependent upon another at all, as is the case in the other existents. None of the other existents could say of himself “I am that (because) I am.” They would have to say, “I am that (because) He is,” the expression “He is,” referring not to the first person, but to a third person, who is the cause of the first. He would say then, “I am that (because) He is,” i. e. I am in existence because another than I is in existence, namely the First Cause, upon whose existence that of all other beings depends. But God’s existence depends upon Himself and not upon another cause. Therefore to Him alone of all existing things is applicable the name “I am that I am,” i. e. I am in existence because I am in existence, and not because another is in existence. And therefore His existence is true because He has no need of another. And the word true applies to Him more than to any other existing thing.

We can say therefore that among all attributes there is none which is applicable to Him in all respects except the attribute true, because it adds nothing to the essence, and is merely an explanation of the expression necessary existence. Just as in the proposition, man is rational animal, animal and rational are explanatory of man and not something other than man, so “true” is the explanation of necessary existence and nothing else. The expression necessary existent means nothing else except a being whose existence is absolutely true, in whom there is neither potentiality nor dependence upon another. For this reason this attribute is preferable to all the other attributes and names.

And the prophet, too, characterizes God as true in a manner different from his characterization of Him by means of other names and attributes. He says, “But the Lord God is the true God, He is the living God, and the everlasting King.” In this expression he indicates the difference between describing God as true and describing Him as living or King or by any other attribute.

It is explained in the fourth book of the Metaphysics that whenever we say, “the same who,” there may be imagined a kind of plurality or otherness, as in the expressions, “This is Ahasuerus who reigned from India even unto Ethiopia;” “These are that same Dathan and Abiram, the elect of the congregation, who strove …”; “These are that same Aaron and Moses … These are the same that spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt.” In all these cases one might suppose (but for the description) that the persons named are other than those which are described later. The same thing is true of the expression, “He is the Lord our God; His judgments are in all the earth.” For one might possibly suppose that the God of Israel has a specific kingdom like the other celestial rulers, who are assigned to rule the various nations. For this reason the Bible explains that it is not so, but that the judgments of the Lord who is our God extend over all the earth, i. e. His rule is universal over the whole earth. So in all cases where the word “same” is used, it is for the purpose of making clear that the reference is not to another, as one might have supposed. In the word “true,” however, no other reference is possible, therefore the prophet is careful in his mode of expression. When he describes God as true he does not use the word “same,” but says simply, “But the Lord God is truth.” But when he ascribes to Him the attributes life and royalty, he uses the expression, “The same is the living God, and the everlasting King.” The meaning is that while one might suppose a distinction between God and the attributes life and royalty (though, as we said before, this supposition is not true), no such thing is possible in connection with the word truth. Hence he does not say, “But the Lord God, the same is truth.” And by reason of the otherness which might be supposed in connection with the other attributes, we said above that all the attributes must be understood in a negative sense, so as not to necessitate any multiplicity in God’s essence.

And because the understanding of this attribute is a more profound matter than the understanding of any of the others, Daniel said in his prayer, “Yet have we not entreated the favour of the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and have discernment in Thy truth.” Discernment in God’s truth is nothing else than the understanding of His necessary existence. And inasmuch as the word “truth” points more clearly to a necessary existent than any other attribute, one of the ancient lawgivers said that truth is God.

Moreover it is fitting that the word truth should be specially applicable to God as distinct from other beings, because it contains the first and last letter of the alphabet, and the mem too, which is the middle, indicating that God is first, last and middle, continually bearing all things by His power. The reason that we did not mention truth as a derivative dogma coming from the principle of the existence of God, as we mentioned unity, is because, as we have shown, truth is nothing more than an explanation of the expression necessary existent. To count it as a dogma would therefore be tautology. For to say God is true is the same thing as saying that God’s is a true existence, and this is nothing else than an explanation of the term necessary existent.

CHAPTER 28

The name of God expressed in the letters, yod, he, vav, he, is called the Shem ha-Meforash, which means the separate name. The root parash is often used by the Rabbis to denote something that is separate and different from another. Thus they speak of “flesh that is separated (ha-poresh) from a living animal”; “He who separates himself (ha-poresh) from the foreskin.” Men who are different from others and superior in virtue and saintliness are called Perushim. This is the explanation given in Sifre.

In the Talmud, treatise Sotah, we find the following discussion: “The Bible says, ‘On this wise ye shall bless’; ‘on this wise,’ denotes the use of the Shem ha-Meforash. We can not suppose that another appellation is permitted, for it says, ‘So shall they put My name upon the children of Israel,’ ‘My name,’ means the name that is peculiar to Me.” We thus see in this explanation that the meaning of the expression Shem ha-Meforash is the name that is separate from the other appellations and is peculiar to God alone. For the other names are applied to God by reason of His activities, or by reason of some other aspect of His being, other than His necessary existence. Thus the word Elohim denotes power, and therefore can be applied to others also, as for example to angels and judges. Similarly Adonai, which denotes lordship, is applied to others besides God. Also in the case of other names the same is true. They are applicable to God and to other beings either as pure homonyms or on the basis of some analogy. But the tetragrammaton can not be applied at all to any being other than God, because it denotes God as the necessary existent, as Maimonides says in chapter sixty-one of Part One of the Guide of the Perplexed. But this is a matter in which no other being shares. Hence the name is called Shem ha-Meforash (distinct and separate name).

And yet we sometimes find this name applied metaphorically to other beings, as in the biblical verse, “And the Lord (Jhvh) went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way …,” while in a subsequent verse we read, “And the angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of cloud removed from before them, and stood behind them.” The explanation of this usage is that names are metaphorically applied to things other than that which they properly designate, for two reasons. One is because there is some similarity, though a remote one, between the two things. The other is because the name points in a distant manner to the thing in question, as an instrument points to the owner of the instrument. Thus the Bible, in speaking of the Messiah, says, “But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them.” The reason for this is because the Messiah resembles David in his kingship, or princehood. The expression, “And My servant David shall be king over them,” has reference to the Messiah’s being descended from the seed of David, and points to the permanence of David’s kingdom, as is specified in another passage, “And David, My servant, shall be their prince forever,” which is no doubt a reference to David himself. For since the rule of his descendants is permanent, he is a prince forever. Similarly, the Bible calls the ark by the name of God, though it is a vessel artificially made, because it points to God, the giver of the Torah, which was in the ark. Thus, we read, “And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said: ‘Rise up, O Lord’ … And when it rested, he said: ‘Return, O Lord, unto the ten thousands of the families of Israel.’ ” Also Joshua said concerning the ark, “Behold the ark of the covenant, the Lord of all the earth, passeth on before you over the Jordan.” The ark is not the Lord of all the earth, but he calls it so, because it owes its existence to the Lord of all the earth. So he calls it by the name of the Lord of all the earth, because it is the usage of language to call a thing by the name of the master of the thing, or the one from whom the thing emanates, or to ascribe the act of the master of the thing to the thing because by means of it the act is realized, as in human language the act of an agent is attributed to the instrument by means of which the act is done. Thus we say, the eye sees, the ear hears, though sight and hearing are functions of the soul, and the eye and the ear are merely instruments or organs by means of which the act is accomplished.

For both of these reasons at once Moses called the name of the altar, Adonai-nissi (Lord my miracle), because the altar is an instrument by means of which miracles are performed, and also because it points to God, who performs the miracles. In the same way the Bible calls the name of the Messiah, “The Lord our righteousness,” because he is the medium through whom we obtain justice from God. For this reason he is called by the name of God. Similarly Jerusalem is called, “The Lord is there,” because it is a place where the glory of the Lord was revealed more constantly than anywhere else. And this is also what the Rabbis meant when they said, “Do not read, Adonai Shammah (the Lord is there), but Adonai Shemah (the Lord is her name), i. e. the name of Jerusalem is the Lord, for the reason mentioned above. So we find that Abraham called the name of the place, Adonai-jireh (the Lord seeth), because there was seen an act which pointed to God, who sees and provides.

In the same way the Bible calls the Shekinah or the glory which was seen or apprehended in a prophetic vision, “the Lord,” as in the expressions, “And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, … and the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of My people that are in Egypt”; “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up.” It is also called the God of Israel, as in the expression, “And they saw the God of Israel.” Also God, “And they beheld God.” Thus we see that the Bible calls the Shekinah or the visible glory, “Lord,” “God,” and “God of Israel,” though no creature can see God, as is said, “For man shall not see Me and live.” The Bible also calls an angel God. Thus, concerning the angel who appeared to Gideon, the Bible says, “And the Lord turned towards him, and said: ‘Go in this thy might’ … And the Lord said unto him, ‘Surely I will be with thee …’ ” Throughout the entire narrative the Bible calls the angel by the name of the Lord.

The Bible also applies the term “glory” to various things. It is sometimes applied to the face of God Himself, who can not be seen. Thus when Moses asks of God and says, “Show me, I pray Thee, Thy glory,” God replies, “Thou canst not see My face.” Here glory is applied to the face of God. The Bible also applies the term to something that is visible to the senses, “And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people”; “And the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire in the top of the mount”; “And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the Lord.” The reason for this is because the object which is visible to the senses symbolizes something that is hidden and not visible, which is called the face of the Lord, and the glory of the Lord. This is why the prophets took the liberty to refer to a thing that was visible to them by the name of a hidden thing that was not visible, namely God, with the result that they spoke with an angel or the glory that was visible to them as if they were speaking with God. Thus Elijah addressed the angel who appeared to him or who spoke to him, in the second person, as though he were God, “For the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the sword.” The reply was, “Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord … but the Lord was not in the wind … but the Lord was not in the earthquake …” Then he heard a voice speaking to him out of the stillness and saying, “What doest thou here, Elijah?” and was then commanded by God what he should do. Now there is no doubt that Elijah was not guilty of the error of thinking that the one who spoke to him first was God, for he said to him, “Go forth and stand upon the mount before the Lord,” and yet he addressed him as though he were speaking to God Himself, when he said, “For the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant.”

In relation to the expression, “Come up to the Lord,” the Rabbis raise the question that the expression should have been “Come up to Me.” Such a question is not raised in connection with the expression above quoted in relation to Elijah, “And stand upon the mount before the Lord.” No question is here raised why it does not say, “And stand before Me,” because they felt nothing strange in the case of Elijah that he should have been addressed by an intermediate being. In the case of Moses it was different. After the revelation on Sinai, Moses attained the high privilege of speaking to God face to face. Hence the Rabbis think it unusual that Moses should be told, “Come up to the Lord,” from which it would seem that he was speaking to an intermediate being, and not to God Himself. Their explanation is that the intermediate being was Metatron, whose name is the same as that of his Master, and who is the Prince of the Presence, but not such a subordinate being as in the case of the other prophets who were addressed by other angels and intermediate beings. And yet the prophets took the liberty to address them as though they were speaking to God, because they were the media through whom divine prophecy came to them. This is the meaning of the statement of the Rabbis, “Great is the power of the prophets, who compare the creature to the Creator.” The meaning is, Great is the power of the prophets, who take the liberty to do an important thing like this. The reason for their doing this is because an angel is a medium of prophecy or an instrument through whom a sign or a miracle is performed, which indicates God’s will and purpose being realized upon the beings of the world. And it is customary among mankind to speak of an order which comes from a messenger or official or general of the king as being the command of the king, and the representative is addressed with respect as if he were the king himself This is why the Bible calls him by the name of God, and the prophets speak of him as if he were God.

Angels are immaterial beings and not subject to those accidents to which material beings are liable, like envy, hatred, strife. They are free from all evil. They have no pride, nor desire to do evil or sin. They always choose what is good and right in the eyes of God. For this reason when they are sent to mankind they are given permission to speak in the name of the One who sent them. We see this clearly in many instances when the visible speaker is an angel and yet he speaks in the name of the One who sent him. Thus the angel said to Hagar, “I will greatly multiply thy seed.” To Abraham he said, “I will certainly return unto thee when the season cometh round.” “Will return unto thee,” is conditional upon God’s sending him, as Rashi explains, for we do not find that the angel ever returned to Abraham. Jacob also says, “And the angel of God said unto me in the dream: Jacob; and I said: Here am I”; while at the end of the dream it is said to him, “I am the God of Beth-el, where thou didst anoint a pillar, where thou didst vow a vow unto Me.” But Jacob did not make his vow to the angel, but to God. Similarly an angel said to Abraham, “For now I know that thou art a God-fearing man, seeing that thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from Me.” But Abraham offered Isaac to God alone. In the case of Gideon, also, the angel said to him, “I will be with Thee.” Also in the case of Moses, in the beginning of the vision of the burning bush, the Bible says, “And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him”; while when he begins to speak to him he says, “I am the God of thy father, … I have surely seen the affliction of My people that are in Egypt …” This proves that an angel speaks in the name of the One who sent him. This matter deserves notice.

The reason for all this is because the angel can not disobey the command of God and alter the message or speak on his own responsibility. For the reason he is called angel is not because he is a separate intellect, but because he comes with a mission from God. If he changed the message he would no longer be an angel. Moreover he is not allowed during his mission to say or do anything which he was not commanded by God to say or do. This is the reason why an angel sent with a divine mission refuses to reveal his own personal name, or his special power, apart from the mission with which he is entrusted. Thus, when Jacob says to the angel, “Tell me, I pray thee, thy name,” the latter replies, “Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?” Similarly the angel said to Manoah, “Wherefore askest thou after my name, seeing it is hidden?” He also said, “Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread, and if thou wilt make a burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord.” The meaning is, if you offer me a burnt-offering, I will not accept it, and it will do you no good, for I do not appear to you in my personal capacity, as representing my own individual power. Hence it will be of no benefit to you to know my name and my personal power, for this might lead you into error, and you might imagine that I have some personal and independent power in this mission, which is not true. Therefore, “if thou wilt make a burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord,” for the power and the mission come from Him.

For this reason, too, a person who worships an angel in his personal and individual capacity is guilty of “cutting the plants” and of idolatry, which is forbidden in the commandment, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me,” as our Rabbis explain in the Mekilta, and as will be made clear in the eighteenth chapter of the Third Book. But if one worships an angel in his capacity as a messenger of God, there is no offence. In the same way when one does obeisance to an official of the king in his individual capacity and power, accepting him as a master, and not as one who has power delegated to him from the king, he is guilty of treason to the king. But if he does obeisance to the official as a representative of the king, he does honor to the king. For this reason it was permissible for Joshua to bow down to the angel when he appeared to him in Jericho and said, “I am captain of the host of the Lord; I am now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and bowed down …” For though genuflection is one of the four modes of worship which, like sacrifice, incense and libation, are forbidden to be practised even in honor of angels, nevertheless since the genuflection in that case was in honor of God, and the angel was His messenger, it was permissible. But if one prays to an angel or bows down to him in his personal capacity, as possessing independent power which is signified in his name, he is liable under the prohibition, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.” This is also the opinion of Nahmanides.

This shows the error of those who mention the names of the angels in their prayer. For they use the names of the angels for the power which they exert in their personal capacity. But this is precisely what is forbidden in the commandment, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me,” as we said before. The origin of the error is because there are certain prayers of ancient authorship containing certain special names of angels. Hence they thought that it is permissible to include all the names in the prayer. But it is not so. No name may be mentioned in prayer except those which are peculiar to God, but no other. This is why the science treating of these things is called Cabala (lit. tradition), because tradition must be followed in the study and the practice of it, else one is liable to commit an error and to worship as God some one other than the Lord.

To make the matter clearer, I will give an illustration. We find in ancient prayers the name Mzpz, and one might think it is the name of one of the angels. But this is not true. It is merely another form of the tetragrammaton, which is derived by a substitution of letters according to the correspondence known as at bash. Similarly, kvzv bmvksz is a transformation of Jhvh El(o) henu (the Lord our God), by changing every letter in Jhvh El(o) henu for the letter which follows it in the alphabet. Thus yod becomes kaf, he becomes vav, and so on. This is the reason why no one is permitted to make use of any of the statements of the Cabalists on his own responsibility, unless he has that particular matter by direct oral tradition from a Cabalist. Opinions in that science are forbidden except to one who has received the tradition from a wise man. The written word alone can not be used as authority. This is why it is called Cabala, as the name signifies.

I was obliged to make this observation because I have seen men fall into error by reading the Zohar and other cabalistic books without having any oral tradition. They presume upon their own opinion, exhibiting their great wisdom, and transgress the permitted boundary, reflecting upon things upon which reflection is forbidden. The greatest of the modern Cabalists, Nahmanides, has said by way of admonition that the words of the Cabalists can not be understood or known by any kind of reason or intelligence, but only through oral communication by a wise Cabalist to an intelligent person. Independent opinion in the matter is folly and the cause of great harm. This is what Nahmanides says in his commentary on the Pentateuch. To sum up, Take heed unto thyself and be very careful lest thou be caught and fall into their snare, for they forsake the paths of uprightness and walk in ways of darkness. For those who make a study of the Cabala independently, without having an oral tradition from a learned Cabalist, know and understand nothing and walk in darkness.

CHAPTER 29

The word or (light) is applied first to light which is perceived by the senses, as in the expressions, “Who giveth the sun for a light by day”; “As soon as the morning was light.” And inasmuch as light shows a person the way, the name is applied also, metaphorically, to denote guidance and leading, as in the verse, “And nations shall walk at thy light,” which means, shall live by the guidance which they receive from thee. It is also used to denote divine guidance, as in the expression, “Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord.” For this reason the Torah is called light, “For the commandment is a lamp, and the Torah (teaching) is light,” because it guides and leads one to eternal happiness.

Inasmuch as light causes pleasure to the soul, as we read, “And the light is sweet,” the name light is also applied figuratively to corporeal pleasure, “The Jews had light,” as well as to spiritual pleasure, “Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.” It is also applied metaphorically to denote good will, “In the light of the king’s countenance is life”; “And the light of Thy countenance, because Thou wast favorable unto them”; “And cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.” It is also applied to the soul, “The light of the righteous rejoiceth; but the lamp, of the wicked shall be put out.” It is applied also to understanding of wisdom, “A man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine.” Hence folly is called darkness, “But the fool walketh in darkness.” It is also applied to things which are free from matter, “And the earth did shine with His glory.” It is applied to God Himself, “And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame.”

The reason for this is as follows. The existence of light can not be denied. Light is not a corporeal thing. It causes the faculty of sight and the visible colors to pass from potentiality to actuality. It delights the soul. One who has never seen a luminous body in his life can not conceive colors, nor the agreeableness and delightfulness of light. And even he who has seen luminous objects can not endure to gaze upon an intense light, and if he insists on gazing at it beyond his power of endurance, his eyes become dim, so that he can not see thereafter even what is normally visible. Similarly God’s existence can not be denied. God is incorporeal. He causes things to pass from potentiality to actuality. There is wonderful delight in apprehending of God as much as one can. One upon whom the light of reason has never shone can not conceive the delight just mentioned. And even wise men who pry into the matter more deeply than is proper become blind and confused, as the Rabbis say, “Ben Azzai looked, and was stricken.” This is the reason why the Bible speaks of God as light, to indicate that though God’s existence is something that can not be denied, like light, nevertheless, since the human mind resides in matter, it is impossible for it to perceive of God’s essence, by means of the Separate Intelligences, except a little bit. In this apprehension there is a wonderful, spiritual delight that man can not conceive. And the amount that is perceived is similar to the amount which the bat perceives of the light of the sun. By reason of the intensity of the sun’s light the eyes of the bat are dimmed, so that it can not look at the sun, nor enjoy its light as the other animals do; though it has some idea of the matter, since it enjoys the weaker light of the moon, or a lamp, or the light which remains in the clouds after the sun sets. It can move about only in the darkness of night, and avoids the light of the sun. This shows that it takes pleasure in a little light, but can not endure and is pained by a bright light, and hence avoids it; unlike the eagle which, by reason of its intense power of vision, takes pleasure in light and flies high by reason of its desire to get near to it. All these qualities of light bear a greater similarity to the things which are free from matter than to anything else to which the things may be compared. Hence the Bible compares them to light so as to make the matter intelligible.

But in order to prevent the error that intellectual light is something emanating from a corporeal object like sensible light, Habakkuk, describing the conception of divine revelation when the Law was given, says: “God cometh from Teman, and the Holy One from Paran. Selah. His glory covereth the heavens … and a brightness appeareth as the light.” The meaning is that the brightness which appeared then was like light, but was not actually light, such as that which is perceptible to the senses. For sensible light emanates from a corporeal object, while that brightness did not come from a corporeal object. This is why he says “as the light” and not “light.” In further explanation of the conception, he says in the sequel that the brightness which was perceived at the time when the Law was given did not come from the power of some intermediate being, who derived the sparks of light and the influence from some one else, but it came from God Himself. Hence he says, “Rays hath He at His side,” meaning that those sparks of spiritual light come to Him from Himself and not from any one else. This shows that it was not something caused, for the light and brightness and splendor of caused things is acquired by them from elsewhere, namely from God who is the cause of all. But the brightness and splendor and majesty, i. e. the attributes and perfections, of God come to Him from Himself and not from another, for He acquires no perfection from another. And inasmuch as it is very difficult to understand how He can have all the attributes of perfection imaginable without having plurality in His essence, and how every one of them can be infinite in excellence, he says, “And there is the hiding of His power.” The meaning is that the attributes, which are comparable to rays emanating from His side, are the secret and hiding of His power. For since His strength and power are infinite, they are, so to speak, hidden, i. e. they can not be understood. For a finite being can understand of an infinite being merely the general nature, that He is an infinite being, but not the specific elements as specific; just as we say that a person conceives the general nature of all human beings, past and future, in a general way, but he can not conceive the specific nature of every individual.

It is clear therefore that the infinite perfections of God can not be comprehended except by God alone, who is infinite in every respect. Hence the Bible uses the expression, “And there is the hiding of His power.” It is clear also that when God is compared with light, it is merely a linguistic metaphor in order to bring the matter nearer to the understanding, but nothing else. In the same way Ezekiel, describing the glory which appeared to him like brightness, said, “As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord.” He compares it with the appearance of the bow, not because it is similar to it in appearance, but because the colors seen in the bow are not really such as they appear, the appearance being due to the mixture of different vapors. This is proved by the fact that the moisture in the eyes sometimes produces the appearance of a circle in the air with the colors of the rainbow, though of course there are no such colors in reality.

Ibn Sina says, “I understand certain elements in the phenomenon of the rainbow, and certain elements I do not understand, but I do not understand the nature or the cause of the colors, and am not satisfied with the current opinions on the subject, which are untrue and foolish.” From these words it appears that there is no explanation for the existence of the apparent colors, and that they are merely appearances, and do not really exist. This is why the Rabbis say, “If one looks upon the rainbow, his eyes become dim.” The meaning is that if one looks carefully at the colors which appear in the rainbow, he will find that his eyes are dim, because they see what does not exist. This is the reason why the prophet compares the appearance of the brightness of the glory which he saw to those colors, to indicate that the attributes under which God appeared to the prophets do not exist in reality, as the appearance of the rainbow is not in reality such as it seems. This is why he says, “I fell upon my face.” When he understood that the light and the brightness which appeared to him were not objective realities, he said, “This is the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord.” He does not say, “This is the appearance of the glory of the Lord,” but adds the word “likeness,” because a thing which is free from matter can not be perceived by the senses. For the senses can perceive only the accidents of things, but a separate intellect has no accidents. Having said therefore that he had seen colors like those of the rainbow, he was obliged to say that it was the color of the likeness of the glory of the Lord, and not the color of the glory itself, which has no color. Therefore he fell upon his face and refused to look at those colors, so that he might not come to think that those colors were such in reality, and that God is a corporeal substance and the subject of accidents.

Moses did precisely the same thing during his vision of the burning bush. At first, when he thought that the thing he saw was a corporeal object, he said, “I will turn aside now, and see this great sight.” Then, when he was told, “I am the God of thy father,” and knew that it was not a corporeal object, it became clear to him that those colors which appeared in the flame of fire in the bush were not in reality such

as they seemed. Therefore he hid his face, for he was afraid to look. His fear was due to the fact that the senses far from helping us to conceive a spiritual nature, hinder us from comprehending the truth, because they can perceive only the accident of a thing, like colors, length, width, and so on. This may lead one to think that an immaterial thing has accidents. Therefore Moses hid his face to show that the senses have no part in this conception at all, because there are no accidents in it. Hence the Rabbis praise him for hiding his face, “As a reward for hiding his face, he was given a shining countenance.” And because, as we said, a spiritual object is compared with light, the Bible applies the term light to the world of the Separate Intelligences, as the Rabbis understand it.

In Bereshit Rabbah we find the following comment on the verse, “And God saw the light that it was good, and God divided…” Said Rabbi Judah son of Rabbi Simon, God set apart the light for Himself, for He said, no creature can use it except Myself. That is why it is written, i “And the light dwelleth with Him.” Said Rabbi Abin, the Levite, God took the light and wrapped Himself up with it as with a garment, and caused His world to flash forth from its splendor, as is written, “Who covereth Thyself with light as with a garment.” The Rabbis said, He hid it away for the righteous for the future world; like a king who sees a beautiful portion and says, This shall be for my son, as is written, “Light is sown for the righteous.”

We thus see that all these sages agree that it is not sensible light that is meant, but that the reference is to spiritual light, which is the world of the Separate Intelligences. R. Judah son of Rabbi Simon says that the human intellect can not apprehend them, and that they were created only that they might know the greatness of God and sing praises before Him. Rabbi Abin the Levite says that this light is causally prior to the other existing things, and that the spiritual substances were created to serve as God’s instruments, as the philosopher said that God looked upon the world of Separate Intelligences and caused existence to emanate from them; while the Rabbis say that though the human intellect can not comprehend the Separate Intelligences perfectly, the righteous may achieve immortality as a result of such limited understanding as they may acquire of them. This is the meaning of the expression, “He hid it for the righteous for the future world.”

CHAPTER 30

As men and animals differ in the appreciation of light, some, on account of weak sight, taking pleasure in dim light and being annoyed by a strong light, like the bat, while others who have strong sight take pleasure in strong light, like the eagle, so do the righteous differ in the degree in which they attain spiritual delight, which the Rabbis speak of as light, as we said before. This difference in degree on the part of the righteous, wise and perfect in the enjoyment of spiritual delight depends upon the degree in which they apprehend the attributes of divine perfection, as the difference in degree of the angels also depends upon such understanding, as we explained in the twelfth chapter of this Book.

Now if the attributes are to be understood as we explained in the twenty-first chapter of this Book, we can see that there may be an infinite number of degrees in wise men, depending upon each one’s apprehension of a given part of the infinite attributes of God’s perfection. But if the attributes of divine perfection can be understood only in a negative manner, according to the opinion of Maimonides, as we explained in the twenty-second chapter of this Book, then the question arises, what difference can there be among wise men and philosophers? For if one knows that no positive attribute applies to God at all, and that negative attributes do, as we said there, he knows all that can be known of God. What difference would there be, then, according to this, between a beginner and Solomon, concerning whom it is said, “He was wiser than all men?” But it is absurd to suppose that they are both alike, and that there is no difference between one prophet and another, or between Moses and Joshua, his attendant. The Bible says, “That I may know Thee, to the end that I may find grace in Thy sight.” This request Moses made after he had seen all that he had when he received the Law. It appears therefore that the more one knows of God the more favor one finds. Moreover, the Rabbis say, “The face of Moses is like that of the sun, the face of Joshua is like that of the moon,” which means that there is a difference in the degree of apprehension of spiritual light, as there is between the light of the sun and the light of the moon. The Rabbis say, also, “We can learn from this that every righteous man has a separate dwelling, and that every one is scorched by the canopy of the other …” All this shows that there is a difference in degree between one righteous man and another. The matter needs explanation. Maimonides treats of this subject at length in the fifty-ninth chapter of the first part of the Guide, but his explanation is not satisfactory. For we can say, by way of criticism, that one who believes that all negative attributes are applicable to God, has already differentiated God from all other existing things. What superiority is there then in the wise man who knows specifically that God is not mineral or plant, and so on through the specific negations?

The proper way to understand this matter is as follows: Two contraries, like living and dead, wise and ignorant, can not be negated of God in the same way. For if He is neither dead nor alive, He is non-existent. The truth is this: When we say He is not dead, we deny death absolutely, because the opposite, which is life, does belong to Him. Similarly when we say, He is not ignorant, we deny ignorance in a true manner, because the opposite, which is wisdom, exists in God, while death and ignorance are defects. But when we say, He is not living, He is not wise, which is the negation of the other contrary, we do not understand the negation as before—He is not living, but dead—He is not wise, but ignorant—for by living and wise we mean perfections. What we mean is that He is not living in the same way as man is living, that His life is not like that which we understand by life. So when we say, He is not wise, we mean that the attribute of wisdom in Him is not, as in man, an accidental attribute, added to His essence, but that His wisdom is essential and not something added to His essence. Similarly in the other attributes which we deny of God, we must differentiate between the manner of negating the one contrary and the manner of negating the other. Herein is the superiority of one wise man over another, in the knowledge of the mode of negation, since not all attributes are negated in the same manner. For although it is true that all negations are predicable of God, still no wise man can negate any attribute unless he knows how the positive attribute applies to the thing characterized by it, and understands the aspect of perfection as well as of defect which the attribute contains. If the attribute denotes a defect, it is negated in one way, if it denotes a perfection, it is negated in another way, namely in respect to its defective element. To deny everything of God without reason or understanding would not indicate God’s perfection.

All those attributes which we regard as defects, like dead, weak, ignorant, poor, bad, and so on, we negate absolutely, meaning that such attributes, which are defects, are not found in God, but that the opposite, which is a perfection, is found in Him. But when we negate the other opposite, which denotes a perfection in our estimation, like living, powerful, wise, rich, good, the meaning is not that this attribute does not exist in Him but the opposite, which is a defect, does. Such negation, far from ascribing perfection to God, is insult and blasphemy. What we do mean in the latter case is that the perfections which we understand by the terms living, powerful, wise, and so on, are not found in God as they are found in us but in a manner more honorable and more excellent, so much so that there, is no relation between the perfection in us or as we understand it and the perfection when ascribed to God. The perfection or perfections in question are applied to man and to God as homonyms, considering the enormous difference that there is between them.

When we say that they are applied homonymously we do not mean that the attribute means one thing when ascribed to man, and the opposite when ascribed to God. We do not mean that when wisdom is ascribed to man it denotes a perfection, and when ascribed to God it denotes ignorance, a defect, which is the opposite of wisdom. This can not be. For if this were the case, then when we deny ignorance of God, we should be denying the word merely and not the signification of the word. But there can be no doubt that when we deny ignorance of God we mean to deny the signification of the word, and not merely the word. Therefore, when we deny wisdom, we mean to deny it in so far as it is a defect, not so far as it is a perfection. But in order that we may not suppose for a moment that the attributes of perfection are predicated of God in the same way as they are predicated of us, we do not permit their predication of God, except by way of negation.

The truth of what we are saying may be made clear from the concept of existence, which is attributed to God. It is true, indeed, that the term existence is applied homonymously to God and to all other existing things, because all of them acquire their existence from Him, and their existence is distinct from their quiddity, whereas in God His existence and His quiddity are identical, and as His quiddity is absolutely unknowable, so is His existence, while the existence of all other things is dependent upon His existence, for they all acquire their existence from Him. Nevertheless it is certain that the word existence as applied to God does not denote the opposite of the same word’s denotation when applied to all other existing things. In that case existence as applied to God would denote non-existence, the opposite of existence as we use it ordinarily. For we always necessarily understand by the word existence the opposite of non-existence. But in order to distinguish between the two kinds of existence and indicate that the one is true existence, and the other is not true and is similar to non-existence, we say that the word existence when applied both to Him and to us is used as a homonym, in order to differentiate between the two kinds of existence and to indicate that God’s existence is absolutely unknown, as His essence is absolutely unknown; and that the existence which is ascribed to all other things denotes, as it were, non-existence in comparison with the existence which is ascribed to God.

It is clear from this that we can not characterize God with even negative attributes, unless we know in what way an object is characterized by a positive attribute, and can distinguish between the aspect of perfection and that of defect in the attribute. Only then can we permit ourselves to negate them in relation to God. For only in this way do we understand the meaning of the negation, since, as we said before, not all negations are predicated of God in the same way. Herein lies the difference between one wise man or philosopher and another. Their degrees differ according to the difference in their conception of the manner in which the attributes of perfection are ascribed to God.

Thus, we read in Vayikra Rabbah: “Rabbi Eleazar son of Rabbi Menahem said: The Psalmist says, ‘And Thou makest them drink of the river of Thy Edens.’ ‘Edens’ is used in the plural. This signifies that every righteous man has a separate Eden to himself.” This is an allusion to the conception which each one has of the attributes of perfection in God, as we explained in the fifteenth chapter of this Book. It is called “Eden” because true sweetness, joy and delight are found in conception only. All the other agreeable things come to an end, and necessarily their enjoyment ends likewise. Moreover, an excess of those good things gives rise to harm. A person takes pleasure in food and drink. But if he eats and drinks to excess, he feels pain and nausea. The same thing applies to all the other corporeal pleasures. The only permanent delight and joy there is consists in the apprehension of spiritual things, especially if the thing is infinite. For the greater the understanding the greater the joy and the greater the delight, which never ceases. Now since the attributes of perfection in God are infinite, there are infinite conceptions, which are accompanied with infinite joy. This is the meaning of the biblical expression, “In Thy presence is fulness of joy.” The meaning is, a great number of joys, corresponding to the number of conceptions of Thee. And inasmuch as all the conceptions of God are infinite in excellence and sweetness, and are eternal, as we explained in chapter twenty-five of this Book, the Psalmist concludes, “In Thy right hand bliss for evermore.” And since a human being can not embrace the infinite in his knowledge, his perfection must consist in a partial conception of God, hence the Psalmist says: “Thou makest me to know the path of life.” He does not say derek (=way), but orah (= path), meaning one narrow path, to indicate that even one conception of the attributes of perfection contains a path and a way to eternal life, and as a person’s understanding of the attributes of perfection in God increases, his delight in eternal life increases likewise, and so does his joy and enjoyment.

From this we may get an idea of the great joy and delight which God has in the apprehension of His own essence, for He has an infinite number of perfections, and each one is infinite in worth. Therefore no other being can apprehend His essence, as the wise man said when they asked him if he knew the quiddity of God. His answer was, if I knew Him, I would be He. The meaning is, there is no one who apprehends His essence except God, though His existence is evident most plainly to all from His acts. Praise be to Him who surpasses us with His perfection; who is hidden from us despite His intense visibility, as the light of the sun and his agreeableness are hidden from those of weak sight. Their defective understanding does not prove His non-existence. The most that we can understand about God is that we can not understand Him, as the wise man said: The sum total of what we know of Thee is that we do not know Thee.

CHAPTER 31

If we reflect upon nature as a whole, we find that it consists of three parts, which can not be denied. First, the lower world, the world of the elements and of genesis and decay. Second, the world of the spheres. Third, the world of angels.

These three parts are absolutely different from each other. In the lower world, which is the world of genesis and destruction, we find that there is no individual permanence, but all the individuals come to an end. In the world of spheres, all the individuals are permanent as such and are not subject to decay, but they are corporeal and are affected with corporeal accidents. They have form and shape, they occupy space, they come under the category of quantity and are composed of parts.

These two divisions, though different, act and react upon each other. The motions of the spheres and their change of position produce motions and changes in the elements. Sometimes they cause the wet element to predominate, and sometimes the opposite, the dry; sometimes the cold, and sometimes the hot. This brings about a mixture of the elements, from which mixture are produced the various kinds of minerals. This mixture rises to a higher level, and a new and superior combination arises, assuming the forms of the various species of plants. The mixture rises still higher and is purified gradually until it is ready to receive the form of animal. These qualities emanate from the spheres not as dead bodies, but by reason of a certain power which they have to give life to composite things when the latter are prepared for it by the motions of the spheres. This power which gives life is called the soul of the sphere.

And inasmuch as we see that the spheres move continually in a circle, and yet every sphere has a different motion from every other—one moves east, one moves west; one moves rapidly, one moves slowly—we infer necessarily that every one of them has a cause outside of it other than its soul, which gives it its peculiar motion. This individual cause of each sphere is responsible for its individual motion. Those who give the spheres their individual motions are their movers, and these movers are called Separate Intelligences, because they are free from matter, as is explained in the science of physics. In the Bible they are called angels.

It follows therefore that there must be a third division, which is called the world of angels. This division, though absolutely different from the other two mentioned before, acts upon the world of the spheres, as we said before, by giving them a great variety of movements, one moving to the east, one to the west, one inclining to the north, one inclining to the south, and those which have the same general direction differing in the specific character of their motions. These different motions bring about the union and combination of the different parts of nature, and maintain order continually in the world of spheres and the world of genesis and decay. The necessary inference is that these three parts have one controlling power which combines and unites them together.

A comparison with animal life will make the matter clear. We find in animals three distinct powers, the nutritive soul in the liver, the vital soul in the heart and the sensitive soul in the brain. All these powers or souls are different from one another in their functions. The nutritive soul in the liver is similar to the world of genesis and decay, because there the food loses its original form and changes into the form of blood. It is different, however, from the vital soul in the heart. The vital soul in the heart is similar to the world of the spheres. For as the motions of the spheres cause life to flow to the whole lower world, the world of change and genesis and decay, and if the sphere were to cease its motion for one moment, the world would by natural law come to an end, so the motions of the heart cause life to flow to the entire body, and if the heart were to cease moving for a moment the animal would die. The sensitive soul in the brain is similar to the world of angels, for from it come the five senses and the other psychic powers, like the forming power, the power of imagination, and the incorporeal powers which can not be perceived by the senses, but can be apprehended only through the acts or functions which come from them, as the Separate Intelligences can be apprehended only through the acts which come from them.

Now just as these three powers in the body of the animal have one unifying power, called the power which controls the body, a power which binds all the parts and powers of the body together, and is called by physicians nature, so in the world as a whole there is one power which binds all the parts and powers of creation together and controls them.

I am not now intending to speak of the rational power which is in man alone, and by virtue of which man is called a microcosm, because he has an intellectual power which thinks and realizes the things in his intellect from their potential state by means of his will, as the world has an intellectual principle, which brings all things into existence by its great power and simple will, unlike the lower animals, which have no power acting with volition, which can do opposite things, but have only a natural power, as is explained in the De Anima. I am referring here to the power which controls the body of the animal in a general way only. Such a power exists in every animal, though some of them have more of it than others. Nevertheless we can prove from this power, as Maimonides says, the existence of a being which controls and binds together all the individual existences and their parts. From the rational power in man we infer that that being is an intellectual substance, acting with will, as there is in man an intellectual substance acting with will, else he would not have been given commands by God.

The only difference in this comparison between the powers of the body and those of nature as a whole is, that in the former every power acts upon the other power and is in turn acted upon by the latter. Thus, the heart gives the power of life to the liver and the other organs, and the liver in turn gives the nutritive power to the heart, while the brain gives sensation and motion to the heart and the liver, and takes from them life and nutrition. But in the world as a whole it is not so. The substance which exerts influence does not receive any influence from that upon which it acts. For the influence which is bestowed upon the lower beings by the higher is exerted by way of generosity and kindness and not because of any benefit to the giver.

All this matter, discussed in this chapter, of the division of existence into these three parts and the existence of a being who controlls all things, though absolutely distinct from them, was shown to Elijah in a nobler and more perfect way in the vision which he saw on Mount Horeb, when he was asked, “What doest thou here, Elijah?”, when he ran away from Jezebel and was grieved because she persecuted him. His answer was, “I have been very jealous for the Lord, the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant … and they seek my life to take it away.” Then he was told, “Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind.” This alludes to the power which controls the world of genesis and decay, which rends mountains and breaks in pieces rocks. The Bible says, “Before the Lord,” because God sees to it that the power does His will, for it is like an axe in the hands of the one who hews with it. The expression, “But God was not in the wind,” alludes to the fact that nature, which is the wind that rends mountains and breaks rocks, is not the power that controls the world of genesis and decay.

Then it continues, “And after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake.” This is an allusion to the world of the spheres, concerning which it is said, “And the Ofannim and the holy Hayyot raise themselves with great noise,” the spheres being called “holy Hayyot,” as Maimonides says in the third chapter of Part Three of the Guide. “But the Lord was not in the earthquake,” indicates that God is not the soul of the sphere, as the ancients thought.

He continues, “And after the earthquake a fire.” This alludes to the world of angels, which are called in the Bible fire, “The flaming fire Thy ministers.” The appellation fire is an allusion to the fact that as a man can not perceive the element fire with the sense of sight because the eye has no power over elemental fire, and yet we are aware of it through its functions or acts, so the angels are known through their acts, though the eye can not see them. For the very same reason the Bible compares God to fire, “For the Lord thy God is a devouring fire.” The meaning is, He is known from His acts, though He can not be perceived by the senses. This is why the Bible calls the world of angels in this vision fire.

Our Rabbis also call the angels fire. In the treatise Hagigah they say: “What is the meaning of hashmal? It stands for hayyot esh memalelot (= fiery hayyot speaking).” “Fiery hayyot” means, not perceptible by the senses, like fire. The “holy hayyot,” on the other hand, namely the spheres, which are perceptible by the senses, are not called “fiery hayyot.” The angels alone are called fiery hayyot. “Speaking” has reference to the fact that they are known from their acts, which is their speech. And to prevent the error of supposing that “fiery hayyot” refers to the spheres, and that the expression “speaking” is to be understood in the same way as, “The heavens declare the glory of God,” the author of the Talmud quotes a baraita, which explains the meaning of the word hashmal in another way, showing clearly that it alludes to the angels, as Rabbi Judah said. The difference is only in the interpretation.

The baraita says, “At times they are silent, and at times they speak. When speech comes from the mouth of God, they are silent, and when there is no speech coming from the mouth of God, they speak.” The baraita means to explain a very subtle philosophical idea. The effect understands in a manner its cause and it also understands its own essence. As a result of the conception it has of its cause, which is the more noble of the two, an angel emanates from it, i. e. a Separate Intelligence. As a result of the conception it has of itself, a sphere emanates from it, as was explained in the eleventh chapter of this Book. This is the meaning of the expression in the baraita, “When speech comes from the mouth of God, they are silent.” This refers to the fact that the conception which the first effect, let us say, forms of God results in the emanation of a Separate Intelligence which is not perceptible by the senses. This is the meaning of the expression, “they are silent.” “And when speech does not come from the mouth of God, they speak.” This refers to the fact that the conception which the effect forms of its own essence, causes the emanation of a sphere which is perceptible to the senses. “They speak,” means the same thing as, “The heavens declare the glory of God.” It is clear therefore that the Rabbis call the Intelligences, “fiery hayyot.” In many passages the Rabbis call them, “fiery seraphim.”

The meaning of the expression, “The Lord was not in the fire,” is that God’s existence is different from that of the angels. The angels are effects and possible existents, whereas God is a cause and a necessary existent. And to indicate that God’s quiddity is absolutely unknown, and absolutely simple, in a manner inconceivable, the text says in the sequel, “And after the fire a still small voice,” pointing to the impossibility of understanding God’s quiddity, so much so that the only way to speak of Him or of the attributes of His perfection is by way of negation, which is the still, small voice. The literal meaning of the biblical expression is, “a voice of fine silence,” fine silence being an allusion to the subtle distinction to be observed in the understanding of the various negative attributes predicated of God, as we explained in the preceding chapter.

In the same vision Elijah was told, “Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus; and when thou comest, thou shalt anoint Hazael to be king over Aram; and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-Meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.” In these words it was made clear to him that the three worlds mentioned before are governed by God. In the world of genesis and decay, where it is the nature of one animal to overpower another animal or human being and put him to death, like Hazael, who prevailed over the king of Aram and slew him, this is not an accident, but the result of God’s providence, rewarding and punishing individuals and groups and exercising judgment through them over those who transgress His will, as is said, “And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay.” 

The expression, “And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel,” indicates that divine providence stands above the prognostication of the constellations, and nullifies their influence in favor of God’s will and purpose. The constellations sometimes indicate prosperity to the wicked and misfortune to the righteous. But Jehu killed all the wicked men who worshipped Baal and saved all the righteous men who worshipped God, indicating that the judgment in this case was due to divine providence and not to the influence of the stars. Then the text says, “And Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-Meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.” This indicates that the prophetic inspiration which the prophets get from the world of angels, comes only through the will and command of God.

To sum up, then, we say that in this great vision Elijah was informed of the division of existence into the three worlds, the world of genesis and decay, the world of spheres and the world of angels. Also that there is one Being over them who binds together all the parts of nature, and controls them, and watches over their effects in the lower world, realizing His purpose and will. This is God, who is absolutely different from them. His quiddity is absolutely unknown, and He can be described only in negative attributes, which are called a still, small voice, for the reason we gave before. This is the purpose of this chapter.

And so we close the Second Book, which deals with the first principle, the existence of God, and the derivative dogmas derived from it. Praise be to God, who is One without a second, He is first and He is last, and beside Him there is no God.

