The SCHIFF LIBRARY of JEWISH CLASSICS

This Series of JEWISH CLASSICS was made possible through a fund given to the Jewish Publication Society of America by Jacob H. Schiff, and it is named in his honor, the Schiff Library of JEWISH CLASSICS.

SEFER HA-‘IKKARIM

BOOK OF PRINCIPLES

BY

JOSEPH ALBO

CRITICALLY EDITED ON THE BASIS OF MANUSCRIPTS AND OLD EDITIONS AND PROVIDED WITH A TRANSLATION AND NOTES

BY

ISAAC HUSIK, LL.B., M.A., Ph.D.

Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania

VOLUME THREE

PHILADELPHIA

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

5706–1946

Copyright, 1930, by

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

Second Impression, 1946

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher: except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

PRESS OF THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA.

CONTENTS

PAGE

Facsimile Frontispiece

Book Three, Text and Translation 1

BOOK THREE

Treating of the second principle, which is revelation of the Torah. Inasmuch as the derivative dogmas depending upon this principle are, as we said in the First Book, the knowledge of God, prophecy, and the genuineness of the messenger, and since God’s knowledge of the existing things of the lower world necessarily comes before all other dogmas, for if God does not know the existing things of the lower world, neither prophecy nor message can come from Him, would be appropriate to speak first of the knowledge of God. But inasmuch as God’s knowledge of the lower existences must be compatible with the nature of the contingent, which depends upon freedom of choice, we found it proper to postpone treatment of God’s knowledge until the Fourth Book, when we shall discuss the problem of freedom. We will therefore first speak of the principle of revelation of the Torah, and then we will explain the dogmas depending upon it, prophecy and the genuineness of the messenger.

CHAPTER 1

Man, being equable in temperament and more capable of thought and reflection than the other animals, is a nobler and more perfect object of creation than they. The equableness of his temperament is evident from the fact that he is equally affected by the contrary qualities, while his ability to think and reflect is shown in his invention of the arts and sciences.

We must not say that the animal species are more perfect in their organization than man because they require no shade or shelter from the heat and the storm, nor preparation of the food they need, which nature provides ready for their use. Moreover they have certain instincts, like the beasts and birds of prey, which they use in hunting their prey to sustain life. Among the ancients there was one who maintained this very thing. He said that man is an inferior creation in comparison with the other animals. For the latter do not need other animals to ride on in order to go from place to place, being more swift of movement than man. Similarly they do not have to prepare weapons with which to fight against their enemies, for they are provided with natural weapons, the ox has horns, the boar has tusks, the porcupine has quills, the turtle has a shell, and so on. Nor do they need to make themselves any garments, for their garments too are given them by nature, and they do not have to prepare their food, for they use it as found in nature; whereas man is devoid of all these things. For he requires garments to cover his body, and buildings to serve as shelter and protection against the wind and rain. His food must be subjected to many processes of preparation before it is fit for his nourishment, and many other things of this sort, as is found in the fourteenth book of the treatise On Animals.

But on reflection we shall find this idea quite erroneous. If we consider the various forms as they exist in their matters in the genesis of the lower forms of existing things, we find that they form an ascending series in regard to quality. The later form is superior to the prior one, as though the matter in receiving forms proceeds from imperfection to perfection, first receiving a lower form and then a higher form, and thus gradually ascending from an inferior grade of existence to a more perfect one. Thus matter first receives the forms of the elements, then it rises to the stage of minerals, to which the elements stand in the relation of matter. Then it attains to the grade of plants to which minerals bear the relation of matter. Then it ascends to the degree of animals, to which plants are related as matter, and then it rises to the grade of man, animals being in the position of matter. Here the process comes to an end. As in a given motion, every part of the motion is for the sake of the part which comes after, so it seems, in the genetic process of the lower forms of existence, that every part is for the sake of the part that comes after. And as a given motion ends up with a result which is the final cause of all the partial motions, so the genetic process rises gradually until it attains finally to the human form, where it stops, because this is the end of all the lower genetic processes.

That matter always moves from a less perfect to a more perfect form of existence, as the character of the composition rises in quality, is proved by the coral, which is intermediate, so to speak, between mineral and plant; by the marine sponge, which has only the sense of touch, and is intermediate as it were between plant and animal; and by the ape, which stands midway between the animal species and man, where the process stops. It follows necessarily, therefore, that man, who is the end of all the lower creatures, is nobler and more perfect than all, since in him are combined all the earlier forms, which stand to him in the relation of matter. Therefore he is greater than all the others, and subdues all the animals and rules them, because he has the power of comprehending the general, whereas the lower animals perceive only the particular, having no power to comprehend the universal. Therefore they have particular organs and particular instincts corresponding to their perception of the particular. Thus, they have particular organs to fight with in a specific way, the boar with his tusks, the ox with his horns, the porcupine with his quills, the turtle using his shell as a protection. But man who is the end of all the lower existences, and in whom are combined all the particular perfections of the other animals, is endowed with general comprehension and intelligence. He comprehends all that the other animals do, and besides understands the general and not merely a particular thing. Therefore his organs are general, like the hands which are potentially every kind of weapon to fight against all kinds of animals in all possible ways and to subdue them. The spear takes the place of horns, the sword represents the tusks of the boar, the shield or the coat of mail protects him as the shell protects the turtle. All these weapons and arms are not born with the human being as is the case with the animals, so that he might not have to carry a heavy burden with him all the time.

Therefore the Creator in forming man used His wisdom in giving him organs general in their utility, which are potentially all kinds of weapons, and an intellect capable of comprehending generalities rather than particulars, that he may be able to understand all that the animals perceive in the way of particulars, and utilize the weapons above mentioned in different ways when he needs them and lay them aside when he does not need them, so that they may not be a burden to him. Similarly man’s garments are not attached to his body, so that he may use such clothes as he needs in winter and take them off in summer that they may not be a burden, as their wool is to lambs, who have to be sheared. Intelligence and understanding is given to man to build strong buildings where he can fortify himself against the violence of wrong-doers instead of holes of the earth and of the rocks used by the animals.

By means of his general intellect he can comprehend all the particular instincts of the animals and their particular perceptions and characteristics, as is said in Job, “Who teacheth us through the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wise through the fowls of heaven.” The meaning is not that the beasts and the fowls are wiser and more intelligent than the human species, and that the latter must learn from them, for experience belies this, seeing that man rules and manages them. The meaning is that man with his general intelligence and instruments learns from all the animals all their particular instincts and perceptions, combines them all and makes them general. So we find in the Talmud: “Said R. Hiyya, The verse, ‘He teacheth us through the beasts of the earth,’ refers to the mule which urinates kneeling, while the verse, ‘And maketh us wise through the fowls of heaven,’ alludes to the cock, who pets his consort before copulation. Said R. Johanan, If the Torah had not been given to Israel, we should learn modesty from the cat, prohibition of robbery from the ant, and the wrongfulness of incest from the dove.” This can be explained in the way expressed above, namely that the particular characteristics of the animals man should learn with his intellect, which combines them and makes them general. In the same way, as, on account of his intellect and organs he is just as capable as though he were provided by nature with all instruments of war and with garments corresponding to the wool of sheep, and is able to prepare his food by combining articles of diet in a way that is appropriate and agreeable and wholesome for his nature and temperament, so he should learn all the particular good characteristics of the various animals and combine them, and thus invent the arts and the sciences.

This is the meaning of “Perek Shirah,” concerning which the Rabbis say, “Whoever says Perek Shirah every day is assured of a share in the hereafter.” “To say,” means not merely to repeat by rote, but to understand with the mind, as in the expression, “I said in my heart.” The meaning is that one should consider the fact that every visible creature has something to teach us, a good quality, or a moral lesson, or some wise inference. To quote an example from Perek Shirah, “What do the heavens say? ‘The heavens declare the glory of God, etc.’ ” The word “say” that is used throughout Perek Shirah has the same meaning as “signify,” like the talmudic expression, “This says,” meaning, this signifies. The meaning is that from the motion of the heavens we may infer that there is a Being who moves them without being Himself in motion, and that He is omnipotent, seeing that He moves such tremendous bodies, that is, He is God. This is a philosophic inference, as is explained in the proper place.

We also read there, “What do the dogs say? ‘Come, let us bow down and bend the knee; Let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.’ ” The meaning is that from the dog, who knows his master or any one who treats him well, and is obedient, loyal and grateful to him as far as lies in his power, we may learn the moral lesson of thanking God for the good He has done us in providing us with food; of submission and obedience as far as lies in our power, even as He does good also to those who are guilty; and we should not be ungrateful.

Another example is, “What does the ant say? ‘Who giveth food to all flesh, for His mercy endureth forever.’ ” The meaning is that if one reflects upon the ant, which is a tiny creature and yet prepares her food in the summer and gathers it in the harvest, he will learn the quality of industry, and will understand that God gives food to all flesh and prepares sustenance for all the creatures that He has created in that He has endowed each one with the instinct of seeking its food at the proper time and from the proper source. Man, therefore, who is endowed with knowledge and understanding, must make efforts to obtain food and not to be idle. For the blessing of God makes rich those who prepare themselves to receive it, as the Rabbis say in commenting on the biblical expression, “In order that the Lord, thy God may bless thee.” To prevent the inference that God’s blessing comes to the idle, the sequel reads, “In all the work of thy hand which thou doest.”

But a man might say: inasmuch as the matter depends upon my own efforts, I will steal and rob and plunder as I find opportunity. To counter this they say, we learn the wrongfulness of robbery from the ant, which never steals or robs or takes anything that belongs to another. The experiment has often been tried to take a grain of wheat from one of them and put it in front of the others. When they approach it they know by the smell that it belongs to another ant and pass it by, refusing to take what does not belong to them. This is what Solomon meant when he said: “Go to the ant, thou sluggard: Consider her ways, and be wise; which having no chief, overseer, or ruler, …” i. e. none to prohibit robbery, yet keeps away from it and takes pain to prepare her food in summer without robbery.

We read in the same place, “What does the dove say? ‘O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock …’ ” The meaning is that Israel is compared to a dove, so that they may learn her ways, as we read in Midrash Hazit: The dove is modest, and so is Israel. The dove never changes her mate after she knows him, and similarly Israel never changed their God from the time that they knew Him. This is similar to the passage mentioned before, where it is said that we can learn to reject incest from the dove. In Midrash Hazit there are many similarities expressed between Israel and the dove.

We also find in Perek Shirah, “What does the apple say? ‘As an apple-tree among the trees of the wood so is my beloved among the sons. Under its shadow I delighted to sit, and its fruit was sweet to my taste.’ ” The meaning is that God is compared to the apple-tree, as is said in Midrash Hazit. An apple-tree does not give as much shade as other trees, and yet one desires to sit in that small shade, because of the expectation of the fruit, which is so good and sweet smelling and agreeable to the taste. In the same way though a person who serves God may meet with trouble and suffering and find no prosperity in this world as long as he “dwells in the covert of the Most High and abides in the shadow of the Almighty,” nevertheless he should not abandon his innocence, because of the expectation of future reward, which is so sweet and agreeable to those that know it. We also find in Midrash Hazit, “As all run away from the apple-tree in the hot season because it has no shade, so the gentile nations refused to dwell in God’s shadow at the time when the Torah was revealed. Was Israel guilty of the same act? No! ‘Under its shadow I delighted to sit.’ ” In this way should the entire Perek Shirah be interpreted. The teaching of the whole composition is that man can learn a lesson from all existing things which he perceives with his senses, a lesson concerning conduct. For the human intellect is general and must combine in it all the particulars observable in nature. It is clear therefore that he is more noble and more perfect than the other animals because he combines all particulars in a way no other animal does, and because he rules over them by his wisdom and subjects them to himself, as the Bible says, “Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet.”

CHAPTER 2

Every natural existent has in its specific form a certain property and purpose which distinguish it from other species. This purpose which exists in every species is the cause which determines its existence in that specific form. Man is also a natural existent, being the noblest and most perfect of them, as we have explained. He must therefore also have a proper purpose which is related to his specific form. It can not reside in the faculties of nutrition and sensation, for in that case the perfection and purpose of the ass and the pig would be the same as that of man. It is clear therefore that the perfection of man must consist in something which he has over and above the other animals.

Now we see that man has a potentiality and capacity of apprehending concepts, discovering sciences and bringing them from potentiality to actuality, more than all the other animals. Therefore human perfection must depend upon this intellectual power. And this power being divided into theoretical and practical, human perfection must depend upon the theoretical part rather than upon the practical, for the former bears closer relation to man’s nature.

We can not say that the purpose of the human intellect is exclusively practical, to enable man to invent arts and trades. For it is made clear in the Treatise on Animals, composed by the Brethren of Purity, that as a general rule the lower animals are more adept in practical skill than man. Moreover if this were the case, then since the purpose is more important than that which comes before the purpose, the practical arts would be more noble than the speculative, and those speculative arts which lead to no practical result at all would be vain and of no value whatever. But this is contradicted by our nature and universal opinion. For all agree that the theoretical arts are superior to the practical. Again, the joy we feel in a thing relates to the purpose, and to that which is near to the purpose more so than to that which is far from it. But we find that the satisfaction and joy derived from a little theoretical knowledge are infinitely greater than all the satisfaction derived from practice. This proves that the real purpose of man depends upon the theoretical part of the intellectual power.

This is why we find that man has a stronger desire for the sensibilia of sight and hearing than for those of smell and taste. Nature has put in us a stronger desire for the former because we are more apt through them to acquire theoretical knowledge, upon which human perfection depends. The other sensibilia, on the other hand, bear a closer relation to the corporeal sensations and desires, which are far away from the specific perfection of man. Man has them only for the maintenance of his body, like the other animals. Now as every existent has a greater desire for that which has a bearing on his specific form and proper purpose, he has also a strong desire for the powers and instruments which lead to that purpose. Therefore man has a greater desire for these two sensibilia than for the others, because they play a greater part in leading man to his purpose than the others.

And this is the reason why the Bible ascribes to God the formation of these two senses, rather than the others. Solomon says, “The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, The Lord hath made even both of them.” And since instruction which is imparted by a teacher is more permanent than that which is not so acquired, the author of Proverbs explains in another verse that hearing is superior to sight, “The ear that hearkeneth to the reproof of life abideth among the wise.” In allusion to the superiority of these two senses over the others because they are instrumental in man’s acquisition of perfection, Solomon says in the Song of Songs, “O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the covert of the cliff, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.” In poetic figure he speaks to his own soul, which he pictures as a dove, and speaks of her as being in the clefts of the rock, in the coverts of the cliff, alluding to the fact that the soul is hidden in the body, its seat not being known. The word countenance in the above passage is expressed in the Hebrew by the plural to indicate two things, letters in a book, and the sensibilia, both of which are necessary means of acquiring knowledge, and both of them are comely. Then he says, “Let me hear thy voice,” meaning to say that though the voice of the dove is not sweet, the voice of this one is sweet, meaning the voice through which the soul learns concepts from the teacher; that voice, he says, is very sweet. Therefore he says, Let me hear thy voice, that which thou hast received from thy teacher, for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is comely. For through these two senses man’s capacities are realized in actu, and he attains his perfection if he uses them properly.

But if he directs them to the world’s vanities, he is as though he were deaf and blind. Thus, the prophet calls those who occupy themselves with the vanities of the world, deaf and blind, “Hear, ye deaf, and look, ye blind, that ye may see.” The reason is, because they do not employ their senses properly, i.e. to actualize their potential perfections, which is the only way by which man can realize his purpose.

In explanation of this we must say that there are two kinds of perfection, a first and a last. The first is that perfection which a thing has as soon as it comes into existence, the perfection of existence. The other is the perfection which a thing has not solely by existing. It is only potential in the existing thing, which attains that perfection when its potentialities are actualized. This is called the perfection of purpose. This is the perfection that is intended for man. Take a chair, for example. Its first perfection is attained as soon as it comes into existence, as soon as its manufacture is completed. The last perfection of the chair, the perfection of purpose, is not attained until it is sat on. In the lower animals the only perfection that is expected of them is the perfection of existence. Hence in speaking of their formation, the Bible says, “And God saw that it was good,” to indicate that as soon as they come into existence, the good of which they are capable is attained and completed, and no other good is expected of them. But in the account of the formation of man there is no statement “that it is good,” which seems strange. For it would seem that the formation of man should be characterized as good just like the formation of animals. The reason for the omission is in order to indicate that the good that is intended in the creation of man is not the perfection of existence merely, as in the other animals, but another nobler perfection, which can be attained only when he has actualized his potentialities. But as long as his intellect does not actualize its potentialities, the perfection intended, namely the perfection of purpose, is not attained.

This is the meaning of Solomon’s statement, “A good name is better than precious oil; and the day of death than the day of one’s birth.” The meaning is, a good name acquired by good qualities is better than good oil, for a good name is heard much farther away than extends the odor of good oil. But a good name is not an essential and ultimate good of the soul. Therefore the day of death, when a man has attained his complete knowledge, is better than the day of his birth; for on the day of death he has already actualized the potentialities of his intellect, which is not the case on the day of his birth, for then the perfection of the soul has only potential existence, though the perfection of the body is actual.

The difference between man and animals in the purpose of their creation is alluded to also in variation of expression. Thus in the account of the formation of animals, we find the expressions, “after its kind,” “after their kind,” “And God made the beast of the earth after its kind, and the cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the ground after its kind,” to indicate that in animals there is no difference between the purpose of one species and that of another. Nor is there a difference between the creation of the male and that of the female. There is one general purpose including them all, and that is the perpetuation of the species, which is the perfection of existence. This is the same for all species and for male and female, for the male has no superiority in this matter over the female. But in the case of man, since the purpose of his creation is not merely the perpetuation of the species, but also the perpetuation of the individual, the expression “after his kind” is not mentioned, and the female was not created at the same time as the male, to indicate the great difference between the two kinds of creation (man and animal). The purpose in the latter is perpetuation of the species, wherein male and female are equal. The purpose of the former is perpetuation of the individual, in which the female is not equal to the male, but was created to help him that he might attain the intended perfection, which was there potentially, at the time of creation, and must be brought into actuality.

As this perfection is in man potentially, and potential existence stands midway, as it were, between existence and non-existence, the Bible calls it nothing. Thus Solomon says, “The pre-eminence of man above the beast is nothing; for all is vanity.” The meaning is, the pre-eminence of man above the beast is something whose existence is weak. If the passage read: “There is no pre-eminence of man over the beast,” it would have the meaning of a purely negative proposition. But since he says: “The pre-eminence of man above the beast is nothing,” the judgment is affirmative, equivalent to the statement that man has pre-eminence over the beast, but this pre-eminence is nothing, i. e. something whose existence is weak, because it is mere potentiality. The student of logic will understand that this judgment has the value of an affirmative proposition rather than a negative. In reference to this power Job said, “But wisdom shall arise from nothing.” The meaning is that wisdom comes from a potentiality residing in man, which is called “nothing” (ayin). Man’s final perfection is attained when it becomes actual, not before. And the manner in which this power can attain wisdom is by answering the question, “What is it?” in defining things. Hence he says in the sequel, “And ‘what’ is the place of understanding.”

CHAPTER 3

Everything that is potential must pass from potentiality to actuality. And if it does not, then its potential existence is vain, and as though it were not at all. It is clear, therefore, that if man’s ultimate perfection and purpose which, as we said, is potential were not realized, the existence of the human species would be vain, for man would have no pre-eminence over the other animal species. We must therefore explain what this purpose is, that man may endeavor to attain it.

According to the opinion of the philosophers the ultimate purpose is the attainment of intellectual knowledge (lit. intelligibles). They say also that the intellect that is acquired by means of it (lit. them) survives after death. This takes place when the intellect, the cognizing subject, and the intelligible object are consolidated into one substance and are identified with the intelligibles in the Active Intellect. This, they say, is the ultimate purpose of man and the happiness of his soul. They also maintain that except in this way we can not conceive of any survival of the soul, and therefore the existence of the human species would be vain, the human species would have no pre-eminence over the animal, and the perfection of the species of which we spoke in the preceding chapter would be vain. This is the opinion of the philosophers concerning human perfection. It is also the opinion of many Jewish theologians, as stated in their works. They adopted this opinion because they thought that it is the opinion of the Bible. For Moses says, “That I may know Thee in order that I may find favour in Thine eyes.” From this, they say, it seems that only he who knows finds favor in God’s sight, and no one else. But this is not necessarily implied in the text, which only signifies that he who knows stands on a higher plane than the one who does not know, but nothing else. For the expression, “that I may know Thee,” refers to God, and no one can know God outside of Himself. We must therefore examine this question briefly, enough to give the believer an idea, as is our purpose in this work.

If we examine this opinion we shall find that it is absurd in itself and in disagreement with the divine Torah. For the philosophers can not by any means avoid the conclusion that the existence of man is vain, thus meeting with the same difficulty which they are endeavoring to escape. The purpose is either one that can be attained or one that can not be attained. If it can not be attained, then the existence of the human species is vain and man has no pre-eminence over the ass and the pig. And if it can be attained, it is clear that neither all nor the majority of mankind can attain it, but only one in a thousand, or one in a generation, like Socrates or Plato. But the other persons who have not as much knowledge as they, and have not reached their high plane, will be, in their opinion, in the position of the ass and the pig, since, according to their opinion, they have not attained the human purpose. The existence of all would therefore be vain except the one man in his generation. And if it happens that there is a generation without a man like Socrates, for example, the existence of the whole species at that time would be vain. Thus we see that they are subject to the same objection which they endeavor to avoid. For according to this theory it would follow that all God’s work at certain times and the greater part of His work at all times never attains or can, by any possibility, attain its purpose. This is something that can not be charged to any perfect agent, how much less to the Cause of Causes, who is far above any such limitation.

Moreover, even according to their opinion, those ideas which the wise man or the unique one in his generation apprehends, may not lead him to his human purpose and perfection. For knowledge concerning the elements and objects of nature does not confer essential perfection upon the soul even according to the opinion of the philosophers. Certainly this is true of mathematical knowledge. For what perfection can the soul attain by knowing that the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, or that the external angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the two opposite internal angles, or that when you add the side of an inscribed decagon to the side of an inscribed hexagon, the resulting line is divided into a mean proportional and two extremes? This knowledge gives perfection to the soul only so far as it is an introduction and a means to the understanding of the heavenly objects and the causes upon which the natural objects depend, but it does not of itself give perfection to the soul. Therefore the soul can not acquire eternity from such knowledge.

David calls attention to this fact in the nineteenth Psalm. The statement is there made that human speculation can make inferences from the motions of the spheres because we see that the heavens move continuously. As every moving thing requires a mover, we infer the existence of God who moves them. And being enormous bodies, they point to the mighty force of their mover, thus indicating His glory and power. This is the meaning of the expression, “the glory of El (God),” the word El indicating power in Hebrew, as in the expression, “Yesh le-el yadi,” which denotes power. Similarly the firmament, i. e., that part of the atmosphere in which rain and snow and hail and thunder and lightning originate, also points to the great power of God. It is possible also that the word firmament alludes to the diurnal sphere, which Ezekiel also calls firmament, as in the statement, “And over the heads of the living creatures there was the likeness of a firmament like the color of the terrible ice, stretched forth over their heads above.” The Psalm continues to describe how the heavens and the firmament declare the glory of God and the work of His hands, by saying, “Day unto day uttereth speech, etc.” The meaning is that they declare the glory of God through the diurnal motions which are visible every day and the changes by which one day differs from another. And similarly, “Night unto night revealeth knowledge”. For in reality there is no ‘speech,’ that is a proposition or judgment, such as, “the world had an origin in time,” nor ‘words,’ such as the component words of the proposition mentioned, viz. “world,” “origin,” etc. Nor is there even the ‘voice’ or sound of a single letter, for “their voice is not heard.” The heavens have not any of these, but “Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world”, through their visible motions, through the sun for whom “He hath set a tent” in the heavens, and through whom are known day and night, and through the other celestial motions which cause the genesis of existing things in the lower world, thus pointing to God’s handiwork. Further in the same Psalm we read, “which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber,” the meaning of which is that the sun is forced in its diurnal motion by the diurnal sphere like a bridegroom who does not desire to leave his chamber but is forced to, as the prophet says, “Let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the bride out of her pavilion.” And despite this fact the sun “rejoiceth as a strong man to run his course,” in order to do the will of his Maker. In explanation of the statement that the sun is forced in his diurnal motion, he refers to the other motion of the sun which is proper to him, “His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it,” i. e. to the north and to the south. For the sun does not rise to-day in the same place where he rose yesterday, and in this way he warms now the south now the north, “And there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” This is the knowledge that may be derived from the heavens and their motions. But it is not this that gives perfection to the soul, enabling it to cleave to the higher beings and return to the place of its origin. “The Law of the Lord,” alone, “is perfect,” and adequate to bring the soul back to its original home, “The law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul.” In the sequel the Psalm describes the pre-eminence of the divine law over other laws, as was explained in the eighth chapter of the First Book.

From all this it is clear that knowledge of the motions of the spheres and of the natural phenomena that take place in the firmament of heaven does not confer perfection upon the soul. But if the soul is to attain perfection, it can come only from a knowledge of divine things. But this can not be unless the knowledge is true, i. e. unless what is in the soul is in agreement with that which is outside of the soul. Then only can the soul unite with the Active Intellect. But this union can take place only if there is a complete agreement. But this is impossible, for it is inconceivable that there be one so wise that his ideas should agree in every way with the ideas in the Active Intellect. This is the reason why some philosophers deny the immortality of the soul altogether, because that which man knows of divine things can not be absolutely true and in complete agreement with the ideas of the Active Intellect. For the soul’s knowledge of things abstracted from their matter is mere surmise and conjecture, and it may be that the reality is quite different from the idea. To give an illustration, there is a difference of opinion between the ancient philosophers and the modern, whether the first mover is an effect of the First Cause or not. Ibn Sina, Alfarabi and R. Moses ha-Lavi are of the opinion that the first mover is an effect of the First Cause, whereas Ibn Roshd maintains that the First Cause is the immediate mover of the sphere, and attributes this opinion to Aristotle. Now if Ibn Sina is correct, then Aristotle did not have the true opinion concerning this question, which is the most important of questions concerning divine things, but entertained a theory which is different from the truth. If so, then the entire existence of man from the time of Aristotle to that of Ibn Sina was in vain, since their opinion concerning the most important question was different from the truth. Clearly, then, the philosophers are subject to the objection which they endeavored to avoid.

Moreover, even if we grant that the perfection of man is dependent upon a knowledge of ideas, and that this knowledge may be acquired by the whole human race or the greater part of it, it can not be denied that there is a difference between one person and another, for it is a matter of experience. This being the case, I should like to know what would happen when Reuben has certain ideas, and Simeon has one idea more than Reuben. What difference would there be between them when they are both identified with the Active Intellect? And if it is maintained that no one can be identified with the Active Intellect unless he has all the ideas of the latter and the two become one, no man has ever attained this stage. And therefore this kind of immortality becomes null and void, a species of immortality invented by men wise in their own eyes and following the desires of their evil heart, who dive in deep waters and bring up a potsherd.

David alluded to this when he said, “I hate them that are of a double mind; but Thy law do I love.” The meaning is, I hate philosophical ideas, but I love Thy law, for through it man attains perfection of soul, embracing the entire species or the greater part of it. For the purpose of a given species must be realized in the whole species or in the greater part thereof. For example, the power of scammonia to pass red gall or the power of rhubarb to purify the bad mixture in the liver must apply to every individual in the species, whether he be strong or weak. It is impossible that it should not apply to the whole species or to the greater part thereof, for in that case the respective definitions would not be applicable to scammonia and rhubarb. It is clear, therefore, that all individuals to whom the definition of man applies or a majority of them should be able to realize the purpose of man, unless it be hindered through their own evil choice. If not at all times, this should be possible most of the time, else the existence of the human species is in vain. But it is absurd to suppose that there exists a species with a specific form which does not realize the function and purpose which it ought to realize. Hence Aristotle says that there must come a time when all men will pursue the truth and endeavor to know God as far as it is possible for man. He says this because he thought that otherwise the existence of the human species would be in vain. Now since the acquisition of knowledge in the manner explained is impossible for all men, we must explain what is the method by which human perfection, embracing the whole or a greater part of the species, may be obtained by the whole species or by the greater part thereof.

CHAPTER 4

Every existing thing, in accordance with its natural capacity, can easily acquire its appropriate quality and perfection, no matter to what species the thing belongs. This observation is clear if we examine the various kinds of perfection peculiar to the human species.

We observe that individuals properly formed and of strong constitution acquire good health without effort or work. Health is always theirs. There are others who have good health as an intimate quality, but they must do something, engage in exercise or take walks, to maintain their health. There are others again of whose constitution health is not so intimate a quality, and who must take great pains and make special efforts to maintain their health, but if they try hard, they achieve perfect health. There are others again whose constitution is so poor that they may try ever so hard and yet can not acquire perfect health, but with slight effort they acquire something like health, i. e. they prevent their illness from increasing. The same thing applies to wisdom or wealth. Some acquire wisdom or wealth with little effort, some only after great toil, some can not acquire it with all the labor in the world, but only a certain degree of wisdom or wealth.

The same thing holds of every thing in relation to its appropriate perfection. The First Cause, being sufficient in itself for maintaining in actu its own proper perfection, needs no act of its own or of another to acquire any perfection. The Separate Intelligences, being free from matter, always have the perfection which is proper to them, and need no act of their own to acquire their perfection, except the act of causing others to move, viz. the spheres. The spheres, on the other hand, though they have intelligent souls, as all wise men agree, yet since they have matter, can not acquire the perfection appropriate to their nature except by doing something in their own person, namely move. The act of motion confers upon their intellectual soul its perfection. For as the soul resides in a body it requires a corporeal act to attain the perfection appropriate to its nature. And yet the spheres differ from one another in this act. The noblest and most perfect of the spheres, the diurnal sphere, needs only one simple act to attain the perfection appropriate to its nature, namely the diurnal motion, which is one simple motion. The sphere of the fixed stars, being further away from nobility and perfection than the diurnal sphere, must have two motions, the diurnal motion and its own proper motion. Of the other spheres, every one needs more acts to attain its proper perfection according as it is farther from nobility. This is why the spheres have different motions, one having more motions than another according as it is farther from the attainment of its perfection. Thus we find that some of the planets and especially the moon have many different motions. For by reason of the moon’s distance from nobility it needs more acts than the other spheres, so that through the many motions the moon may acquire the perfection appropriate to its nature. The Philosopher agrees with this view in the third Summa of the second book of the treatise. De Caelo et Mundo.

This shows that no material being can attain the perfection appropriate to its nature except by doing corporeal acts which are completed by the body. Therefore the spheres must move in order that they may attain the perfection which is appropriate to their souls, since they are powers residing in bodies. It follows also that man who is a material being and whose matter is thicker and coarser than the matter of the spheres, must necessarily have more activities than the spheres, in order that by the multiplicity of acts he may attain the perfection appropriate to his nature, viz. the perfection of his intellectual soul. For if it were possible for man to attain this through intellectual contemplation alone without any practical activity, the spheres could accomplish this even more easily and would not have to move and do corporeal acts to acquire perfection. The fact is, however, that no material being can acquire any perfection without a corporeal act.

As for the irrational animals, they are far removed from the degree of the beings endowed with souls, and can not, by reason of their nature, attain individual immortality because they are devoid of reason. They were given, therefore, a mode of immortality which bears some similarity to the immortality of the other beings who have souls, namely immortality of the species. This immortality can be attained through one act or a few, because this perfection is far from the perfection of the other beings, who are endowed with souls, viz. individual immortality. But in the case of man, since he has the capacity of individual immortality by reason of his rational soul, like the spheres, but is far removed from the degree of the latter, he was given a great variety of acts, through which he may correct his deficiencies and attain the same kind of degree which the spheres attain with one or a few acts.

It is clear that not all acts give perfection to the soul, but only those which are proper. Moreover those acts do not give perfection to the soul in so far as they are purely corporeal. For in that case all corporeal beings endowed with an animal soul would attain that perfection. On the other hand, man, being a material being, can not attain human perfection through intellectual contemplation alone without practical activity, as we explained in reference to the spheres that, being possessed of matter, they must have a corporeal form of activity, such as motion, through which activity they may attain the spiritual perfection appropriate to their nature.

It follows therefore that the thing which gives perfection to a being having matter as well as an intellectual soul, must be something composed of a corporeal activity and an intellectual contemplation. The practical activity does not give perfection by virtue of its being corporeal merely, but by reason of the intellectual comprehension which is involved in the act, as we have explained. The act which is done in such a way, namely that it is a composite of a corporeal act and an intellectual conception, is the one that gives perfection to the soul. These are the activities we mentioned before, which follow man’s rational form and issue from it, not the mere understanding of intellectual conceptions, as those who follow the Philosopher think.

CHAPTER 5

We spoke of intellectual conception as giving perfection to the soul when combined with practical activity. This intellectual conception does not mean the understanding of intellectual concepts, but the intention to serve God as the purpose of doing the physical act. In other words, he must do whatever he does with the intention of pleasing God and not for his own pleasure or any other purpose.

We can take an example concerning this from the spheres. They have bodies and rational souls like man, and attain their perfection by continuous motion in order to carry out the will of God who commanded them to move in order to maintain the natural universe. The Psalmist makes this clear when he speaks of the duty of the creatures to praise God for the kindness He has bestowed upon them. He begins with the soul of man, “Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.” Then, speaking of the stars and the constellations, he says, “Bless the Lord, all ye His hosts, Ye ministers of His, that do His pleasure.” The meaning is that the sole purpose of their motions is to do God’s will, and nothing else. This is the most perfect service any creature can give to God. For even in reference to the Separate Intelligences the Bible makes it clear that in moving the spheres their only purpose is to carry out God’s decree, who commanded them to cause those motions, and nothing else, as we read, “Bless the Lord, ye angels of His, ye mighty in strength, that fulfil His word, Hearkening unto the voice of His word.” He calls the angels, who are the Separate Intelligences, “mighty in strength,” because they move the spheres continually with great force. Then he adds that in causing this motion they have no other purpose except to do God’s bidding, who commanded them to cause the motions. This is signified by the expression, “hearkening unto the voice of His word”—they move the spheres because they are obedient to God’s word, the greatest object they can achieve, and not in order to receive reward or for any other purpose. I have seen an explanation given of the expression, “hearkening unto the voice of His word,” that they move the spheres in order that they may hear better the word of God, i. e. in order to attain a greater perfection than they otherwise would, for they think that in this way they will get more influence and reach a higher degree.

But this is impossible. For the verse in question deals with the angels causing the motions and not with the spheres. But the perfection of the angels is always in actu, there being no potentiality in them, and their perfection consists in continuous comprehension. And with all this the Bible explains that their perfection is not due merely to their conception of ideas, but to the act of causing motion in the spheres together with the intention to obey God who ordered them to move the spheres. In the same way the perfection of the spheres and the stars is due to the motions which they undergo in order to do the will of God, as we have said. The philosophers are wrong when they say that the sphere moves continually because of the desire to acquire perfect understanding by change of position and by making a potential position actual. This is surely erroneous. For according to this opinion the motion of the sphere would be foolish and insane, like a crazy person who turns round a pillar all the time, thinking to acquire perfection by changing place, facing now the east, now the west, or the north or the south, and by making the potential places actual. This is clearly absurd, for since they admit that the spheres are rational animals, having intelligent souls, how can they move in this way? The true explanation is as we have written, that the purpose and intention of the Separate Intelligences in causing the spheres to move and the purpose of the spheres in moving, is none other than to do the will of God and to carry out His command that they should move. This is their only desire and perfection, and nothing else.

This may be illustrated by supposing the case of a person who was fond of a certain king, and on coming to visit him was accepted in the king’s service. It is clear that his greatest happiness and glory are to be an acceptable servant to the king and that he does his work with great enthusiasm for no other purpose than to do the will of the king. This is also the consensus of opinion of the genuine ancient philosophers, as Ibn Roshd says in the third Question of the Destructio Destructionis. His language is as follows: “The opinion of the ancients is that there are immaterial beings (principles), which move the heavenly bodies, and the latter move from loyalty and love and obedience, in order, by means of motion, to carry out the command of the former and to acquire an understanding of them, for the heavenly bodies were created for the sake of their motions. Now since it is accepted that the principles which cause the heavenly bodies to move are free from matter and are not bodies, there is no other way in which they can move the heavenly bodies except in the sense that the moving body is commanded to move. Hence they inferred that the heavenly bodies are rational beings, who understand themselves and understand the principles which move them by way of command.”

The men of the Great Synagogue also agree that the motion of the spheres is in order to do the will of God. We can see this in the Blessing of the Moon, which reads, “Who by His word created the heavens, and by the breath of His mouth all their hosts … they are glad and rejoice to do the will of their Maker.” All this shows that a corporeal act done with an intelligent purpose to carry out the will and command of God gives perfection to those beings who have an intellectual soul. This is also proved by the prophetic promise of reward to those who honor the Sabbath, “If thou turn away thy foot because of the sabbath … and call the sabbath a delight.… Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord.” The Rabbis also expatiate upon the great reward which comes to him who has pleasure on the Sabbath and the holidays, though pleasure is a corporeal matter and a physical act which man enjoys as a member of the genus animal and not by virtue of his being human in species. If the pleasure were something enjoyed without any purpose it would no doubt be the act of an animal. But if it is indulged with the purpose of serving God and obeying His command, it is without doubt an intellectual act like the motion of the spheres, and it is by this kind of an act only that the purpose is attained, as we have said.

Thus the Rabbis say: This may be compared to the case of two persons who roasted their paschal lambs. The one ate it in the name of the paschal offering, while the other ate it merely to gratify his appetite. To the first we may apply the biblical text, “For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just do walk in them.” To the second applies the sequel, “But transgressors do stumble therein.” And it is properly so, for in this way human perfection may be attained by the whole species or the greater part thereof, though he who has knowledge stands higher than he who has no knowledge. But if attainment of human perfection depended upon intellectual conception alone, it would be impossible of attainment by the whole species or the greater part thereof.

There is an allusion to this also in the book of Ecclesiastes, where Solomon inquires into the purpose of man, “And I applied my heart to know wisdom … Come now, I will try thee with mirth … I searched in my heart now to pamper my flesh with wine … till I might see which it was best for the sons of men that they should do under the heaven the few days of their life.” The question in his mind is whether the purpose is conception of ideas, or great wealth, or high honor, or corporeal pleasure. Then at the end, after he has considered each one separately and discussed the reasons pro and con, he sums up, “The end of the matter, all having been heard: fear God, and keep His commandments; for this is the whole man.” The meaning is, we have heard all the arguments, and considered the profit of great wealth or great wisdom or the other goods, and found that there is no good among them which embraces the whole race or the greater part thereof, except doing God’s commandments from the fear of God. Therefore, “Fear God and keep His commandments,” for this good is superior to all other goods, “for this is the whole man,” i. e. this perfection embraces the entire human race, therefore it stands to reason that of all perfections this is the true one.

That this is the true way of attaining perfection is also proved from that passage in which God is represented as finding fault with those who think that the perfection which they possess is the real one, and pointing out that none of them is possessed of human perfection unless he does the right thing with the proper motive: “Thus saith the Lord: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, Let not the rich man glory in his riches.” Praise is due only with a view to the purpose. A horse is praised as a fast runner because the purpose is to use the horse in running. And if we praise his color or form, it is because they are indications of his speed as a runner, which is the purpose. Similarly a physician is praised for his knowledge of medicine, not for his knowledge of geometry or astronomy. This is the reason why the prophet names here three types of excellence which, one might suppose, determine human perfection, viz. wisdom, strength, wealth. And he says that the wise man must not insist on his wisdom, thinking that in this way he has attained human perfection, nor should the strong man boast of his strength, nor the rich man of his riches, for a thing is praiseworthy only if it leads to the purpose, whereas no man can attain the human purpose with any of these unless he associates conduct with every one of them, i. e. unless he benefits others with the excellence which he has. This is the meaning of the text, “Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches,” i. e. he has no reason to boast if the wisdom is confined to himself, and similarly the wealth and the strength, but only if he bestows the benefits thereof upon others, and that too not with the hope of reward, but in order that the other may have the benefit, as God does when He bestows good things in this manner. This is the meaning of the prophet’s words, “That he understandeth and knoweth Me, that I am the Lord who exercise mercy, justice and righteousness in the earth,” i. e. that he should understand and know that since I do mercy by reason of My wisdom, justice because of My power, and righteousness by reason of My riches, though I am not obliged to do so, it shows that these things are agreeable to Me, and that you too should endeavor to do the things which I desire, and should understand that “in these things I delight, saith the Lord.”

Man must have this end in view in his acts, namely to do the will of God and nothing else. He must not act with the expectation of reward, for God does good and shows mercy to others without expectation of reward, but because acts of this kind are acceptable to Him. Though the function of wisdom is primarily self-perfection, nevertheless it is proper as a matter of mercy that the wise man should benefit others too with his wisdom. This is why the prophet associates the benefits coming from the wise man with mercy. Similarly though strength is given to the strong primarily to oppose an enemy and protect himself, still the superior strength which a person has is not intended solely for self-protection, but in order to help others and save them from violence. Therefore the protection of others which proceeds from the strong man is given the name of justice. Finally riches, which are given to a man primarily to supply his own wants and secondarily to do good to others, are intermediate between mercy and justice, and are therefore called righteousness.

In short the idea of the prophet is that the acts which a person does, whether they be acts of mercy or of justice or of righteousness, must be done because they are acts which God desires to be done. Hence the prophet ends up his advice with the words, “For in these things I delight, saith the Lord.” From this it is clear that God desires certain acts when accompanied with the intention of doing that which God desires, as is said, “That he understandeth and knoweth Me, that I am the Lord who exercise mercy, For in these things I delight, saith the Lord.” Knowledge alone without the act is not sufficient. It is called knowledge when it is accompanied by the act, not before. Jeremiah says, “Did not thy father eat and drink, and do justice and righteousness … He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well. Is not this to know Me? saith the Lord.” Thus he says expressly that there is no virtue in the power of the king except when he does justice, and that this is what knowing God means.

And it is clear that there is no end more noble to enable man to attain human perfection than to know God. An act done in the manner described is called knowledge to indicate that by doing acts in this manner, namely with the intention of pleasing God, does man attain his purpose, namely immortality of the soul in the world to come. Similarly we find that the angel in the name of God promises Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, immortality of the soul in the future world, as a reward for keeping the commandments and acting with the intention of serving God: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts: if thou wilt walk in My ways, and if thou wilt keep My charge, and wilt also judge My house, and wilt also keep My courts, then I will give thee free access among these that stand by.” Jonathan ben Uziel translates the last phrase, “among these Seraphim.” We see therefore that he promises him immortality of the soul, and access to the angels who stand continually before God, as a reward for judging His house and keeping His courts. This is what we desired to make clear.

CHAPTER 6

There are three possibilities as to the tendencies of human acts. Either all of them lead to the end and perfection of man, or none of them leads to the perfection of man, or some do and some do not. It can not be that all acts lead man to his perfection, for violence and robbery and the like are condemned by all men. Indulgence in sexual appetite and in gluttony are characteristic of the irrational animals. Neither of these can lead man to his end, for then the perfection of the swine and the ass would be the same as the perfection of man. Nor can it be that no human act leads to his end, for we have made clear that the perfection of man is necessarily dependent upon human acts since the latter embrace the entire species or the greater part thereof. It remains then that some acts bring man to the human end and some do not, but keep him away from it.

To know and to define the acts which bring man to the human end, namely the perfection of the soul, is very difficult. For if we do not know the essence of a thing, we can not know what things are beneficial to it and what things are injurious. If, for example, we do not know the nature of man’s physical disposition, we can not know what things to give him so as to maintain his temperamental equilibrium, or to restore it to him when lost. We must first have a true idea, as far as possible, of man’s nature, and then we can know what things are good for him and what things are not. Hence as we can not, by human investigation, know the true nature of the soul except that it is something emanating from an intellectual and immaterial principle, we can not know by investigation what things are injurious or beneficial to it. Hence a certain philosopher has said, “If thou knowest thyself, thou wilt know thy Creator.” It becomes a difficult problem, therefore, to determine, by human investigation, what acts are beneficial to the soul, enabling it to attain its perfection. There is no doubt that the test must be found in the essential nature of man. If we should follow the consensus of the majority of mankind, we should have to say that we must keep away from the acts of prophets and pious men, for the majority of mankind act differently from them. On the other hand, there is no doubt that since the first man was created alone, there must be something in man’s essential nature by which he can distinguish between good acts conducive to the perfection of his soul and those which are not good.

We find there are certain acts concerning which all agree that they are good, as for example to refrain from wrong doing, to do right, and so on. There are also acts concerning which all men agree that they are bad, for example, wrong doing, violence, etc. We find also that the soul finds pleasure in doing good, and feels pain and sorrow in doing evil. Everything finds pleasure in the like and pain in the unlike. Hence it would seem that the soul, being divine, would find pleasure in good deeds, which resemble its own nature, for all divine acts are good, and would feel pain in evil deeds, because they are different from and opposed to its nature. From this point of view we may say therefore that we can infer the character of an act as good or bad from the pleasure or pain which the soul feels in doing it. Those acts in which the soul always takes pleasure, before doing them as well as after, are good, and those acts which cause the soul pain and sorrow after they are done, are bad.

Even the wicked man who is eager to do evil, as Solomon says: “The soul of the wicked desireth evil,” has the desire only before the act by reason of his strong passion which inspires him to do the act, but after the act is done and the intensity of the passion relaxes, the soul is aroused and feels grief and sorrow for the evil deed that he has done. For example, in sexual sin, before the act the desire is so intense that the person is unable to tell whether the act is good or bad. But after the act is done, and the passion has cooled down, the soul realizes the nature of the act, sees the evil of it, and suffers pain and sorrow.

The prophet Jeremiah uses this test of evil deeds, as he addresses Israel in the name of God and says to them that they must realize that the deeds they do are evil because the soul suffers pain and sorrow in the doing of them: “Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that it is an evil and a bitter thing that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and not My fear that is in thee.” The meaning is: It is proper that the evil deed which thou doest should correct thee and that the backsliding itself should reprove thee, because they impress upon the soul sorrow and grief after they are done. From this thou shouldst know that it is an evil and bitter thing that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and not by reason of My fear in thee, i. e. I do not say this to thee because of the fear of My punishment and because of My dread which is upon thee, but because of the nature of the wrong deeds themselves which leave behind them in the soul a feeling of pain and sorrow. From this thou canst realize that they are bad and that it is an evil and a bitter thing that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and not from thy fear of Me. And conversely, from the gladness and joy which a good deed impresses upon the soul it can be known that it is good. Similarly the Psalmist says: “I considered my ways and turned my feet unto Thy testimonies.” The meaning is, When I consider my ways in order to know which is good and which is evil, I turn my feet to Thy testimonies, which is the good way. And he also gives the reason, because he found intense pleasure in them, “I have rejoiced in the way of Thy testimonies, as much as in all riches,” i. e. he found infinite joy like a person who has obtained all wealth, meaning an infinite amount of wealth. Thus a person may distinguish between good and bad acts by the pain or the pleasure which the soul feels after doing them.

CHAPTER 7

The test which we mentioned for distinguishing between good and bad acts is not sufficient to enable us to know all the good acts which are appropriate to the nature of the soul. For as men differ in their temperaments and dispositions they necessarily have different qualities. A person whose temperament is hot will admire courage and take pleasure in it; while a person of opposite temperament will admire and take pleasure in quiet. The only way to determine what is becoming and what is unbecoming in the manner above mentioned is by referring to the standard of a person of equable temperament, who does not exist. And even if such a person did exist, we should find enormous difficulty in determining what is a good quality in a particular case, a difficulty that is due to the acts themselves. For an admirable act and a good quality represent the mean between the two extremes of excess and defect. Thus generosity is a mean between niggardliness and extravagance; courage is a mean between rashness and cowardice. But the mean between two extremes can not be determined, because it is only a point. Thus it is impossible to determine the truly lukewarm, which is a mean between the hot and the cold, nor is it possible to determine the true mean between black and white so that it may be perceived with the eye. In the same way it is impossible to know or define actually the actions which are intermediate between the two extremes. It is clear therefore that it is very difficult to determine acts by intellectual investigation.

Moreover even if it were possible by rational investigation to determine good acts in reference to human nature, it would still be impossible to know what things are acceptable to God. But we made it clear in the fifth chapter of this Book that human perfection depends upon doing those things which are acceptable to God. But we can not by investigation know what things are acceptable to God, because if we do not know the qualities of a ruler and his method and habits, or his perfection and the nature of his government and his station, we do not know what things please him and what things arouse his displeasure. Now as God is absolutely unknown to us, we can not know which of all the possible acts of man are pleasing to Him, and which are not. We can only have a general knowledge, for example that evil is displeasing to God, as the Bible says, “Thou that art of eyes too pure to behold evil, and that canst not look on mischief,” and that good is acceptable to Him. But we do not know what particular good deeds are pleasing to Him.

Now inasmuch as it behooves every wise agent to devise a method by which to ensure the realization of the purpose of his acts, else his work would be in vain, God in His wisdom devised a method by which we may know what things are acceptable to God and what things are not, in order that by means of this method man may be able to attain the human end and perfection, since he can not determine this matter by intellectual investigation. This method is to bestow the spirit of prophecy upon a chosen individual of the human race through whom mankind may know what things are pleasing to God and what things are not. This is why the Rabbis say that in the beginning of creation the first man was given seven commandments, as is explained in the treatise Sanhedrin, chapter “Arba‘ Mitot,” connecting the statement with the verse, “And the Lord God commanded the man saying: ‘of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat;’ ” intimating that without the divine command it would be impossible to know what things are agreeable to God and what things are not; and that Cain was punished for killing Abel because he transgressed the command of God. Also that the generation of the flood were punished for their wrong doing, the men of Sodom for their sins, Pharaoh on account of Sarai the wife of Abraham, because all of them transgressed the command given to the first man. Otherwise, it seems from their words, they would not have been punished. This is the opinion of the rabbinical sages.

The question, however, still arises, according to this point of view, why did not God have respect unto Cain and his offering, seeing that Cain had not violated any of the seven commandments given to Adam? Unless we say that he sinned in intention in a manner which bordered upon idolatry, an interpretation which is not suggested in the expression of the text.

The proper answer is this. There are two kinds of actions which ought to exist by nature in the human mind. One is suppression of wrong doing and continuous pursuit of right among men, so that the human race may be perpetuated. This is why Cain was punished for killing Abel, the generation of the flood was destroyed for violence, and Pharaoh and Abimelech were punished. This kind of acts makes the transgressor liable to punishment but does not confer any perfection upon the soul of the observer, for if a man were to live alone in a desert without participating in social and political life, he would not need this kind of perfection.

The second kind of acts is also natural to man and gives perfection to his soul. Examples are: submission to God, and doing those things in general which the human reason declares are acceptable to God. These things are known to man by nature, as the prophet says, reproving Israel for ignoring the ways and judgments of God: “Surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the ordinance of their God.” In another place he says, “Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the swallow and the crane observe the time of their coming; but My people know not the ordinance of the Lord.” These observations do not refer to the ways and ordinances of the Torah, for these are not known to man by nature as the stork knows her appointed times, or as the turtle and the swallow and the crane observe the time of their coming. They refer to the knowledge of God which is known by nature to all, such as the fact that He supports the world and mercifully supplies food to all creatures and maintains them continually, and that He should be thanked because all things come from Him. This is the meaning of the expression, “way of the Lord.” “The ordinance of their God,” denotes the knowledge of the relation of the Creator to His creatures—the duty of constant submission to Him, as a slave submits to his master, and to refrain from showing disrespect to Him by equal treatment of the honorable with the inferior—all of them things which the nature of human reason dictates without any study or teaching.

The reason God did not have respect unto Cain and his offering, was because his service was not done with the proper intention, as the nature of the reason demands. Reason dictates that we should be thankful to a benefactor in accordance with the benefits we receive from him, and that one should not bring to the master a cheap present of an inferior quality if one can bring one of good quality, for this signifies an offence to the honor of the master. Therefore Cain should not have brought of the fruits of the earth, like flax seed, beans, vegetables, and so on, but he should have brought of the fruit of the tree, like figs and grapes and pomegranates, which belong to a better species. Not doing so, he sinned, and deserved punishment, though he had not received any command concerning the matter. But although the general principles of these two kinds of acts are known by the human mind, nevertheless, inasmuch as the human reason is not adequate to give a knowledge of particulars and of all the things which are agreeable to God, there must be a divine inspiration by which one may acquire true and complete knowledge and belief concerning the particular acts acceptable to God, by which the human purpose may be realized. It can not be that divine providence should fail in a matter of this sort which is almost indispensable for man for the attainment of human perfection, as we find that Providence has not failed to supply the lower animals with many things which are not indispensable for their existence, as for example the double sense organs, and other instances of provisions found in different animal species to improve their condition, which are not absolutely necessary, as we explained in the sixth chapter of the First Book.

CHAPTER 8

The divine inspiration which we said was necessary in order that we may know through it what things are acceptable to God and what things are not, man can not acquire by himself without divine consent. For it is not natural that the spirit of an intellect devoid of matter should rest upon a material thing. For this reason all the ancients thought it impossible that the divine spirit should rest upon man, and that the latter should prophesy by means of a supernatural power and foretell the future. And therefore the ancient peoples used to make images and burn incense and offer prayers to the stars to bring down the spiritual influence of some star upon one of their images, in order that through it the spirit of the star residing in the body of the star should rest upon man, who is a corporeal being, so that the latter might foretell the future through the spirit of the star exerting an influence upon the person. This is the meaning of divination.

And inasmuch as men are eager to know all the things that are going to happen to them from day to day, the ancients used to follow the diviners and pursued the study of astrology. Some nations practised magic and served evil spirits, depending upon their intellectual status. Some served the demons of fire and caused their sons and daughters to pass through the fire, others served the demons of the air. (R. Hai writes in a responsum that there are demons composed of the element fire, and demons of the element air.) They did all these things in order that an unclean spirit of the demons should rest upon them and enable them to foretell their future. Others again smoked and burned incense, so as to have communion with the dead, and slept in cemeteries, in order than an unclean spirit of the dead should rest upon them. They went so far as to bury their dead in their idolatrous temples, where men and women gathered together and prayed over the graves. As a result the unclean spirit of the dead rested upon them or upon their priests, and told them what was about to happen to them. Nahmanides, in one of his discourses, on the authority of those who are familiar with sorcery, describes the process as follows: a man and a woman stand by the grave, one at the head and the other at the foot, holding a little bell between them, pronouncing formulas of adjuration and sounding the bell. The woman watches, and the man inquires, and information is given to them of what will happen to them in the near future, as Saul inquired of the woman who had a familiar spirit. He says, too, that those who inquired of the demons relied much upon this method of inquiry. He says also that this is the origin of the Christian custom of burying their dead in their churches, where the men and women pray together and sound a bell while burying their dead, remarking that when the pagans adopted Christianity they retained their ancestral customs. They also retained a custom of the fire worshippers, which consists in lighting fires on a given night in every year when the sun enters the sign of Cancer of the true zodiacal signs, and dancing and skipping around the fire.

All these practices are forbidden in the Torah because they are unclean and done in the service of evil spirits: “There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, one that useth divination, a soothsayer, or an inchanter, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or one that consulteth a ghost or a familiar spirit, or a necromancer.” And the reason given is, “For whosoever doeth these things is an abomination unto the Lord …” The meaning is that God is holy and His ministers are holy and pure, therefore you must keep away from all these things which are impure. This is the reason, also, why the Torah legislates concerning uncleanness, and provides the penalty of being ‘cut off’ for one who enters the temple while unclean. The reason is that the spirit of uncleanness may cause the holy spirit to depart from the temple.

Then the Torah makes it clear that the other nations indulged in those practices in order to obtain a knowledge of the future, thinking that it can not be obtained in any other way, and that the holy spirit of God never rests upon a human being: “For these nations, that thou art to dispossess, hearken unto soothsayers, and unto diviners …,” because they think that there is no one else that one can hearken to, “But as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do;” i. e. it is not as they think, but, “A prophet will the Lord thy God raise up unto thee, from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me.” one upon whom the holy spirit of God will rest, and from him you will learn the future. You must not grieve in thinking that you have no way of knowing the future, as the other nations have, and that you are without this privilege. It is not so, for you will be complete and perfect with the Lord your God. The meaning is that you will not merely have the ordinary human privileges, but also this one. This is the reason for doubling the letter mem (tamim), as if to say, you will want for nothing in association with Him, for He will reveal to you the future also through His prophets, and you need not follow the diviners or the service of evil spirits or inquire of ghosts and familiar spirits in order to obtain knowledge of the future. For though these agencies do impart knowledge of the future, nevertheless as they are connected with the spirit of uncleanness, they keep man away from his perfection, and man cannot on their account have human perfection and soundness, because it is impossible to know from them what things are acceptable to God and what things are not. This is the meaning of the expression, “Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God,” indicating that the idolatrous nations are not possessed of human perfection, but thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God, having both perfections through the prophet who prophesies by the holy spirit and by the will of God, for through him you will know what things are acceptable to God. The expression, “with the Lord thy God,” denotes that the prophetic spirit is given to the prophets for the sole purpose of admonishing mankind to observe the Torah, to worship God and to do the things which are acceptable to Him in order that man may be whole-hearted with God, and not for the purpose of foretelling the future, as will be explained in the twelfth chapter of this Book.

The prophets had indeed also this power of foretelling the future as a secondary consideration, as a testimony to the truth of their prophetic teaching, in order that men may believe them. Accordingly we find that all the prophets admonish us constantly to observe the Torah and carry out the commandments. The main purpose of God in inspiring the prophets was that through them man may attain to his perfection by doing those things which are acceptable to God and not in order to give mankind a knowledge of the future, as is the case with the diviners. These foretell the future by certain practices which strengthen the power of imagination in a natural way, and not through the spirit of God, as the prophets do; unless, indeed, we say that prophecy is also a function of the imagination, as is the opinion of some of our wise men who follow the Philosopher. They hold that prophecy is a natural phenomenon, pertaining solely to the power of imagination, like dreams. They go so far as to say that it is an unusual thing if a man does not prophesy being wise and prepared thereto, i. e. if his imagination is prepared for prophecy.

This is, however, contradicted both by our senses and our reason. The argument from the senses is that we never find the gift of prophecy in any one of the philosophers, though they were wise men in theoretical speculation; whereas we do find prophecy among the Jewish people. This shows that it is not a natural phenomenon associated with theoretical speculation. For if it were so, why should this gift have been kept from the other nations, so that their wise men despite their perfection of intellect and imagination are devoid of the prophetic inspiration? There is no doubt, therefore, that prophecy is a divine inspiration which comes by the will of God upon the rational power, either through the medium of the imagination or without it, as will be explained.

The argument from reason is that the diviners, the image worshippers, those who consult ghosts and familiar spirits, and those who indulge in other practices in order to strengthen the power of imagination so as to know the future, can not determine the things which are acceptable to God, because they have no means of knowing this, seeing that it is above nature and the spirit of uncleanness and the powers of the spheres, from which they obtain all their information. And for this reason they are not always correct in their prognostications. And this for two reasons, first, because the power of imagination is necessarily deceptive from its nature, for not everything that is imaginable is possible, as is known to those who are familiar with the nature of that faculty. And secondly, because God can destroy the power of the constellations and bring about the opposite of that which they determine. Therefore astrologers are necessarily liable to deception, as the Bible says: “Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up and save thee from the things that shall come upon thee.” The Rabbis comment upon the expression “from the things,” as meaning that they can save from some of the things, but not from all the things. They can not foretell truly all that has been determined for they are necessarily liable to error for the two reasons mentioned, either by reason of the nature of the imaginative faculty, or because God can nullify by His will that which is determined by the stars.

The prophet is the opposite of all this. His inspiration comes from God and is due to the will of God, and not to the powers of the spheres. Moreover it descends primarily and essentially upon the rational power. Hence there can not be any error in it. The Bible testifies to this effect concerning Samuel, “And did let none of his words fall to the ground. And all Israel from Dan even to Beer-Sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord.” The meaning is that the true character of his prophecy was known from the fact that none of his words fell to the ground, unlike the diviners and magicians. So Balaam says to Balak, “For there is no enchantment with Jacob, neither is there any divination with Israel; Now is it said of Jacob and of Israel: ‘what hath God wrought!’ ” The meaning is, Do not think that the good which is promised to Israel can be nullified in any way, as those things are nullified which are determined by the stars. No, it can not be, for they know what is determined, not by means of divination and enchantment, but through prophecy do they know “what God hath wrought,” i. e. what God has decreed that He would do. Therefore it can not be nullified in any way. For God has power to destroy the constellation and the work of the diviners and the magicians as well as the results of their science, for He is “God who brought them forth out of Egypt, though they have lofty horns like those of the wild-ox.” The word lo (lit. to him) refers to the people of Egypt, though it is in the singular, as in the expression, “Egypt said, ‘let me flee from the face of Israel;’ ” “Shall Egypt be like women.” The meaning is that though the people of Egypt had knowledge through diviners and magic, and great strength like the horns of the wild-ox through the constellations, nevertheless God took Israel out of their power and punished their gods.

From all this it is clear that it is impossible to know all the things that are acceptable to God in any way except through the will of God, i. e. through the medium of a special inspiration coming from Him for this purpose. Accordingly the definition of prophecy from this point of view is that it is an inspiration coming from God to the rational power in man, either through the medium of the power of imagination or without it, by virtue of which information comes to him through an angel or otherwise concerning matters which a man cannot know naturally by himself. The purpose is to lead him or others to happiness, so that mankind may attain the human purpose.

In defining prophecy as coming through the medium of the imagination or without it, our purpose is to embrace all degrees of prophecy. For there are prophets to whom, in the beginning of their career, prophecy comes through the medium of the power of the imagination. For this reason they see extraordinary images in their prophetic visions by reason of their inferior status as prophets. Thus some see forms of women, as Zechariah said, “And, behold, there came forth two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork …” Others see angels with great and fearful bodies, as Daniel said, “His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as torches of fire …” And there are other instances of images named by the prophets when the inspiration of the rational power came through the medium of the imagination.

Some prophets remain in that stage, while others ascend to a higher stage, some reaching so high that their prophecy comes to them without a medium. That is, the inspiration of the rational power is not associated with the activity of the imagination at all. This was the status of Moses at all times after the first revelation, when an angel of God appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of the burning bush. Thereafter the Bible says, “With him do I speak mouth to mouth,” i. e. without a medium. For this reason we do not find any figures of speech or allegories in his words, but his words are all plain. This was also the status of all Israel when the Torah was given, as the Bible says, “The Lord spoke with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire.” God desired to give through Moses a law that should be free from all doubt, and hence He desired that Moses’ power should be of so high a character that the power of the imagination should have no part in it, so as to avoid suspicion and doubt. And for the same reason Israel who received the law also attained to the grade of being spoken to by God face to face at the time of the Sinaitic revelation.

CHAPTER 9

A question may arise as follows: Since the prophetic inspiration comes from God, who is One, and the purpose of the prophetic message is always the same, namely to lead mankind to happiness, how is it that the prophets differ in their expressions when they treat of the same topics, and why are their visions different, one prophet seeing God under one form, another under another?

The answer is that the differences of vision and expression do not prove difference in origin, nor do they necessarily indicate a change in the nature of the author of the prophetic inspiration or in the purpose. Different effects may come from the same agent, depending upon the nature of the recipients. Thus fire, being one and the same thing, causes wax to melt and salt to harden. Similarly, though the soul, according to the consensus of philosophers, is one in essence and indivisible, nevertheless it is the cause of different activities in the body, depending upon the different parts of the body in which its activity is visible. In the brain the soul exhibits one kind of activity, in the liver another kind, in the heart still another, though all the activities are for one purpose, namely to conserve the body. In the flesh again the soul has sensation, in the bones she has no sensation, and in different members the soul shows different powers. This shows that the same agent may exhibit his power in different ways in different places, causing different activities for one and the same purpose. The difference is due either to the media through which he shows his power or to the localities in which his power appears.

In the same way prophetic visions are different either by reason of the means through which the prophetic revelation comes or by reason of the recipients. This is clearly implied in the statement which God made to Aaron and Miriam, who were prophets, “If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord do make Myself known unto him in a vision, I do speak with him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so; he is trusted in all My house; with him do I speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches …” Here we are clearly told that it is God Himself who appears in a vision and who speaks in a dream, as is indicated in the expressions, “make Myself known,” “speak.” And it is also He who speaks in dark speeches and parables, but who speaks to Moses “mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches.” The purpose of this verse is to show that prophetic inspiration of whatever degree emanates from God, as we said when we gave a definition of prophecy, and yet it changes according to the preparation of those who receive it, and according to the means by which the inspiration comes to them. Therefore we should not be surprised if one prophet says that he saw God “sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up,” while another says that he saw Him as an old man, whose “raiment was as white snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool,” and still another saw him like “a man of war,” while a fourth likens him to a precentor wrapped up in his praying garment. Similarly as regards the media, i. e. the angels, who are sent to the prophets, one prophet says that he saw the angel whose “body was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning,” another saw him like “a man clothed in linen,” while a third saw in a chariot “red, sorrel and white” horses. These differences are due to the two causes which we mentioned, the recipient and the medium.

The Rabbis explain this subject in Bereshit Rabbah: “A Cuthean asked Rabbi Meir, Is it possible that God, of whom it is written, ‘Do not I fill heaven and earth?’ should have spoken to Moses from between the staves of the ark? Said Rabbi Meir, bring me large mirrors. When he brought them, R. Meir said to him, look at your reflection. He looked, and he saw they were large. Then he said, bring me small mirrors. When he brought them, R. Meir said, look at your reflection. He looked, and he saw they were small. Then R. Meir said, If you, a man of flesh and blood, can change yourself into many shapes at your pleasure, surely God who created the world can do so.”

The purpose of the Cuthean was to deny that prophetic inspiration emanates from God. He thought that it was the work of the power of imagination, as the philosophers hold and those who follow after them. Their reasons are twofold. First, God being one cannot appear to the prophet under many different forms, for this would argue multiplicity or change in the agent. The second reason is that an abstract intellect can not appear to a material being.

These arguments R. Meir refuted by means of the mirrors. The first argument is answered as follows: As in the mirrors a thing appears different in form, large or small, straight or crooked, bright or obscure, according to the nature of the mirrors through which the thing is seen, i. e. according as the mirrors are large or small, straight or crooked, clear or obscure, though the thing itself does not change, so God appears to the prophets under many and various forms according to the brightness and purity of the media, though God Himself does not multiply or change. The change and the multiplicity come from the media, as in the illustration of the mirrors. A thing seen also varies according to the difference in the person who sees. Thus, if the person who sees a thing through a mirror has sharp and clear vision, he will see the thing in one form, whereas if his vision is weak or dimmed, he will see the thing in another form, though the thing seen and the mirror are the very same which appeared to the man of clear vision.

The second argument is answered as follows: As the person or the thing seen through a mirror is different from the mirror through which he or it is seen, nor does his existence depend upon that of the mirror; and yet the likeness of the person appears in the mirror, though there is no likeness in the mirror in reality, it only appears so to the eye, so though God is separate and abstract and can not be comprehended, He nevertheless appears to the prophet in a given form, which the prophet sees speaking to him, though in reality there is no such form in existence, the voice alone which the prophet hears being the real purpose of the vision, and nothing else.

And if the question is asked, How is it possible that one should see what does not exist and yet acquire truth by means of it? The answer is, when a person sees in a true dream a man speaking to him, the things are not real, though the dreamer imagines that they are, and he hears a voice speaking to him, which does not really exist, and yet the information which the person gets through that dream is correct. In the same way, from the analogy of the dream or the mirror, in which a person sees the form or hears a sound of words, the prophet understands the meaning of the prophetic inspiration which comes to him. As in the mirror in which one sees his likeness, there really is no such likeness as he sees, so the prophet understands that there is no such form in reality as he sees, though he sees it, and that the purpose of the form which appears to him is that he should hear the voice or get the meaning of the vision, in which the truth resides. In the mirror, too, the likeness seen in it does not really exist, but the significance of the visible likeness is real and points to the thing seen through the likeness, which is real. So in the prophetic vision the idea signified in the vision is true, though the form itself which appears is not real. It may be that the expression, “I make myself known to him in a vision (מראה),” is an allusion to the nature of the mirror (מראה), as we have explained.

And similarly the expression, “I speak with him in a dream,” has reference to our previous explanation. There is a great difference, indeed, between a dream and a prophetic vision. There is no dream without foolish elements, whereas a prophetic vision is entirely correct and true. Nevertheless, since we can not imagine a voice speaking without corporeal organs except by thinking of a dream, the Bible uses the expression, “I speak with him in a dream,” to indicate that as in a dream one hears a voice speaking and sees a person speaking, though in reality no such things exist, so in a prophetic vision, the truth in it is the information which the prophet obtains. This is God’s purpose in sending the vision, but the voice that is heard expressing itself by means of corporeal organs is not really there. This is what the Rabbis meant when they said, “A dream is one sixtieth part of prophecy.”

The illustration which R. Meir employed of the mirrors has shown, therefore, that the variety and multiplicity of likenesses which appear to prophets are no indication of multiplicity and change in God, as the multiplicity and change of the mirrors or the multiplicity and change of the spectators imply no change or multiplicity in the thing seen in the mirror. It follows also from this that the variety of expression of the different prophets does not indicate change in God or in His purpose. For though the speakers use different expressions, the idea is the same necessarily since it comes from one author, and hence the purpose is the same. This is the meaning of the Rabbis when they say, “Many prophets have one idea, though no two prophets use the same expression.” This is what we intended to make clear in this chapter.

CHAPTER 10

We must now explain the existence of prophecy and its various grades, so that believers may find it easier to understand the existence of prophecy and the different degrees thereof. At the moment of birth the individual is devoid of all understanding. The first things that are formed in him are the five external senses, touch, taste, smell, hearing, sight. The individual does not get these all at once, but one at a time. At the moment of his appearance in the outer world he perceives only with the coarsest of the senses, that of touch. The objects of his perception at this stage are heat and cold, moisture and dryness, softness and hardness, roughness and smoothness and the like. After a further interval of time after birth, he perceives a finer and more ‘important class of objects, namely tastes, like sweet, bitter, sour, astringent, sharp, and so on. Later on he perceives another class of things still finer, namely the odors, the agreeable and the disagreeable, etc. Later still he perceives with the sense of hearing a class of objects that is still finer than those of the sense of smell, and that may be perceived at a greater distance, such as sounds and tones, and their various kinds, etc. Still later he perceives with the sense of sight another class of existents finer than all the rest, which can be perceived at a greater distance than the others, such as colors and forms according to their various kinds, and so on. One of these five senses can not perceive the objects of the others. Thus, the sense of sight can not perceive sounds, or tones or odors; nor can the senses of smell and taste perceive colors and sounds.

After he has advanced a considerable time and has become habituated to the five senses, he rises to a higher degree than that of perceiving the objects of the various senses. He now has the power of recognizing a thing when it is no longer actually perceived. He recognizes what he has once perceived when he sees it again, and though the thing has disappeared he remembers the knowledge which is impressed on his imagination and recognizes the object. This power of apprehension he acquires through the medium of the first faculty.

As he grows older still, he attains to a higher degree by means of the first powers, a new gate opens before him, and he acquires the power of intellectual apprehension. He strips the sensible object of its particular qualities and apprehends the general essence. For example, he takes animality and rationality in a human being and judges that these are common to the whole species and are different from those particular qualities which differ in different individuals.

As he advances further in years and acquires information, another gate opens before him which he has not entered hitherto. He now makes a distinction between substance and accident, and between the necessary, the possible and the impossible. He combines rational principles not based upon sense perception with each other, and acquires all the sciences, which he could not have acquired by means of the powers mentioned before. These four stages form the limit of the human intellect, beyond which it can not go. Some individuals do not reach the highest stage, but stop with the second or the third. These then are the powers which the generality of men have.

But it is possible that in addition to these powers, still another gate may open to a person and still another degree may be attainable by him of which he has no idea. For just as, if a person who has never seen them were told about lights and colors, he would not be able to imagine them and would not understand the different colors, as a eunuch can not imagine the pleasure of sexual intercourse, so it is possible that though by the custom of nature man does not attain a greater degree than the four mentioned, nevertheless the mind may conceive of a higher degree. And experience testifies to this. For we see that beyond the four degrees above mentioned, a new gate opens before a given person which his own nature never imagined, and he speaks words of wisdom or words of song and praise to God in pure and fluent style such as he was incapable of hitherto. Everyone who hears him wonders at his knowledge and the manner of his expression, while he himself does not know whence this power came to him, as a child learns to speak without knowing whence the power came. But everybody recognizes his superiority in this respect. This degree is called the holy spirit.

Now just as the human intellect stops at the four degrees above mentioned and does not pass beyond, so there are persons who stop at the degree of the holy spirit and do not pass beyond it. There are persons whose imagination is strong by nature or who do certain things to strengthen it, like the practices of the diviners or the woman with the familiar spirit. As a result of this they have imaginative visions. There are others who have true dreams, like Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, the chief butler and the chief baker. By reason of these powers some of them think they are prophets. They are the persons of whom the prophet in Scripture says that they “prophesy out of their own heart.” For though they sometimes speak the truth, they are bound sometimes to speak falsehood. Thus Ezekiel says, “Woe unto the vile prophets, that follow their own spirit, … They have seen vanity and lying divination, that say: The Lord saith; and the Lord hath not sent them, yet they hope that the word would be confirmed.” The intimation is that it is impossible, for though their words may be partly true, they can not but be partly false, for such is the nature of the power of imagination, the source of dreams. Our Rabbis say: As there is no wheat without straw, so there is no dream without foolishness.

When, however, the rational power prevails over the imagination, then the person sees true dreams without foolishness. The explanation is given by the Rabbis: “Raba asked the question, How reconcile the statement, ‘And the dreams speak falsely,’ with the expression, ‘I do speak with him in a dream?’ His answer is, the two passages are not incompatible. The one passage refers to dreams that come through the medium of an angel, the other to those that come through the medium of a demon.” Angel stands for the rational power, demon for the power of imagination. If the rational power prevails over the power of imagination, the person sees true dreams or visions which communicate to him information he never had before. In the measure in which the rational power prevails over the imagination is the person better or less well prepared for prophetic inspiration.

There are persons whose rational power is stronger than the imagination, but the superiority is not great, and hence the power of imagination maintains its strength. And therefore though the rational power is prepared to receive the prophetic inspiration, yet on account of the strength of the imagination and its opposition to the rational power, the person receives the inspiration in trembling and pain. His limbs shake, his sinews tend to dissolve, and a great trembling comes over him, that his soul almost leaves him. And after all that pain the prophetic inspiration comes to the rational power in a dream or vision of the night, and the person dreams prophetic dreams and learns things he has never known before—ideas about the separate substances, or particular notions, or universal ideas of existence, and the like. This is the first degree of prophetic inspiration.

There are others who do not stop here. They enter still another gate that opens before them and attain to a higher degree, which sometimes comes before the first degree and sometimes after. When the two powers are equally strong, the person receives the prophetic inspiration without trembling and without toil, while sleeping on his couch, or in a deep sleep which comes upon him during the day. This degree is called vision (מחזה, מראה). In this stage he sees, by means of the power of imagination, forms which are not real, like the women and the horses seen by Zechariah, or the basket of summer fruit seen by Amos, and the like, which did not really exist. But by reason of the fact that the rational power is stronger than the imagination, it makes the ideas indicated by the forms true, though the forms are not real. This is the second degree of prophetic inspiration.

There are others who do not stop at this degree, but enter another door that opens before them and attain a still higher degree. This happens when the rational power prevails so completely over the imagination that it subdues it and does not allow it to imagine unreal forms. The visions that such a person sees in the prophetic state are real, like the visions of Ezekiel, which were all real, representing mysteries of nature and of the divine being as represented in the mysteries of the chariot. He may also see or hear an angel speaking to him and communicating to him some particular matter for his own benefit or for the benefit of others, or he communicates to him something of a universal nature, and gives him information concerning human events that are to come in the future, particular events that are to happen to an individual, or something general that is to happen to a nation or nations or to humanity as a whole. This is the third degree of prophecy. This degree sometimes comes after the earlier ones, and sometimes it comes first, depending upon the equipment of the recipient. Samuel is a good example. At the beginning of his prophetic career he heard a voice speaking to him, and was free from trembling or toil, nor did he see any form. However, this did not take place while he was absolutely awake, but during a waking vision. A vision or appearance which one has while awake is called, “hand of the Lord,” as Maimonides explains in the forty-first chapter of the second part of the Guide of the Perplexed. Thus we are told, “And the lamp of God was not yet gone out, and Samuel was laid down to sleep in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was.” The verse should be construed as follows: “The lamp of God was not yet gone out in the temple of the Lord, and Samuel was laid down to sleep,” i. e., in his upper chamber in the court. And “the Lord called Samuel”, i. e. in a vision. This is as far as all prophets attain. In every case, even if the individual has the preparation, he does not get the prophetic inspiration except by the grace of God. And it happens sometimes that after having had a prophetic experience, a prophet ceases from prophesying for a long time. And sometimes he must undertake a certain preparatory practice to receive a prophetic inspiration, as in the case of Elisha, who said, “But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord came upon him.”

There are others still who do not stop at these degrees, but rise to a higher degree where the power of imagination has no say at all. The person does not see or imagine any form, he does not see any angel or likeness before him, but hears a voice speaking to him and communicating to him general ideas for the benefit of a nation or nations, or a rule or rules of conduct for the human race or for a part of it, such as lead to human perfection. This inspiration comes to him without any apparition or vision, but in the daytime while he is awake. And whenever he concentrates his thoughts in reflection and considers a question, the answer comes at once while he is awake; and this happens not at great intervals, but whenever he desires. An individual who attains such a degree as this should no longer be called a human being, but an angel. There is no one among us who has reached this stage except Moses our teacher, peace be upon him, whose prophecy is distinguished from that of all the other prophets in four respects, as enumerated by Maimonides in his commentary on chapter “Helek.”

These four points of difference are the four degrees of prophecy which we named, and which are referred to in the Bible, “And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face as a man speaks to his neighbour.” “Face to face,” means that the inspiration did not come through an angel or intermediary, as is the case in the third degree. “As a man speaks,” indicates that the message did not come in visions of the night or in a deep sleep that fell upon him, as in the second degree, but Moses was awake and heard the voice speaking to him, without feeling any trembling or pain, as is the case in the first degree, but “as a man speaks to his neighbour,” i. e. without any pain. Whenever he desired to go into the tent of meeting, he heard the voice speaking to him, as we are told, “And when Moses went into the tent of meeting … then he heard the voice speaking unto him from above the ark-cover … from between the two cherubim.” We also have the testimony of Scripture in the passage, “Stay ye, that I may hear what the Lord will command concerning you.” And immediately the answer came to him: “If any man of you … shall be unclean by reason of a dead body …” Similarly in the case of the daughters of Zelophehad we read, “And Moses brought their cause before the Lord.” And then came the answer, “The daughters of Zelophehad speak right.”

No person can attain to any degree of prophetic inspiration at all unless he has the first four natural qualities which we mentioned. Our Rabbis say, “The prophetic spirit does not rest upon a person unless he is wise, strong, rich and tall.” Unless he has the quality of wisdom and the other natural qualities, the prophetic inspiration can not come to him at all. This is why they say that Jacob’s ladder had four steps. The meaning is that Jacob’s prophetic experience was not preceded by the degree of the “holy spirit,” which sometimes comes before prophecy, but that the preparatory quality in Jacob was wisdom, which he learned in the school of Eber,” where he concealed himself for fourteen years. Without wisdom the prophetic inspiration would not have come to him even in a dream, which is the first degree of prophecy.

The prophets and the righteous and the pious differed from each other in the degree of their association with God. There are some whose souls cleaved so intimately to the celestial beings that the powers of heaven were obedient to them and exerted their influence on the matters of this world at their bidding, for their own benefit or for the benefit of others. They could cause rain to come down by their prayer, heal the sick, cause barren women to bear children, cause fire to come down from heaven, revive the dead, as in the case of Elijah and Elisha. We find that when a person thinks about a palatable article of food or sees another eating sour grapes, the salivary power is aroused and his mouth waters of its own accord; and similarly when he is thinking about sexual intercourse, the seminal power is aroused and the organ stretches. In the same way the natural powers of the physical universe are obedient to the pure soul of the prophet, and dew or rain or a storm comes at his bidding. For just as the powers of the body were created to serve the powers of the soul, and therefore as soon as the psychic power determines upon anything, the corporeal powers and the limbs are impelled to carry it out, so the physical forces in the world of nature are subservient to the pure souls—the whole universe being as one individual—and obey them. Accordingly when such a pure soul conceives the coming of dew or rain or a great and mighty wind, or an earthquake or the opening of the earth, and the like, immediately the power which controls the world of genesis and decay is impelled to carry out the conception.

Sometimes the degree of the prophet or pious man goes beyond this measure, so that the celestial powers too are obedient to him and do his will, bringing down fire from heaven, reviving the dead, and the like, since all things are subject and subservient to him, whether he be a prophet or not. This power varies among righteous men, pious men and prophets according to the degree in which their souls cleave to the higher beings. In this way the prophet or the pious man rules over nature and produces signs and wonders in the world according to the measure of his communion with the higher beings.

This explains the differences among pious men. There are some who reach such a degree of communion that they can produce signs and wonders in nature, like Honi ha-Me‘aggel, R. Phinehas ben Yair, R. Hanina ben Dosa, and others, though they did not attain to the degree of prophecy. On the other hand, there are prophets who never performed any sign or miracle, like Jeremiah, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi. Others have only one sign to their credit, like Samuel, who caused rain to come down in the season of wheat harvest by praying for it. Others again have two or three miracles recorded of them, like Isaiah, who brought about the destruction of Sennacherib, the cure of Hezekiah and the going back of the shadow a number of degrees. Some have still more miracles to their credit, like Elijah and Elisha.

All these miracles, however, performed by the prophets, have this in common that they did not last a long time, and were not performed in the presence of all or of a great concourse of people; whereas all the signs and wonders performed by Moses were not merely more numerous than all those of all the other prophets, but they were superior to them in that they were performed in public and lasted a long time, for example, the manna lasted forty years, also the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night.

For this reason these differences between the miracles of Moses and those of the others are mentioned at the end of the Torah. First the text refers to the differences between the prophetic inspiration of Moses and that of the others in the expression, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,” as we explained the passage above. Then the text proceeds to explain the differences between the miracles of Moses and those of the others, “In all the signs and the wonders which the Lord sent him to do.” This indicates their great number. Then it says, “In the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,” alluding to the publicity of the miracles in the presence of his opponents. Then, referring to their duration, Scripture says, “And in all the great terror, which Moses wrought in the light of all Israel.” This refers, as we said, to the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night, which lasted all the forty years that the Israelites were in the wilderness, as we read, “For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and there was fire therein by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.” This is the way to understand the conception of prophecy and its various degrees as shown logically and in the difference between the prophecy and miracles of Moses and those of the other prophets. This is what we intended to show.

CHAPTER 11

What we said above concerning the manner in which the various degrees of prophetic inspiration come upon a person holds good when there is no prophet who may serve as a medium or instrument through whom inspiration may come to those who are not prepared. But when there is such a prophet, inspiration may come to those unprepared without reference to the degrees mentioned. This possibility was realized, at the time of the revelation on Sinai, when all Israel, the foolish as well as the wise, attained to the prophetic quality: “These words the Lord spoke unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire.” And not merely did they attain to prophetic inspiration, but they reached the degree called “face to face”, which is the highest that any one can attain and which requires the grace of God, viz. the degree attained by Moses. For we read concerning Moses, “And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face,” and similarly in reference to the degree reached by all Israel at the time of the Sinaitic revelation, we read likewise, “The Lord spoke with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire.”

Now it is clear that the six hundred thousand men who came out of Egypt on foot and had been accustomed to hard work in clay and in bricks were not worthy of so high a degree, and yet they attained it through the instrumentality of Moses. God said to him, “Go, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee.” The meaning of this verse is, I wish to come to you and to reveal Myself to you in the highest degree, face to face, though you are clothed in the thickness and obscurity of matter, symbolized by “thick cloud,” and are not worthy of it,—all this I do in order that the people may hear when I speak with you. This is the highest degree possible, namely that a person in the waking state should hear a voice speaking to him, without seeing any form, “Ye heard the voice of words, but ye saw no form.”

This degree the people attained through the grace of God and the instrumentality of Moses, in order that they might give up the doubt which they entertained concerning the possibility of a human being receiving prophetic inspiration. They expressed their wonder after the revelation, saying, “For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God …” This shows that the Israelites doubted the possibility of prophetic inspiration until that day. But Moses did not wonder at the prophetic inspiration of an individual, but at the attainment thereto by the whole people. Hence he said, “Did ever a people hear the voice of God …” After the revelation they all acknowledged the possibility, as we read, “We have seen this day that God doth speak with man, and he liveth.” This proves that the experience at that time removed the doubt from their mind.

In the same way the prophetic power was communicated by Elijah to Elisha without the preparatory degrees. For there was not a single one of the sons of the prophets who did not serve Elijah and learn from him before Elisha came to serve Elijah, for only when God wanted to take Elijah away did he say to him in Horeb, “And Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-Meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.” Through the instrumentality of Elijah he attained to a higher degree than any of them.

Also Joshua owed the degree which he attained to the instrumentality of Moses. And hence the Rabbis in discussing this matter say, “The face of Moses was like that of the sun, the face of Joshua was like that of the moon. The elders of that generation used to say, ‘Oh, the shame and disgrace!’ ” The meaning is, Joshua himself was not worthy to attain the degree which he did. It was due to the instrumentality of Moses.

Therefore Moses was like the sun, who gives of his light to the moon, while Joshua was like the moon, which receives her light from the sun, having none of her own. Hence they said, “Oh, the shame and disgrace” that Joshua himself should not have been worthy of prophecy and should get it through Moses only!

Similarly the seventy elders owed their prophetic gift to the instrumentality of Moses, not having been worthy of it in their own right: “And I will come down and speak with thee there; and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them.” The meaning is, though they are not worthy of it on their own account. Hence when Joshua said to Moses, “Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp,” Moses replied, “Art thou jealous for my sake?” He meant to say, You should not be jealous on my account, for the prophetic spirit comes upon them through my spirit and instrumentality, “Would that all the Lord’s people were prophets” on their account, worthy in their own right without my influence, “that the Lord would put His spirit upon them,” not through my instrumentality, but that they should themselves be worthy of the prophetic spirit without any intermediary.

The need of a medium may be explained as follows. When a spark of sunlight strikes a bright body, like a polished mirror, it is reflected upon a dark place, which is then illuminated by the reflection, not having been illuminated before. Similarly when the divine influence descends upon a perfect prophet, it is reflected from him upon one who is not worthy, thus inspiring with the prophetic spirit one who is not perfect and not prepared, and causing him to prophesy. Still, even in case of reflection, the one who is prepared gets a greater portion than he who is not prepared.

My opinion is that this is the reason why prophecy existed among the people of Israel in the land of Palestine and not among other nations in other lands. The Shekinah rested upon the ark and the tables of stone, and from these it was reflected like a ray of sunlight, and the prophetic spirit then rested upon a person who had in him a certain preparation analogous to the contents of the ark, that is a person who really had the ideas of the Torah, which are written upon the tables of the covenant. We find this illustrated in the prophecy of Samuel. He lay in his chamber and the prophetic voice came to him from above the ark-cover which was upon the ark that was then in Shilo. Samuel himself did not know who called him, for he did not think that he was worthy of the prophetic gift, that he should hear a voice in the waking state in a prophetic vision. Therefore he rose from his bed and went to Eli, until Eli understood, as we read, “And Eli perceived that the Lord was calling the child.”

An inspiration of this kind, which comes in this way without the mediation of a prophet, requires preparation in the recipient, that is the recipient must be himself prepared to a certain extent. Divine inspiration of this nature comes only when the recipient has a certain degree of preparation, and upon this is dependent the degree of inspiration which comes to him. The prophetic inspiration, however, which comes through the mediation of a prophet, comes also to a person who is not worthy of prophecy, as it came to all Israel at the time of the Sinaitic revelation; or it comes to one who is not prepared for it, as it came to Aaron and Miriam through the mediation of Moses, though they were not prepared for it at that time. This is the reason why the Lord called Moses with Aaron and Miriam, so that the prophetic spirit should come upon them through the mediation of Moses. For though they were worthy of the prophetic gift, they were not prepared for it at that time. This matter requires attention, for many learned men have wondered why God called Moses with Aaron and Miriam.

It is worth noting that when the prophetic spirit comes through the mediation of a prophet upon a person who is not worthy or who is not prepared, the recipient is able to pass it to another only when the nation has in its midst the ark and the tables. Moreover after the ark disappeared, the unprepared could not get prophetic inspiration even through a prophet. This is why Baruch son of Neriyah did not receive the prophetic gift through Jeremiah, because he was not prepared for it, and the ark had been hidden. Prophetic inspiration did come to Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi, because they saw Jeremiah and Ezekiel and were more prepared for it than Baruch. But it did not reach others through them, because the ark was not there and the inspiration they received was not sufficient to pass from them to others, since there was no ark. The proof of this is that there was no prophecy during the second temple, though there were at that time pious men and men of good works more worthy of prophetic inspiration than the men of the first temple. The reason was because they did not have the ark. Ezekiel could receive his inspiration outside of Palestine because he had already received it in Palestine, as our Rabbis explain the verse in Ezekiel, “The word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar.” They construe the verb (היה היה) as meaning: ‘it came’ because ‘it had come’ before.

CHAPTER 12

The principal purpose of the prophetic institution existing in the human race is not to foretell the future or to regulate particular matters that interest individuals, such as are communicated by diviners and star-gazers, but to enable a whole nation or the entire human race to attain to human perfection.

The Rabbis make this clear in the treatise Berakot: Commenting upon the biblical verse, “And the Lord spoke unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people … have dealt corruptly”, they say, God said to Moses, get thee down from thy greatness. I gave it thee only for the sake of Israel. Now that Israel has sinned, why do I want thee? This clearly shows that the prophetic gift of Moses was given to him solely for the sake of Israel, that they might receive the Torah and fulfil it. We find the same idea in “Torat Kohanim.” Commenting on the verse, “These are the commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses for the children of Israel”, they say it was the merit of Israel that was responsible for Moses’ receiving divine inspiration.

Hence some learned men say that the beginning of Moses’ prophetic experience did not take place in the gradual manner we described in chapter ten, but that it was a miraculous phenomenon and came upon him suddenly by the will of God, though he was neither prepared nor worthy of that high degree, the purpose being that the human race or the Jewish nation as a whole should attain to the destined end of man. This is why God said to him, Now that Israel has sinned, why do I need you? That is if I can not realize My purpose, there is no need of the prophet’s inspiration. This is the reason why when the Rabbis say, in the treatise Nedarim: “Prophecy rests only upon a person who is wise, strong, rich and tall,” they derive these requisite qualities from Moses. Since the prophetic gift is bestowed for the sake of the nation’s perfection, the prophet must have the qualities of Moses, whose prophetic gift was given to him for the same purpose. Therefore one of these attributes is tall stature, so that he should be admired and respected by the people. But if a prophet has not these qualities which are for the people’s benefit, there is no purpose in giving him the prophetic gift. This will also explain why we made revelation of the Torah a fundamental principle, while we considered prophecy as a derivative principle dependent upon the former, though one might suppose that the reverse is true, namely that prophecy is the fundamental thing and revelation of the Torah the derivative.

The truth is this. If the purpose of the prophetic institution among men were that people may know the particular events of the world or that by means of it signs and wonders may be produced for a particular purpose, as might seem at first sight, then the objection would be well taken. But since we have made clear that the necessity of prophecy is that men may be guided toward eternal happiness, that they may know through it what is agreeable to God and what is not, and that they may attain to the destiny intended for mankind by doing those things which are agreeable to God, the above objection does not hold. For since the purpose of prophecy is that the human race may be guided by God, which means revelation of the Torah, the latter must be a fundamental principle, because it is that which makes prophecy necessary. For this reason we consider prophecy a derivative principle dependent on revelation. For the same reason also we considered Providence a subordinate principle derived from reward and punishment, though it might appear that the reverse is true. One might say that since providence precedes reward and punishment, the latter is derived from it.

The answer is as follows: If God’s providence of human individuals were of the same nature as in the other animals, namely the preservation of their species, reward and punishment would be derivative from providence. But it is not so. The providence which we consider as a principle is not the kind which provides for the lower animals by maintaining the species merely, but the kind that rewards a man according to his deeds both in this world and the next, as the divine wisdom decrees. Hence we considered reward and punishment a fundamental principle and providence a subordinate principle derived from the former, because the providence which is concerned with reward and punishment is not the same as that which has to do with the lower animals, preserving merely their species.

In the same way must be understood all the relations of the subordinate principles to the fundamental ones, where the former are prior to the latter. Thus, prophecy is prior by nature to revelation of the Torah, and prior in time also, for the prophetic inspiration of the patriarchs came before the revelation of the Torah through Moses; and yet we considered prophecy subordinate to revelation of the Torah. The reason is because all the instances of prophecy that occurred before the revelation of the Torah were for the purpose of the Torah, and similarly all the prophetic teachings of the prophets who came after the Torah were for the purpose of the fulfilment of the Torah. Inasmuch as in the mind of an agent the purpose or final cause is necessarily prior to the other causes, our Rabbis say that the Torah came two thousand years before the world. The Torah is the purpose for the sake of which the human race was created, which is the highest form of existence in the world of genesis and decay. All other things exist for the sake of man, and man exists for the sake of the Torah. This principle may be applied to all the other dogmas which we considered as derived from the fundamental principles.

CHAPTER 13

We now desire to investigate whether it is possible that a given divine law of a given people should change in time, or whether it can not change but must be eternal.

It would seem that a divine law can not change, for reasons based upon a consideration of the giver, of the recipient, and of the law itself. Considering the giver, it would seem inconceivable that God who is the giver should desire one thing at one time and then change His will and desire its opposite at another time. It can not be that God should desire right at one time and wrong at another. Why then should God change His law for another?

Considering the recipient, we can not see why, since the nation is the same, the law should change in the course of time. We can not use the analogy of the individual and say that just as the rules of health for a child are different from those of a young man and those of a young man are different from those of an old man, as the time changes from childhood to youth and from youth to old age, so the rules of divine law must change with the times. For while it may be true in the case of an individual that his behavior is bound to change as the period of his life changes, the rule does not apply to a political group in which there is no such change from childhood to youth and to old age, for the convention of law is that all the times are the same. Hence we can not see that divine law should change by reason of the recipient.

Now if we consider the law itself, it would seem that since the purpose of the divine Torah is to teach men intellectual conceptions and true opinions, there can be no reason for its changing at any time. For true opinions can never change. Monotheism can not be true at one time and dualism or trinitarianism at another, any more than it is possible that a thing that has already been should change and not have been. It seems clear therefore that there can be no change in a divine law, whether we consider the law itself, the giver, or the recipient.

Nevertheless, if we consider the matter carefully, we shall find that it does not necessarily follow that a divine law can not be changed for one and the same people. For though the ideas themselves do not change, nor the giver, a change may occur on the part of the recipient. A perfect agent does his work in a manner corresponding to the preparation of the recipient. As that changes, the work of the agent changes, no doubt. Nor does this imply any change in the agent. A physician prescribes a certain regimen to his patient for a term known to himself, which he does not reveal to the patient. When that time passes and the patient gets better, the physician changes his regimen, allows what he prohibited before and forbids what he formerly permitted. The patient has no reason to wonder at this, for it does not imply any change in the physician’s original intention or imperfection in the physician because he did not in the first place prescribe a regimen good for all time. When the physician prescribed the first regimen, he knew the length of time that the patient would have to conform to it. And though he did not say anything to the patient, he knew when that regimen would have to change, estimating as he did, from the condition of the patient, the time required to pass from disease to health. When he prescribed the first regimen, his purpose was to improve the condition of the patient so that he might be ready and prepared to follow the second regimen, which was to come after its work had been done by the first. And when the time came he changed the first regimen for another which he had in mind in the first place.

In the same way it argues no defect in God if He did not give at the beginning a law and a regimen that would suffice for all times. For when He gave the Torah He knew that that law would suffice for the time which in His wisdom He estimated would be required to prepare the recipients and improve their condition so as to fit them to receive the second regimen, though He did not reveal this purpose of His to any one. When the time comes, He gives the second regimen, which may contain rules different from and opposed to the first, but it was in His mind from the beginning. On the contrary, as it would show a defect in the physician if he prescribed solid and substantial food, like bread and meat and wine, for convalescents and children and infants before they grow up or are strong enough to stand such food, so it would argue a defect in the giver of the Torah if He gave the same law for all time to novices and to habituates. The proper thing is to change it according to the change in the capacity of the recipients. As soon as they are accustomed to an easy regimen, He can advance them to a more difficult one, suitable to their nature, like bread and meat and wine and other substantial foods which, though unsuitable for children, are fit and proper for adults. And children, as they grow up and become accustomed to solid foods, change their mode of sustenance. A teacher treats his pupil in a similar manner. First he trains him in matters easy to understand until he gets accustomed to study little by little. Then he advances him to a more difficult and more profound plane for which he was not fit at the beginning before he became accustomed to study.

And if one object that it is not fitting to suppose that God’s power is so limited that He can not prescribe a rule of conduct that will embrace all men, young and old, for all time, his objection would be analogous to the question that is asked, why did not God create all men righteous and eager to worship Him so that there be not one that is crooked? assuming that this would show perfection. The fact is not so, as Maimonides has shown, touching this and similar matters, in the thirty-second chapter of the third part of the Guide of the Perplexed. We do not say that perfection would require that God should have created all animals with reason to praise Him, because it is contrary to nature. Similarly we do not say that it would be a credit to God if all things happened by way of miracle and not in accordance with natural law. For all theologians are agreed that nature is precious to God and He does not change it except when it is absolutely necessary. We are here discussing this subject as reason demands and as a study of the Torah suggests. Any one who chooses may disagree and insist that God constantly creates miracles in opposition to nature. When the Rabbis say that the Torah is a panacea and a drug that gives life to all, they mean for all the organs of the body. Similarly they say that “the words of the Torah are a salve for the eye, an emollient for the heart, and a medicine for the bowels … as is said, ‘and health to all their flesh,’ ” but they do not say that it is the same for all men, women and children, and for all time. The truth of our statement will be made clear in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 14

If we investigate the divine laws of the world, we find that they changed from time to time, forbidding what was originally permitted, and then again permitting what had been forbidden. Thus in the beginning Adam was given a few commandments which, according to the tradition of our Rabbis, mankind followed till the time of Noah. Noah was permitted to eat animal food, which was forbidden to Adam. Originally animal food was forbidden to Adam, plants alone being permitted, “Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed—to you it shall be for food.” Later, Noah was given permission to eat animal food, “Every moving thing that liveth shall be for food for you; as the green herb have I given you all.” An additional commandment was given to him, forbidding him to eat a limb cut from the living animal. Abraham was given the additional commandment of circumcision. Moses received many other commandments. Also God prohibited certain marriages of relations which were permitted to the Noahites and permitted certain matters which were forbidden to the Noahites. Thus an Israelite may eat an animal after it is slaughtered even though it is still struggling, whereas a Noahite would deserve the penalty of death if he ate the animal before it died, for it would come under the prohibition of eating the limb of a living animal. Similarly a Noahite is punishable with death if he is guilty of robbery, even to the extent of less than a perutah, not so an Israelite. Also a Noahite seeing another committing a robbery without preventing him is guilty of a capital crime. This is why all the inhabitants of Shechem deserved the punishment of death, because they saw Shechem committing a robbery and did not prosecute him, as Maimonides says in “Sefer Shofetim.” Also a Noahite who marries a half sister on the father’s side goes unpunished, whereas an Israelite guilty of such an act is punishable with death.

We find even a more remarkable statement than this in “Sifre,” by way of comment on the verse, “Neither shalt thou set thee up a pillar, which the Lord thy God hateth.” “Though it was dear to God in the days of the patriarchs,” is the comment there made. And this includes the time of Moses also, for at the time of the Sinaitic revelation he built an altar at the foot of the mountain, and set up twelve pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel. The prohibition came in the plains of Moab in the fortieth year. God said to Jacob, “I am the God of Bethel, where thou didst anoint a pillar.” It is clear, therefore, that a thing which the worshippers of God were in the habit of doing in God’s honor and which was absolutely permitted in the time of Moses at the Sinaitic revelation, was forbidden in the plains of Moab, according to the opinion of the Rabbis. So far as certain marriages of affinities are concerned, which were permitted to the Noahites, we see them expressly forbidden in the Bible. All this shows that the divine law did change, now permitting, now forbidding, in accordance with the times. This was the situation in the times of Adam, Noah and Abraham, until Moses came. There has been no change since his day.

The opinion of Maimonides is that the Torah will never change in whole or in part. Hence one of his principal dogmas is the immutability of the Torah. Now inasmuch as we have found that the divine laws which existed before Moses did undergo changes in the matter of permission and prohibition, immutability would be a principle peculiar to the Mosaic law. Maimonides bases this dogma upon the scriptural passage, “Thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.” The reason he gives, in the Guide of the Perplexed, is because a thing which is harmonious and perfect can not have anything added to it or taken away from it, as the harmony and perfection would be destroyed. But the Torah is perfect, as Scripture testifies, “The law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul,” therefore it can never be changed. This is the gist of Maimonides’ opinion in this matter, as expressed in a number of places.

But his ideas on this point require careful consideration in respect to their source. The dogma is surely of great importance, nevertheless we must know whether Maimonides derives it from tradition or from his own ratiocination. If the former, we must gracefully accept it, but if it is the latter, we have something to say about it. The prohibition against adding to or subtracting from the commandments has no reference to the number of the commandments, but to the manner of performing them. The meaning of the prohibition is that we should not invent of our own mind or borrow from the idolaters some addition or diminution in the manner of performing the commandments, because we may think it does greater honor to God. The context proves that this is the meaning. In section “Reëh” the Bible warns against idolatry: “When the Lord thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest in to dispossess them … take heed to thyself that thou be not ensnared to follow them, after that they are destroyed from before thee; and that thou inquire not after their gods, saying: ‘How used these nations to serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.’ Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God; for every abomination to the Lord, which He hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters do they burn in the fire to their gods. All this word which I command you, that shall ye observe to do; thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.” Now there is something strange in the sequence of thought in the above passage, “Take heed to thyself that thou be not ensnared to follow them, after that they are destroyed from before thee.” Would a person be likely to be ensnared to follow them after he has seen them destroyed? Why then does the text connect the idea of inquiring after their gods with their destruction?

The explanation of the text is this. The Bible is concerned that one should not be enticed in any manner after idolatrous practices. Therefore it says, a person might make a mistake and suppose that the reason God commanded the destruction of the idolaters is because they offered to the idols the honorable service that is becoming to God. Hence the text says, after destroying the idolaters you might inquire after the manner in which they worshipped their idols, thinking to do likewise and to serve God in the manner in which they served their idols, believing that it would be doing God a great honor. Hence the Bible says, “And that thou inquire not after their gods, saying: ‘How used these nations to serve their gods? even so will I do likewise,’ ” i. e. to God. “Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God.” Then comes the reason, “For every abomination to the Lord, which He hateth, have they done unto their gods.” The meaning is, you must not suppose that the reason God forbids those practices is because He is jealous on account of their being performed for others, but because they are despicable and an abomination in His eyes, and the proof of it is that “even their sons and their daughters do they burn in the fire to their gods.” They think this is doing honor to God, but it is an abomination to Him, for God does not desire the destruction of the world, nor does He command the killing of human beings. So the Rabbis comment, in the treatise Ta‘anit, on the statement of Jeremiah, “And they have built the high places of Topheth … to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded not nor spoke it, neither came it into My mind.” “I commanded not,” say the Rabbis, refers to the son of Mesha, the king of Moab, concerning whom it is said, “Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt-offering upon the wall.” “Nor spoke it,” refers to the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite. “Neither came it into My mind,” refers to Isaac, the son of Abraham.

Mesha the king of Moab was never commanded to offer sacrifices as Israel was, therefore he is referred to by the expression, “I commanded not.” Jephthah was an Israelite and was commanded to offer sacrifices, but God never spoke to him that he should make a burnt-offering of his daughter, hence, “nor spoke it.” And as for Abraham, God did command him to offer sacrifices, and also spoke to him, telling him to offer Isaac his son as a burnt-offering, but his intention was not that he should actually sacrifice him, hence the expression, “neither came it into My mind,” is referred to Isaac, the son of Abraham.

The Rabbis thus make clear that God does not desire sacrifices. The meaning of the Bible therefore is, do not think to honor God by performing for Him those services which the idolaters did for their gods. For far from being agreeable to Him, they are an abomination to Him, “for every abomination to the Lord, which He hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters do they burn in the fire to their gods.” Then the Bible sums up the matter and explains how God should be worshipped, “All this word which I command you, that shall ye observe to do; thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.” The meaning is, you must not merely not do anything that was not commanded, but you must not make any additions in the manner of the service.

This is also the explanation given by Nahmanides in his commentary on section “Reëh.” And we find the same idea in Sifre: “Hence they said that if the blood that requires one sprinkling is mixed with other blood that requires one sprinkling, there shall be only one sprinkling.” From this verse, Sifre makes an inference applying to all the commandments of the Torah: “How do we know that it is not allowed to add to the Lulab and the Zizit? Answer: ‘Thou shalt not add thereto.’ How do we know that it is not allowed to take away? Answer: ‘Nor diminish from it.’ How do we know that if he began to pronounce the priestly benediction he must not say, since I began the benediction I may as well add the words, ‘The Lord, the God of your fathers add unto you?’ Answer: The text says, ‘this word,’ meaning, you must not add even a word.” Thus we find express support for our view. Rashi, in his commentary on section “Vaëthanan,” says, in explaining the words, “Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you,” for example, to have five compartments in the phylacteries; and similar is the meaning of the expression, “Neither shall ye diminish from it.” There is therefore no proof in these verses of Maimonides’ opinion.

Moreover, if the meaning of the text were to forbid adding to or taking away from the number of the commandments, how could the Rabbis say that the court may decide to suspend a biblical commandment, where the suspension involves merely non-feasance? Is the court allowed to violate the command not to diminish from it? Similarly, Solomon, who introduced the ‘erub and the washing of hands, was guilty of violating the commandment not to add thereto. In short, I do not see any evidence in the passages cited by Maimonides that immutability is a dogma of the Mosaic law at all, as Maimonides thinks.

Moreover, assuming that the biblical expressions have the meanings he gives to them, that does not prove that the Torah will never be repealed or changed. The Bible merely warns us not to add to or take away from the commandments on our own account. But what can there be to prevent God Himself from adding or diminishing as His wisdom decrees? As for the argument that the equal and the mean can never be added to or taken away from, that applies to the true and absolute mean, whereas the relative mean may very well change with the nature of the recipients. Thus food that is fitting for a child is milk, while for an adult the proper food is bread and meat and wine.

Similarly divine commandments change with the times. Thus flesh was forbidden to Adam and permitted to Noah and his descendants by reason of the degeneration of Cain and his descendants, as we shall explain later. Some have written that the reason Adam was forbidden to eat meat is because the world was new, and if Adam had been allowed to eat meat, many animal species might have been exterminated. But this can not be the reason, for in that case permission should not have been given to Noah and his children either, for in their time also the number of animals was small, while Noah and his three sons and their wives were more than Adam and Eve, who were the only persons in existence when they were forbidden to eat meat. Moreover, if the explanation be as these men say, then there was no reason for again forbidding Israel the meat of certain animals. At any rate it is thus proved that though divine laws are not completely repealed, they may change in their permissions and prohibitions, as the character of the recipients changes.

CHAPTER 15

We must now explain the reason for the change that we have found, namely that that which was forbidden to Adam was permitted to Noah, and that a part of that which was permitted to Noah was forbidden to Israel. In order to explain this properly, we must first inquire what was Cain’s sin when he brought an offering to God from the fruit of the ground, as a result of which God refused to have respect unto him or his present. Was it that he did not bring of the best of the sheep and rams of Nebayoth, as Abel did? Surely this is no sin. If his occupation was the tilling of the ground and he prospered therein and brought of its fruit a present to God to thank Him for His benefits, why did the Lord refuse to have respect unto him or his offering? It stands to reason that when a person receives a benefit from another, having been treated with food and drink, he should return thanks to his benefactor corresponding to the kindness which he received. He is not obliged to thank him for having clothed and enriched him if he has done nothing of the sort. But the thanksgiving must correspond to the benefit received. If it is not greater, that is no cause for criticism and surely does not involve guilt.

And if we say that Cain’s sin consisted in the fact that he did not bring of the fruit of the tree but only of the fruit of the ground, as we said before, this did not deserve such severe punishment as is expressed in the verse, “If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted up? and if thou doest not well, sin coucheth at the door …” The question also suggests itself, since God favored Abel as well as his present, how is it that he was killed? Why did not an angel of God protect the God-fearing man and save him from death? Another question is, why is it that we read about Seth, “And begot a son in his own likeness, after his image,” while there is no such expression in reference to Abel, though God favored his present?

The explanation of all this is, I think, as follows: In the killing of animals there is cruelty, rage, and the accustoming oneself to the bad habit of shedding innocent blood, but the eating of the flesh of some animals produces besides, coarseness, ugliness and stupidity, as is stated in the Bible. After prohibiting the food of certain animals to Israel, the text ends up, “Ye shall not make yourselves detestable … neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby.” The word translated “defiled” (ונטמתם) is written without an aleph, thus indicating that the forbidden food produces mental coarseness and obtuseness. The Rabbis also say, in reference to the verse in question, “Transgression of a law stupefies the person, as is said, ‘that ye should be defiled thereby.’ Read not ‘defiled’ (ונטמאתם), but ‘stupefied’ (ונטמתם).” This is the reason why, though the flesh of certain animals is good food and suitable for man, God chose to deprive him of the slight good of eating the meat, in order to prevent the much greater evil which might result therefrom. This is why he forbade Adam the eating of animal food. He made up for this loss of good food by assigning to Adam vegetable food which was very good and nourishing, like wheat, barley, and the other seed-bearing plants that can be sown, also all those trees which bear fruit having seed in them. To other animals he gave for food all green grass that has no seed that may be planted. The purpose of this was to show the superiority of the human species to the other animals.

When Cain and Abel were born and saw their father Adam laboring in the tillage of the ground and planting wheat and barley and other grains, and nourishing himself by eating the plants, each one of them chose his own way, indicating his purpose and ideas in his practice. Cain took to tilling the ground because he thought that the only superiority of man to the animals consisted in his ability to till the ground and live on the choice plants. Seeing that Adam lived on plants like the animals, he thought that the spirit is the same in all and that all die alike. Therefore he brought an offering of the fruit of the ground, to thank God for the superiority He gave him over plants. He did not bring an animal offering, because he did not think that his superiority to them in the ability to till the ground was important enough to warrant bringing an offering. Part of his sin consisted, as we said before, in the fact that instead of bringing fruit of the tree, which is the best of plant life, he brought of the fruit of the ground, i. e. green vegetables. But his main offence was that he did not think that man’s superiority to the animals amounted to anything. Also he thought that he was forbidden to kill the animals because they were like him and were subject to death like him. He thought too that the main purpose of man is to eat and drink, since he fed on plants like the animals.

Abel, on the other hand, thought that man was superior to the animals, but that the superiority lay in the fact that he has control over them and can subdue them and make them do his work. But he did not think that man was authorized to kill the animals. So far human superiority did not reach, according to his opinion. Hence we read, “And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock.” The meaning is, he, too, thought like Cain that man is not allowed to kill animals except for God as an offering to show that God is superior to both man and animal, for He remains forever, while they perish. Man is superior only, he thought, in that he pastures them, governs countries, and so on. This is why Abel was killed, because his opinion was close to that of Cain, and more calculated to mislead men.

Nevertheless, Abel held that man has superiority over the animals and controls them, and is allowed to kill them for God—an opinion which is likely to lead to a recognition of the general superiority of man over the animals. Also he recognized the greatness of the Lord and brought of the first-born of his flock and of their fat ones. Hence God had respect unto Abel and his offering, because it was nearer the truth than the opinion of Cain, but He did not have respect unto Cain and his offering, because he was very far from the truth, since he thought man had no superiority over the animals and failed to appreciate the greatness of God in that he brought of the fruit of the ground instead of the fruit of the tree, as we said before. Therefore God said to him, “Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted up?” The meaning is, You are right, man is born a wild ass, and has no superiority over the animal in actuality when he comes into the world, but he has superiority potentially if he practises goodness and realizes his potentialities and recognizes the greatness of the Lord. If he does well, he will be lifted up above the animals. This is the meaning of the expression, “If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted up?” For this reason envy took hold of Cain and he killed Abel. For he still held the opinion that man is not superior to the animal. Therefore he said to himself, Since God favors Abel and his present, it is clear that it is permitted to kill animals, and hence it is just as lawful to kill Abel as any other animal. On the other hand, since Abel’s opinion was not altogether correct, he was not protected by God from violence.

Then when God revealed Himself to Cain and announced his punishment for the crime, Cain did not yet understand that to shed the blood of a human being is a more serious matter than to shed the blood of an animal, but he thought that as he was punished for shedding human blood, so he would be punished for shedding animal blood, since Adam was not permitted to kill animals; for the spirit of man and the spirit of the beast are alike, as the one dies so does the other. This erroneous opinion remained among the descendants of Cain until Seth was born, who knew the superiority of man over the animals, as his father Adam did. Therefore it says in reference to him, “And he [Adam] begot in his own likeness, after his image.” For he alone was in the image of God like Adam, whereas those before him did not understand the dignity of the human form in them, which is in the image of God.

According to these three opinions of Cain, Abel and Seth, respectively, all mankind are divided into three classes. One class follow the opinion of Cain, and think that the most important human occupation is agriculture. They feel hostility toward political rulers and desire to kill them, as Cain killed Abel. A second class follow the opinion of Abel, thinking that politics is the most important pursuit, and risk their life for political activity like Abel, because they think that it leads to human perfection, as we are told concerning certain Roman rulers. So kings risk their lives for the sake of power, which is natural to them as it was to Abel, who was the first shepherd and ruler and lost his life on that account. The third class follow the opinion of Seth, thinking that the important thing is to worship God, and despise power and the other pleasures. As the opinion of Seth is not easily grasped at first sight, he was followed by only a few rare individuals. But the opinion of Cain was widely prevalent among his descendants, and hence the earth was filled with violence on their account, their belief being that man has no superiority over the animal, and might is right. Therefore they were corrupt and lived like animals. For this reason it was decreed that their name should be wiped out from the earth in the flood.

When they were all destroyed and only Noah and those with him in the ark remained, God wanted to eradicate this opinion. Hence when Noah, after leaving the ark, brought an animal offering to God because he knew that man is superior by virtue of his reason and can know his Creator and serve Him better than the animals and can be thankful to God for this privilege, his offering was accepted with favor, as is said, “And the Lord smelled the sweet savour.” But He feared that unless this opinion was made firm, the Noahites might deviate in the direction of Abel’s idea and assume that God accepted their father’s offering as he accepted Abel’s offering, thus going back to the former errors and wrongdoing. Hence immediately after the offering, He hastened to permit the killing of animals and the eating of their flesh, “As the green herb have I given you all.” The meaning is that as even Cain admitted that man is superior to the plants, since they are created for man, so all the animals are also for the sake of man, who is superior to them, and there is not the same spirit in all. For this reason He prohibited the shedding of human blood, giving as a reason that the spirit of man is not like the spirit of the animal, for in the image of God made He man, i. e. man has a rational form which is nobler than the spirit of the animal. For this reason it was necessary to permit all animals without distinction, which He did, in order to eradicate the former opinion and wipe off its memory.

But when the Torah was given to Israel, and the opinion in question had been wiped out, God prohibited certain animals which produce coarseness and ugliness of soul. Nay, even the animals that were permitted were merely a concession to human lust and desire, in the same way as the Israelites were permitted women taken in war. Thus the Rabbis say, commenting on the verse, “because thy soul desireth to eat flesh,” There is a moral lesson in this expression, namely that one should not eat flesh unless he has an appetite for it. This shows clearly that the eating of flesh was permitted only because of necessity. For this reason it was forbidden at the time of creation, though it is good for food, for the reason we mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. The same is true of wine. It is good food and is permitted, and yet the Bible calls the Nazirite, who abstains from it, holy. At any rate all this shows that a given thing may be forbidden and then permitted, and vice versa. We may say, therefore, that there are matters in the divine law which are forbidden for a certain length of time, as God’s wisdom decrees, and later are permitted in accordance with the same divine wisdom. There is no evidence in the Bible to the contrary. As to the kind of things that may be abolished or repealed, this will be explained later on in this Book.

CHAPTER 16

Some have thought to prove the eternity of the Mosaic law from the expressions which are used in connection with some of the commandments, such as, “a statute forever,” “throughout your generations,” “a sign it is for ever.” Thus in connection with the day of atonement and the prohibition of new fruit we find, “It is a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.” In connection with the Sabbath, we read, “It is a sign between Me and the children of Israel forever.” In the commandment concerning Passover, we find, “For an ordinance to thee and to thy sons forever;” and so there are other commandments besides in which we find the expressions, “a statute for ever,” or “throughout your generations,” or “in all your dwellings.”

This, however, is no proof, for the opponent may say, this rather proves that the other commandments will be abolished, since these alone are so qualified. Besides, we are expressly told in the treatise Kiddushin: Why do we find the expression, “in all your dwellings,” in connection with the prohibition of fat and blood? Answer: If the expression were not there, we might argue that since the prohibition is found in connection with the sacrifices, it holds only of the time when sacrifices are offered, but not when there are no more sacrifices. In the same place they explain why the expression, “a statute forever,” occurs in the commandments concerning the day of atonement and the prohibition of new fruit, and not in other commandments. And it appears from their answers that if the expressions were not there one might suppose that the commandments in question might become obsolete even while the others are still in force. But the expressions in question do not denote the eternity of the law, for it is possible that when the other commandments are abolished, these will be abolished also.

Nor can any evidence be found in the expressions “eternity” (עולם), “unto eternity” (צר עולם), “a statute for eternity” (חקת עולם), or “to eternity” (לעולם). For these expressions and their like are also applied to a limited and not an infinite time. Thus we read, “Remove not the ancient (צולם) landmark, which thy fathers have set.” The word צולם (= eternity) is here used to denote a time limited and dating from the fathers. Other passages are: “For of old time (מעולם) I have broken thy yoke;” “Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old (עולם).” The Plural צולמים is also used to denote a finite time, as, “I will dwell in Thy Tent for ever (צולמים);” “O Israel, that art saved by the Lord with an everlasting (צולמים) salvation.” This refers to the salvation from Sennacherib. Similarly in the expression, “It hath been already, in the ages (לצולמים) which were before us.” The word denotes here, “a long time.” The word לצולם is also applied to a finite short time, as, “And he shall serve him forever (לצולם),” which means, until the year of the jubilee. The expression צד צולם has a similar use. Thus Hannah said, “I will bring him, that he may appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever (צד צולם).” The expression here means fifty years, which is the term of a Levite, as we find, “And from the age of fifty years they shall return from the service of the work, and shall serve no more.” The expression צד צולם is also applied to a finite short time not known to man but to God alone. Thus Isaiah says: “For the palace shall be forsaken; the city with its stir shall be deserted; the mound and the tower shall be for dens for ever (צולם צד).” And later it says, “Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high.” Similarly the expression, “all the days of eternity” (עולם כל ימי) is applied to a finite short time. Isaiah says: “And He bore them, and carried them all the days of old (כל ימי צולם),” while in the sequel it says, “But they rebelled and grieved His holy spirit; therefore He was turned to be their enemy, Himself fought against them.”

In short, none of these expressions or those like them necessarily denotes eternity or infinite time, but each one must be explained from its context. The very word לנצח, which signifies perpetuity, is applied to a finite brief time. Thus in reference to the dwelling of the divine glory on Mount Sinai, we read, “The mountain which God hath desired for His abode, yea, the Lord will dwell therein forever (לנצח).” But the divine glory did not dwell on Mount Sinai forever, for when the tent of meeting was built, the glory departed from Mount Sinai and dwelt in the tent of meeting. Similarly the expression, “a statute forever (חקת צולם),” does not necessarily signify that the thing will last an infinite time. For in the commandment concerning the candelabrum we find the expression, “a statute forever, throughout your generations,” and yet it has been interrupted from the time of the destruction of the second temple to this day. Similarly the expression, “a statute forever,” is used in relation to the feasts of Passover and Tabernacles, and yet our Rabbis say in “Vayyikra Rabbah” that all festivals will be abolished except Purim and the Day of Atonement. It would seem then that their interpretation of the expression, “a statute forever,” is that we may not abolish them on our own account, but that there is a possibility of their being abolished by God’s command.

We find also that in the time of Ezra they ceased counting the months from Nisan, though this is the method of counting prescribed in the Torah, as we read, “This month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you,’ this being the first commandment given to Israel. Although Tishri is the beginning of the year when we count the years of the world, as we read, “And the feast of ingathering, at the turn of the year;” “And the feast of ingathering, at the end of the year;” and when we compute the sabbatical and the jubilee years, yet the Torah commanded us to count the months from Nisan whenever we count them, because in this month Israel came out of Egypt and the nation first came into existence. The Torah itself computes all its calculations from Nisan. Thus, “And it came to pass in the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month;” “In the third month, etc.;” “And in the seventh month on the first day of the month;” “And on the tenth day of this seventh month is the day of atonement.”

According to the usage of the Torah the months have no names, but must be called second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, beginning with Nisan, in memory of the Exodus from Egypt. This is the meaning of the verse, “It shall be the first month of the year to you.” That is to say, when you count months, begin with Nisan, though when you count years, you must count from Tishri, as we said before.

But when they returned from Babylon, they desired to commemorate the second deliverance, which they did in two ways. The first was that they discontinued the Hebrew script and adopted the Assyrian in memory of the redemption from the Assyrian exile. Thus our Rabbis say, in the Tosefta of the treatise Sanhedrin, “Why is it called Asshurit? Because it came with them from Assyria (Asshur). Rabbi says, The Torah was given to Israel in these characters … And the reason it is called Asshurit (אשוריח) is because it is the most excellent (משורית) of writings.” According to the sense of the Gemara in the beginning of chapter “Kol Kitbe,” it seems that the characters we now use and in which our books are written, are not Hebrew. If so, we may say that Rabbi’s difference of opinion consists merely in saying that since the Tables of Stone were written in these characters, the name Asshurit was not given to them because they came from Assyria; but he admits that the Hebrew characters used by the people anciently were changed. But even if we grant that he does not agree that there was a change, it matters not, because his opinion, that of a single person, does not count as against the opinion of the majority of the wise men.

Moreover, in Sanhedrin, Chapter “Kohen Gadol,” the Amoraim explain the words of the wise men. The passage is as follows; “Rab Hisda says in the name of Mar Ukba: Originally the Torah was given to Israel in Hebrew characters and in the holy tongue. When the exiles came back in the days of Ezra, they chose Assyrian characters and the holy tongue, leaving the Hebrew characters to the common people, i.e. the Cutheans, who lived in Palestine before the exiles came. These used the Hebrew characters and the Aramaic language.” The Amoraim, therefore, agree that the characters now in use are not Hebrew.

Nahmanides also testifies that when he was in Palestine he found in ‘Akko an ancient silver coin with the jar of manna and the rod of Aaron engraved upon it, and with characters all around that he could not read. When they showed it to the Cutheans, who retained the ancient Hebrew characters, they read it שקל השקלים. These are the words which he adds as a note at the end of his commentary which he sent from Palestine, from which it is clear that the characters now in use are not Hebrew.

As for the statement of the Rabbis that the mem and the samek maintained themselves on the Tables of Stone by a miracle, it may be that this statement is made according to the opinion of Rabbi that the Tables of Stone were written in Asshurit or square characters, or else they also held the opinion that the Tables of Stone were written in the square characters, though the people at that time used the Hebrew characters. Or it may be that they were not referring to the mem and samek which we now use; and that in the Hebrew characters in which the Tables were written, the mem and the samek were closed letters, or there were other letters similar to the mem and samek of the square characters now in use. For Rab Hisda himself who said that the mem and the samek in the Tables maintained themselves by a miracle holds that the characters were changed. It is possible that the expression, “They chose the square characters,” refers not to the whole alphabet but only to a part. They selected some of the square characters and left the rest. Thus the mem and samek were retained in their closed form, as they were in the Tables, though some of the square characters were adopted in memory of the second deliverance. This is, however, not likely.

At any rate it is clear from all that went before that they changed the whole or part of their writing in memory of the second deliverance. And they also did another thing in memory of the second deliverance, namely they ceased counting the months from Nisan, as they had been accustomed to do in memory of the Exodus from Egypt, and adopted another method of counting. This is what our Rabbis mean when they say, “The names of the months came with them from Assyria.” That is to say, they counted the months by name, Tishri, Marheshvan, Kislev, as they did in Assyria, in memory of the second deliverance, and not second, third, fourth, as they did before. This is also the explanation of Nahmanides in his commentary on section “Bo.”

It seems from this, then, that they understood the pentateuchal commandment concerning the numbering of the months to be temporary, i. e. as long as that deliverance lasted. But after they were exiled a second time and were delivered again, and were told by Jeremiah, “They shall no more say: ‘As the Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;’ but: ‘As the Lord liveth, that brought up and that led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country’ …,” they thought that it was proper to give up the first mode of counting which was in memory of the Exodus from Egypt, and adopted a different one, beginning with Tishri, when they counted the years of the world. And they also retained the names of the months which they brought with them from Assyria, in memory of the second deliverance, for they understood that the commandment in the Pentateuch to count the months from Nisan was temporary and not perpetual, though there is no mention of time.

There is nothing therefore to prevent us from supposing that the divine law may in the future permit some things which are forbidden now, like fat or blood or the slaughter of animals outside of the temple. These things were originally forbidden when the Israelites left Egypt because they were addicted to the worship of evil spirits, and ate the flesh with the blood and also ate fat and blood, as we read in relation to the killing of animals outside of the temple, “And they shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices unto the satyrs, after whom they go astray.” But when this form of worship has been forgotten, and all people shall worship God, and the reason of the prohibition will cease, it may be that God will again permit it. And some of our Rabbis have the same opinion. In “Yelammedenu” they say, commenting on the biblical expression, “The Lord looseth the prisoners” (מתיר אסורים), “He permits the forbidden” (מתיר איסורין).

To sum up, I see no evidence, nor any necessity, from Maimonides’ arguments, that the immutability or irrepealability of the law should be a fundamental principle of a divine law generally or of the law of Moses in particular. This is also the opinion of my teacher R. Hasdai, namely that it is not a principle or dogma of the law of Moses. But he says that it is a doctrine which every one professing the Mosaic law should believe. The reason he gives is that if we examine all the parts of the Mosaic law, we find that they embrace all those moral qualities and theoretical ideas which are calculated to give perfection to the soul in some manner. This reason is similar to that which we quoted above from Maimonides’ Guide. We will come back to the subject and inquire from a different point of view whether the Mosaic law is liable to change as are other divine laws or not. This requires some preliminary considerations.

CHAPTER 17

All the words of the prophets are true without doubt. Nevertheless there is a difference in degree. The greater the dignity of the prophet and the higher the degree of his prophetic inspiration, the greater the truth value of his words. Some prophets, by reason of their weakness of comprehension, do not apprehend things with sufficient clearness. Prophetic apprehension has certain similarities to sensible apprehension. If a sense faculty or organ is healthy and strong, it apprehends the objects clearly; whereas if it is weak, it does not apprehend them clearly. It may apprehend the species to which the object belongs or it may apprehend the genus only without being able to tell to what species it belongs. Thus a person who has powerful vision apprehends color correctly, as, for example, red or green. But he also apprehends the degree of redness or greenness. On the other hand a person with weak vision will apprehend the genus only, i. e. he will know it is a color, and no more. Or he may know the species too; that it is red or green, but will not know what degree of redness or greenness it is. The same thing is true in hearing and the other sensibilia.

The same thing applies to the prophetic apprehension. The prophet who has a strong power of apprehension perceives the thing as it is without imagination and his words come out clear and not obscure; hence they may be understood in their literal meaning. On the other hand, a prophet who is inferior in degree to the one mentioned, will express himself in obscure language, in riddles and parables which are not clear. Hence the truth is not in the literal meaning, but in the allusion. If his words are taken literally, one gets an idea different from the one intended. Thus Ezekiel, prophesying after the exile, speaks in parables and riddles, which can not be understood literally; so much so that he complains about this to God, “They say of me: Is he not a maker of parables?” Similarly Zechariah, coming toward the end of the prophetic period, experienced his prophetic inspiration in visions, the truth of which lay not in the vision itself as it appeared, but in the ideas which it suggested. Thus when he says that he saw horses and women and a golden candelabrum and two olives upon it, the candelabrum and the olives are not to be taken as real things, but only as alluding to a certain idea.

Jeremiah, on the other hand, who lived before the destruction of the temple, spoke always plainly and clearly. God Himself made clear the difference between Moses’ prophecy and that of the others. In relation to the prophecy of Moses He says, “With him do I speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly and not in dark speeches,” From this we infer that the other prophets spoke in dark speeches which were not clear, and saw visions which were not real. For this reason their prophetic messages must be interpreted so as to agree with the words of Moses. In general, the words of an inferior prophet must be interpreted so as to agree and not be in conflict with the words of a superior prophet. For example, Isaiah says, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up;” whereas Moses said, “for man shall not see Me and live.” Now if we did not know the relative greatness of these two, we should suppose that Isaiah’s words are true and should say that by reason of his greatness as a prophet he apprehended as much as can be apprehended of God, and hence he said, “I saw the Lord;” while Moses, being inferior to Isaiah, and having apprehended of God only very little, said, “Man shall not see Me and live.” But since we know that Moses was the master of the prophets, concerning whom the Bible says, “And the Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend;” “If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord do make Myself known unto him in a vision, I do speak with him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so; … with him do I speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly and not in dark speeches;” we know that the words of Moses are true as they are in their literal meaning; while the words of Isaiah, who was inferior to Moses, are not correct. It is because of his inferiority that he said, “I saw the Lord,” because he thought he had seen God, but he had not really seen him, except in imagination. Moses, on the other hand, in whose prophetic inspiration the imagination played no part at all, but the reason only, as separated from all corporeal powers, said, “For man shall not see Me and live,” which is the truth.

Isaiah, on the other hand, made use also of the power of imagination, called by the Rabbis, a non-transparent glass, and hence was misled by it into thinking that he saw God. He was not unaware that his perception was an error due to the imagination, and said so, explaining that his matter was not as pure as that of Moses, “Because I am a man of unclean lips;” and that his moral qualities were not all that they should be, “And I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips;” for association with men of bad morals corrupts the morals of a good man. This is why he complained, “Woe is me! for I am affected by imagination.” The meaning is, I am affected by the power of imagination and my prophetic inspiration is not through a luminous glass like that of Moses, who heard a voice speaking to him, without seeing any image before his eyes. But as my prophecy is through a non-luminous glass, through the medium of the power of the imagination, I am not able to apprehend speech without seeing a form in the act of speaking. And this is due to the fact that I am a man of unclean lips and that I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. Therefore I complain and say, “Woe is me! for I am influenced by imagination … For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts,” and I know that it is the work of the imagination, for God can not have any attribute or likeness ascribed to Him, even in a prophetic vision, if one prophesies through a luminous glass.

This is the meaning of the statement of the Rabbis: Menasseh killed Isaiah. Then they say, he first tried him and then killed him. He said to him, Your teacher Moses said, “Man shall not see Me and live,” whereas you say, “I saw the Lord.” Then they remark that Isaiah could have answered Menasseh but did not, because he knew that he would not accept his answer. The answer he could have made is that even concerning the contemporaries of Moses it is said, “And they saw the God of Israel,” because their apprehension was not through a luminous glass.

From all this it is clear that an inferior prophet must not oppose the words of a prophet who is superior to him, but that his words must be so interpreted that they should not conflict with the words of the superior. Now since it is clearly stated in the Torah that the prophecy of Moses stands on a higher plane than that of any other prophet, it follows that we can not accept the words of any other prophet in opposition to and refutation of the words of Moses. Whether, however, any prophet may interpret the words of Moses and say that though they are stated without qualification, they are conditional in their meaning, or that a time limitation should be attached to them, though no such limitation is explicitly stated,—this will be discussed in the sequel with the help of God.

CHAPTER 18

There is a great difference between a thing which a prophet learns from God, and a thing which is told him by another prophet. A thing which a prophet hears from God can not be abolished unless he subsequently hears from God a statement opposed to the first. Thus Abraham was told, “Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, even Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering.” Later he was told, “Lay not thy hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him.” Iddo, the prophet, was devoured by a lion, as a punishment because he listened to the old prophet in Bethel and went back to Bethel and ate bread there, contrary to the order he had received directly from God. But any command that comes to one through a prophet may be opposed by a contrary command from another prophet. For this reason God desired that all Israel should hear from Him directly the ten commandments, so that no prophet may have the power to abolish them in whole or in part. This is stated explicitly in Scripture: “These words the Lord spoke unto all your assembly in the mount … And He wrote them upon two tables of stone, and gave them unto me.”

But there is some difficulty in connection with the statement of the Rabbis at the end of the treatise Makkot, that the first two commandments were heard directly from the mouth of Omnipotence (lit. strength). This is strange. For the Bible says, “And the Lord delivered unto me the two tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written according to all the words, which the Lord spoke with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.” And again, “And He wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the ten words, which the Lord spoke unto you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly; and the Lord gave them unto me.” From all this it appears clearly that all the ten commandments which were written on the tables were spoken to all Israel. How then can the Rabbis say that they heard from God the first two commandments only and not the rest?

Maimonides, in the Guide of the Perplexed, says that the expression of the Rabbis, “They heard them from the mouth of strength,” means they heard them through the force of rational demonstration. For his idea is that the first commandment teaches the existence of God, and the second, the unity of God, both being principles which can be proved by reason. He is also of the opinion that a thing that can be known by reason is equally known to the prophet and the layman. Hence although they heard them from God, these two should not be counted among the commandments. But the other commandments belong to the class of things known by tradition or generally accepted. Hence it was necessary that they should be heard from God, and the Rabbis do not speak of them as having been heard from the mouth of strength. So far Maimonides.

Now since he agrees that Israel heard all the ten commandments from God, his words require examination. If it is true that the first two commandments teach the existence and unity of God, why was it necessary to reveal these two commandments through prophetic inspiration? Human reason is sufficient to prove them, and any one denying them can be compelled by rational arguments to acknowledge the truth. There was more need to reveal through prophetic inspiration those things which the human mind alone can not discover. And there are still greater objections to Maimonides’ opinion. He says in the book “Madda‘:” The heathen argued as follows: God created stars and spheres to control the world. He placed them in heaven and showed them honor. They are His servants and serve Him continually. Hence they deserve praise and glorification and honor. It is God’s desire that we should show honor and respect to any one whom He honors and to whom He gives greatness, as a king desires that honor be shown to his servants who stand before him. For this reason the heathen offered sacrifices to the heavenly bodies and praised and glorified them and bowed down to them in order to obtain the favor of God. Such was their erroneous opinion. In the second chapter of the same treatise he says, It is not proper to serve them [the stars] as mediators between man and his Creator. According to Maimonides’ opinion, therefore, since reason might seem to favor the worship of the stars, the spheres and the constellations on the two grounds just mentioned, the first commandment should have warned against it, instead of concerning itself with God’s existence and unity, which not even the heathen denied, according to his opinion.

My opinion is that the heathen were led to their wrong worship by different reasons. The error of some was due to the fact that they denied the existence and unity of God, believing that God is a corporeal power and that He is the soul of the sphere, which is the belief of the Epicureans. These require no prophetic refutation, for reason can convince them with conclusive proofs. Others were led into the error of worshipping the spheral powers for the two reasons we mentioned above in the name of Maimonides. Examples of this are Ahab and other kings of Israel and Judah. Solomon too seems to have fallen into this error, as appears from the literal meaning of the scriptural text. All these men believed in the existence and unity of God, in prophecy and revelation of the Torah, and yet they fell into this error either because they thought in this way to honor God, or because they thought of making mediators between themselves and God, as Maimonides says.

There is still another sect of men who erroneously incline to idolatrous worship for a deeper reason. They hold with some of the philosophers that “God hath forsaken the land.” Believing in the existence, unity and incorporeality of God, they hold that God has no care of the lower world at all, thinking it a sign of greatness in God that He pays no attention to the human species because man is inferior and despised by Him. They think it a virtue and a sign of nobility in God to refuse attention to that which is inferior, saying that in respect to inferior things ignorance is better than knowledge. Job inclined to this opinion when he said, “What is man that Thou shouldest magnify him, and that Thou shouldest set Thy heart upon him?” Therefore he thought that the lower world is controlled by the spheres. Referring to such persons David said, “Who exalt Thee with wicked thought.” That is to say, they exalt and lift Thee up, but this exaltation is with a wicked thought, in that they say that Thou dost not pay attention to particulars, because they think that it would be a defect in the nature of God if He took account of particulars, since this would necessitate His being favorably disposed at one time and angry at another, and so with other qualities which indicate change in us, and therefore would argue a defect in His nature also if He changed from favor to anger. Their opinion therefore is that the lower world is governed by the spheres and that God has no knowledge of it.

They also say that since God created stars and constellations and angels to rule over the lower world, and assigned to them dominion over the nations, as we read, “Which the Lord thy God hath allotted unto all the peoples under the whole heaven,” and influence comes through them, we must prepare ourselves to receive this influence from them, and must worship them since they control us and exert an influence upon us. This was the opinion of the accursed women who said to Jeremiah, “But since we left off to offer to the queen of heaven and pour out drink-offerings unto her, we have wanted all things …” They say also that every one of the seven metals is peculiarly related to one of the seven planets, gold corresponds to the sun, silver to the moon, lead to Jupiter, and so on. And when a figure is made of a certain metal at a certain hour, when the corresponding star is in a certain position in relation to the other stars, the spiritual power of the star will come down upon the figure, and by worshipping the figure one will obtain the influence of the star in question. Hence comes the worship of figures by the heathen. They also say that if a drop of human seed enters the uterus at the moment of a certain position of the stars, the person born of that seed will come under the influence of a certain star, and will be a diviner or a prognosticator by virtue of the spiritual influence of the star, and may even obtain so high a degree that he may be worshipped himself like the figures which the ancients made. This was the error of Pharaoh and of Hiram, king of Tyre, who made themselves gods, and of Nebuchadnezzar, who made of Daniel an object of worship, as we read, “And worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an offering and sweet odours unto him.” All this error is due to the fact that they do not believe that God takes care of the human race.

Inasmuch as this opinion sounds very plausible so far as reason goes and was very prevalent at the time when the Torah was given, God was concerned about it, and wanted to eradicate it completely. It could not be eradicated through a prophet, for one who denied providence and revelation would deny the divine origin of prophecy in which the religionist believes. God therefore wanted to show as firmly as possible the refutation of this idea, as well as of the idea that absence of providence is a sign of greatness, and of the idea of making the heavenly bodies mediators between man and God. This end He accomplished by showing to them that there is such a thing as prophecy and revelation of a law to guide men in the right path. But this can not be unless God does provide for man.

This was made clear to them when they received from Him through prophetic inspiration, face to face, the two first commandments. The first commandment teaches that God provides for us and guides us. This is the meaning of the expression, “thy God,” i. e. the one who guides thee. The commandment ends with the words, “Who brought thee out of the land of Egypt . .,” i. e. I am the one who took care of thee and took thee out of the land of Egypt. “Out of the house of bondage,” points to providence, for the constellations indicated that you were to be a slave, but I took you out of there with great strength, hence the expression, “out of the house of bondage.” What you saw with your own eyes at the time of the Exodus proves the existence of Providence, and what you hear me now speaking to you proves that there is such a thing as prophecy. Thus, this commandment refuted the philosophical opinion which we mentioned.

But there still remained the possibility of retaining the other ideas, namely that the angels or the stars or the constellations are mediators between God and man, or that it is proper for man to worship them on the ground that one thus exalts God and performs His will, seeing that God has shown them honor, therefore He added the second commandment, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.” This is a prohibition of worshipping the Separate Intelligences, i. e. the angels. For, as our Rabbis say in Mekilta (so Nahmanides says in his commentary on section Jethro), the angels are everywhere called, “other gods.” “Before Me,” means, even if you do believe in My providence, you must have no other gods to bring in as mediators between you and Me, nor must you think that you will exalt Me by worshipping them, not to speak of expecting to receive any influence from them without My knowledge. Then He says, “Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, nor any manner of likeness …,” as a warning against those figures which are made to receive through them astral influence, figures which are everywhere in Scripture called, “molten gods.” The commandment ends up, “For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.” That is to say, do not think to exalt Me by worshipping them, for it will have the opposite effect, as I shall be jealous of them.

Thus all possible opinions are refuted which might lead to the worship of idols or any god but the Lord. But God was not concerned to refute the opinion of Epicurus, who denied the existence and unity of God and thought that God is the soul of the celestial sphere, for he can be convinced by conclusive, rational arguments; whereas the other opinions needed refutation, as we have explained.

That our explanation of the purpose of the first two commandments (namely, to refute the opinions of the philosophers) is correct, is proved by the fact that immediately after the Sinaitic revelation Moses was told, “Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel: Ye yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven. Ye shall not make with Me gods of silver, or gods of gold …” It seems very strange that immediately after the ten commandments we have again a prohibition of idolatry, which has already been forbidden in the second commandment. But the meaning is this. He explains once more that the erroneous idea of the philosophers, namely that God being exalted and dwelling in heaven is too dignified to have anything to do with corporeal things, and that He does not provide for the human race because man is inferior and despised and unworthy of such dignity; or the idea that there is need of figures or other mediators between Him and us through whom God’s spiritual power may descend,—these were the cause of Israel’s mistake in making the calf. Therefore He says, “Ye yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.” That is to say, you have seen that though I am exalted in heaven, I lowered My dignity, and did not refrain from speaking to you, though all of you except Moses were unprepared for such a dignity. This shall be an indication to you that I provide for man though he is inferior and despised and unworthy of My providence. Therefore, “Ye shall not make with Me gods of silver, or gods of gold,” so as to cause My spirit to descend; for My influence can be obtained with something less valuable—“An altar of earth thou shalt make unto Me;” “I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit;” or even with something less substantial than this, namely with prayer—“In every place where I cause My name to be mentioned I will come unto thee and bless thee;” i. e. I will cause My blessing to emanate upon you. In this way were refuted those opinions which led to error and idolatry, so prevalent in those days.

It might seem, however, that the first two commandments would be sufficient. But one might say that the first two commandments do not necessarily show that there is special providence in human affairs. For they deal only with God Himself, and prohibit substitution of other worship for the worship of God. This proves only general providence of the species as a whole, but not special and individual providence, since the first two commandments say nothing about the conduct of men in their relations to one another, which would indicate special providence. For this reason it was necessary to give them on the same occasion other commandments, necessary to teach revelation and providence, as will be explained later with the help of God.

The difference between the first two commandments and the rest is that the first two Israel heard from God without the mediation of Moses. Therefore they are expressed in the first person, “I am the Lord thy God,” “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me,” “For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,” “Of them that love Me and keep My commandments.” But beginning with the third commandment, all is in the third person, because Moses was speaking to them in the name of God—“Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain,” instead of, “I will not hold guiltless,” or “taketh My name.” Similarly we read, “For in six days the Lord made,” “And rested on the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day,” instead of “I made,” “I blessed,” “I sanctified,” and so on. This shows the difference between the first two commandments and the rest. The first two they heard directly from God without the mediation of Moses, whereas in the others they heard the voice speaking to Moses, and Moses then explained the words to the people. Hence they are in the third person, as we explained.

This is what the Rabbis mean when they say, “They heard the first two commandments from the mouth of the Almighty (lit. strength).” The meaning is that since God spoke these two commandments to Israel Himself, face to face, without the mediation of Moses, no prophet has the power to say anything against them, or to weaken them in any way, even as a temporary measure. This is why they use the expression, “from the mouth of the Almighty,” and not “from the mouth of God,” to indicate that anything which is told through a prophet another prophet has the power to abolish, either as a temporary measure, or as circumstances determine, as for instance Jeremiah abolished the counting of the months from Nisan. But that which is told to a person by God without the mediation of a prophet, no prophet has the power to abolish even temporarily. Hence the statement of the Rabbis, “If a prophet tells the people to worship idols, even temporarily, he must not be obeyed; but if he says that we should violate the Sabbath or transgress some one of the commandments as a temporary measure, or even permanently, provided he does not subvert the foundations of the religion, we must listen to him, because it says, “Unto him ye shall hearken.” And if he says, God commanded me that you shall pray to a certain star or a certain angel that he should be a mediator between Him and you, we must not pay any attention to him, because it is in opposition to the first two commandments, which we heard from God, and no prophet may listen to another prophet trying to abolish something which he himself heard from God, as we explained in the beginning of this chapter.

CHAPTER 19

From what we have said it is clear that a divine law can not change in respect to the three general principles which we mentioned. For when they heard the first two commandments from God, they were convinced of the reality of revelation and the existence of God who gave the commandments, also that He takes notice of, and punishes those who transgress His will, while He rewards those who fear Him, freeing them from bondage, as they saw how He punished the Egyptians and delivered the Israelites. The expression, “Who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,” shows the extent of divine providence, from which we conclude that we must not worship any one else even as a mediator. All this is contained in the expression, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me,” as we have seen. It is clear, therefore, as we have written in the twenty-fifth chapter of the First Book, that the difference between divine laws does not lie in their general principles. What still remains to be explained is whether the other commandments in the law of Moses may be changed by a prophet or not.

Now as there is a difference between the first two commandments and the others in that the former were spoken by God without the mediation of Moses, while the latter, though heard from God, were explained by Moses, so we can say that there is a difference between the ten commandments and the other precepts in that the ten commandments were heard from God, whereas the others were commanded by Moses. And as we have found that the last eight commandments of the decalogue may be changed by a prophet temporarily, so we may say that the other precepts of the Mosaic law can be changed by a prophet even permanently. And it is for this reason that they could abolish counting the months from Nisan in the time of the second temple by the command of Jeremiah, as we have seen.

But if it were true that any prophet or any one who professes to be a prophet is authorized to change any commandment of the divine law except those of the decalogue, or to say that the time has come to change it, the entire law would fall and it would have no permanence at all. On the other hand, if we say that no prophet has the right to change the commandments of the divine law given by another prophet, it would cause grave difficulty, for if this were the case, then why did Israel believe Moses when he changed the Noachian law which they had received by a continuous tradition from their ancestors, who were prophets?

The changes, moreover, which Moses introduced did not concern merely the details of conventional and positive rules, or matters which are relative to the recipients, or those things in which nations may differ and which differentiate one divine law from another, as we explained in the First Book, but they concerned also those matters in which human convention plays no part, like the laws concerning the red heifer, or the sowing of mixed seeds, or the permission to eat an animal as soon as slaughtered, though it is not yet dead, and the other things permitted to Israel, which had been forbidden to the Noahites, as we find in chapter “Arba‘ Mitot,” for example the law that a heathen who observes the Sabbath is guilty of death, and so on. All this would indicate that a thing which is commanded by a prophet in a divine law may be changed by another prophet. How then can we tell what things may be changed or abolished by a prophet and what things may not?

Our opinion therefore is, as the matter appears from an investigation of the Torah, that one is not permitted to budge from his traditional belief which came down to him by a continuous chain of communication, going back to the teaching of a prophet, provided he is convinced that the principles, fundamental and derivative, of the belief in question are true, as we explained in the First Book of this treatise, unless he is absolutely certain that God desires to abolish the words of the first prophet from whom the traditional belief came down to him.

The manner in which one can have this latter certainty is by having an absolute verification of the genuine character of the second divine messenger. This proof can not consist in the performance of miracles, since we see many other persons who are not prophets performing miracles either by creating an illusion or by magic, like the Egyptian magicians, or through some other art. Moreover, we find that those prophets who are not sent to announce a law also perform miracles, hence we can not tell whether the miracle performed by the person in question shows that he has been sent to promulgate a law, or whether it merely indicates that he is a prophet. It is clear therefore that a miracle is no proof that the messenger is genuine, as was explained in the eighteenth chapter of the First Book, but the proof must be derived from the law of Moses for the reason given in the eleventh chapter of the First Book. Accordingly, if his mission is proved in the same manner as was that of Moses, it is proper to listen to the second prophet even if he desires to abolish the precepts of the first.

This is the reason why the Israelites believed the words of Moses, even though some of his precepts were opposed to the Noachian law, as we said before, which they knew by tradition as divine. But they were absolutely convinced that God desired to promulgate a law through Moses; else they would not have had the right to budge from their tradition, from the law which came down to them by an unbroken tradition from their ancestors, going back ultimately to Adam and Noah. This conviction was reached in two ways. They felt certain that the last prophet, who was introducing changes, was greater than the first; and they verified the genuineness of the last prophet’s mission as firmly as that of the first. Both of these kinds of proof applied absolutely in Moses’ case.

He was a greater prophet than those who lived before him, for he performed wonderful miracles, such as had never been performed before. The Bible makes this clear when it says, “And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, but by My name Jhvh I made Me not known to them.” The meaning is that God revealed Himself to Moses with His great name, by means of which he was able to perform miracles openly and publicly, changing the laws of nature, such as had never been done for the earlier prophets, who could only perform invisible miracles, to deliver them from death in time of famine, and from the sword in time of war. The mission of Moses was verified, because all Israel heard the voice speaking to Moses, as the Bible says, “That the people may hear when I speak with thee;” for I desire to promulgate a law through thee, and this will make them believe what thou sayest. For this reason Israel was obliged to believe his words, even though he were to abolish all that was said by the prophets before him, since his mission was verified, as we explained in the eighteenth chapter of the First Book, and his prophetic grade was superior to all the rest, as we explained in chapter ten of this Book.

Whether in the future there may come another prophet who will abolish the words of Moses and whom we shall be obliged to believe—this can happen only, as we have said, in one of two ways. Either the new prophet will be proved to be greater than Moses, or his mission will be verified as was that of Moses. Now the Bible says that there can not be a prophet greater than Moses, “If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord do make Myself known unto him in a vision, … My servant Moses is not so; he is trusted in all My house; with him do I speak mouth to mouth.” It seems then that Moses’ prophecy is superior to any other. And at the end of the Torah we read that there will never arise another prophet like Moses whom God knew face to face. This is the degree which Moses asked for and it was granted to him, as we read at the end of the Torah, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face.”

Therefore if any prophet or any one professing to be a prophet should come and say that he has attained a higher grade than Moses, which is impossible, and should say that we should listen to him and abolish any of the commands of Moses, not as a temporary measure merely, we will refuse to listen to him, but will tell him that he must prove his superiority to Moses and all the prophets who came after him and who were his disciples, by performing miracles greater and more wonderful than those performed by Moses and all the other prophets; by humiliating all those who dispute with him, as Moses did to Korah and his assembly; by triumphing over and overcoming all the wise men of his age and all his opponents, as Moses did to Pharaoh and to all the magicians and wise men of Egypt; by performing miracles in public and in the presence of all the people, as Moses did in the presence of Pharaoh and of all Israel; and by maintaining the miracles a long time, as Moses caused to go before the people a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night, and caused the manna to come down for forty years without ceasing, except on the Sabbath day, when it did not come down, in order to show the sanctity of the Sabbath and the truth of his words; and by fulfilling many other conditions of this kind, without which he can not make good his claim.

The reason the Israelites obeyed Jeremiah and abolished counting the months from Nisan, as we have seen, is perhaps because they based their action upon the interpretation of a biblical verse, as we find in the Tosafot on the first chapter of the treatise Megillah, that the reason Ezra changed the written characters when he returned from the exile was because of his interpretation of a biblical verse. “He shall write him a copy of this law (התורה משנה),” he interpreted to mean, a writing that is destined to change (mishne, משנה, from the rabbinic shanah, שנה, to change). Or it may be that they obeyed Jeremiah because his precept did not concern any of the ten commandments, or because there was no intention to abolish any of the Mosaic commandments, but to commemorate the second redemption as they commemorated the first. For they had a tradition that it should be commemorated, provided that the exodus from Egypt should not be ignored, as the Rabbis say, “Not that the exodus from Egypt should be entirely removed.”

But if a prophet or one professing to be a prophet should come and say that he has been sent by God to promulgate a law, abolishing permanently the words of Moses, he must not be believed so far as concerns the ten commandments, since they were heard from God. But neither must he be believed in respect to the other commandments outside of the decalogue, unless he can verify his mission as Moses verified his, when all Israel heard the voice saying to Moses, “Go say to them: Return ye to your tents. But as for thee, stand thou here by Me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandment, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which thou shalt teach them.”

This is the reason why God revealed Himself to all Israel and spoke to them face to face, in order that Moses’ mission should be absolutely verified. Therefore God said to Moses, “Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and may also believe thee forever.” The meaning is: God said to Moses that He desired to reveal Himself to him face to face despite the fact that he (Moses) was in a thick cloud, i. e. wrapped in the coarseness and obscurity of matter and unworthy of such a dignity, for the sake of two advantages to follow: one was with reference to the immediate present, namely, “that the people may hear when I speak with thee,” and obey all his commandments even if they are opposed to the Noachian law. The other concerned the future: that they should believe in Moses forever as the messenger of God.

Hence they will not listen to any prophet who may come to abolish the words of Moses, unless they hear from God that he was sent for that purpose. For to obey a prophet and permanently violate a Mosaic command, is like obeying a prophet and violating that which one has heard from God Himself. In such a case one must not obey a prophet. It is for a thing of this kind that the prophet Iddo was punished by being devoured by a lion, because he obeyed another prophet and violated that which he himself heard from God. It is clear therefore that we must believe no one, whether he be a prophet or one professing to be a prophet, if he says that he was sent by God to abolish the words of Moses, or if he says that they are temporary and that the time has come for their abolition, unless his mission can be proved as publicly as the mission of Moses was proved in the presence of six hundred thousand people.

As to the question whether there will ever be in the future such a great publicity as the first, when all Israel will hear the voice of the Lord God speaking to them out of the midst of the fire, the opinion of our Rabbis is that there will be such an event. Thus we read in Midrash Hazit, on the biblical verse, “Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,” “Said Rabbi Judah, when the Israelites heard the first two commandments, the Torah was impressed upon their minds and they learned without forgetting. Then they came to Moses and said, Moses our teacher, You be the messenger between us, as is said, ‘Speak thou with us and we will hear.’ Thereupon they learned and later forgot. They said then, as Moses who is made of flesh and blood is temporary, so is his teaching temporary, i. e. it is forgotten. Hence they went back to Moses and said: we should wish that God would reveal Himself to us again, ‘Let Him kiss me with the kisses of His mouth.’ Said Moses in reply, not now, but in the future He will, as is written, ‘I will put My law in their inward parts.’ ” It is clear from this that the Rabbis are of the opinion that in the future all Israel will experience a second revelation like the first, which will come directly from God without any mediation.

My own opinion is that since this does not necessarily follow from an interpretation of the biblical verses, it is more proper to say that this matter depends upon the will of God. According to the Torah it belongs neither to the category of the necessary nor to that of the impossible. Our position at present is that of a prophet who heard something from God. He must not listen to any other prophet who advises him to act contrary to the command he himself received from God, unless he himself hears to the same effect from God. And even if we can verify the mission of a new prophet as the mission of Moses was verified, we will refuse to listen to him if he bids us abolish any one of the ten commandments which we ourselves heard from God.

In this way we can reply to our opponents, who argue from the verse in the Torah: “I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee; and I will put My words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.” This verse signifies, they say, that a law will be given through the new prophet as it was given through Moses; also that “from among their brethren,” means from the brethren of Israel and not from Israel itself. Our reply to these men is that granting that, according to the verse quoted, a prophet will come to give a law, as Moses did before, the expression, “I will raise them up a prophet … like unto thee,” signifies that his “raising up” and the verification of his prophetic mission, which is a fundamental dogma of divine law, as we have seen, must be of the same kind as the verification of Moses’ prophetic mission, which took place in the presence of six hundred thousand people, so that there was no doubt and no suspicion of any kind.

CHAPTER 20

An opponent might say that the passage in the Torah, “If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord do make Myself known unto him in a vision, I do speak with him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so …,” has reference merely to Aaron and Miriam, but there may be in the future a prophet like Moses or even greater. Similarly the expression, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,” does not signify that there will never be another like him or even greater than he. For we find similar expressions where we know that another like the persons so characterized will arise in the future. Thus we find in reference to Hezekiah, “After him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor among them that were before him.” Similarly in reference to Josiah we find, “And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the Lord … neither after him arose there any like him.” And yet it is not possible that there shall never arise another like him or even greater than he, for the Messianic king will be equal to him or greater. The expression, “there has not arisen like him,” does not mean that there will never arise a person like him, but that in some specific attribute there will be none like him, or the meaning is that there was no one like him in the entire period of the kings until the exile when the kingdom was cut off from the seed of David, but not that there will never be another like him. There is no reason therefore why we should not say the same here. “There hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,” means that there was none like him in the entire period of the prophets until the prophetic institution ceased; but there will be another in the future like him or even a greater than he. As for the word “since” (עוד), which is used in reference to Moses and not in the other cases cited, the word “since” (עוד) denotes a short time, as, “Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more (עוד).” עוד denotes here the time during which the effect of the wine is still present. Similarly, “Neither shall they learn war any more (עוד),” means in that generation. Also, “The vile person shall be no more (עוד) called liberal,” is to be explained in the same way.

The answer to such an argument is that our conviction concerning the superiority of Moses as a prophet does not rest merely upon the verses quoted, else the opponent might say that the passage reads, “hath not arisen in Israel,” but he might have arisen among other nations. The real basis of our opinion is that Moses asked of God that Israel and himself should be raised above all other nations in respect to prophetic inspiration. This is what he asked for when he said, “So that we are distinguished, I and Thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.” He asked of God two things, first, that no nation should be equal to Israel, i. e. that the Shekinah should not rest upon the idolatrous nations and give them prophetic inspiration. So our Rabbis say, “Moses asked that the Shekinah should not rest upon the idolatrous nations, and his request was granted.” Second, he asked that no man should be equal to him in prophetic power, hence he said, “I and Thy people.” Just as he asked that no nation should be equal to Israel in having the Shekinah rest upon them, as our Rabbis say, so it seems that in the word “I” he asked that no one should be equal to him as a prophet.

In reply to this he was told, “I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken, for thou hast found grace in My sight, and I know thee by name.” God therefore granted the elevation which he sought. This is the reason why the Torah testifies about him at the end that a prophet will never arise again like Moses; even in Israel, which has the prerogative of the prophetic institution, there will never arise another like him, as he was promised; not to speak of the other nations, who are not worthy of the prophetic spirit. The Rabbis indeed say, commenting on the passage, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses,” there hath not arisen in Israel, but there hath arisen among the heathen, namely Balaam. By this they mean to say that just as Moses’ prophetic power was given to him for the sake of Israel, as we explained in chapter twelve of this Book, so Balaam owed the degree of prophetic power which he attained, though only a diviner, solely to Israel, namely in order that he should bless them. They can not mean that Balaam’s prophetic power was equal to that of Moses, Heaven forbid! God had promised him, “I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken, for thou hast found grace in My sight, and I know thee by name.” In other words, God granted his request that no prophet should be equal to him in prophetic power, and that the gift of prophecy should not be given to the Gentiles.

Moses, seeing that God granted his request, inferred from this two things: First, that prophecy does not come to a man by nature, but by the will of God. Hence God granted Moses’ request that the prophetic gift should not be given to the heathen. For if prophetic inspiration came by nature, God would not deprive mankind of their natural good by refusing prophecy to the heathen. Second: he inferred that his own prophetic gift would be something miraculous, transcending the power of the human mind, which the latter could not grasp by means of prophetic inspiration even through the Torah, and even though he was prepared for it. For if his power had been such as the human mind was itself capable of attaining, God would not have promised as he did, “I know thee by name,” and that no prophet would arise in Israel like Moses. God does not deprive any one of his natural benefits, so as to refuse the gift of prophecy to a member of the people of Israel, the nation that is chosen as a seat of the prophetic gift, if he is prepared for it. But if Moses’ prophetic power was a miraculous thing, and a result of extraordinary divine grace, such as human nature alone can not attain, God could have promised that He would not lend such grace to any one else.

Now Moses, having perceived that the moment was propitious for obtaining grace, added another request, namely, “Show me, I pray Thee, Thy glory.” Moses thought that since God consented to give him special grace, such as no man can attain, He would also consent by special grace to let him see or apprehend the divine glory, though it is not in the nature of man to have such apprehension. The reply to this was, “Thou canst not see My face, for man can not see Me and live.” Our Rabbis explain this to mean, not even the angels, who are ever-living. The meaning of the reply is, then, this: Do not think that the reason I withhold this power from you is because it is not in the nature of man to have it, but because it is not even in the nature of the ever-living angels to have such power. Therefore you can not attain such a degree, for it is enough if you attain to the power of apprehension of angels, more than that you cannot have. For this reason he did not withhold from him the apprehension of the “back,” i. e. a knowledge of the manner in which existing things result from God’s causality. He withheld from him only an apprehension of His “face”, i. e. a knowledge of God’s essence, which no one but God Himself can have.

It follows, then, as a result of what we have said, that since God granted Moses’ request, as He said, “I know thee by name,” we must understand the verse, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses,” to signify a permanent miracle showing the superiority of Moses as a prophet to all the prophets who came after him. Therefore no prophet has the authority to oppose Moses’ words.

Now it would seem according to this that the superiority of Moses as a prophet should be counted as a special and separate dogma of the Mosaic law, because it signifies the perpetuity of the latter. But an opponent may object to our interpretation. He may say, It is true that no prophet like Moses or greater than he will arise in Israel, but he may arise among the other nations, as our Rabbis say by way of comment on the verse, “He shall be exalted and lifted up, and shall be very high:” He shall be exalted above Abraham, and shall be higher than Moses, from which it seems that there may arise one greater than Moses. For this reason we regard this point as a derivative dogma under the principle of the genuineness of the messenger, and not as an independent dogma. Our idea is this. Granting that their interpretation is correct and there may arise in the future another prophet as great as Moses, we can not believe such a prophet or one professing to be a prophet in opposition to Moses unless we are clearly convinced of the genuineness of his mission. This means that his mission as the promulgator of a law must be verified in the presence of six hundred thousand people, as the mission of Moses was verified.

Whether such a thing will ever happen in the future, that all the people at once will hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as was the case with Moses—this is something that is hidden from us and can not concern us, as it depends solely upon the wisdom of God. But as long as a prophet’s mission is not verified in this manner, we will pay no attention to any one who comes to abolish permanently the commands of Moses.

There is something strange, however, in Maimonides’ procedure. After having laid down the superiority of Moses’ prophetic power as a principal dogma, and explained the differences between Moses as a prophet and the others, saying that all the prophets who came before Moses, as well as those who came after him, were inferior to him,—he adds as another dogma, the irrepealability and immutability of the law. From this it would seem that he thought that if not for the latter dogma, we might have to obey a prophet who desired to abolish the laws of Moses. But how can that be? How can we listen to an inferior prophet and abolish the laws of Moses, the greatest of all the prophets, as he himself says? Unless we say that his interpretation of the verse, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses,” is that it refers to the period of the prophets, but that in the future there may arise a prophet equal to Moses. Therefore there is the need of an additional dogma, the irrepealability of the Law. But we have made it clear that there can not arise at any time another prophet greater than Moses or equal to him; and that it is not proper to listen to an inferior prophet at any time who desires to abolish the laws of his superior. But inasmuch as the opponent may obstinately insist that there may arise in the future among the other nations a prophet equal to Moses or greater than he, we did not lay down the superiority of Moses as a basic dogma, but only as a derivative dogma depending upon the dogma of the genuineness of the prophet’s mission. The result is that we can not permanently abolish the laws of Moses at any time unless we can verify the prophet’s mission in the way in which the mission of Moses was verified. Hence we do not have to regard the irrepealability of the Law as a main principle or dogma, as Maimonides did. For we have made clear that there is no evidence of it in the Torah. It is not therefore an independent principle, but a true belief, which depends upon the genuineness of the prophet’s mission, as we explained. The same idea seems to be contained in the words of our Rabbis in Torat Kohanim. Commenting on the verse in Leviticus, they say: “These are the commandments”—this shows that hereafter no prophet is authorized to make changes; “Which the Lord commanded Moses”—the messenger is worthy of the one who sent him. We see here that the Rabbis attach the perpetuity of the Law and the commandments to the mission of the prophet. This is what we desired to explain.

CHAPTER 21

The Torah is called “testimony” (עדות), as we read, “And in the ark thou shalt put the testimony;” “If thy children keep My covenant and My testimony that I shall teach them.” This is to signify that the Torah must be understood literally like the testimony of witnesses. When witnesses testify, we do not say let us change the time or interpret the testimony so that the witnesses shall not be guilty of perjury. For example, if they testified that Reuben killed Simeon on the first day of the week, and their testimony is proved false, we do not say let us interpret their testimony so that they shall not be false witnesses, viz. that “on the first day of the ‘week’ ” means on the first of the seven years ending with the sabbatical year; or that “killed” means did not give him alms to support him, or did not teach him Torah, which would give him life in the world to come. We do not say all this because testimony must be understood literally, and if witnesses are shown to have given false testimony, they must be put to death, and we do not interpret their words so as to save them from death. In the same way the law of God is called testimony because the commandments must be understood literally. We must not give them figurative interpretations and read into them conditions or time limitations which are not there.

Therefore David said, “The testimony of the Lord is sure,” i. e. it is true as written. And the burden of proof is upon him who gives figurative interpretations, saying for example that the prohibition of swine’s flesh was temporary, or that ‘swine’ means the evil instinct, and so on, or that the important thing in the Torah is belief and not performance of the commandments. He can not abolish the literal meaning of the commandments by imposing a condition or time limitation which is not mentioned. This is what the Psalmist meant when he said, “The proud have digged pits for me, which is not according to Thy law.” Then he explains that the pits are their statement that, “All Thy commandments are only a matter of belief (אמונה)”, and that their time has already passed and there is no need of performing the commandments at all. And with this “falsehood they pursue me.” Therefore, “Help Thou me,” for I need Thy help, else, “They had almost consumed me upon the earth.” But with all that, “I forsook not Thy precepts.” He ends up, “Quicken me after Thy loving kindness, and I will observe the testimony of Thy mouth.” The meaning is: they had almost consumed me, but Thou with Thy loving kindness quicken me, and I will keep the commandments according to their literal meaning, for they are the testimony of Thy mouth, i. e. they are like testimony, which must be understood literally. No man has the power to abolish the literal meaning of the commandments by interpretation.

Though there are many passages in the Torah concerning which all the wise men agree that they bear allusion to noble, sublime and intellectual things, like the story of the Garden of Eden, and the four rivers, and so on, nevertheless they do not deny the reality of the literal meaning. Their opinion is that while those things do exist in reality, they at the same time bear allusion to more noble and celestial things. Thus, the account of the tabernacle refers to real things, and at the same time bears allusion to sublime and celestial things. In the same way the human organism has by nature a tongue, teeth and lips for eating, the same as in the lower animals, but at the same time they exist in man for a nobler purpose also, namely as organs of speech and expression to laud God and speak His praises, which is a nobler purpose than that which they serve in animals. So in the world of nature, we find four rivers and so on, which at the same time allude to more noble things. In this way the Rabbis say, Jerusalem on earth is representative of Jerusalem in heaven. In saying this they do not mean to deny that Jerusalem does exist on earth and serves an important purpose, namely as the dwelling place of the Shekinah. Nor do we deny the existence of Ezekiel for an important purpose in himself like any other righteous man, because the Bible says, “Thus shall Ezekiel be unto you as a sign.” In the same way we must understand that there are in the Torah expressions which allude to other nobler and more sublime things, and yet are also true in their literal meaning. This is especially true of the commandments. They do allude to noble and sublime things, but at the same time there is an important purpose in themselves and in their performance. This is the reason why the Torah is called testimony, as we have explained, namely to signify that the words are true in their literal meaning, and that they must not be interpreted figuratively so as to abolish the literal meaning.

CHAPTER 22

The Torah which we have to-day and which has been handed down to us by unbroken tradition from father to son is the same that was given to Moses on Sinai, without any change. It could not have received change in the time of the first temple when the priests and teachers were in the temple and the Torah was well known to everybody. And though there were among them kings who worshipped idols, they also had prophets during the entire period until the time of the destruction, who admonished the people to observe the Torah. And as for the great alarm which Josiah felt when the priest Hilkiah found a book of the Torah in the house of the Lord, this does not signify that they had no copy of the Torah, for Jeremiah was alive then. But the reason was this. Amon and Menasseh were worshippers of idols and offended God, so much so that our Rabbis say, Menasseh cut the names of God out of the Torah and substituted names of idols in their place. Accordingly one of the priests who feared that the king might do the same with the original copy of the Torah which Moses wrote, if it got into his hands, hid it in the walls of the building. Later, in the days of Josiah, who returned to the Lord with all his heart, with all his soul and with all his might in accordance with the law of Moses, they looked for this book and could not find it. And when they repaired the temple, Hilkiah found it in the wall and was very much elated over it, as if he had found a great treasure. He then sent a message to the king, saying, I have found the book of the Law, the well known book which Moses wrote; he did not say I found a book of the law. Now the reason that king Josiah was so alarmed at the find and rent his garments when he heard the words of the book, is as our Rabbis explain in the Jerusalem Talmud. The Torah which Moses wrote was rolled up so that it opened on the beginning of Genesis, whereas the manuscript which they found opened on the verse in Deuteronomy: “The Lord will bring thee, and thy king whom thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation that thou hast not known. .” This is the reason why the king was alarmed, and not because the people had forgotten the Torah, God forbid!

Nor could the Torah have undergone change when the Israelites were exiled to Babylon. For in the beginning of the exile under Jehoiachin, before the destruction of the temple, the craftsmen and the smiths and the leaders of the wise men of Israel were exiled, Daniel was among them and also the prophet Ezekiel, as we read, “One that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying: ‘The city is smitten’.” And all the Jewish exiles who were scattered through all the land of Assyria had in their possession a copy of the Law, for even the Cutheans, whom the king of Assyria settled in the cities of Samaria, had a copy of the Torah. When the temple was destroyed, the Torah had already spread through all Babylonia and could not have undergone any change by reason of the destruction of the temple.

When Ezra returned from Babylon, only a few went with him, while the leaders of Israel and the wise men and those of noble lineage, all remained in Babylon. Thus our Rabbis say, Ezra did not leave Babylon until he made it like fine flour; that is to say, he left those of pure descent and took with him those who were not pure, because he knew that in Palestine he would be able to prevent the Israelites from mixing with them. Thus none of the tribe of Levi returned with him, as we read: “And I viewed the people and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.” He, therefore, sent to Babylon, and they sent him eighteen persons of the sons of Mahli. Since, therefore, all the great men who were conversant with the Torah remained in Babylon, Ezra would not have dared to make any changes in the Torah, for then his Torah would not have agreed with that of all those who remained in Babylon, and who lived in the cities of Samaria and in the land of Assyria and in other places, who refused to return with him.

It is true that he changed the mode of writing, as we said before, in commemoration of the second deliverance, but he was not authorized to make any changes in the content of the Torah. Changing the count of the months from Tishri instead of from Nisan was not regarded as a real change, because in the Torah also Tishri was the first month when they computed the sabbatical and the jubilee years. It is possible that they were told by Jeremiah, who in turn had a tradition going back through the prophets to Moses, that they should commemorate the second deliverance so long as they retained the Passover, which was in memory of the exodus from Egypt, in its original place. But he did not change anything of the contents of the Torah. The differences in word and expression which are found in the Torah among the other nations are due to errors of translation into the other languages by unskilled persons. The Jews were very careful about the letters of the Torah, the plene and defective writings. They prided themselves on knowing the number of letters and verses, which they recorded in the margins of their copies, calling it Masorah—a practice which the other nations did not follow. “Why were they (sc. the Scribes) called ‘Soferim’ (lit. counters)? Because they counted all the letters of the Torah.” This shows that they kept it in the form in which it was given to Moses without any change. A proof of this is that the Torah is exactly the same to-day without any change among all Israel who are scattered all over the world from the extreme east to the farthest west.

The Rabbis speak of certain words in the Torah as being corrections of the Scribes, for example in reference to the verse, “But Abraham stood yet before the Lord,” they say that the reading ought to be, “The Lord stood yet before Abraham,” but the expression was changed by the Scribes. Also, “Let me not look upon my wretchedness,” they say, is a correction of the Scribes for “Let me not look upon Thy wretchedness,” and they say the same thing about other expressions. But this does not mean that anybody changed any words in the Torah, God forbid! No one who falsifies a book would admit that he falsified it or made changes in it. How then could the Rabbis say that the Soferim (Scribes) made changes? The meaning is that from the context it would seem that Moses should have said, “Let me not look upon Thy wretchedness.” The reason for the changed reading, “my wretchedness,” is like a correction which a scribe makes out of respect to God. Moses was not speaking in reference to himself, but in reference to God, but he changed the expression by divine order, as a scribe changes an expression by way of euphemism. The other instances must be explained in the same way. Similarly we must explain the dots which we find in the Torah over the word ואהרן (and Aaron) in the verse, “Whom Moses and Aaron numbered;” over the words ולבנינו לנו (unto us and to our children), and in other passages. The word in question remains in the text, and the dot indicates something intermediate between retaining the word and deleting it. The meaning is that though the text reads, “Whom Moses and Aaron numbered,” the one who did the numbering was Moses, while Aaron was merely with him, and his name is mentioned out of respect, for Moses was the important person in the act and not Aaron. Similarly the dots on ולבנינו לנו are intended to show that though children may be obligated by the parents, the obligation is not of the same degree as when the parents obligate themselves. The other cases must be explained in a similar manner.

CHAPTER 23

A thing is perfect if we can not conceive it to receive addition or diminution. Now since David characterizes the Torah as perfect, it follows that it can not in any respect be deficient in the realization of its purpose. Now every written document of whatever nature it be, can be understood in two different ways, one of which corresponds to the intention of the writer and the other is very far from it. Thus Maimonides says in his epistle on resurrection that the expression, “Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One,” is understood by the Jews to mean absolute unity, whereas the Christians interpret it to teach the Trinity. For this reason it was necessary, in order that the divine Torah should be perfect and should be understood in the correct way, that when God gave the Torah to Moses in writing, He should explain it to him in the proper manner. Similarly Moses explained it to Joshua, Joshua to the elders, the elders to the prophets, and so from generation to generation, so that there should be no doubt in the correct meaning of the written document.

This interpretation of the written law which Moses transmitted to Joshua and Joshua to his successors, is called the oral law, because this interpretation can not be in writing, else the same uncertainty of which we spoke would attach to this writing as to the first, and we should require an interpretation of the interpretation, and so on without end. Thus the Mishnah, which is an interpretation of the written Torah, gave rise to doubt and confusion and required another interpretation, namely the Talmud, which Rab Ashi composed to explain the Mishnah. The Talmud, in turn, which is an interpretation of the Mishnah, required another interpretation, and so there is a multiplicity of commentaries on the Talmud and a variety of opinions, and the same is true of the commentaries. It is clear, therefore, that the written Torah can not be perfect unless it is accompanied by this oral interpretation, which is called the oral law.

This is why the Rabbis say, God made a covenant with Israel only for the sake of the oral law. This is because the written law can not be understood except with the oral law, and also because the law of God can not be perfect so as to be adequate for all times, because the ever new details of human relations, their customs and their acts, are too numerous to be embraced in a book. Therefore Moses was given orally certain general principles, only briefly alluded to in the Torah, by means of which the wise men in every generation may work out the details as they appear.

These principles are mentioned in Torat Kohanim, in the beginning, in the baraita which begins, “Rabbi Ishmael said, Thirteen rules are applied in the interpretation of the Torah, the inference from minor to major, similarity in expression …” By means of these principles, or of any one of them, we may know something that is not explicit in the Torah. But if a thing is expressed in the Torah, or is handed down by tradition, the principles mentioned have no force to abolish the text or the tradition. Thus we find often in the Talmud the question asked, “How do you know?” and the answer is, “It is a halakah which dates from Moses and Sinai.” We also find the expression used by an opponent, “If it is a matter of tradition, we will accept it, but if it is a question of inference, we can argue against it.”

A point which is not handed down by tradition, but is the result of applying one of the thirteen principles or some other mode of inference, is liable to be the subject of difference of opinion among the learned men of Israel. Hence in order to remove dispute as much as possible and make the Torah perfect, divine wisdom decreed that the decision in every generation should belong to the majority of the learned, as we read, “To incline after the many;” also, “Thou shalt not turn aside from the sentence which they shall declare unto thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.” The Rabbis comment on this: Even if they tell thee the right is left and the left is right. The meaning is this: Every person thinks he has more understanding, judgment and common sense than the other, and thus even fools and women and ignorant persons speak disrespectfully of the learned and think they have more understanding than the latter. Hence the text says that even if it appears to one that the learned call the right left and the left right, he must not deviate from their decision, and the power of deciding must always be given to the majority of the learned. And though it is possible that a single individual may be wiser than every one of them, and his view more in agreement with the truth than that of all the rest, nevertheless the rule is as the majority decide, and an individual has no authority to oppose them in a practical decision.

This was the point of the dispute between Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Eliezer in the treatise Baba Mezi‘a. For though Rabbi Eliezer was more learned than all the rest, and a voice from heaven said, “Why do you dispute with Rabbi Eliezer? He is right every time,” nevertheless Rabbi Joshua stood his ground and said, “The law is not in heaven,” i.e. though the truth may be in the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, we must not ignore the opinion of the majority and follow an individual, for the Torah was given to us on Mount Sinai, and therein is written, “Incline after the many.” If we abandon the majority and follow an individual in one matter, there will be a serious division in Israel in every generation. For every individual will claim that he is right and that the law shall be as he decides. This would destroy the Torah entirely. We must not therefore abandon the general rule, which is to follow the majority and ignore the individual or the minority, provided, however, that the majority consists of learned men and not ignoramuses, for the masses and the ignorant people are easily persuaded of a thing that is not so, and strenuously insist that it is.

Solomon admonishes us against following the masses, for they agree on many things which are not true. The masses “do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry.” They are agreed on this and do not condemn it, but they are wrong; “But if he be found he must restore sevenfold, He must give all the substance of his house,” according to the laws of the Torah, which says, “If he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.” Similarly the masses are of the opinion that an adulterer does not deserve punishment, for they say, “He that committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding,” and should be pitied, for he does harm to himself and destroys his own soul. He does the wrong and the evil to himself, but no sensible person does injury to himself, therefore the common people say that he lacketh understanding and should not be punished. But they are wrong, for “Wounds and dishonor shall he get … For jealousy is the rage of a man, and he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.” Therefore the agreement of the masses is no argument, as they are often agreed in opposition to the truth. In the days of Ahab and Menasseh and their like, all agreed on the worship of idols except the prophets and their disciples. Therefore the decision belongs to the majority of the learned men only, for wisdom is a gift of God, “For the Lord giveth wisdom, Out of His mouth cometh knowledge and discernment.” In this way will the Torah of the Lord be perfect in every generation, and free from any deficiency.

CHAPTER 24

This divine Torah of Moses embraces in general three parts, representing three different elements, namely, wisdom, will, power. The first part embraces true ideas, and is called “words,” as we read: “These words the Lord spoke unto all your assembly …;” also, “And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten words,” because of the theoretical ideas it contains, such as concerning the existence of God, divine revelation of the Torah, Providence, the incorporeality of God, the creation of the world, and so on. This part comes from the influence of God’s wisdom, i. e., it comes from God as wise.

The second part embraces those things which are desired by God. These come from His will and show that God has will. They go by the name of “statutes,” and embrace all those commandments whose reason is not known, such as the prohibition of swine’s flesh, or of wearing garments of wool and flax mixed, or of sowing divers seeds, or the commandment concerning the red heifer, and so on, which are royal fiats, things which God willed after He commanded them. Thus our Rabbis say: What difference can it make to God whether one slaughters an animal by cutting its throat or by breaking its neck? God simply takes pleasure in having His will carried out. Similarly in relation to the offerings, they comment on the expression, “A fire offering and a sweet smell,” saying, it is a pleasure to Me to have My will carried out.

The third part embraces the doing of right and the removing of evil in human relations. These are called “judgments,” and emanate from God’s power.

Now it is clear that a conventional law can not include the first part, namely true ideas, for, as we said in this Book, the important principles upon which these ideas depend are still the subject of dispute. Nor can it include the second part, namely the statutes, or those things which God desires, for the human mind has no way of knowing in detail the things which God desires, except by means of prophetic inspiration, as we explained above. It is therefore concerned mainly with the third part, namely, judgments, endeavoring as it does to remove wrong from among men and to establish right, and establishing law and justice in human relations, so as to make society perfect.

But when we consider the matter carefully, we shall find that even in matters of the third part it can not judge correctly, because it can not determine accurately what is right or just in every case. For what human knowledge can determine how much a thief shall pay, whether double or treble or four times or seven times? Some legislators provide that a thief be put to death, whether he stole much or little. But this is against human reason, for why should a man be put to death for stealing money, even if he has done it repeatedly? For this reason the divine Torah undertook to fix different penalties for the stealing of money. Thus one who refuses to return a deposit, and the like, which is a light kind of theft, must pay double. He who steals a sheep, must pay four sheep for one. If he steals an ox, he must pay five oxen, because the damage he caused to the owner in the loss of the ox’s work, makes the crime greater than that of stealing a sheep. The reason he has to pay four-fold when he steals a sheep is because there is more damage caused to the owner than in stealing other chattels, the loss of the milk, the wool and the young. And in all these cases, “If he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.” This is just law and true equality, viz., that a person who causes loss to his neighbor must make compensation, and if he has no money to give he should be sold for his theft, so that compensation should be made from his body if necessary. But that a person should be put to death for the theft of property is not true justice, except when he steals a human being. Thus, “If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel … then that thief shall die,” but no one else. A conventional law therefore is not able to determine what is justice and true equality in the greater part of the matters with which it deals. It was necessary, therefore, that the divine Torah in addition to the first two parts should also embrace the “judgments,” in order to show that no man is able to determine true justice and decide a case correctly, except God alone. Accordingly the Torah is divided into these three parts, in order to show God’s wisdom, will and power, as we said before.

This is expressed by the Psalmist, who praises God because He bestows certain things, which show that He is wise, possessed of will and powerful, adding that God is gracious and gives of His own accord to Israel these three parts, words, statutes and judgments, which also show that He is wise, possessed of will and powerful. Hence he says, “For it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant and praise is comely,” i. e., it is pleasant and good and becoming to exalt and praise Him about all the things which come from His wisdom and His will and His power, and which show His providence. He begins therefore with, “The Lord doth build up Jerusalem, He gathereth together the dispersed of Israel.” This shows that He has will, like a king who builds a country according to his will and admits into it any people he likes, seeing that no one can prevent him, since he is greater than all those over whom he rules, and hence can do as he pleases. Then he says, “Who healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.” This indicates God’s power. If the heart is broken, that is, if its parts are severed, there is no natural cure for it, as we are told by medical writers. Any other members if broken can be cured. Therefore the Psalmist attributes to the Lord the cure of a broken heart, in which the parts are severed, though it can not be cured in the ord nary way. This shows His great power in delivering the oppressed from his oppressor, as David says, “The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saveth such as are of a contrite spirit.”The meaning is that just as God cures the broken hearted, who could not recover if left to nature, so He saves those of a crushed spirit, who can not be saved in a natural way, as Solomon says: “The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a broken spirit who can bear?” The meaning is, if a man is sick and the animal spirit is strong, he can sustain the infirmity, but if the spirit is sick and broken, who can bear it? That is, who can sustain it? For by nature it can not get well. Then he says: “He counteth the number of the stars; He giveth them all their names.” This shows God’s wisdom. Then he adds: “Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; His understanding is infinite,” alluding to all three attributes. “Great is our Lord,” refers to will, meaning that God is great enough to do what He wills, without any one preventing Him, corresponding to “The Lord doth build up Jerusalem.” “Mighty in power,” refers to His ability to heal the broken hearted, corresponding to “Who healeth the broken in heart.” “His understanding is infinite,” alludes to His wisdom, in that He knows the number of the stars, and the powers of each, as well as the composition of their powers with one another, corresponding to “He counteth the number of the stars.” The meaning is, since His wisdom is infinite, He can embrace the infinite, much more so the number of the stars, which is necessarily finite, as there can not be an infinite number of bodies. But by reason of the immense quantity of their powers when they are combined together, he attributes the knowledge of their number and of the immense quantity of their powers when combined to infinite wisdom.

The statement of naturalists that the number of the stars is known and that it amounts to eleven hundred and twenty-two, has reference to the visible stars only. The stars which are not visible to us are very, very many, as we find in the Bible, “Behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude,” and in other passages besides. We see only a few of them because of the feebleness of our vision, but we must not say that what we can not see does not exist. The bat does not see the light of the sun, but that is no proof that it does not exist. The Psalmist proves God’s wisdom from the fact that He counts the number of the stars, in order to indicate how immensely great is the result when their powers are combined, and yet they are subject to Him, and He can annul their prognostications, as His wisdom decrees. “He giveth them all their names,” like a master who calls his servant to do his will.

The sequel of the Psalm contains the same idea, alluding to God’s wisdom, will and power. “The Lord upholdeth the humble …, refers to His power. “Who covereth the heaven with clouds,” denotes God’s wisdom. Thus Elihu cited the wonders of the rain as proof of God’s wisdom. “He delighteth not in the strength of the horse,” alludes to His will, and the meaning is that His will is not in favor of horsemen or of men of stature and strong arm. But “The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear Him, in those that wait for His mercy;” for God saves not with valor and strength. “Glorify the Lord, O Jerusalem,” corresponds to “The Lord doth build up Jerusalem,” denoting His will. The same idea is expressed in the sequel where he speaks of the rain and the other things in the world which emanate from God, to indicate that all things come from Him and point to His wisdom, will and power. Hence he says at the end of the Psalm: “He declareth His word unto Jacob, His statutes and His judgments unto Israel,” to indicate that these three parts which the Torah embraces, namely, words, statutes and judgments, also show that He is wise, has will and has power, as we said before, and that He should be praised because He bestowed these three parts upon the entire people. This is why he calls them His words, His statutes, and His judgments. “He hath not dealt so with any nation,” makes plain the great kindness which God showed to Israel in that He gave them words, statutes and judgments, by which they should guide themselves in order to acquire their human perfection—a thing which He has not done to any other nation. And even the judgments, with which conventional law is concerned and which it determines, the other nations “have not known them.” For their knowledge was not sufficient to determine true justice and equality, as we explained before, hence he says: “And as for His ordinances, they have not known them.” He ends up with the word “Hallelujah” (praise ye the Lord), to indicate that it is fitting to praise the Lord for the extraordinary kindness He showed Israel by providing for them in so wonderful a manner, and bestowing upon them words and statutes and judgments emanating from His wisdom, His will and His power, so as to realize the purpose of man.

CHAPTER 25

In a discussion I had with a Christian scholar he said to me: A thing must be tested by reference to its causes, the material, the formal, the efficient and the final. If we test the Torah of Moses in this way, we find that it is defective in all four respects. It is defective in respect to its matter, for it contains stories and other matters which are not Torah, i. e. teaching and guidance; whereas the teaching of Jesus has nothing but instruction. It is defective in respect to the efficient cause, because it expresses the divine mysteries alluding to the Trinity in a very obscure manner, so that it is not possible to understand from it the perfection of the Maker and His attributes; while it is very clear in the teaching of Jesus the Nazarene that God is father, son and holy ghost, and that they are all one. It is defective in respect to the final cause, for it says nothing about spiritual happiness, which is the purpose of man, but speaks only of material happiness. The teaching of Jesus, on the other hand, promises spiritual happiness and not material prosperity. It is defective in respect to the formal cause, for a law should embrace three things: 1. The relations between man and God, i. e. commandments relating to divine worship, called ceremoniales in their language, “cere” in Greek meaning God. 2. Relations between man and man; these are judgments, called judiciales, i. e. rules and principles having their origin in the business transactions of a man with his fellow. These are necessary for the maintenance of the social group. 3. Relations between a man and himself, called morales. These are precepts which a man follows in order to acquire a good character, such as virtuous living, humility, and so on, which develop character.

Now his opinion was that if we examine the Law of Moses in respect to these three kinds of precepts, we find that it is defective in all of them. It is defective in the duties of man to God, i. e. in the ceremonial part, which prescribes the manner of divine worship. For it commands the slaughter of animals, the burning of the flesh and the fat, the sprinkling of the blood, all of which are unclean forms of worship; whereas the manner of worship prescribed in the law of Jesus is clean, consisting of bread and wine. It is defective also in the social and judicial precepts, which concern human relations, for it permits interest, saying: “Unto a foreigner thou mayest lend upon interest;” whereas interest is destructive of social life. Also it prescribes that an unintentional homicide should live in exile until the death of the high priest. But this is an unequal punishment, for sometimes the period is long and sometimes it is short. Moreover, an unintentional homicide is not deserving of death, and yet the law of Moses exposes his life to the avenger of the blood, who may kill him with impunity; the result is that the intentional homicide goes free, while the unintentional loses his life. This is not so in the law of Jesus, where all depends upon the opinion of the judges. It is defective in the matter of a man’s duty to himself, for the law of Moses commands only right action, and says nothing about purity of heart; whereas the law of Jesus commands purity of heart, and thus saves man from the judgment of gehenna. This is the gist of the views of the Christian scholar.

My answer was as follows: All these statements are untrue, and are due to a lack of understanding or insight or knowledge of the ideas of the Torah. Before answering his arguments, however, I will make an introductory statement which no man of intelligence can doubt, namely that anything that is the subject of belief must be conceivable by the mind, though it may be impossible so far as nature is concerned, as was explained in the twenty-second chapter of the First Book. Such natural impossibilities as the dividing of the Red Sea, the turning of the rod into a serpent, and the other miracles mentioned in the Torah or in the Prophets can be conceived by the mind, hence we can believe that God has power to produce them. But a thing which the mind can not conceive, for example that a thing should be and not be at the same time, or that a body should be in two places at the same time, or that one and the same number should be both odd and even, and so on, can not be the subject of belief, and God can not be conceived as being able to do it, as God can not be conceived able to create another like Him in every respect, or to make a square whose diagonal is equal to its side, or to make now what has happened not to have happened. For since the mind can not conceive it, God can not do it, as it is inherently impossible. Therefore it can not be the subject of belief, for belief in impossible things does not give perfection to the soul, else reason would have been given to man to no purpose, and man would have no superiority to animals, since the mind does not affect belief.

Having made this preface, I will say that the opponent’s statement that the law of Moses is defective in respect of its matter shows his ignorance of the law of Moses. For there is not a word and not a narrative in the law of Moses which is not essential either to inculcate an idea or moral, or to explain one of the commandments. Even the verse, “And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau’s son,” serves a necessary purpose, namely to differentiate between Amalek, whose destruction is commanded in the Torah, and the other sons of Esau, concerning whom it is said: “Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother.” So are all other narratives understood by the initiated, and the commentators of our Torah have explained them at length.

As for the law of Jesus, we do not find that Jesus gave a law. He commanded his followers to keep the law of Moses. The Gospels are not a law, but an account of the life of Jesus; and the miracles which they say he performed are similar to those which we find were performed by the prophets, who did not give any law. The moral instruction in the Gospels and the teaching of right conduct are expressed altogether in the form of parables and dark sayings, which is not appropriate for a law. For it is hard to get at the meaning of anything expressed in the form of parable and metaphor. Hence the Torah says plainly in reference to the prophecy of Moses that it was not in the form of dark sayings. For since the Torah was given through him, it was not proper that he should speak in dark sayings, like the prophets of an inferior grade. A statement expressed in the form of a parable or allegory, like the prophecies of Zechariah, has not the perfection it ought to have, for it needs explanation, and may bear many different meanings. This is why Ezekiel complained because his prophetic messages took the form of parables: “Ah Lord God! they say of me: Is he not a maker of parables;” indicating that this was a defect. And God then spoke to him in plain words. Now it is clear that a law must represent the very highest degree of prophetic message, and for this reason the Bible praises the prophecy of Moses: “With him do I speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches.” From this it is clear that any legislative matter expressed in obscure language is defective in respect to its matter, and we come to an opposite conclusion from that of the Christian.

He also said that the Torah is defective in respect of the efficient cause, because it does not describe the attributes of God. But the very opposite is the case. The Torah expressly emphasizes the dogma of the unity and incorporeality, and makes clear that God can not be apprehended, “For man shall not see Me and live.” It also declares that the conception we have of God comes from the qualities shown in His government of His creatures, as He explained to Moses. Moses said to God, “Show me now Thy ways, that I may know Thee, to the end that I may find grace in Thy sight.” And God replied that the thirteen attributes with which He governs His creatures are His ways, which man may know more or less, depending upon the ability of the person, but His essential attributes can not be known.

The law of Moses says nothing about trinity because it is not true from the point of view of reason, and the Torah does not inculcate an idea which is not true, such as that one is three and three are one, while remaining separate and distinct, as they say. The statement of the philosophers that God is intellect, intelligent and intelligible, and at the same time one, is a different thing. For they do not believe that there are in Him three different things self-existing, Heaven forbid! They merely say that the one Being may be called by those three names from three different aspects. God Himself is a simple intellect without any composition. But since He is intellect, He must necessarily comprehend, therefore He is intelligent. But He comprehends nothing except Himself, for His perfection can not depend upon another, so that the other should cause Him to pass from potentiality to actuality. Hence, from this point of view, He is always intelligible, and yet His unity is not in any way changed to plurality. But that there should be in Him three distinct things, each one existing by itself, distintos en personas as they say, and that they should nevertheless be one, this is impossible, unless two contradictories can be true at the same time, which is opposed to the primary axioms and inconceivable by the mind. For the same reason the Torah rejects corporeality and admonishes us not to believe in it: “Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves—for ye saw no manner of form … lest ye deal corruptly and make you a graven image, even the form of any figure …”

As for his statement that the Torah is defective in respect of its purpose because it does not speak of spiritual happiness, it is not true. There is an allusion which the wise understand, as we shall explain in the Fourth Book with the help of God. The reason this point is not clearly stated and at length is because the Torah was not given to the wise and intelligent only, but to all people, great and small, wise and foolish. It must therefore contain such things as are understandable of all and calculated to inspire belief.

Now those things which can be perceived by every one with his senses, inspire strong belief, whereas those things which are apprehended by the intellect and can not be perceived by the senses, being understood by the wise only, do not inspire belief at all. The people say that that which can not be perceived by the senses is improbable and untrue. For this reason the Torah of Moses promised explicitly corporeal rewards, which every one can see and perceive with his senses, whereas intellectual things, which the intelligent alone understand, are contained by way of allusion. The purpose is that every one may understand, according to his ability, that through the Torah is obtained all corporeal and spiritual happiness, so long as sin does not prevent. Nay, the corporeal rewards which can not be obtained in the ordinary way of nature are evidence of spiritual rewards.

Balaam also, who was a great sage and a prophet, though not a member of the Israelitish nation, testifies to this. He said: “Let me die the death of the righteous, and let mine end be like his.” It seems that through his wisdom or prophetic inspiration he understood that Israel had an end and a hope after death, hence he expressed the desire to have after his death such an end and hope as Israel had. He understood that providence in this world proves happiness in the world to come. And especially when extraordinary miracles take place constantly in the life of a nation, it is proof of their spiritual happiness in the next world. During the whole period of the first temple prophecy existed in Israel continually, and even in the time of the second temple, when there was no prophecy, the people often had their questions answered by a voice from heaven (בת קול), and there were other miracles taking place constantly, for example, every sixth year the land produced enough for three years, as we read: “I will command My blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth produce for the three years.” Also, in accordance with the verse, “Assemble the people, the men, and the women, and the little ones, and thy stranger that is within thy gates …,” all Israel went up during the feast of tabernacles of the sabbatical year to Jerusalem to hear the Torah, and the Bible says: “Neither shall any man covet thy land, when thou goest up to appear …” And there were many other miracles constantly in the temple, such as are enumerated in the treatise Abot. In Yoma we are told that a thread of red wool turned white every year on the day of atonement. And there are other miracles told there which took place continually. The Christians have no continuous miracle to prove the truth of their belief.

The proof they bring from the prosperity of those who believe in their faith is no proof at all. For more than two thousand years before the law of Moses was given, all the nations worshipped idols, except a few rare persons, like the patriarchs and the like, and yet every one of the nations prospered in its own government and lived in quiet and tranquillity. And after the law was given, too, all the nations worshipped idols except Israel, and yet they were all prosperous in their own states. Surely the fact that Sennacherib and Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander were successful in ruling over Israel is no sign that their faith was better than that of Israel. Even now the Christians maintain that the law of the Mohammedans is positive and conventional, not divine, and yet they are successful and rule over a great part of the world. It seems clear therefore that the prosperity of a nation is no proof of the truth of its faith. The real proof of the truth of a faith is the continuity of miracles, such as we find in Israel when they lived on their own land. We do not find any such condition among the believers in Christianity or Mohammedanism. As for their claim about the happiness of the soul in the world to come, this is precisely the point of dispute, whether it is so or not, and what proof have they?

His statement that the Torah is defective in respect to its form is absolutely untrue. For it is absolutely perfect in all the three parts which he says the Torah embraces. Take the part which contains the commandments dealing with man’s relation to God, i. e., the ceremonial commandments which concern themselves with the service of God. It is perfect, for it commands prayer, as the Rabbis say in commenting on the verse, “And you shall serve the Lord your God, and He will bless thy bread, and thy water.” The service mentioned here, they say, is prayer, as we shall also explain in the Fourth Book, with the help of God. The law also tells us to love God and to fear Him: “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God;” “But thou shalt fear thy God;” “Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; and Him shalt thou serve.”

He says that the offering of the sacrifices is unclean, because it consists of the burning of the flesh and the fat and the blood. In answer to this we may say that if we agree with Maimonides that the institution of sacrifices was not intended for its own sake but only as a means to keep the people away from sacrificing to idols, the objection is removed; for the purpose of the sacrifices was merely to purify their intentions and keep them away from offering sacrifices to idols. Thus Jeremiah says, “For I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices; but this I commanded them, saying: Hearken unto My voice …”

But even if we say that some part of the institution of sacrifices was intended for its own sake, namely to call the attention of the sinner or of man generally that just as the sheep or other animal which he offers as a sacrifice was a living thing that sustained itself with food like himself, and now it is burned and destroyed, nothing being left of it except in so far as God has pleasure therein, so man will be destroyed in the same way, without anything being left except the works that he does which are pleasing to God in having His will fulfilled, this being the superiority of man to the animals. (This has the purpose of causing man to devote himself to doing good and that which is right in the eyes of God in order to acquire immortality, which is the real perfection of man.) Or if we say that the purpose of the sacrifices is to bring together and unite the upper powers with the lower, as the Cabalists think—in any case we can not say that the mode of worship is an improper one, since the senses testified that those things were pleasing to God. For the fire came down from heaven and consumed upon the altar the burnt-offering and the fat. Fire came down for Moses in the tent of meeting, for Solomon in the temple, for David in the threshing floor of Aravna the Jebusite, for Elijah on Mount Carmel. The Shekinah or holy spirit rested upon Israel through the offerings, and the priest foretold the future through the Urim and Thummim, as the senses testified. Nothing like this can be cited in all the offerings of the Christians. They can not show a single continuous and public sign, well known to all, as in the sacrifices. Their statement that their offerings benefit the soul, is one which is not testified to by the senses nor proved by the intellect. The Rabbis say in reference to such a situation, if one desires to lie let him cite witnesses which are far away.

Moreover, the sacrament of the bread and wine of which they speak is not an offering at all. The bread and the wine is not an offering to their God, but, as they say, it is the body of their God. For they say that the body of Jesus, which is in heaven and is of very great extension and magnitude, comes to the altar and clothes itself in the bread and the wine as soon as the priest has pronounced the words—no matter who the priest is, a good man or a bad—and the whole becomes one with the body of the Messiah, who comes down from heaven instantaneously. And after the bread and the wine have been consumed, he goes up to heaven again where he was before. This takes place at every altar. Such is their idea concerning this offering. Now this belief the human mind utterly rejects, and can not accept or conceive, for it is in conflict with first principles and with the evidence of the senses.

In the first place it demands belief in instantaneous motion from the highest heavens and the throne of glory to the earth. Secondly, it requires belief in the simultaneous presence of one body in two or more different places; for the body of the Messiah is present on different altars at the same time. Thirdly, it involves the belief that the body of the Messiah goes up and down without breaking through the body of heaven, since the heavens can not be broken through. Moreover, they say that the flesh and the blood which comes into being at the particular moment from the substance of the bread and the wine, which is finite and limited, is the very body of the Messiah, who existed from eternity, and does not thereby increase or diminish in quantity. This leads to belief in the interpenetration of bodies.

All these things not merely deny first principles but they are in conflict with the evidence of the senses. For they say that the bread and the wine which appear to the eye are not food and do not nourish the animal or the man who eats it. But we believe that if the bread and the wine were a large quantity, they would nourish the person who consumed them and help to form his limbs or organs like any other bread and wine. Again, they say that the substance of the bread and the wine changes into the body of the Messiah, while the accidents (properties) remain just as they were without any subject. The taste and the color and the odor and the feeling and the heaviness and the lightness and the softness and the hardness which we perceive in the bread are not in the bread at all, for the matter has disappeared and become the body of the Messiah. These are things which the reason can not conceive, the mouth can not utter, and the ear can not hear. How then can one believe things like these, which the mind rejects and the senses contradict? Therefore a Jew who is used to true opinions, which are not in conflict with the evidence of the senses and do not contradict first principles, opinions found in the law of Moses, which all acknowledge to be divine, since it was revealed with great publicity in the presence of six hundred thousand people, can hardly force his mind to believe things which the mind can not understand. For how can a man believe what he can not understand or even conceive?

It is especially difficult for him to believe in the things stated in the law of Jesus when he considers that the fact which they lay down as the basis of their belief, namely, that Jesus was Messiah the son of David, is uncertain. For chapter one of the Gospel of Matthew traces the ancestry of Joseph, the husband of Miriam, or as they say, her betrothed, to Solomon and David, and says that he was of royal descent, whereas in the third chapter of the Gospel of Luke it is said that he was not of royal descent and was descended from Nathan the son of David. Both of these genealogies concern Joseph alone. For they say that Joseph never knew Miriam either before the birth of Jesus or after. This despite the fact that in the Gospel of Matthew, the statement is made that Joseph did not know Miriam until Jesus was born, which would indicate that afterwards he did. We also find in the same Gospel that Jesus had brothers, which would lead to the same result. They explain, however, that brothers means relatives. The statement, too, that Joseph did not know Miriam until she gave birth to Jesus they explain like the verse, “For I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of,” and as we explain the passage, “The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until he comes to Shiloh and unto him shall the obedience of the peoples be,” the meaning of which is that afterwards too the scepter shall not depart. If this is so, Joseph’s descent does not benefit Jesus at all, and how do we know the genealogy of Miriam?

Moreover, how can a Jew who is familiar with the Bible and sees that the biblical passages cited in the Gospels and in their other books as evidence do not prove the thing intended at all—how can such a person bring himself to believe in their ideas? Thus it says in Matthew that Jesus was born of a virgin to fulfil the words of the Bible, “Behold the young woman (עלמה) shall conceive.” But every one who can read knows—even a child in school is aware—that this verse was said to Ahaz about six hundred years before the birth of Jesus as a sign that the kingdoms of Syria and Israel would be destroyed, and that the kingdom of Judah would remain under the kings of the house of David. How could Jesus’ birth of a virgin be a sign to Ahaz?

In the second chapter of Matthew it says that Herod killed all the young males, whom it calls innocent, to fulfil the verse of the Bible, “Rachel weeping for her children.” But it is obvious from the context that the expression refers to the exile at the time of the first temple, for we read in the same place, “And they shall come back from the land of the enemy;” “And thy children shall return to their own border;” “I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself … turn thou me, and I shall be turned.” There are other verses quoted in the Gospels and interpreted erroneously. All this prevents one believing that the law of Jesus is divine. One is rather inclined to believe that it is a conventional law laid down by persons who were not familiar with the Bible, and did not understand the meaning of the text. Nor did they take the trouble to understand the manner of worship in the law of Moses, or to note that divine influence was bestowed upon Israel through the offerings at the time of the temple, and that the perfect worship of God at all times and places is to carry out the commandments.

In that part of the commandments which pertains to the relations between man and man and which are called judiciales, the law of Moses is more perfect than any other law. It enjoins upon us the love of mankind, “And thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” It forbids hatred, “Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart.” In respect to the stranger it says, “And ye shall love the stranger,” and it admonishes us not to vex him, “He shall dwell with thee, in the midst of thee, in the place which he shall choose within one of thy gates, where it liketh him best; thou shalt not wrong him.” And this applies not merely to a proselyte, but also to one who is not converted to Judaism, provided he does not worship idols. The Torah also commands to be kind to him, “Thou mayest give it to the stranger that is within thy gates, that he may eat it.” This refers to a foreigner living in Israel, who is permitted to eat the flesh of an animal that dies of itself. Interest is permitted to be taken only from a foreigner who worships idols, as the Bible says: “Unto a foreigner thou mayest lend upon interest.” One who worships idols, and refuses to carry out the seven Noachian commandments, which the stranger observes, may have his life taken, too, according to the consensus of all religions. Even the philosophers permit to take his life. “Kill the one who has no religion,” they say. And so the Torah also admonishes us in relation to idolaters, “Thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth.” Now if it is permitted to take his life, surely one may take his property. The idolater should be killed and deserves no pity.

In the other rules the Torah is more perfect than other laws. For it measures the proper punishment according to the magnitude of the wrong, as we explained in the preceding chapter in connection with the punishment for stealing property. As to the rules relating to the unintentional homicide, we must bear in mind that an unintentional homicide is often very close to an intentional one. Therefore the Torah permits the avenger of the blood to take his life, in order that a person may be very careful in this matter. That this explanation is correct is proven by the fact that if the homicide could not avoid the result, he does not have to go into exile and the avenger of the blood is guilty of a capital offence if he puts him to death. For example, if he threw a stone and the other put out his head and was struck.

The reason for making his return from exile depend on the death of the high priest is explained by the Rabbis as follows: This matter is made dependent on the life of the high priest, they say, in order that he may be careful to pray for mercy in behalf of his contemporaries that no wrong may occur on account of them. Besides, it is generally the case that the righteous bear punishment and suffering for the sake of the common people who are sinful. Thus Ezekiel was told by God to lie on his side and endure suffering, so that he might bear the iniquity of the house of Israel. It is not to be wondered at, then, that the priest is punished for the iniquity of the people.

The real and extraordinary wonder is that any one should say that the laws of the Torah of Moses, which is divine, are defective, and are completed by the law of Jesus. The law of Jesus has no civil laws governing human relations. The Christians follow in their civil life the rules of their learned men by order of the emperor or of the Pope. How is it possible that rules which are laid down by learned men on the basis of human opinion, should supply the defect of the rules in the law of Moses, which is divine? And even if the rules were laid down by the Apostles, they could not improve upon the rules of the law of Moses, since this is not a matter that depends upon belief.

A still more important consideration is that a person should correct only that which he knows. But the Apostles, as it seems, were not familiar with the law of Moses. For we find in the seventh chapter of the Acts of the Apostles that according to Stephen, Joseph brought his father Jacob to Egypt with seventy-five souls. Then Jacob and his ancestors died and were buried in Shechem in the cave which Abraham bought with silver from the sons of Hamor, son of Shechem, all of which is different from the explicit account of the Torah. In the book of Genesis, section Vayyiggash, all the persons are enumerated by name who came to Egypt with Jacob. And together with Joseph and his sons, there are not more than seventy. And we have an explicit statement, “Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons.” The cave which Abraham bought was in Hebron and not in Shechem. And he did not buy it from the sons of Hamor, son of Shechem, but from Ephron the Hittite, as is explicitly stated. Moreover, in the thirteenth chapter, Paul says that the Israelites asked Samuel for a king and he gave them the son of Kish, a Benjaminite, who reigned forty years. This contradicts the text, according to which he reigned only three or four years. They can not answer these criticisms by saying that the Jews falsified the text, for the point does not affect religious belief. It seems therefore that they were not familiar with the words of the Torah and the Prophets.

But even if we suppose that, as they say, the Apostles had the authority to change the civil laws, who gave authority to the Pope to change the commandment of the Sabbath, which is not one of the civil laws? The descent of the manna is a valid proof that the Sabbath day is essentially holy through the power of God and not merely for the sake of rest, as would be the case in a conventional rule laid down by man. Therefore the Bible says, “See that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath …” The meaning is that as the manna came down on the six days of the weeks and not on Sabbath, and on the sixth day it came down in double the amount, this was a sign of the essential holiness of the Sabbath day, and of its divine origin. No man can abolish it, especially since it is one of the ten commandments. Jesus and all his disciples observed the Sabbath, and it was only about five hundred years after Jesus that the Pope changed it and substituted Sunday for the Sabbath. This despite the fact that the manna was a clear sign of the essential holiness of the Sabbath day, a sign without any defect, and that the Sabbath is one of the ten commandments, which they admit to be free from defect. But it seems that their purpose was to destroy the law of Moses on their own account without any reason or argument, for neither Jesus nor his disciples gave any such command. It is clear therefore that the charge of imperfection which he makes against the true laws of the Torah of Moses, is not at all sufficient to abolish them.

The charge of imperfection which he brings against the third part of the Torah, namely the moral precepts, on the ground that the Law of Moses prescribes only correct action, but not a pure heart, is the opposite of the truth. For do

we not read, “Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart;” “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart …;” “And thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;” “But thou shalt fear thy God;” “Thou shalt not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people”? The reason it commands right action is because purity of heart is of no account unless practice is in agreement with it. The important thing, however, is intention. David says, “Create me a clean heart, O God.” And there are many other passages of the same kind, more than we can enumerate here.

It is clear therefore that the law of Moses is perfect in all manner of perfection and not imperfect, as the Christian thought. David made allusion to this briefly, praising the law in respect to its four causes. “The law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul.” The word law refers to the material cause; and in calling it Torah (teaching, law) he indicates that all the narratives in it like those of the drunkenness of Noah and Lot, and so on, were put there to give rules and regulation and guidance, and for no other purpose. The expression, the law of the Lord, indicates that it is perfect in respect to the efficient cause. For since the efficient cause is God, it can not have any of the defects which may exist in a human law. The word perfect denotes perfection in form; while the expression, restoring the soul, refers to perfection of purpose, namely, the happiness of the soul. “Restoring the soul,” is similar to the statement of Solomon, “And the spirit returneth unto God who gave it.”

Here the Christian translator Jerome erred in his translation of the word תמימה ( = perfect), which he renders, “without blemish.” He did this so as not to ascribe perfection to the Torah, in order that he might say that it is defective and that the law of Jesus completed it. But this is a mistake. The word תמימה means perfect, without any doubt. In the section dealing with the red heifer, the word תמימה occurs, and yet the text finds it necessary to add, “wherein is no blemish,” which shows that תמימה means one thing and “no blemish” means another. Our Rabbis explain that תמימה means perfect in redness. This shows that תמימה always denotes ultimate perfection in a given line. Since, therefore, the Torah has been described as perfect in form—תמימה; in purpose—“restoring the soul;” in respect to its efficient cause, who is God, and therefore perfect; and in matter, which is Torah, i. e., guidance and rule, it is clear that it is free from all defects and perfect in all manner of perfection. This concludes what we intended to explain in this chapter.

CHAPTER 26

Inasmuch as the divine law is a rule and a guide for the human race, emanating from God, it necessarily points to a bond and a union between God, who is the author of the commands, and man, who is the subject of them. Hence it is clear from this aspect that hearing a command from God necessarily proves that there is such a thing as prophetic inspiration, divine revelation, and that there is a God who is the author of the law and who exercises providence. This is especially true when one hears the first two commandments of the decalogue, for they denote essentially these three dogmas, as we explained before. Nevertheless God desired to let Israel hear from His mouth the ten commandments so as to indicate all those duties which a man becomes liable to by reason of this bond between God and him, both from the point of view of the master who is the author of the command, and from the point of view of the servant, who is the subject. For this reason they were expressed in two separate tables, to indicate that these two aspects are different from each other. Those five which have reference to God, the Master, are in one table, while the five which concern specially man, who is the servant, are in the other table, to show that both are necessary for the attainment of human perfection.

The ten commandments are general rules embracing the two classes of commandments, as follows: The first table contains the first five commandments, which a person is obliged to follow by reason of his acceptance of the divine being. Take the following instance: A king builds a city, then frees a body of slaves and settles them in the city, and then comes to speak to them in order to induce them to accept his lordship. Clearly the first thing he has to tell them is that he is the master who cared for them and liberated them from bondage. This is the meaning of the first commandment in the decalogue, “I am the Lord thy God …” It behooves you to accept My lordship because I made you free. Then he commands them that they shall not give the power to any one else, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.” Similarly he commands them not to rebel and set another king over them, “Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, nor any manner of likeness.” Then it is proper to command them that they should show him honor, and not treat him with disrespect, as by swearing falsely in his name, “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.” Then it is necessary that he should fix a mode of commemorating the building of the city. For in this way they will remember that they have a lord who built the city, and that they had been freed from slavery and settled therein. For this reason He commanded them to keep the Sabbath, which bears allusion to the creation of the world and the deliverance from Egyptian bondage.

The Rabbis say, “Remember” and “Keep” were pronounced in one statement. The meaning is this The Sabbath is not intended merely to signify the existence of an agent who created the world, as is indicated in the commandment beginning with the word, “remember.” The phiosopher, too, believes in the existence of such a being, and no one denies it except the sect of Epicurus. The main reason for the Sabbath is to show that there is a being who acts with will continually, even after the creation of the world. This is alluded to in the commandment beginning with the word, “keep,” mentioning as it does the deliverance from Egypt, from which it became known that God acts with will and desire. And not only at the time of the creation of the world, but even after the world has come into being, He exercises providence and changes nature, compelling it to perform His will and desire at all times, as He did in delivering Israel from Egypt, to refute the notion of those who say there is nothing new under the sun. Hence the Rabbis say that the commandment beginning, “remember,” which calls attention to the existence of a divine agent, and the commandment beginning, “keep,” which calls attention to the existence of a divine agent who acts continuously with will and exercises providence, both were said in one word or command, i. e., in the word which commands the Sabbath. For the purpose of the Sabbath is to call attention to the existence of a divine agent continually acting with will and exercising providence, and not merely to teach the existence of a divine agent.

Consider this carefully, for it is a wonderful interpretation of the rabbinic passage, which I have not seen adequately explained by any of the commentators. Some say that the word “remember” denotes a mandatory commandment, while the word “keep” signifies a prohibitive or negative commandment, as the Rabbis say: “ (take heed, lit. keep thyself), (lest) and (do not …) are indications of prohibitive commandments.” Accordingly the meaning of the passage in question is that the precept of the Sabbath necessarily embraces both a positive and a negative commandment, a positive commandment alluding to the creation of the world, and a negative commandment, viz., cessation from work, as a memorial of Israel’s deliverance from bondage. For as a slave can not cease from work, cessation from work is a memorial of the deliverance from Egypt. But according to this explanation, the version of the commandment beginning with the word “remember” should not contain the prohibition to do work. And since it does contain that prohibition, what need is there of saying that “remember” and “keep” were pronounced in one commandment?

Another explanation is this: rest in general would be a commemoration of the deliverance from Egypt, for a slave can not rest. If the prescribed rest were to take place one day in ten, it would still be a memorial of the deliverance from Egypt. But since the command is to rest one day in seven, it is a memorial of the creation of the world, “For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day He ceased from work and rested.” Hence the Rabbis say that the two versions of the Sabbath commandment were pronounced in one statement. This explanation, however, is not satisfactory. Why not say that the whole is a commemoration of the creation? And if the idea intended in that statement is that there are various reasons for the commandment of the Sabbath, that is no reason for saying that the two versions were pronounced “in one statement.” There are many commandments which have more than one reason, and yet the Rabbis did not say that they were pronounced in one statement.

According to my explanation, however, the two versions had to be pronounced in one statement; the one to indicate that there is a divine agent who brought things into being, and the other to show that He is a voluntary agent, that He acts continually and that He exercises providence. The one is not sufficient without the other. The Sabbath day, therefore, points to both these ideas because they are both necessary for a proper conception of God.

According to the Rabbis, there is still a third idea contained in the commandment of the Sabbath. “All agree,” they say in the treatise Shabbat, “that the Torah was given to Israel on a Sabbath.” If this is true, then the commandment of the Sabbath embraces three principles of religion, existence of a divine agent, providence, and revelation. And at the same time the Sabbath commemorates the day when the King revealed Himself to them in the city and they acknowledged His lordship. Inasmuch, however, as this latter idea is acknowledged only once a year, it was not mentioned explicitly in the Torah. We thus see that the Sabbath is obligatory and necessary for a true conception of God, in the three aspects mentioned.

Then comes the commandment, “Honour thy father and thy mother.” For it is well known that the king who built the city does not reveal himself every day to the men of the city. And while the men of that generation, who saw the king come into the city, remember that he built that city and freed them from bondage, and that they accepted his sovereignty, those who come after them, having never been slaves, and not having seen the king enter the city, may rebel, thinking that the city has always been theirs, and that they have no overlord. There is no way of escaping such folly except by submitting to parents and receiving instruction from them. For the parents will inform their children that they were slaves and that a certain lord freed them from bondage, that it was he who built the city and settled them therein. Hence it was necessary, in order that the rule of the king throughout the city and the benefit he conferred upon them in freeing them from slavery might not be forgotten, that children of every generation should obey their parents and accept their instruction. Hence the fifth commandment, “Honour thy father and thy mother,” teaches respect for tradition, viz., that a person should follow the tradition of the fathers, which is a fundamental dogma of all religions. Their existence can not be conceived unless a person is obedient to the tradition of the fathers and the wise men of that religion.

We did not count it among the primary or derivative principles because it is a particular command. Obedience to parents is expressed in the words, “Honour thy father and thy mother;” obedience to the learned and the wise is taught in the expression, “Thou shalt not turn aside from the sentence which they shall declare unto thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.” This commandment completes all those things which concern the relation of man to God, i. e. the things which the servant must do in relation to the master.

Then the Bible inculcates those general principles which men must have as social and political beings in order that the political group may be perfect. The first commandment is to preserve his fellowman’s body, “Thou shalt not murder.” Then comes the command to preserve his neighbor’s property, “Thou shalt not steal,” which is to be understood literally. Then comes the commandment to preserve that which is intermediate, as it were, between a man’s body and his property, namely his wife. For the wife is in a sense the man’s body, as it were, and in a sense, as it were, his property—“Thou shalt not commit adultery.” Then he adds that it is not sufficient if one refrain from injuring his neghbor in his body or his property or his wife, but that he must take care not to injure him even by a word, “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour;” nor even by a thought, “Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his field nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour’s.” This completes the general rules which are necessary for man as a being that must associate with others, as we said in the First Book.

Hence the ten commandments were placed on two tables, to show that though these two classes of commandments are distinct, they are necessary for human perfection, the one for the perfection of man as an individual, and the other for his perfection as being part of the state. The first five were all on the same table to show that they also represent one special class. All commandments are included in these two classes, as is seen on examination. The Rabbis say in “Torat Kohanim:” “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself:” says Rabbi Akiba, this is a very important principle of the Torah. Ben Azzai said: “This is the book of the generations of Adam,” is a more important principle, as we explained in the twenty-fourth chapter of the First Book.

CHAPTER 27

An important principle to bear in mind in connection with the performance of the commandments is that all depends upon intention, as the Rabbis say, “God requires the heart.” One may, therefore, perform many commandments without any benefit at all, or at least without enough benefit to realize human perfection or an appreciable part thereof. On the other hand, one may observe one commandment and succeed, according to his intention in the performance thereof, in acquiring a great part of perfection, more than the performer of many commandments. Since, therefore, intention is the important thing, it follows that all the commandments of the Torah, whether positive or negative, are a means to the attainment of human perfection, or a certain degree thereof, if they are done with the proper intention. A man attains to eternal life not only by doing good deeds. The soul’s perfection is attained also by abstaining from evil deeds through fear of God.

This is proved as follows: The Torah says explicitly, “And walk in His ways.” From this we see that walking in God’s ways is the essence of man’s service of God. Now we find that the Psalmist explains that he who refrains from doing evil for fear of God is called one who walks in the ways of God, “Happy are they that are upright in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.” The meaning is, happy are the mass of believers who are described as, “upright in the way,” i. e., they do not seek to be too clever in their relation to God, but follow the law of God with simplicity. Then he explains that those who walk in the law of the Lord are those who keep His commandments with the intention of the heart, “Happy are they that keep His testimonies, that seek Him with the whole heart.” And to obviate the idea that only he is described as walking in the ways of the Lord and keeping His testimonies, who keeps the positive commandments, and that a negative commandment can not be conceived as bestowing perfection upon the soul, he adds in the sequel, “Yea, they do no unrighteousness; they walk in His ways.” The meaning is, a person who intentionally refrains from doing evil is also a man walking in the ways of God; as the text says, “They walk in His ways.” The Rabbis also say, if one refrains from committing a transgression, he is rewarded as if he had performed a positive commandment.

It may seem strange that a person should be able to acquire any perfection by sitting idle and doing nothing. The Rabbis seem to be opposed to it. For in commenting on the verse, “Who is the man that desireth life … keep thy tongue from evil … depart from evil, and do good,” they say, If you think that you can win life by indulging in sleep, the text emphasizes, “And do good.” From this it seems that good deeds are necessary if one is to merit eternal life and the good which is reserved for those who fear God, as is expressed in the verse, “Oh how abundant is Thy goodness, which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee …” It is this goodness which is referred to in the verse, “Who is the man that desireth life, and loveth days, that he may see good therein.”

The answer to this is that, to be sure, if a person sits idle, he can not in this way acquire any perfection. But if the temptation to commit a transgression comes to him and he refrains from committing it for fear of God, he merits thereby eternal life as if he had done a good deed. In this way all the prohibitive commandments in the Torah give perfection to the soul. Thus if a person does not eat swine’s flesh because he has other things to eat or because he does not like swine’s flesh, he does not deserve any reward. But if he has a desire to eat swine’s flesh, or if he has nothing to eat and swine’s flesh is given to him and he refrains from eating it for fear of God and in order to fulfil God’s command not to eat it, though he is hungry and eager to eat it—such a person is surely deserving of reward. This is the meaning of the verse, “Thou shalt not eat it [the blood]; that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the eyes of the Lord;” concerning which the Rabbis say, “A person must not say, I do not want to eat swine’s flesh, I do not want to wear garments of wool and flax mixed; but he must say, I want to do these things, but what can I do, seeing that my Father in heaven has forbidden them!” This shows clearly that a person deserves merit for refraining from transgressing a commandment only if the opportunity is present and he refrains through the love and fear of God and not for any other cause.

This may seem easy to attain, but it is not. It is very difficult. David himself, who said, “Keep my soul, for I am godly,” was unable, in the incident of Bathsheba, when there was no other preventive except the fear of God, to conquer the temptation through the love of God. But to refrain from doing a wrong act for the fear and love of God is equivalent to the doing of a good deed in the proper manner and with the proper intention. In this manner negative precepts give perfection to the soul by not being performed, as positive precepts give perfection to the soul by being performed.

The Rabbis explain this in the treatise Makkot: Rabbi Simlai held the following discourse: “Six hundred and thirteen commandments were given to Moses on Sinai, three hundred and sixty-five corresponding to the days of the solar year, and two hundred and forty-eight corresponding to the number of organs (limbs) in the human body …” This passage endeavors to explain that the Torah in prescribing the particular number of precepts, intended to show how it is possible to acquire perfection by means of negative precepts as well as by means of positive precepts, though they are opposites, for positive and negative precepts are without doubt opposites.

The number two hundred and forty-eight of the positive commandments, corresponding to the number of members in the body, indicates that as the members of the body by their actual existence give man the perfection nature intended for him as an animal being, so the positive commandments give man the perfection intended for him as a human being, if they are actually carried out in practice, not if they are merely the subject of knowledge and belief. The number three hundred and sixty-five of the negative commandments, corresponding to the days of the solar year, indicates that these commandments give perfection to the soul though they are not actual existents. Time is not an actual existent, for the past is no longer here, the future is not yet, and the present is merely the now which binds the past to the future. The now itself is not real time, since it is not divisible, whereas time is divisible, pertaining as it does to continuous quantity. The now is related to time as the point is related to the line. Time is therefore not an actual existent, and yet it gives perfection of existence to all things existing in time. In the same way the negative commandments, though they are not actual existents, give perfection to the human soul as non-existents. Hence their number is three hundred and sixty-five, to indicate that as time is non-existent, so these commandments must be actually non-existent. And by being actually non-existent they give perfection to the soul, provided the forbearance from doing them is caused by the proper motive, like time which, being non-existent, gives perfection to existing things.

CHAPTER 28

From our explanations in the preceding chapter it follows that human perfection can be attained only by means of the positive and the negative precepts. Just as no human perfection can be acquired except by means of the actually existing limbs and the non-existing time, so the perfection of the soul can be attained only by the positive and the negative commandments. For this reason every one of the three parts into which the Torah is divided, namely ideas, statutes and judgments, as we explained in the twenty-fourth chapter of this Book, includes positive and negative commandments, in order that every part should contain the means for acquiring perfection, or a part of that perfection which man attains by means of the positive and the negative commandments.

In theoretical ideas, positive commandments are, for example, belief in the existence, the unity and the incorporeality of God; while examples of negative precepts are, not to entertain the notion that there is another god, not to incline after idolatry, and so on. In the statutes, the wearing of zizit (fringes) is an example of a positive commandment, while prohibited foods illustrate the negative precepts. In the judgments the positive precepts are illustrated in the following passages: “In righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour;” “In the same day thou shalt give him his hire;” “Thou shalt furnish him liberally.” The negative commandments are exemplified in the following passages: “And ye shall not wrong one another;” “Ye shall not steal; neither shall ye deal falsely, nor lie one to another,” and many other passages besides.

Now it is clear that perfection may be acquired through the theoretical part of the Torah, its negative as well as its positive side. Similarly perfection may be acquired through the part containing the statutes, i. e. the rules concerning those things which are pleasing to God and those which are displeasing to Him, as we said before. The thing that requires explanation, however, is, how can perfection of the soul be acquired through the third part, which embraces judgments? It is hard to conceive how any of its parts, whether the positive commandments or the negative, can give perfection to the soul. Those positive commandments which deal with injuries caused by an ox or an open pit or a fire, and negative commandments like, “Ye shall not steal,” “Thou shalt not oppress thy neighbour, nor rob him,” and so on, are no doubt right rules for the preservation of social life, but by what merit does the soul of a mortal man acquire perfection by means of them? And if their virtue consists in the fact that they are a guide to right morals, which alone enable one to acquire human perfection, then it would follow that the intensive occupation with the Talmud on the part of the Jewish sages and their study of talmudical questions, is of no benefit in acquiring perfection, and their labor is in vain! Besides it is not likely that so large a part of the Torah bestows perfection only because it leads to right morals and for no other reason.

The solution of the question is as follows: The performance of a precept must be considered from two points of view. One is the doing of the commandment and its complete performance. The other is the intention of the doer. Now the perfection which is acquired through the commandment does not come from the act of performance, for the Rabbis say, “The transgression of a commandment for a good purpose is better than the performance of a commandment without such purpose.” In the same place they say: The matter may be illustrated by the case of two persons, each of whom roasted his paschal lamb. One ate the lamb to celebrate the Passover, and the other to satisfy his craving for food. To the first we apply the verse of Scripture, “And the just do walk in them,” to the second we apply the expression, “But transgressors do stumble therein.” They thus make plain that an act without the proper intention is not credited to one as the performance of a divine command.

On the other hand, mere intention without the act is of no value at all. For if that were the case, then the knowledge of a commandment and its deep study would take the place of the performance. But the fact is not so. To read the sections of the Pentateuch which are inclosed in the phylacteries can not take the place of laying the phylacteries on the head and arm. Moreover we find an explicit statement in the treatise Kiddushin, in connection with the discussion as to which is more important, study or practice. It was decided by a vote taken that study is more important. But the reason given is because study leads to practice. It is clear therefore that since the importance of study is due to its being an incentive to practice, the essential thing is the end, which is practice.

Whenever two arts are so related that the one is prior by nature to the other, like bridle-making in relation to horsemanship, or the art of weaving in relation to tailoring, the prior art is inferior in worth to the other. For the prior art serves the other, so to speak. Thus the art of quarrying stones is inferior in degree to the art of building, being subordinate to it, although the building art can not be realized without the art of quarrying. In the same way though practice is impossible without study, for “An ignoramus can not be a pious man,” nevertheless since study is only for the sake of practice, practice is the important thing.

But since we have shown that the act alone is not the essential thing, nor intention alone, it follows that the essential thing in the performance of the commandments is a combination of the two, as is the case in the relation of theory to practice, as we have explained in this Book. Accordingly, in the performance of the commandments, an act accompanied by the proper intention constitutes a perfect performance, such as gives perfection to the soul, for intention gives completeness to an act, as we explained in the fifth chapter of this Book. My opinion is therefore that the part of the Torah which contains judgments is more calculated to give perfection to the soul than the corresponding part of a conventional law.

When a person living under a conventional law does a right or just act, no matter what his intention, and realizes the purpose intended, viz., improvement of social life, he has exhausted the situation. There is no other perfection or end to be realized. The judgments of the Torah are different. Social welfare is realized through their performance as in the others. But when their performance is joined with the proper intention, there is realized another perfection, more noble than the first. As the teeth and the tongue and the lips are found in animals for the intaking of food, and at the same time they have in man a more honorable purpose, as organs of speech and expression to laud God and declare His praises, so the judgments of the Torah have a more honorable purpose than the improvement of social life, though it may not seem so at first sight. This purpose is that in performing these judgments one should have in mind that God commanded them. This intention, joined to the act, gives perfection to the soul of the agent, since he does the act not merely to preserve social life, but for the love of God, i. e. in order to fulfil the commandments which God gave. It follows, therefore, according to this, that if one does a given act, such as giving alms, or lending to a poor man in need, or refraining from oppressing one’s neighbor or from stealing his property,—if one does any of these in obedience to the conventional law, because they are good acts leading to social welfare, he will get no special perfection from this except that which follows from the improvement of social life. But if one does these things in obedience to the Torah, because God commanded them, and in order to submit to Him and do His will and carry out the commandments which He gave, he will realize another special end, more honorable and more worthy than the other, namely the service of God. This intention, joined to the act, gives one perfection of soul, as we explained in the fifth chapter of this Book.

This is what the Bible means when it says: “And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and confidence forever.” That is, the doing of righteousness will bring peace in the social community and the poor man will not rob the rich. But the intention of charity, if it is in order to obey the command of God, being then called, “the effect of righteousness,” gives “quietness and confidence forever,” which means the immortality of the soul. In relation to this the Rabbis say, “Greater is he who does what he has been commanded to do than he who does a thing without having been commanded.” The reason is because one who does an act which he has been commanded to do, accomplishes two things, first, he does a good and just act; and second, he performs the will of his Father in heaven. Whereas one who does a good deed without having been commanded, does it only because it is right. In this way we can understand how a person can acquire perfection and future life through the judgments of the Torah, positive as well as negative, if he performs them for the love and fear of God, and in order to carry out God’s commands.

It is clear from this that the mere act of performance by itself is not calculated to bestow perfection, and that the latter comes from the evidence that is implied in the performance of submission to God, obeying His will and loving Him. It is like one lighting a lamp. The purpose is not the act itself and the immediate and inherent effect, namely the consumption of the oil and the burning of the wick, which is the immediate result of the act of lighting. The real purpose of lighting the lamp is the light which results from the act. So the purpose of the Torah is to guide man in the service of God, to illumine before him the way in which he should go in doing God’s service, and to show him what he must do to obtain God’s love.

This is why the Bible compares a commandment to a lamp, “For the commandment is a lamp,” and the Torah to light, “and the Torah is light.” The meaning is that the Torah, like light, is the end itself, intended for its own sake, whereas the commandment is not intended for its own sake. The act involved is like the lamp, which is not intended as an end in itself, but for the sake of the light which comes from it. So the purpose of performing the commandment is the meaning implied in the performance, namely the service of God, which is the light coming from Him. This is called Torah (teaching), “The teaching (Torah) is light.” Hence when the intention is lacking in the performance of a command, the agent is like one walking in deep darkness, who is bound to stumble. For this reason our Rabbis call a person who performs a commandment without the proper intention a transgressor, saying that a person who observes the commandments of the Passover in the wrong manner, i. e. not with the proper intention, comes under the biblical expression, “Transgressors do stumble therein.” Solomon says, “The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble.” On the other hand, in relation to intention joined to the proper act, they say: “For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just do walk in them;” and Solomon says, “But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day,” i. e. it never goes out.

CHAPTER 29

We must consider now a very important question, namely, whether this divine law bestows perfection if observed in its entirety or also if observed in part. This is a matter of dispute between Rabbi Simeon, the son of Lakish, and Rabbi Johanan in chapter “Helek.” Commenting on the biblical text, “Therefore the nether-world hath enlarged her desire, and opened her mouth without measure,” said Rabbi Simeon, son of Lakish, the nether-world opens her mouth for the one who neglects even one statute of the Torah. Said Rabbi Johanan, The Lord is not pleased with this that you say about them (Israel). The meaning of the expression is, the nether-world opens her mouth for him who has not performed even a single statute of the Torah.

Now it would seem that in order to attain perfection the Law must be fulfilled in its entirety, as Rabbi Simeon, son of Lakish, says. For if a part is sufficient for the attainment of human perfection, why should God have burdened us with a multiplicity of commands and admonitions? For it seems that if a given end can be attained with one act it is useless to do many acts to attain it. Thus if one can cure a certain disease with a simple and easily obtainable drug, it would be idle work to make a compound of many drugs, hard to obtain, as the wise man says, “It is vain to accomplish with many acts what can be realized with one.” It would seem, then, that all the commandments and admonitions found in the Torah are essential to the attainment of human perfection, else God would not have commanded them.

But such a proposition is very strange and hard. For if this were the case, no man would be able to acquire the perfection in question, “For there is not a righteous man upon the earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.” If he lacked one commandment, according to this opinion, he could not attain to human perfection, and the Torah which was given to Israel as an act of grace, so as to bring them all to eternal life, would be the very thing which would prevent them from attaining this happy privilege. This is the contrary of God’s intention. Not merely would the result be that not all Israelites could attain to perfection, but not even one person in a generation can embrace all the ideas of the Torah, or perform all the statutes and fulfil all the judgments which are found therein. All Israel would then go down to the pit, “Far be it from God, that He should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that He should commit iniquity.” Besides, our national tradition is opposed to this idea, for we find in the Mishnah, “All Israel have a share in the world to come.” This is a very important question and must be solved.

We find many things in nature which are not absolutely necessary, but are there to make things better than they would be without them. For example, the duplication of the sense organs is not absolutely necessary, for animals could exist and maintain themselves without this duplication. But they exist in animals to make their condition better than it would be otherwise. So God, in His desire to lead man to his perfection, seeing that there are so many hindrances which prevent him from attaining this end, devised a means to make the attainment possible. He multiplied ways and means, not all of them necessary for the attainment of perfection, but making it easier, so that human perfection or a part of it may be obtained by means of any one of the ways, the purpose being that not a single human being in general or Israelite in particular, should fail to attain that perfection if he tries to obtain it in any one of the ways.

This is the meaning of the Rabbis’ statement at the end of the treatise Makkot, Rabbi Hanania, son of Akashia, said: God desired to favor Israel, therefore He gave them many laws and commandments, as is said: “The Lord was pleased, for His righteousness’ sake, to make the teaching great and glorious.” They thus make clear that the reason Israel were given so many commandments is to bestow upon them righteousness and merit. Now it is clear that if all were necessary for the attainment of perfection, the effect would be not merit, but guilt. This is why Rabbi Johanan said, “The Lord is not pleased with this that you say about them, the verse means that the nether-world opens her mouth for him who has not observed even one commandment of the Torah.”

Maimonides is of the same opinion in his commentary on that Mishnah. It is a fundamental belief of the Torah, he says, that if a person fulfils one of the six hundred and thirteen commandments in the proper manner without any selfish or material motive, but performs it for its own sake and for the love of God, as I explained, he merits thereby eternal life. This is the meaning of R. Hanania, that if there are many commandments, it is not possible that one should not sometime in his life do at least one of them in the proper manner, so that his soul merit eternal life. This belief is proved in the Talmud, where Rabbi Hanina, son of Teradyon, asks Rabbi Jose, son of Kisma, What are my chances for eternal life? The answer is, Have you any good deed to your credit? i. e. have you performed any act in the proper manner? R. Hanina replied that he had performed an act of charity in as perfect a manner as possible. Thereby he merited eternal life. So far Maimonides.

It is clear, therefore, as we said, that one commandment alone is sufficient to give perfection to man. And the reason there are so many commandments in the Torah is not because they are necessary, but to make things better, so that no Israelite should fail to merit eternal life by means of some one of them, whichever it be. We have support for this opinion in no less a man than Maimonides, who says that the opinion of our Rabbis is that the reason for the multiplicity of commandments was not to load us with a heavy burden which we could not bear, but that it was an act of divine grace, to enable Israel to acquire merit and righteousness. He increased the Torah and multiplied the commandments, in order that they may have many different ways of acquiring human perfection, though they do not understand this. They think that because they are “a people robbed and spoiled,” the multiplicity of commandments is for the purpose of loading them with a heavy burden. This is why in Isaiah, the verse, “The Lord was pleased for His righteousness’ sake, etc.” is followed by, “But this is a people robbed and spoiled, etc.” They think that because the performance of a single commandment is not sufficient to connect divine providence with all their activities in detail so as to deliver them from their troubles, it is for that reason not sufficient to give any perfection to the soul. But it is not so. Even one commandment done properly, as we explained before, is sufficient to enable one to acquire eternal life. Hence the Rabbis say, “All Israel have a share in the world to come,” for it can not be that a single one of them should fail to do some one of the commandments of the Torah by means of which he would attain to some degree of future life. To be sure, the more commandments he performs, the greater is his degree in the future life. This is why Moses was eager to enter the land of Israel, because by performing those commandments which can not be performed outside, he would no doubt attain to a higher degree in the world to come.

Sometimes a single person performs so many commandments that Providence takes care of him in every detail of his life here below, like Rabbi Hanina, son of Dosa, and other pious men. It may also happen that the many commandments or the whole of them are performed by a number of persons collectively. In that case the group of persons is more cared for by Providence than a single person. In other words the group is in the position of a single person who performs a great many commandments. This is why a group is always better cared for by Providence than an individual, because in the group a great many commandments are performed or the whole of them, which is less likely to be the case in an individual. Therefore a group are always more promptly answered when they pray and are more directly under God’s providence, being protected from harm, than the individual.

This is true in reference to the fortunes of this world, but in the world to come every one stands on the basis of his own actions and the number of commandments which he has performed. The Rabbis go even farther than this in their statements in many places that even if a person does an act which is neither commanded nor forbidden, provided he does it for God’s sake, to honor Him or His law, he thereby merits future life, i. e. he attains to some degree of future existence. They tell in the tractate Ketubot concerning a fuller who lived in the neighborhood of Rabbi and died by throwing himself from the roof, that a voice from heaven said, This fuller is destined to enjoy the future life. From this it appears that a person who is grieved because he did not show honor to a wise man at the time of his death, and commits suicide because of his grief, merits the future life, since his grief as well as his death was for the sake of God.

There is also a story in the tractate ‘Abodah Zarah about an official who was charged with the duty of executing Rabbi Hanina ben Teradyon. Because he hastened the execution so that Rabbi Hanina might not suffer more than was necessary, we are told that he was entitled to future life. Similarly in tractate Ta‘anit, in the second of the two chapters entitled, “Seder Ta‘aniyyot,” we are told of a number of persons concerning whom Elijah said that they would enjoy life in the world to come, though the acts which they had to their credit were not commandments, positive or negative, but just good deeds, as for example the act of the keeper of the prison, who separated the men from the women so that they might not be led into temptation and do wrong, and other instances besides.

The Rabbis give a general principle explaining the good deeds which cause a man to attain the future life, outside of the specific commandments of the Torah. Commenting on the verse, “And thou shalt walk in His ways,” they say, Be thou gracious, as He is gracious; be thou merciful, as He is merciful; be thou benevolent, as He is benevolent; bury the dead, even as He buries the dead, and so on. The principle is that any act which a man does for the sake of God helps him to attain to the future life, even if it seem to be a bad act. “In all thy ways acknowledge Him,” says the author of Proverbs, and the Rabbis comment,—even if thou art doing a bad act. Again they say, better is a transgression committed for the sake of God than the performance of a commandment which is not for God’s sake. This principle should be understood and borne in mind, for it is essential to the Law of Moses. If not for this principle the mass of Israelites would not enjoy the future life through the Torah, but only one person in a city or generation. And then the great love which God showed to Israel in giving them the Torah, as we find, “Beloved is Israel, because God gave them a precious article …,” would be converted into a means of vengeance, for they could not perform all of it and would be punished for it.

The truth is as we have explained. It is a special principle of the Mosaic law, alluded to in the rabbinic expression, “All Israel have a share in the world to come,” that all Israelites attain to some degree of life in the future world. There are, indeed, certain scholars who deny this and hold that one must have a majority of the commandments to his credit in order to merit the future life. But it is not so. The greater the number of commandments that one performs, the higher is his degree in the future world, as we said before, but one may attain to some degree of future life with one commandment alone. In the tractate Makkot we read “Rabbi Simlai in a discourse said, Six hundred and thirteen commandments were given to Moses on Sinai … David came and reduced them to eleven … Isaiah reduced them to six …” From this it might seem that one must perform all the commandments in order to acquire perfection, but that David reduced them to eleven, Isaiah to six and so with the rest. But this is not the case, and we shall explain the meaning of the passage in the following chapter, with the help of God.

CHAPTER 30

The degrees which are attained by means of the commandments are different for many reasons. They differ—first, according to the different commandments. The degree attained through one commandment is greater than the degree attained through another commandment, though the motive be equally sincere in both. This we learn from the rabbinical statement: “Be as careful about an unimportant commandment as about an important one, for you do not know the reward that attends the various commandments.” This shows that there is a difference in the rewards of the different commandments. We also learn from this that we were right in our statement in the preceding chapter that the attainment of perfection does not depend upon a performance of all the commandments. For if this were the case, there would be no meaning in the admonition to be as careful in the observance of an unimportant commandment as in that of an important one on the ground of our ignorance of the rewards attending the various commandments. Even if we knew what the reward was in each case, it would still be necessary to observe them all in order to get any reward. This statement therefore proves that there is a degree of reward attaching to each commandment separately, that the rewards are not equal and that it is not necessary to do all the commandments in order to receive the future reward that is promised.

The degrees of reward differ, secondly, according to the differences of motive in the performance of the commandments. For there is no doubt that the same number of commandments or even the same commandment would be attended by a different degree of reward according to the difference of motive in its performance. Our Rabbis are of the same opinion. “Consider,” they say, “the case of two persons who roast their respective paschal lambs. The one eats it for the sake of the Passover, and the order to satisfy his craving for meat. The one who ate it for the sake of the Passover comes under the designation of the scriptural verse: ‘For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just do walk in them;’ while the other one who ate it to satisfy his appetite is referred to in the sequel, ‘But transgressors do stumble therein,’ ” as we explained above.

Thirdly, assuming equal sincerity in motive and equality of the number of commandments performed, the degrees of reward attained will be different according to the greater or less frequency of performance of a given act. For there is no doubt that the repeated performance of a given act will be followed by a greater degree of reward than a single performance. Take the following case as an example. Two persons equal in wisdom, in wealth and in everything else, donate to charity. The one gives one thousand zuz all at once with the proper motive, while the other gives a thousand times, one zuz each time. There is no doubt that the merit of the second is superior to that of the first, though the amount of the donation is the same. The reason is because the performance of many commands of the same act and the repetition of the motive in every one of the acts is more meritorious than a single performance with a sincere motive. Similarly one who honors his father by giving him a thousand zuz at one time attains a different degree from the one who gives him one zuz a thousand times, since in the latter case there is a multiplicity of performances of the same commandment.

Fourthly, the degrees differ according to the difference in the number of commandments performed. The performance of many commandments gives rise to a higher degree without any doubt, because we have a combination of many commandments and many acts. As a result of this variety of degrees it may happen that one person may have more commandments to his credit than another, and yet attain only a very low degree of future reward because he did not perform the commandments with the proper motive. He may not be able to attain any degree of future life at all. In such a case, since God does not withhold the reward of any creature, He pays him in this world for the commandment or commandments which he performed without the proper motive. It may happen on the other hand that a person may be a transgressor all his life, and then at the last moment he performs one commandment or does one good deed with the proper motive and dies under the influence of that motive. This one motive may be sufficient to give him a certain degree of reward in the future life, as we have seen in the last chapter in the case of the official who hastened the execution of Rabbi Hanina ben Teradyon. Then there are cases in which the degree that a person attains by the doing of many commandments with the right motives is such that he is the subject of divine providence in this world and is delivered from all accidents, like many of the pious men of Israel, who were able to change the laws of nature by their will, as for example, Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa, Nahum of Gamzo, Rabbi Phinehas ben Yair, and others. There are cases, too, where a person, through the performance of many commandments with the right motives and the attainment of a knowledge of God, may reach in this world the degree of Isaiah, Elisha or the others. This is the highest degree there is, being that of the greatest prophets who lived after Moses.

We are now ready to interpret the statement of our Rabbis at the end of the tractate Makkot: “Rabbi Simlai expounded: Six hundred and thirteen commandments were given to Moses on Sinai. David came and reduced them to eleven, as we read: ‘Lord, who shall sojourn in Thy tabernacle?… He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness.’ Then came Isaiah and reduced them to six, as we read: ‘He that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly …’ Then came Micah and reduced them to three: ‘And what the Lord doth require of thee: Only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.’ Then came Habakkuk and reduced them to one: ‘But the righteous shall live by his faith.’ ” The meaning is not that by the doing of eleven or of three commandments one can acquire as much of human perfection as by doing all the commandments of the Torah. Nor does it mean that only by performing those eleven or three can one acquire any degree of perfection and not by less. It means merely that every one of the prophets wanted to lay down general principles embracing many commandments of the Torah and many good qualities, such as men show in their conduct, through which one may attain a high degree of perfection. Inasmuch as it is difficult for a person to carry all the six hundred and thirteen commandments, and it is similarly difficult to perform a commandment properly in every respect, as we explained before, the prophets desired to establish general rules by which a high degree of perfection may be attained, similar to that which is attained through all the commandments, though it can not be equal to it.

David enumerated eleven things which embrace good qualities, rather than ideas or commandments. For the expressions, “Speaketh truth in his heart … Nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour; in whose eyes a vile person is despised,” are not identical with any commandment in the Torah. But the intention of David was to lay down general rules, embracing many commandments and good qualities, by which a person may acquire a high degree of human perfection. Thus, the expressions, “Walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh truth in his heart, that hath no slander upon his tongue, nor doeth evil to his fellow,” admonish us not to sin in thought or speech or action, and to improve our character by means of the good qualities which follow from these general rules; in thought—“speaketh truth in his heart;” in speech—“hath no slander upon his tongue;” in deed—“nor doeth evil to his fellow, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour;” i. e. who is as zealous about the good name of his neighbor as he is about himself. These admonitions lead to perfection though they are not identical with any commandment in the Torah, but teach merely the improvement of moral qualities. He also mentions certain specific commandments against which the people of his time offended, or such as a person is apt to neglect, thinking they are not wrong, for example: “Nor taketh a bribe in behalf of the innocent,” which means that he did not even take a gift to acquit the innocent, an act regarded as harmless, and so with the rest.

This interpretation of ours is confirmed by David himself. In the twenty-fourth Psalm, he asks, “Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? And who shall stand in His holy place?” For an answer he names only three requirements, “He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not taken my name in vain.” Why does he not name the eleven qualities mentioned in the fifteenth Psalm? The answer is that in the twenty-fourth Psalm he embraces all the commandments and good qualities under three heads only, act, thought and speech; act—“clean hands;” thought—“pure heart;” speech—“who hath not taken my name [lit. soul] in vain,” i. e. who did not take a false oath even by the life of David, who did not know the hidden things. This is the meaning of the expression “my soul,” which refers to David, as the Masorah has it. Or we may read, “His soul,” as the ketib has it; in which case it refers to God, as we find: “There are six things which the Lord hateth, Yea, seven which are an abomination unto His soul.” Or the pronoun “his” may refer to the person concerning whom he asks, “Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord?” The meaning would then be that the intellectual power which he has was not given to him in vain, he did not “take it in vain,” but perfected his soul as far as it is in man’s power to do so; “And hath not sworn deceitfully,” for it is possible that one may swear not falsely but the truth, as in the story of Raba’s staff. Nevertheless, he says that it is not right to do so, since it is a deceitful oath.

In these three general concepts are included all the commandments which he names in the fifteenth Psalm; except that in the latter place he specifies a number of things which are not included in Psalm twenty-four, such as have to do with certain moral qualities against which the men of his time were in the habit of offending, or which a person is apt to neglect, thinking there is no harm in them, as, for example, despising the learned. Therefore he adds, “But he honoureth them that fear the Lord,” also, “Nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.”

They have the same idea in mind when they say that Isaiah reduced them to six. The meaning is that Isaiah laid down six general principles of the commandments, as follows: 1. That one should not sin in act, but should do good deeds—“Walketh righteously;” 2. That one should not sin in speech—“Speaketh uprightly;” 3. That one should not sin in thought—“Despiseth the gain of oppressions.” For to despise is the opposite of desire, which is in the heart (mind). 4. Then he says that it is not sufficient that one does not sin in any of the ways mentioned, but that one must refrain from upholding the hands of transgressors—“Shaketh his hands from holding of bribes,” which means that he does not merely refrain from taking a bribe, but he shakes his hands from supporting the hand of him who takes a bribe. 5. And he not merely refrains from supporting those who do wrong, but he keeps away from the sight or the hearing of evil—“Stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from looking upon evil.” 6. Then he says: “He shall dwell on high; his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks.” The meaning is that a man of this sort may be trusted to guard the fortress of faith, for “his bread shall be given, his waters shall be sure,” he will not be afraid of any evil thing, for in famine the Lord will deliver him from death, and in war from the hand of the sword. Or it may be that the words, “He shall dwell on high,” refer to the reward of the soul in the higher world.

The same idea is expressed in the statement that Micah reduced them to three, as is said: “And what the Lord doth require of thee; only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.” These three embrace all the commandments of the Torah or a majority of them. “To do justly,” embraces all rules governing the relations of a man to his fellow. “To love mercy,” includes all kinds of benevolence; while “to walk humbly with thy God,” embraces all those matters which concern the relations between a man and God, namely true ideas and beliefs. The expression, “humbly,” is used in connection with these to suggest, as we said in the Second Book of this treatise, that the divine attributes are negative, attributes to be stated humbly and modestly, so to speak, for a person must not give free rein to his tongue and ascribe to God any positive attribute that occurs to his mind. Our Rabbis say in this connection: “The best remedy of all is silence, as is said: ‘To Thee, praise is silence’.” This is the meaning of the expression, “To walk humbly with thy God.”

The same idea is expressed in the statement that Habakkuk reduced the commandments to one, as is said, “But the righteous shall live by his faith.” Habakkuk, having been complaining of the prosperity of the wicked and the sufferings of the righteous, lays down at the end the following principle, that if the righteous man will persevere in his faith, believing in the words of the prophets and in the promises which God made to punish the wicked and reward the righteous, he will live without concerning himself about the vicissitudes of fortune, will bear everything with good grace, and thus merit life in the future world.

Similarly the sages of the Talmud were in the habit of laying down general principles of the commandments of the Torah. A story is told about one of the later sages, to whom an armed bandit who had committed many sins came one day and said: I want to repent and observe the commandments of God, but I can not assume the responsibility of observing the great number of commandments in the Torah, for it is too much. The wise man said, Are you willing to assume the responsibility of observing one thing properly? Yes, said the bandit. Very well, said the sage. Take upon yourself the duty of telling the truth. The bandit promised and went on his way. Sometime later the bandit was on his way to rob a certain person and to put him to death, when he was met by a person who asked him where he was going. The bandit recalled the promise he had made to tell the truth and told the inquirer where he was going. He was then met by another person who asked him the same question and he gave him the same answer. Then the bandit reflected that those two persons might testify against him and have him put to death. The same thing happened to him again and again whenever he was about to do something wrong, with the result that he refrained from evil deeds: This shows that by keeping one or two general principles a person may come to observe the greater part of the commandments of the Torah, or at least a considerable part, and thus attain to future life or to an important degree thereof.

CHAPTER 31

The aim which the soul is capable of attaining while in the body by performing the commandments of the Torah, is nothing else than the permanent acquisition of a disposition to fear God. And when it acquires this attribute of fearing God, the soul is elevated and is prepared to attain eternal life, which is the good reserved for the righteous, and is the happiness of the soul, as we read: “Oh how abundant is Thy goodness, which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee.” This is made clear from the fact that the Bible announces severe punishment upon Israel and their descendants if their souls do not acquire the character of the fear of God by performing the commandments of the Torah: “If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and awful Name, the Lord thy God; then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed …”

The question may be asked, How can the fear of God lead a person to so great a privilege, namely, the attainment of eternal life? Intellectual knowledge would seem to be a more likely cause to lead to such an effect. The answer is, Solomon has stated clearly in the book of Ecclesiastes that fear is the cause of immortality, and nothing else. God’s wisdom has decreed that it should be so, and we must not seek for any reasons. Solomon begins by inquiring whether there is anything that confers immortality: “What profit hath he that worketh in that he laboureth?” Then he says: “I have seen the task which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith.” This means: I have seen the works which God gave to the sons of men to concern themselves with, viz. arts and trades, and they are all “beautiful in their time,” i. e. for the moment, so that the arts and the sciences should not perish. “Also He hath set the world in their heart, yet so that man cannot find out the work that God hath done from the beginning even to the end.” The meaning is, God also set in their hearts the desire to know the world, i. e. the science of nature. And though it is a thing that can not be attained, because man cannot comprehend the work that God hath done from the beginning even to the end, nevertheless the desire which He gave to them is also beautiful in its time, in that it prevents that art or science from perishing, but not because it may lead to eternal life, as people think; for sometimes what one learns in this way is not the truth, as we explained in the third chapter of this Book. Therefore he says later: “I know that there is no good in them except to rejoice, and to get pleasure as long as they live.” The meaning is, all these human endeavors, including knowledge, have no other good than the joy which they afford. Every one finds pleasure in any work that he does voluntarily and by which he thinks he attains his purpose. The work also helps to do good to him in his life, for philosophy instructs a person to do that which is good and beneficial in human conduct during one’s life, but it is not good for anything else. Therefore we may say, “But also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy pleasure for all his labour, is the gift of God,” like the task which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith. But there is nothing in all this that leads to immortality.

Then he says: “I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be forever; nothing can be added to it, nor anything taken from it; and God hath so made it, that men should fear before Him.” The meaning is that all that which God makes without the mediation of nature which belongs to the sphere of generation and dissolution, as for example the heavens and all their hosts, will be forever, for we see that they are individually permanent, as David says: “He hath also established them forever and ever,” But in order that the intellectual soul in man, which is God’s work, as is said: “And breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,” may have immortality, God hath so made it that men should fear before Him. It is clear from this that fear of God is, as it were, the true mean, to which nothing should be added and from which nothing should be taken away. For this is the definition of the true mean, that it admits not of addition or diminution, for the latter remove the mean and destroy it. God made “fear” before Him, i. e., the Torah and the commandments, which are the true mean, and which produce fear of God, conferring immortality upon the soul. Hence it necessarily follows that the Torah will exist forever, for whatsoever God doeth, it shall be forever. Or we may interpret the passage thus. God hath so ordered that they should have fear before Him. Hence this fear is, as it were, the true mean, which admits not of more and less and can not be destroyed. Therefore it is a fitting means for the attainment of the human end.

Now, since His wisdom has so decreed, it is not proper to pretend wisdom and say, how is it possible for fear to lead man to human perfection? Fear is like the true mean, which admits not of addition or subtraction for the attainment of the end, namely permanence and immortality. Hence the expression in the Torah: “Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God,” though a specific command, is a general principle, embracing all the commandments of the Torah, or a great many of them. For fear is that disposition which is acquired through the commandments of the Torah, and is the noblest disposition for a man to acquire, nor can it be acquired except after great pains and effort. The patriarch Abraham was not called “God-fearing,” until after he had gone through his trials. Then it is said about him, “For now I know that thou art a God-fearing man,” i. e. that thou hast attained the noblest character that a man can attain in this world in order to merit life in the world to come. For this reason the Torah calls attention in many places to this disposition: “And thou shalt fear thy God, I am the Lord;” “Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God;” because it is extremely difficult to attain this quality, and yet it can be attained by observing the commandments of the Torah.

For the same reason the Bible says: “And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul; to keep for thy good the commandments of the Lord.” The interpretation of the passage is as follows. Moses is explaining to the people the extraordinary kindness of God. By right, in order to attain the perfection of one’s soul, a person should fear God, walk in His ways, love Him, and serve Him with all his heart and soul. But it is very difficult for a person to attain the required degree of fear, love and service with all heart and soul. Hence God made it easier for man. He commanded him instead to observe merely God’s statutes and commandments, and thereby he may attain that disposition which he would get from service with heart and soul. The meaning of the above passage is therefore this: Now, Israel, consider the wonderful kindness of God. What does He ask of you? Instead of the fear of God, instead of walking in His ways and loving Him, instead of serving Him with all your heart and soul, all of which you are obliged to do—He asks you merely to keep the commandments of God and His statutes which I command you this day, for your good, i. e. all this is for your good, because by keeping the commandments of the Torah one may attain the human purpose which we should attain by great labor and enormous effort through fear and love and God’s service with all one’s heart and soul.

This interpretation of the passage is worth careful attention, for it is very remarkable, and solves the difficulty raised by the Rabbis. They say, “Is fear so small a thing?” And the answer is given, “Yes, for Moses it is indeed a small thing.” The answer is not satisfactory. For the opponent may say, It is not fair for a man of great wealth to say to a poor man, who has nothing, I ask of you only a thousand gold pieces. A thousand gold pieces for a poor man are a great matter and hard to get. The rich man is not fair in speaking thus. But according to our interpretation there is no difficulty. God does not ask anything that is hard to acquire. He asks merely the performance of the commandments of the Torah, because the quality of fear through which one may attain human perfection follows from the performance of the commandments of the Torah.

David also says: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” The meaning is, the best and essential part of wisdom is to attain to the fear of God. The word, “beginning” (), has the same meaning here as in the expression, “And anoint themselves with the chief () ointments.” Commenting on the sequel, “A good understanding have all they that do them [sc. His commandments],” the Rabbis say, “that do them,” not “that study them.” This is to indicate that the performance of the commandments leads to the aim realized by understanding, that aim which all acknowledge to be the ultimate end of man. Also in Job we read, “Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom.” The meaning is, the aim of wisdom is to attain the fear of the Lord. And inasmuch as this quality is the aim of all the other qualities which are attainable from the Torah through the performance of the commandments, we must treat of it at length in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 32

Fear in every case is the receding of the soul and the gathering of all her powers into herself, when she imagines some fear-inspiring thing. The latter may be of two kinds. The soul may imagine a harmful thing, which she fears by reason of the injury which she thinks may come from it. Or the soul may imagine something very great, exalted, elevated and high, which she fears when she considers her own poverty and lowliness in comparison with that great thing, though she has no fear of any harm coming to her from the thing.

Now when a person performs the commandments from fear of the first kind, fear of punishment or love of reward, he is called, in the rabbinic terminology, an insincere server. In the tractate Sotah, chapter “Notel,” we read: “There are seven kinds of ‘Pharisees’ ” … i. e. such as pretend to virtues they have not. Among these are named, the Pharisee from fear and the Pharisee from love. Thereupon they say to the Tanna, you must not include the Pharisee from love and the Pharisee from fear, for Rabbi Judah said in the name of Rab, One should always occupy himself with the Torah and the commandments, even if it is not for their own sake, for from such occupation he will come to do them for their own sake. Rashi explains the expressions, “from love,” and “from fear,” as meaning from love of reward and from fear of punishment. It is clear therefore that he who concerns himself with the Torah and the commandments from love of reward or fear of punishment, is spoken of as one who does it not for its own sake.

The person, however, who performs the commandments from the fear and love of God and because he is submissive to His commandments, is called by the Rabbis a person who occupies himself with the Torah for its own sake. That is, he does not perform the commandments from fear of punishment and love of reward, but because he imagines the sublimity and dignity of God, and therefore he submits to do His will. This is fear of the second kind explained above. It is the true fear, with which Abraham was praised, when God said to him, “Now I know that thou art a God-fearing man.” And it is the final quality which one attains by means of the commandments of the Torah. For if a man reflects and considers that God sees his open as well as hidden acts, and compares his imperfection and poverty of understanding with the sublimity and dignity of God, he will stand in great awe before Him and will be ashamed to transgress His commandments and not to do His will, as a person is ashamed to do an unbecoming thing in the presence of an honorable prince, a respected and wise old man, who has a reputation for learning, character and dignity. Though he may not contemplate that any harm will come to him from a violation of his command, nevertheless he will without doubt feel ashamed and abashed and hesitate very much to offend his honor in his presence.

This kind of noble fear, the intellect by nature has a desire for, because everything has a desire for that which is of the same nature as, and similar to itself. And just as every person desires to carry out the wishes of a perfect and pious man, and to serve him with sincerity and eagerness, without the hope of reward or the fear of punishment, so the mind desires to fulfil the will of God, because it is natural for it to do so. For this reason the wise man used to say, “Master of the universe, it is well known to Thee that it is our will to do Thy will, but the leaven in the dough prevents …” The meaning is, it is in conformity with the nature of the reason, which decrees that the inferior should be subordinate to the superior, as the animals submit to man. But matter and the evil inclination—the leaven in the dough—are opposed to this, and are always thinking of doing evil and rebelling and offending the honor of the great. Therefore the Torah lays down punishments in order to compel matter and the material forces to serve God from fear of punishment. But it is not necessary to compel the reason, for it is natural to the reason to serve God and to submit to Him without the fear of punishment or the love of reward. Both of these kinds of fear are therefore necessary for man that he may attain his perfection, the one from the side of matter, the other from the side of reason.

Job boasts of both the kinds of fear, saying that he refrained from doing wrong for fear of punishment, and that he did those things which were pleasing to God, submitting to Him on account of His sublimity, exaltation and dignity: “For calamity from God was a terror to me, and by reason of His majesty I could do nothing.” The first part of the verse refers to the fear of punishment, the second refers to the fear of infinite sublimity and exaltation. When I consider His exalted character, says Job, I can not transgress His words and neglect to do His will, for I am ashamed to do that which displeases Him, apart from any fear of punishment, to which reference is made in the first part of the verse.

Similarly when Job reproved his companions and charged them with insincerity, and with flattering God with false words, he said, “Will ye speak unrighteously for God, and talk deceitfully for Him? Will ye show Him favour? Will ye contend for God? Would it be good that He should search you out? Or as one mocketh a man, will ye mock Him? He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly show favour. Shall not His majesty terrify you, and His dread fall upon you?” “Shall not His majesty terrify you,” denotes the fear which one feels because of God’s exaltation and sublimity and because He sees all that a man does openly as well as secretly. This deters a man from speaking unrighteously or deceitfully. The second part of the verse, “And His dread fall upon you,” denotes the fear and the dread which comes upon a person from fear of punishment, which represents the side of matter. Therefore he adds, “Your memorials shall be like unto ashes, your eminences to eminences of clay.” The meaning is, when you remember that you are similar to ashes and that you are made of clay, you must fear God for the two reasons mentioned. This is the conception of fear which one must have before God and which entitles one to be called God-fearing.

CHAPTER 33

That which gives completeness to a commandment so that the purpose intended by it may be attained, is joy. For joy gives completeness and perfection to anything done. One and the same act if done joyfully and cheerfully is called a virtue, while if done in ill humor is called a vice. This is explained in the second book of the Ethics of Aristotle, namely that when a person performs an act of generosity cheerfully, his act is a virtue; while if he does it with ill humor, it is called a vice. The Bible also promises reward for practising charity joyfully: “Thou shalt surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him; because that for this thing the Lord thy God will bless thee.” The blessing is made to depend on “Thy heart shall not be grieved,” and not on “Thou shalt surely give him.”

This may be explained more fully in the following way. There is no doubt that the noblest and most worthy deed should be rewarded by God, and that punishment should be given for its violation, according to the idea of the Torah. But there is no deed that is more noble and more worthy and more deserving of reward, according to the truth and the consensus of mankind, than the service of God. And we find that the Bible announces severe punishment for not serving God joyfully: “Because thou didst not serve the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of all things; therefore shalt thou serve thy enemy.…” The punishment is here made to depend on not serving God with joyfulness, not on not serving Him at all.

That this is the interpretation can be seen as follows: The meaning can not be that punishment will come because he did not serve God when he was in good humor, for it would follow from this that one is not obliged to serve God when he is not enjoying gladness and abundance. We have proved therefore that performance of a commandment joyfully gives completion and perfection to the commandment. Therefore the Psalmist urges that the service of God shall be with gladness: “Serve the Lord with gladness; come before His presence with singing.” We must inquire, therefore, if the service of God can not be performed perfectly unless it is done with gladness and good humor, how can this be reconciled with our explanation in the preceding chapter that the service of God must be with fear, which makes the heart tremble and grieve? For one can not serve God with grief and gladness at the same time, since they are opposites.

The solution of the question is as follows: The proper performance of a function is an indication of the soundness of the power or faculty in question, while the improper performance of a function is an indication of a defect in the power or of its want of soundness. Now as it is a sign of perfection in a person if he does not fear that which should not be feared, so it is a sign of perfection if he fears that which should be feared. Not to fear that which should be feared would be a defect. If one is not afraid to put his hand into the fire, it shows either an aberration of mind or insensibility of the hand, as Hippocrates says in the second book of his Aphorisms: “If any part of the body is diseased and the person does not feel pain because of absorption in his affairs, it shows an aberration of mind.” The same thing applies to the soul. If she is afraid and stands in awe of that which she should be afraid and stand in awe of, that is an indication of health and perfection of intellect. And as the virtue of the soul and the excellence of the intellect increase, she appreciates more the sublimity and exalted character of God, and stands in greater awe of Him and fears to transgress His commandments.

Now when a person finds in himself this degree of fear, he should rejoice in this fear, for it shows health of soul and perfection of intellect. To prove that this is the correct idea, David, in another passage, makes clear that the expression, “Serve the Lord with gladness,” does not mean that the service should be conducted in a light, frivolous and vulgar fashion, but that it should be inspired with fear, “Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.” The meaning is that the fundamental spirit of the service should be one of fear and trembling. When the soul considers the sublimity of God and His exalted character, she will be afraid of Him, as she compares her own lowliness with His greatness and worth. At the same time she will be glad and rejoice at the fear and trembling she feels, because she will realize that she fears that which is deserving of fear—an indication of intellectual perfection and health on her part. This joy, therefore, makes the service perfect and complete—“And rejoice with trembling”—i. e. joy gives completeness and perfection to the service.

Similarly joy gives perfection and permanence to the word or command. Thus David says: “Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage forever; For they are the rejoicing of my heart.” The Torah is divided into three parts—judgments, testimonies and statutes. Concerning the judgments he has said, “I have sworn, and have confirmed it; to observe Thy righteous judgments.” Here the words, “and have confirmed it” ( = and have carried out in practice), allude to the fact that the perfection of the judgments consists in their being actually in existence. Therefore he says now that the testimonies, i. e. the ideas, in the Torah are in agreement with sense and reason because the mind accepts them with gladness, and gladness causes them to remain permanently in the soul. Therefore he says: “Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage forever.”

As for the statutes, they are those commandments of the Torah which the mind does not accept, because no reason is known for the prohibitions they enjoin, such as swine’s flesh or wearing a garment of wool and flax mixed. The reason therefore does not accept them with gladness and must be subdued so as to consent to perform them with gladness. Therefore the Psalmist says: “I have inclined my heart to perform Thy statutes, forever. Their reward is eternal.” The meaning is, I compelled my intellect against its will to perform them. And this was because of the hope of eternal reward which is promised for their performance: “Their reward is eternal.” The reward causes rejoicing and the joy makes the soul take them in permanently. This is what David was priding himself upon when he said, “I rejoice at Thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.” This refers to the statutes, the joy in which is not due for their own sake, but only because they are the word of God. In performing these, says the Psalmist, I rejoice as one that findeth great spoil.

In order however, to make a distinction between the joy felt in the statutes, which is due merely to the expected reward, and the joy which one feels in the testimonies, i. e. those commandments to which the reason assents, he says elsewhere, “I have rejoiced in the way of Thy testimonies, as much as in all riches,” i. e. joy without end. “All riches,” includes all the money in the world, more than which can not be imagined.

All this proves that joy causes a thing to remain permanently in the soul, and gives completeness and perfection to an act, no matter what it be. Even the doer of a bad act, in order to attain his purpose completely, must perform it with gladness, as the Bible says when it warns Israel of the punishment which will come to them if they transgress the words of the Torah: “And it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the Lord will cause you to rejoice in order to cause you to perish, and to destroy you.” The meaning is that God will bring it about that the evil doer will rejoice in his evil deed so that he should perform it completely. The verb ישיש is in the hiphil, which is causative, to indicate that not God, the absolutely good, will rejoice in doing evil, but that He will cause the evil doer to rejoice. Far be it from God that He should rejoice in doing evil! Solomon warns us against it, when he says: “Rejoice not when thy enemy falleth.” And the prophet says: “Neither shouldst thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction.” All this shows that it is wrong to rejoice in an evil deed.

But when it comes to doing good, the joy is attributed to God Himself, and the intransitive form of the verb is used: “For the Lord will again rejoice over thee for good, as He rejoiced over thy fathers.” The verb is used in the kal form, which is intransitive. To indicate that joy gives perfection to an act, Solomon says: “To do justly is joy to the righteous, but ruin to the workers of iniquity.” The meaning is that the righteous, who rejoices in doing justly, produces a result that is perfect in its nature; whereas the wrong doers, who when they do right do it unwillingly and without pleasure, because it is their ruin, necessarily produce a justice which is all crooked, since they take no pleasure in doing it.

CHAPTER 34

The essence of divine service in performing a commandment is, as we have seen, the fear of God. We have also found that divine service must be inspired with joy if it is to be complete. But it is hard to reconcile fear with joy. We must therefore treat of this matter more at length so that we may have a complete and practical understanding how one inspired with fear can at the same time be glad and rejoice, seeing that fear and trembling depress the heart and make it grieve.

Every person understands that in order to attain some high degree or honor, he must undergo great toil and trouble for a certain time. Now although while enduring that toil and trouble he undoubtedly suffers pain and grief, nevertheless when he considers in his mind the great honor or high degree which he expects to attain through that trouble, the latter is reduced to nothing in comparison with the expected good. The same thing applies to the fear of God that we have been speaking of. When one considers the high degree which he may attain through fear,—the fear which results from reflecting upon the divine sublimity and worth,—he ignores all the trouble and the grief and the trembling which come upon him by reason of the fear.

Solomon has a very apt analogy which is in agreement with what we have said: “If thou seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord.” The meaning is that although there is great trouble involved in mining the silver, which comes out mixed with water; and similarly in digging for a hidden treasure on one’s premises there is great trouble and toil and effort, and one may injure a finger or a foot or a thigh and feel great pain, nevertheless one searches after these things with eagerness, and even though he feels pain and suffering when he is hurt, still when he considers the purpose, namely the treasure or the silver, he rejoices and bears all the pain and trouble gladly and in good humor. In the same way we must think of the toil and fear and trembling which one suffers when he is inspired with the fear of God. He must nevertheless feel great joy when he reflects on the great value of the purpose to be attained, namely submission to God and His service, which is the purpose of fear. This is the meaning of the passage quoted above: “If thou seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord.” That is, if you bear all the trouble in good humor like one who digs for a hidden treasure, or who mines silver, then you will understand the fear of the Lord. For in the very same way you should be glad and rejoice despite the pain and trouble and toil which come to you through the service of God.

Not every one can attain this degree, hence the person who does is called, “one who serves from love,” and not merely “God-fearing.” Abraham was told at the end of his trials, “Now I know that thou art a God-fearing man.” But he is also called “friend,” Israel being spoken of as “The seed of Abraham My friend.” Our Rabbis say: Those who act from love of God and take pleasure in their sufferings come under the biblical designation: “But they that love Him shall be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might.” For he who loves God, pays no attention to all the trouble and toil and pains which come to him through the service of God. When God first revealed Himself to Abraham, He told him to leave his land and his birthplace, in order to try him and to accustom him to bear for His sake the trouble and toil which have to be borne in travel. Then when Abraham stood his test joyfully and with good humor, the Bible called him friend. All this shows that the cheerful endurance of toil and trouble in the service of God gives perfection to the service and the fear of God.

The fear of God is not like the fear of a human being. If one is in fear of a human being or a king or a prince, he is in constant terror and dread, which shorten his life; whereas the fear of God, far from shortening a man’s life, increases it: “The fear of the Lord prolongeth days.” The wicked, on the other hand, who do not fear God, not merely do not live longer than the others, but their lives are shortened.

Similarly, although it is natural that a timid and fearful person should have children as timid as he, and that he should never become rich or maintain his wealth because, being always afraid, he does not attend to his affairs properly, nevertheless David says: “Happy is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in His commandments. His seed shall be mighty upon earth …” The meaning is, happy is he who fears God, for this fear does not lead to timidity but to might, so that his seed shall be mighty upon earth. Also, he who delighteth in His commandments, though this involves expense, will not lose his wealth for, “Wealth and riches are in his house; and his merit endureth forever.” This is to show that the fear of God does not shorten or diminish either wealth or life, and does not bring about misfortunes like the fear of man. Solomon says: “The fear of the Lord tendeth to life; and he that hath it shall abide satisfied, he shall not be visited with evil.” That is, the fear of God does not cause death, but leads to life. The man who fears God will want for nothing, but will abide satisfied. And he will not be afraid of misfortune, for he shall not be visited with evil.

CHAPTER 35

The love of God is a degree than which there is none higher, and a person can not attain it unless he has reached the highest degree of fear, as we have explained. Abraham did not get the title “My friend,” until the end of his life and after the incident of Isaac’s sacrifice, when he was told: “Now I know that thou art a God-fearing man.” We must therefore explain the meaning of love and the various species thereof.

Love is of three kinds: The love of the good, the love of the useful, and the love of the agreeable. To love the good is to love a thing solely because it is good, without the element of the usefulness or pleasure of the object entering into the feeling. To love the useful is to love a thing solely because of the utility one may derive from it. To love the agreeable is to love a thing because of the pleasure one derives from it, not because it is good or useful, but only because it is agreeable. The love of the useful and the love of the agreeable admit of degrees of more and less according to the degree of the utility or pleasure, and they may cease altogether. The love of the good for the sake of the good itself can not change or be destroyed, for the lover does not love the loved one because he is good to him, i. e. in relation to the lover, but because he has found that the loved one is good in himself and the loved one is known to the lover and he alone is engraved in his heart, so that the concept of love applies to both. For love is the union and complete intellectual identification of the lover and the loved; whereas in the case of the useful and the agreeable what the lover knows is not the loved one, but the benefit which he derives from him or the pleasure which he gets. Therefore the lover and the loved can not be united. And for this reason the love changes with the change in the utility or pleasure, or it may cease entirely. But the love of the good can not change, for the lover receives no benefit from the loved, but the knowledge of him alone. For this reason the love of the good because it is good is the best of the kinds of love.

Now since God is the absolute good in whom there is no evil at all, since there is in Him neither privation nor potentiality, the love of God is the love of the good because it is good. And it increases as the knowledge of God increases, since we said that the love of the good is dependent upon knowledge alone. Since, however, God is the creator of all things, and the gracious author of the existence of all existing things, and the giver of life to all those things that have life, He is also useful and is deserving of love also because of His benefits. Further, if we reflect upon the manner in which He provides food for all the things He created and observe that He did not merely create those things which are necessary for animal and man for bare existence, but that He also provided luxuries, which are not necessary for bare existence—thus, man may exist on bread alone, yet God created figs and grapes and pomegranates and other fruits which give pleasure, though they are not necessary for the preservation of existence—we realize from this aspect that He deserves to be loved also because of the pleasure He gives, i. e. because He created pleasant and agreeable things. Hence, although He is an absolute unity, all the species of love are appropriate to Him, love of the good, love of the useful, love of the agreeable. It follows therefore that He should be loved as much as possible with all the kinds of love, because it is not conceivable that there can be any other being that is better, or more useful, or more agreeable than He.

For this reason when Moses commanded Israel to love God with all the kinds of love, as we shall see, by saying, “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all thy might,” he prefaced his commandment with the expression, “Hear O Israel, the Lord our God the Lord is one.” The meaning is, though He is one, nevertheless all the kinds of love are appropriate to Him, love of the good, love of the useful and love of the agreeable, because He is the absolutely good, and bestows benefits and confers pleasure, and you must not love any one else no matter what the nature of the love be, because in Him are contained all the causes of love. He must therefore be loved, “with all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy might,” for there is nothing to prevent the love of Him from being as perfect as possible.

A person can not love two things or two persons with a perfect love, for if he loves them both, neither love is perfect since it is divided between two. It is impossible for the lover to be completely united with the loved, as the idea of love requires, unless the loved is one. Therefore he says: “The Lord is one,” to indicate that since God is one, the love is not divided, and your love may be perfect, since it is not divided into two parts. Nor is there any objection from the fact that there are different kinds of love, namely of the good, of the useful and of the agreeable. For since God is one and has in Him all the different causes of love, you should love God perfectly with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might.

Nor does the change in a person’s age cause any hindrance to his love. For we find that a man’s life may be divided into three parts, the years of growth, the stationary years, and the years of decline. The changes in his love during these periods follow the three species of love, the good, the useful and the agreeable. In the years of growth, until the age of thirty or thereabouts, a person loves the agreeable and follows it. Such love is found in young men, in women and in those who are on the same plane as youths. For example, a person who indulges in sexual intercourse because it is pleasant, without considering the injury which results therefrom for body and soul, is like a boy who indulges the appetite for food, without considering the injury resulting from overeating, and cares for nothing else except food and other agreeable delights. During the stationary years, from thirty to fifty or thereabouts, the love of the useful predominates, so much so that there are persons who neglect food and drink and other pleasures by reason of their passion for gambling, because of the great winnings that may be made in a short time. Others again risk their lives in ships on the ocean with expectation of gain, caring for no other pleasure. During the years of decline, from fifty on, a person cares no longer for the useful or the pleasant, but only for the good as such. This is why we find that old people are more diligent in serving God and abstain more from the appetites than others. When they see that the love of the pleasant and the useful are not permanent, they care only for the love of the good as such, which is permanent and unchangeable, as soon as this love finds its object in God, as we explained above. This love gives salvation to the soul.

A young man, by reason of the heat of his blood and his indulgence in the appetites, does not appreciate the soul’s reward and salvation. Being absorbed in the things of sense, he thinks that they will remain permanently, but he does not believe in the salvation and immortality of the soul, which is something that can not be perceived with the senses. This is why the Bible says in reference to the person who trusts in God, “Through long life will I satisfy him, and make him to behold My salvation.” The meaning is, Through length of days, i. e. through reaching old age, when the desires grow weak, he will be able to appreciate the salvation and immortality of the soul, and will come to understand that these privileges are attained through the love of God. And hence he will have a tendency to serve God and to love Him, for it is characteristic of old people that they are more addicted to the service of God than others. This is the general rule as applicable to the generality of men. But there are old people who follow after pleasure like young boys, or after utility and power like a man of forty; and on the other hand there are young men who are in love with the good like old men. Persons differ also in this respect according to their temperaments and habits, and according to the customs in which they have been brought up. Still, in general, the life of a person is divided into the three kinds of love, as we explained above.

It seems that the difference in the character of the love at these three different ages is due to the difference in the influence exerted by the powers of the soul upon the individual. During the time of youth and the years of growth, the influence of the appetitive soul predominates, and hence the person follows pleasure. At the age of young manhood and during the stationary years, the animal soul predominates, to which belongs the spirited faculty and other similar powers, and hence the person pursues power, authority, wealth and utility as he sees it. In old age, when the desires and the other powers become weak, so that he no longer pursues power and authority, the rational faculty comes to the fore, and he comes to realize that all the other things are evanescent, and that there is nothing that is permanent and can give him permanence except the service of God and those things which it is characteristic of reason to follow. Accordingly he will reject the desires and pursue those things which his intellectual soul dictates, such as the love and fear of God, and in general the love of the good, i. e. God, as such, and not because He is useful or pleasant.

This rational power, it seems, is called in our language, lebab (heart). The word leb is applied to the animal organ in which the power of life resides; whereas the word lebab applies only to the rational power. Thus we find: “But I have understanding (lebab) as well as you;” “But an empty man will get understanding (yilabeb).” The word nefesh (soul) is used in a general as well as in a special sense. It is applied to the psychic powers collectively. This is the most frequent use. It is also applied specially to the powers of the animal soul. Thus we read in Job: “In whose hand is the soul (nefesh) of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.” The words, “the soul of every living thing,” denote the animal soul as a whole, while the expression, “and the breath of all mankind,” denotes the rational power in man.

Since the appetitive soul is always eager to attain its desires and acquire money, the Bible calls it “wealth” (meod). Accordingly Moses, wishing to allude to the love of God exercised by these three powers during the three ages of man, as we explained, said: “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart (lebabeka), and with all thy soul (nafsheka) and with all thy wealth (meodeka).” “Thy heart,” refers to the love of the rational power. “With all thy heart,” signifies that all the ideas of the intellect must be concentrated upon this matter. “Thy soul,” refers to the love of the animal power, while “thy wealth,” refers to the love of the appetitive power.

It may be explained as follows: He wishes to teach man that he should love God as much as he can, with all the powers of his body, at all times. First, because the object of his love is good. Such love is dictated by reason, hence, “with all thy heart.” Second, because He is useful, for God it is who breathes the breath of life into man’s nostrils and maintains him, hence, “with all thy soul,” for the word nafsheka (thy soul) refers to the animal power. The word “all” refers to all the animal powers, as the Rabbis say: “with all thy soul,” means even if He takes away thy soul. Third, because He is agreeable, hence, “with all thy wealth,” which refers to the appetitive power and the love which emanates from it, embracing a variety of kinds, like love of money, of property and of pleasure. All this is intended to show that God is the absolute good, that He is beneficent, seeing that He made man and is gracious to him in that He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and that He is also the giver of wealth and property and pleasure to man as long as he lives. Therefore it is proper to love Him with all the kinds of love and at all times.

And inasmuch as the love of God must consist in serving Him and observing His commandments as far as possible and at all times, in thought, in word and in deed, he adds, “And these words which I command thee this day, shall be upon thy heart (lebabeka),” indicating thought; “and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them”—referring to speech; and this must be all the time, “when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.” But this service must also be performed in practice, hence, “And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy hand.” Man’s act, however, is of a double nature, such as continues only as long as the individual is alive, and such as survives the individual. Hence He commands both kinds of act. “Thou shalt bind them for a sign,” refers to the temporary act; “and thou shalt write them, etc.,” refers to that kind of act which remains after the death of the individual. All this is to indicate that God must be loved with all the kinds of love, and with all the powers of the person; that this love will result in doing God’s service as far as possible, in thought, in speech and in action, and at all times.

CHAPTER 36

Love of God gives joy and delight to the soul. Ordinarily love of a thing that can not be obtained or that is difficult of attainment causes trouble and confusion to the soul, which casts about for means to obtain the object of its love. And for this reason lovers are always in pain and sorrow until they obtain the object of their love. But the love of God does not cause trouble or confusion to the soul, although God is not a thing that can be obtained. The reason is because the little of Him that man can attain gives wonderful joy and pleasure and delight to the soul. This is the way of the lover: the little that he obtains of the object of his love is much pleasanter to him than a great deal of something else.

This is why Solomon praises this kind of love above all others: “How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!” The meaning is, How superior is the beauty and the pleasure of the love of God to those of any other love, for this love is one of delights—man has wonderful delights in it, and there are as many kinds of delights in it as there are different kinds of understanding. The other kinds of love give a person great pain before he obtains the object of his love. And when he obtains a little thereof, he finds pleasure therein, but the pain increases until he obtains the whole of it, since it is possible of attainment. And when he has obtained the whole of it, his love ceases, and his desire subsides. But the love of God is different. Man rejoices in the little that he obtains, when he considers how great is the worth of the object to be attained. He takes delight in that which he obtains, without any addition of pain because he knows that God can not be attained. Therefore he takes wonderful delight in the little that he attains, and the more he attains, the greater is the love and the delight.

Moreover this love can not cease because the object is infinite. As one attains a certain degree he finds delight therein and is eager to get more, and so on without end. Therefore it can not stop, but the person’s joy continues with the little that he attains, as we explained in the fifteenth chapter of the Second Book. The greater the worth of the thing desired, the greater the joy and delight in as much as is attained. Therefore, even if the search for this love and attainment cause a man great trouble, he will not on that account desist from the pursuit when he considers the great end that is sought. Particularly the person who serves from love has no reason to regard any utility or damage that may accrue to him from his service, because his purpose is merely to do the will of the beloved. Hence he ignores any benefit or injury which may come provided the beloved is benefited. Thus Jonathan, because of his love for David, cared not about the fact that he would lose the kingdom as long as David was alive, as Saul said to him: “For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the earth, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom.” His purpose was to benefit David, whom he loved, even if he did injury to himself.

This is the way of true love, which considers only the interest of the beloved, whereas the love which considers the interest of the lover is like the love which man has for animals, because of the benefit he receives from them. And the love which is due to protection from injury is like the love of a man for a dog. A man loves dogs because they protect him from injury. True love is that which a man has for the beloved for the sake of the beloved alone, having no other purpose than to do the will of the beloved, because he does not love the beloved for any cause other than the beloved himself. Love which is due to an extraneous cause is sure to change and cease, as our Rabbis say: “All love which is dependent upon something extraneous ceases with the cessation of that thing.” But the love which is for the sake of the beloved solely, and for no other cause, will last as long as the beloved endures. Now since God endures forever, love for Him never ceases.

Such love as this, which considers only the interest of the beloved, can exist only in men of intelligence and understanding. For the love of another for his own sake can be due only to the intellect of the beloved. Therefore if the beloved loses his mind or dies, love ceases, because the beloved object is not there any more, since the soul leaves the dead body. Now inasmuch as this is the best of all kinds of love and is found only in persons of intellect and understanding, a person is praised or blamed for it. Hence there must be no admixture of compulsion therein, for a person is not praised or blamed for that which he is compelled to do, but only for a thing that is altogether dependent on his choice. This is why the patriarch Abraham was praised for this kind of love more than others; and the Bible calls him, “Abraham, My friend,” because he had no other purpose in mind than to do the will of God whom he loved. Nor was there any other cause compelling him to do this, for there was no element of compulsion in the incident of Isaac’s sacrifice. Not even the command of God was a compulsion, as our Rabbis explain, in connection with the verse in Genesis: “Abraham said to God, Lord of the universe, it is known to Thee that when Thou didst say to me, ‘Take, now, thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, even Isaac … and offer him to Me as a burnt-offering,’ I could have said in reply, Hast not Thou said to me, ‘For in Isaac shall seed be called to thee?’ but I did not say so, I suppressed my compassion and did not criticize Thy conduct.” It seems clear from this that even though God commanded him, Abraham was not compelled to obey, seeing that he could have excused himself on good grounds if he had desired. But he did not do so. He suppressed a father’s compassion for a son for the sake of his love for God.

This is why the credit in the incident of the sacrifice is given to Abraham and not to Isaac, though the latter was thirty-seven years old, as our Rabbis say. Abraham could have avoided the act of sacrificing his son, but Isaac had no excuse for refusing to offer himself when he was commanded to do so. This is the reason also why in our prayers we always mention the sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham and do not mention the sacrifice of all the pious and holy men who offered their lives to sanctify the name of God, like Rabbi Akiba and his associates and all the holy men in every generation. The reason is because all the others offered their lives in fulfilment of the commandment, “And ye shall not profane My holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel;” whereas Abraham was not compelled by God’s command. Moreover he knew very well what he was doing, for more than three days elapsed between the time when he was commanded to take his son and the time of the sacrifice, as we read: “On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.”

An absolutely free act is one the opposite of which the person at the time of doing the act knew how to do and was able to do without any prevention or hindrance, and yet chose to do what he did and not something else. But if the person did not know or understand how to do the opposite, and did what he did without distinguishing between the thing and its opposite, merely by accident or by habit or custom, or because he could not do the opposite, his is not a free act for which he deserves praise if it is good or blame if it is bad. Even an offering, which is a good act, if a person brings it without distinguishing between good and evil, merely as a result of habit and custom, is worth nothing.

This is the meaning of the verse in Ecclesiastes: “Guard thy foot when thou goest to the house of God,” i. e. take care that your going there should be the result of discrimination and not of habit and custom. The same idea is expressed in the words in the sequel: “And be ready to hearken: it is better than when fools give sacrifice; for they know not that they do evil.” The meaning is, To be ready to listen to the words of the wise is better than the offering which fools bring, for by listening to the words of the wise a person learns to distinguish between good and evil, and does good as a result of perfect discrimination because the thing is good, and keeps away from evil because he knows that it is evil. This is not the case in the actions of fools. Even the offering which they bring is not accounted to them as service; because, since they are not ready to listen to the words of the wise, they do not understand the difference between good and evil and do not know how to do evil freely. Hence even the offering, which is a good act, is not credited to them, because they do not do it from choice between good and evil. They do not know how to do evil and they bring the offering, not because they choose it in preference to its opposite, which is evil, but as a result of habit and custom. Therefore they do not deserve to be praised for it, for a person deserves praise for a good act only if he knows how to do evil and has the ability to do it, and yet chooses to do good. Accordingly, the person who serves from love deserves praise only if his service is prompted by true love in which there is no mixture of compulsion or of protection from injury or of utility. This love gives delight and is deserving of eternal and infinite reward. Solomon refers to it in the Song of Songs: “If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, he would utterly be contemned.” The infinite can not be exchanged for the finite, viz. “all the substance of his house.”

CHAPTER 37

We must now explain whether it is possible that there should be love between God and man as there is between man and God. A person may say, It is indeed right that man should love God, first, because of the love of the good as such; second, because of the benefits he receives from Him, and third, because He is pleasant. But it is inconceivable that God should love man, who has not one of these qualities. Love can exist between two persons when it is mutual, though different in degree. But if they are at the opposite poles it does not seem that there can be love between them, because they are like opposites. For opposites are at the extreme distance from each other. But the opposite flees the opposite, and love can be, it would seem, only between things which are like. This is why persons are eager to be honored and loved by wise men and men of worth, in order that it may seem that they have something in common with them. And for the same reason love between persons is more complete if they are alike in a certain virtue or accomplishment. On the other hand, if the difference between them is great, the love is slight, so much so that some persons do not wish their friends prosperity for fear that if they rise high in the world the equality between them will change and friendship will cease or diminish. The exception is when the friend is so closely attached to the other as a father is to a child, where the two personalities are almost one. Then he wishes all the good things to his friend as he wishes them to himself, because he recognizes no difference between himself and his friend. But those friends who do recognize a distinction can not have a perfect love for each other.

This can be shown in experience. There can be no friendship or attachment at all between the extremely good and the extremely bad, and neither expects it. Similarly men in a very lowly station do not expect to be, nor does it occur to them that they might be, loved by kings, because the distance between them is very great. What shall we say then of the distance between man and God, which is infinite?

It is clear therefore that though man may feel love for God because of the benefits which he receives from Him, or the pleasure he feels in that which he attains of Him, or for love of the good as such, God can have no kind of love for man, either as the good or as the beneficial or as the pleasant. How, then, can there be love between God and man, as we are promised in the divine Torah: “And it shall come to pass, because ye hearken to these ordinances, and keep, and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep with thee the covenant … and He will love thee and bless thee and multiply thee …?” The prophet also says: “I have loved you, saith the Lord;” “The Lord loveth the righteous.”

The answer to the question is that there are three kinds of love between friends.

First, there is the love of equality or similarity, the kind that obtains between friends who are equal in a certain respect in a virtue, in an accomplishment, or in beneficence, i. e. if each derives a benefit from the other or finds pleasure in the other, or they are both equal in goodness. That one of the two who receives more benefit than he gives must love his friend more than his friend loves him because of the greater benefit or pleasure he receives from the other or because of his friend’s superior goodness. If they are equal in beneficence, pleasure or goodness, their love is without doubt more complete. This kind of love admits of quantitative equality.

The second kind is natural love, and has two subdivisions, the love which a parent has for his child because it is a part of him, and the love which an artificer feels for the art which he invented by his pains and efforts. This is why mothers love their children more than fathers, because they combine both these elements, more so than the fathers. The greater part of the child comes from the mother, who contributes the material part, and the mother takes more trouble in bringing up the child.

The third kind is proportional love, which has three subdivisions.

First, love between the king and the people, or between the governor and the governed. Love between the king and the people is not equal in quantity on the two sides, but only in ratio and proportion. It is proper that the king should be loved by his people more than they are loved by him. Moreover the purpose intended in the king’s love for the people is not the same as the purpose intended in the people’s love for the king. What is expected from the king is that he should benefit the people by maintaining justice among them, protecting their possessions as far as possible and maintaining their welfare; whereas what is expected from the people is that they should honor the king and exalt him, and recognize his rule and superiority and beneficence and their dependence upon him. In this way the king’s love prompts him to benefit the people, and the people’s love induces them to honor and exalt him.

Second, the love between a father and a son. In addition to the natural love between the parent and the child, there is also another love between them, a proportional love, similar to the love between a king and his people. The son expects from the father that he should treat him as a father by being good to him as far as is in his power. The father expects that the son should honor him.

The third subdivision is love between husband and wife. In addition to the natural love between them, the love of male and female for the perpetuation of the race, there is also another kind of love between them, a proportional love, similar to the love between the governor and the governed. For the husband is expected to supply the wants of the wife, to honor her, and to provide for her in as honorable a manner as possible. The wife, on the other hand, is expected to attend upon the husband, to honor him, and to take care of his property, and not to love another. In the third kind, namely in proportional love, the love of the inferior for the superior must be greater than the love of the superior for the inferior. The equality in this kind of love is therefore not arithmetical but proportional.

Now it is clear that the love of God for man can not belong to the first kind, which is the love of equals. But one might suppose that it is of the second kind, natural love. And Moses alludes to the two subdivisions of this kind. “Is not He thy father that hath gotten thee?”—this refers to the first subdivision, the love of a parent for his child. “Hath He not made thee and established thee?”—this refers to the second subdivision, the love of an artificer for his art. The prophet, too, in his prayer alludes to these two subdivisions: “But now, O Lord, Thou art our Father; we are the clay, and Thou our potter.” The meaning is, And therefore Thou oughtest to provide for us and have mercy on us as a father has mercy on his children. But Thou shouldst love us also with the second species of natural love, for “we all are the work of Thy hand”. Thou didst even create the matter before Thou didst put the intellectual form upon it. Hence Thou oughtest to provide for us as every agent provides for the work of his hands whether it is worthy or not.

However, if we examine the matter carefully we shall find that all these expressions are figurative. Neither the form nor the matter is a part of God, as the son is a part of the father. Moreover, since God produces by verbal command, we can not say that He should endeavor to take care of His work. All other agents endeavor to take care of the work of their hands because they have taken trouble in producing it, as the poet loves his poems, but one who takes neither trouble nor pains can not have a love of this kind. It is clear therefore that the love of God for man can only be of the third kind, proportional love.

This is why the Bible describes God as King, Father and Lord. As King: “For God is the King of all the earth;” “Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer;” “The Lord is out King; He will save us.” As Father: “For Thou art our Father; for Abraham knoweth us not;” “Is He not thy Father that hath gotten thee?” and many other passages. As the king and the father supply the wants of the people and the son respectively, and all that is expected of the latter is that they should honor their benefactors, as we said before, so God supplies the wants of mankind, and all that He expects from them is to do honor to His name, as we read in the Bible: “Every one that is called by My name, and whom I have created for My glory.”

This is why we find that God blames the Israelites for not giving Him honor as a son is expected to give to his father, and for not fearing Him, as a servant fears his master: “A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is My honour? And if I be a master, where is my fear?” Not that the Lord needs the honor of any one, for He is the King of all honor, as we explained in the fourteenth chapter of the Second Book. Nevertheless, He blamed Israel because they did not conduct themselves properly in order that they should be prepared to receive the divine influence and His providence, which would protect them from the accidents due to the heavenly bodies. Such influence does not come except to the one who prepares himself for it by honoring God as a son honors his father, and by fearing Him as a servant fears his master. Thus the prophet says: “If ye will not hearken, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto My name … Then will I send the curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings …;” “Give glory to the Lord your God …”

The Bible also compares God’s love of Israel to the proportional love between husband and wife: “For thy Maker is thy husband;” “And I will betroth thee unto Me in faithfulness;” “Thou shalt call Me Husband;” “Plead with your mother, plead; for she is not My wife, neither am I her husband.” The meaning is, She did not behave as a wife should to her husband. As a husband is obliged to supply all the needs of the wife whom he married and singled out of all other women, so God should supply all the needs of Israel, the people which He chose as His possession out of all the peoples which are upon the earth. Therefore Israel must love and honor and fear Him, and observe His commandments and statutes, and not love any one else, as a wife is obliged to honor, love and fear her husband, and not love another.

To show that God’s love of Israel in preference to every other nation and tongue is not like the love of equals, nor like natural love, but a free love, due to the will of the lover alone and without any reason, the Bible calls God’s love of Israel by the name heshek (desire): “The Lord … set His love (hashak) upon you … [and] choose you.” The word heshek is applied to extraordinary love without a reason. Thus the love of a man for a particular woman in preference to another more beautiful is called heshek because it is without a reason. Thus we read: “The soul of my son Shechem longeth (hashekah) for your daughter,” i. e. even though he can find one more beautiful. So God’s love of Israel is like that love (heshek) which is without a reason. The entire book of Canticles is based upon this analogy between the love of God for Israel and the love of a man for his sweetheart, which is without a reason.

This is why the Bible calls this love “peculiar” (segulah): “For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God: The Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be His own peculiar people (segulah) out of all peoples that are upon the face of the earth. The Lord did not set His love upon you, nor choose you because ye were more in number than any people …” The meaning is that just as a property (segulah) pertains to a species and is inseparable from it, and yet is not to be explained either by the quantity or the quality of the thing, so this love is in the nature of a property attaching to the people not because of their quantity: “The Lord did not set His love upon you … because ye were more in number …” Nor is it because of their quality: “Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart … for thou art a stiff-necked people.” This love is like the love (heshek) which has no reason, but is due solely to the will of the lover. And it is this love which was promised to the people at the time of the Sinaitic revelation, as a reward for accepting the Torah: “Now therefore, if ye will hearken unto My voice indeed, and keep My covenant, then ye shall be Mine own peculiar property (segulah) from among all peoples …”
As it is the character of a lover that a little which he obtains of his beloved is more appreciated and enjoyed than a great deal of another, so God appreciates more a small service coming from Israel than a great deal coming from another nation or from all the nations, hence the expression, “from among all peoples; for all the earth is Mine.” Or it may be that the words, “For all the earth is Mine,” are connected with the sequel, “And ye shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests …” That is, since all the earth is Mine and all the governments come from Me, I can promise you that I will make you greater than all the peoples that are under the heaven, for My rule includes all, and there is no God outside of Me, who can give power to a people other than you, even though it be greater than you. For this is the nature of a property (segulah), love attaching without any reason like that called heshek.

The prophet also explains the same thing: “I have loved you, saith the Lord. Yet ye say: ‘Wherein hast Thou loved us?’ ” The meaning is, love in word alone is not worth anything unless it is followed by acts which show love. Hence He says in the sequel, “Was not Esau Jacob’s brother? Saith the Lord; yet I loved Jacob; but Esau I hated …” That is, although as a father I should have chosen Esau, the first born, yet I did not do so, but I hated him, “And made his mountains a desolation.”

We find also that the Bible emphasizes God’s love of Israel on the analogy of a father’s love for his son, in every way in which such love can exist: As a father usually loves his eldest son because he is the first born, the Bible says: “For I am become a father to Israel, and Ephraim is My first-born;” “Israel is My son, My first-born.” Also, inasmuch as sometimes one loves his son because he attends him like a boy (i. e. servant), the Bible says: “For Israel is a boy, therefore I love him.” Sometimes also a father loves his son for his worth, because he is a darling child, or because he is small and his father dandles him. Hence the Bible says: “Is Ephraim a darling son unto Me? Is he a child that is dandled?” That is, is my soul so attached to him in love as that of a father to his darling son or to the child that he dandles, that “as often as I speak of him I do earnestly remember him still?”, as a lover always finds delight in thinking of his friend and hence thinks of him again and again when he speaks of him. Also, by reason of his great worth in My eyes and My love for him, “My heart yearneth for him,” and My sympathies are aroused, like a person who is moved to pity on account of the pain of his beloved son. Therefore I must have pity upon him as a father has pity upon the child which he dandles, or his darling son. Hence the conclusion of the verse, “I will surely have compassion upon him, saith the Lord.”

As no one has more compassion upon another than a father upon the son, we always say in our prayers, “Our Father, our King, may Thy compassion be moved for us.” “Our Father,” is intended t6 show that we pray the kind of compassion which a father has upon the son. “Our King,” means that He has power to help us as a king helps his subjects.

All this makes clear that God’s love for Israel belongs to proportional love, like that of a king for his subjects, of a father for his children, of a husband for his wife. And in order to indicate that this love is an intellectual thing, and that it is permanent and unchanging, the Bible says: “I have loved thee with an everlasting love.” It is also clear that man’s love of God, though it belongs to this third kind, viz. proportional love, may nevertheless embrace all three aspects, the good, the useful and the agreeable. Therefore man is obliged to love God to his utmost ability. The love of God is the purpose of the whole Torah, because it brings the love of God to man, as we have explained. So much for the subject of love.

Here ends Book Three, which explains the second principle, divine revelation of the Torah. Praise be to God who has helped us till now. He is blessed and exalted and uplifted above all blessing and praise. Amen, Selah.

