The SCHIFF LIBRARY of JEWISH CLASSICS

This Series of JEWISH CLASSICS was made possible through a fund given to the Jewish Publication Society of America by Jacob H. Schiff, and it is named in his honor, the Schiff Library of JEWISH CLASSICS.

SEFER HA-‘IKKARIM

BOOK OF PRINCIPLES

BY

JOSEPH ALBO

CRITICALLY EDITED ON THE BASIS OF MANUSCRIPTS AND OLD EDITIONS AND PROVIDED WITH A TRANSLATION AND NOTES

BY

ISAAC HUSIK, LL.B., M.A., Ph.D.

Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania

VOLUME ONE

PHILADELPHIA

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

5706–1946

Copyright, 1929, by

THE JEWISH PUBLICATION SOCIETY OF AMERICA

Second Impression, 1946

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher: except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper.

TO THE MEMORY OF WILLIAM ROMAINE NEWBOLD

CONTENTS

PAGE

Facsimile Frontispiece

Editor’s Introduction xv

Albo’s Table of Contents, Text and Translation 1

Albo’s Introduction, Text and Translation 35

Book One, Text and Translation 43

Additional Note 204

INTRODUCTION

ON THE 26th of November 1412, Antipope Benedict XIII (Pedro da Luna) sent a letter from Tortosa to the Jewish community of Gerona, which read in part as follows: “Being obliged by the bond of charity which constrains us and by the duty of our office to work with all our strength to procure the salvation of the souls of all, believers and unbelievers, … Therefore we order and exhort that you send four or at least two of your most learned men versed in the Law of Moses. These men shall appear before us at the time indicated, here or elsewhere, i. e., wherever we may be located in the States of our very dear son in Christ, Ferdinand, King of Aragon, to hear what we shall say and to reply to the above mentioned articles.… You must not forget that if you will not obey our injunctions, we will proceed against you effectively by means of the proper remedies as is prescribed by the laws, human as well as divine.” Similar letters were sent to other Jewish communities of the Kingdom of Aragon.

On the first of January, 1413, and thereafter, the delegates of the Jewish communities arrived at Tortosa. The spokesman for the Pope was Jerome de Sancta Fide, the physician of Pope Benedict XIII, a converted Jew, whose Hebrew name was Joshua ben Joseph ibn Vives ha-Lorki, and the author of a treatise in Hebrew entitled “Sefer ha-Pikurim,” defending Christianity and attacking Judaism. A good deal of it is based on the “Pugio Fidei” of Raymond Martini.

When the delegates arrived before the Pope, he said to them: “Master Jerome says that he desires to prove that the Messiah has come, and that too from the Talmud which is before you. We shall see whether he has said the truth or not. As for you, you need have no fear of him, for as regards the controversy you have equal right with him.”

The Colloquium or Conference was opened, on the 7th of February, 1413, with great pomp by the Pope himself in the presence of the entire curia, “with all the requisite formalities to which it is customary to conform on such occasions and with the solemnity which the importance of the subject demanded.” The debate lasted from the 7th of February, 1413, to the 13th of November, 1414. Altogether sixty-nine sessions were held, sixty-two at Tortosa and seven at San Mateo. At the last two sessions, held on the 12th and 13th of November, 1414, was published the constitution or bull entitled, “Et si doctoris gentium,” against the Talmud and other books attacking Christianity. Jerome then travelled through the Kingdom of Aragon to give effect to the constitution and to confiscate the existing copies of the Talmud.

Among the eight principal spokesmen for the Jews at this debate is mentioned one Joseph Albo of Daroça. At the third session held on the 9th of February, 1413, Jerome cited a passage from the Talmud, Sanhedrin 97b, as follows: “Elijah said to Rabbi Judah, brother of Rab Sala, the Pious, The world counts no less than eighty-five jubilees, and in the last jubilee the son of David will come.” Now eighty-five jubilees, explained Jerome, make 4250 years. Hence the Messiah has already come. The Pope agreed with Jerome, whereupon Joseph Albo with a sort of rage cried out: “Posito Messiam mihi probari iam venisse, non putarem deterior esse Judaeus.” His name is mentioned again as having taken up the defence of the Talmud in the subsequent sessions.

This disputation no doubt made a strong impression on Albo and may account for some of the features of Albo’s treatise on the Dogmas of Judaism, or as it is called in Hebrew, “Sefer ha-‘Ikkarim,” Book of Roots, i. e., fundamental principles of the Jewish Faith, which has been very popular among the Jews since its appearance in the fifteenth century. A critical Hebrew text with an English translation and explanatory notes is offered to the reader in the present work.

The “ ‘Ikkarim” is the last of the philosophical and theological classics of mediaeval Judaism, belonging to the same genre of literary works as the “Emunot ve-Deot” of Saadia, the “Hobot ha-Lebabot” of Bahya ibn Pakuda, the “Cusari” of Judah Halevi, the “Emunah Ramah” of Abraham ibn Daud, the “Moreh Nebukim” of Moses Maimonides, the “Milhamot ha-Shem” of Levi ben Gerson, the “Or Adonai” of Hasdai Crescas and other less important works, constituting the mediaeval philosophy of the Jews, for a detailed study of which the reader is referred to the present writer’s History of Mediaeval Jewish Philosophy, published in 1916. The eighteenth chapter of that work is devoted to a study of the philosophy of Joseph Albo.

Being virtually the last of the mediaeval Jewish philosophers and having no knowledge of the new spirit that was beginning in Italy as a result of the Renaissance—Albo was a contemporary of Georgius Gemisthus Pletho, who was most influential in reviving the study of Plato and Neo-Platonism in the Occident, and of his pupil Bessarion—Albo has nothing new to contribute to genuine philosophic thought. On the other hand, he was familiar with the works of his predecessors, Saadia, Judah Halevi, Maimonides, Gersonides, Crescas, and summed up their ideas in the “ ‘Ikkarim” in a very popular and attractive style. There is a good deal of the homilist in Albo and he devotes many pages and chapters to lengthy—one might be so unkind as to say long-winded—interpretations of biblical and rabbinic passages, reading into them all sorts of metaphysical, ethical, psychological and theological ideas without regard to context, a method sanctioned by long usage which goes back to early rabbinical literature.

Albo’s interest was, however, primarily concerned with Jewish dogma. Maimonides had made a list of thirteen fundamental principles of the Jewish faith, and Hasdai Crescas, the teacher of Albo, found fault with Maimonides and made a list of his own, distinguishing between fundamental doctrines, which he reduced to six, and true beliefs of which he enumerates eight. Albo followed in Crescas’ footsteps and reduced the basic dogmas to three: Existence of God, Reward and Punishment, and Revelation. Under these three he subsumes the derivative principles, of which he enumerates eight, making in all eleven.

Albo’s classification of law into divine, natural and conventional (I, ch. 7) seems new in Jewish philosophic writings, though Maimonides (Guide, II, 40) makes a distinction between conventional and divine law. There is a certain similarity between Albo’s classification and that of Thomas Aquinas if we omit eternal law. Both of them, too, make use of the nineteenth Psalm in their discussion of the superiority of the divine law to the natural and the conventional. Hence it is possible that in some indirect manner Albo was indebted to the angelic doctor. But one can not be certain.

As was said before, Albo was much exercised by the aggressive attitude of the Church, which attempted by compulsory disputations to force upon the Jews an admission of the truth of Christianity. As he had taken part in such a disputation himself, the questions raised on that occasion must have haunted his mind and we should expect to find evidence of this in his work. There are, indeed, certain discussions in the “ ‘Ikkarim” which seem to owe their existence to the circumstances mentioned above. Thus Book I, chapter 18, is devoted to a discussion of the test of a genuine divine religion. Chapter 24 of the same Book raises another question whose motive is similar to the first: Is it permitted to investigate one’s religion to see if it is genuine or not, and is one at liberty to abandon it if on a comparison with another religion, the latter is found to be better? And there are other direct and indirect references to Christianity, as in III, chs. 8 and 19, and IV, ch. 31.

The chapter in the ‘Ikkarim which deals most directly with the conflict between Judaism and Christianity is the 25th in the Third Book, which is a record of an actual disputation, but hardly that of Tortosa. The ordinary editions omit important portions thereof and even some MSS. and early editions, including the first, either delete certain portions or cut out the entire chapter. As the chapter reads in the Warsaw edition, one can only guess that the opponent of Albo was a Christian, as all reference to Christianity has been excised. The criticisms of the Mosaic law have been retained, but the New Testament with which the opponent compares the law of Moses to the disadvantage of the latter, is not mentioned. Only part of the opponent’s words is given and all reference to the Gospels is omitted even when they are cited as being superior to the Mosaic law. It is not surprising, therefore, that in Albo’s reply, in which he defends the Mosaic law against the strictures of his opponent and points out the superiority of the Pentateuch and the imperfections and errors of the New Testament, only his defence and praise of the Mosaic law are retained, while his criticism of the New Testament is expunged.

Albo shows wide reading and a great familiarity with the writings of his predecessors, Jewish and non-Jewish. He lays under contribution the literature not only of philosophy and theology, but also writings on Cabala, science, medicine and history. He is a great compiler, and while in many places he names his authorities, he is in as many others quite negligent of such courtesy, though he borrows whole discussions and analyses bodily from other writers. This has earned him the charge of plagiarism in mediaeval as well as in modern times. In particular it is his dependence on his teacher Crescas and on Simon b. Zemah Duran, author of a philosophico-theological work “Magen Abot,” which is cited in justification of such a serious charge. While he mentions Crescas once or twice, he should have done so more often and have been more frank in acknowledging his indebtedness. He never mentions Duran at all, and yet he seems to have borrowed from the “Magen Abot” and from Duran’s Commentary on Job, “Oheb Mishpat” and “Mishpat Zedek,” even more perhaps than from Crescas. Among non-Jewish writers he uses Aristotle’s ideas quite freely, without naming him, as, for example, in his discussion of love in chapters 35 to 37 of Book Three. He has been praised, however, by such Christian Theologians as Hugo Grotius and Richard Simon. The former speaks of him (Com. on Matthew, 5, 20) as “Judaeum acerrimi judicii” and in his letters (p. 14 and 111) he expresses a wish that the ‘Ikkarim should be translated. Richard Simon praises him in his Supplements to the Ceremonies of the Jews, p. 116. Joseph De Voisin in his Theologia Judaica, Paris, 1647, 4, cites the ‘Ikkarim frequently and criticises it.

The following translation, the first complete version of the ‘Ikkarim that has appeared in English, is based upon a critical text which is a composite of the first edition published at Soncino on the 21st of Tebet, 5246 (= 1485), and MS. A described below. For other editions see the Bibliography. For the complete collation of the Soncino edition I used the copy in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris, and in the course of making and revising the translation I also used the two copies of the library of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, New York.

I also made a complete collation of a MS. in the National Library of Paris listed as 740 in Zotenberg’s catalogue. It was written in Venice בלאגונה סירקה ניגריליוש by Abraham, son of Jacob, Benieto for Don Isaac Albilia, and was completed in the month of Tammuz 5214 (= 1454). This MS., designated in the critical notes as A, suffers from frequent omissions, partly through homoioteleuton and partly through skipping of lines by the copyist. But on the whole it represents a text which is far superior to that of the editions.

In addition to the editio princeps, which is designated in the critical notes to the Hebrew text as S, and MS. 740, designated in the notes as A, I have compared in cases of doubt the following MSS.

741. This is also in the Paris National Library. It was written in Pisa by Joseph, son of Samuel the Spaniard, and given by him to his patron David of Tivoli. It was finished on the 16th of Elul 5229 (= 1469). The polemical chapters against Christianity, Book III, chapters 25 and 26, are mutilated or erased. This MS. is designated in the critical notes as B.

742. Also in the Paris National Library. This MS. was written in 5234 (= 1474). Here, too, the polemical sections in Book III, 25 and 26, are cut out. This MS. is designated in the notes as C.

A MS. in the Mayer Sulzberger collection of the Jewish Theological Seminary, New York (D. 157). It was written by Perez, son of Nathaniel Elijah Traboti of France, and was completed on the 12th of Kislev, 5259 (= 1499). Except for the first 3½ lines the polemical chapter III, 25 is entirely cut out. This MS. is designated in the notes as D.

A MS. in the Elkan Adler collection of the Jewish Theological Seminary, New York. There is no indication of copyist or date. The greater part of the polemical chapter is here also cut out. An entire sheet must have been torn out between פד and פה and the pagination added later. This MS. is designated E.

While the basic text is a composite of S and A, I departed from them where they were obviously incorrect, and for the rest all the variants of A and S and some variants of B, C, D and E are given in the critical notes, thus enabling the reader to adopt such readings as he chooses. I have tried as far as possible to indicate all sources, biblical, rabbinic and philosophical, Jewish as well as non-Jewish. Most of the Jewish sources are given in the Warsaw edition. The mistakes in these references, which are considerable in number, have been corrected in Schlesinger’s translation, and some new references added which are not given in the Warsaw edition. But Schlesinger’s references are also incomplete and in trying to improve upon my predecessor I could do no better than consult the renowned Talmudist, Professor Louis Ginzberg, to whom nothing rabbinic is difficult or unknown. What others would have to spend weeks in searching he has at his fingers’ ends, and his generosity in coming to my aid fills me with gratitude and obligation.

Dr. Michael Higger also was kind enough to find a few references for me, for which I am very grateful. Professor Alexander Marx of the Jewish Theological Seminary showed his kindly interest in my work not merely by lending me books and MSS. from the great Seminary Collection, of which he is the head, but took pains, in his capacity as a member of the Classics Committee of the Jewish Publication Society, to read carefully certain parts of the text and translation and the notes. The valuable suggestions and corrections which his great bibliographical and other knowledge enabled him to supply will certainly give completeness, and add accuracy and precision to the work. I take great pleasure in acknowledging my indebtedness to him. Professor Israel Davidson was equally diligent in reading other parts of the work and giving me the benefit of his scholarship, which I greatly appreciate. I also wish to express my thanks to Professor J. Z. Lauterbach of the Hebrew Union College, Rev. Dr. Samuel Schulman and Dr. Solomon Solis Cohen, the other members of the Committee, who have read parts of the work and given me valuable suggestions. Prof. Harry A. Wolfson of Harvard University kindly responded to questions of mine and put at my disposal the proofs of his learned work on Crescas, while in press, which I found useful and to which I refer in my notes. I thank him. Any shortcomings this edition may have—and there are plenty, no doubt—are of course due to the present writer himself.

Dr. Julius Grodinsky, the Secretary of the Society, deserves commendation for the efficient aid he gave me in the mechanical part of the work. Dr. Baruch Weitzel is to be credited with the preparation of the Index and the Lists of biblical and rabbinic passages. My thanks to both.

Last, but not least, I take especial pleasure in expressing my thanks and obligations to the Chairman of the Publication Committee, Dr. Cyrus Adler, for the kindly interest he has shown in my work as it was going through the press, by giving freely of his valuable time to facilitate its progress.

ISAAC HUSIK

Philadelphia,

September, 1929.

BOOK OF PRINCIPLES

BY RABBI JOSEPH ALBO

Human happiness depends upon theoretical knowledge and practical conduct, as the Philosopher explains in the book On the Soul. But it is not possible by the human intellect alone to arrive at a proper knowledge of the true and the good, because human reason is not capable of comprehending things as they are in reality, as will be explained later. There must therefore be something higher than the human intellect by means of which the good can be defined and the true comprehended in a manner leaving no doubt at all. This can be done only by means of divine guidance. It is incumbent therefore upon every person, out of all laws to know that one divine law which gives this guidance. This is impossible unless we know the basic principles without which a divine law cannot exist. Accordingly the purpose of this work is to explain what are the essential principles of a divine law, and for this reason it is called The Book of Principles.

The present work consists of an Introduction and four books.

The Introduction deals with the necessity of a work of this kind, outlines in a general way the topics which it is proper to investigate therein, points out the great importance of the subject under investigation, and explains the last verse of the ninetieth Psalm.

Book One discusses the number and nature of the principles of laws. It points out the difference between divine and conventional laws, and states the principles of each. It distinguishes between principles which are common to many laws and those which are peculiar to a given law. It shows that the principles which are common to divine laws are three: the existence of God, revelation, and reward and punishment, and from these other principles are derived. It is also pointed out in this book how the genuine law of God can be distinguished from the spurious, which pretends to be a law of God.

Book Two discusses the first principle, the existence of God, and the subordinate principles derived therefrom.

Book Three discusses the second principle, revelation, and the subordinate principles derived therefrom.

Book Four discusses the third principle, reward and punishment, and the subordinate principles derived therefrom and based upon it.

BOOK ONE discusses the principles of laws, and is divided into twenty-six chapters.

Chapter one speaks of the difficulty of investigating the principles of laws. It is pointed out that there are principles common to all laws and principles peculiar to a given law. Maimonides is criticized for listing the belief in the Messiah as a principle of the law of Moses. Similarly are those criticized who maintain that creation of the world is a principle of the law of Moses.

Chapter two points out what denial of principles constitutes heresy and what denial does not. It is pointed out that neither the belief in the Messiah nor creation of the world should be regarded as principles of the law of Moses, as many have thought.

Chapter three explains the meaning of the term principle and discusses the thirteen principles of Maimonides in order to determine whether the number is correct or not. It also discusses other principles of the divine law laid down by others and points out that none of them have the correct number.

Chapter four explains that the common principles of divine law are three, which are basic, namely, the existence of God, revelation of the Torah and reward and punishment. Then there are other principles derived from the former and dependent upon them. It is pointed out that the three benedictions in the ritual of the New Year, Malkuyyot, Zikronot, and Shofarot, bear allusion to the three principles mentioned, and that all the principles mentioned by Maimonides are derived from these three basic ones.

Chapter five explains the necessity of natural law for the existence of the human race, pointing out at the same time that natural law alone is not sufficient for the existence of, political society unless there be also another law. It is also pointed out that a country must have a judge or a king.

Chapter six decides that there must be a divine law to guide mankind to happiness.

Chapter seven explains that law is natural or conventional or divine. The meaning and purpose of each are explained and the manner in which they are distinguished.

Chapter eight points out some of the defects of conventional law which make it inferior to divine law. It points out also that some of the qualities of divine law are alluded to in Psalm nineteen, verse eight and following.

Chapter nine explains that the general principles of conventional law are freedom of the will and purpose. It also explains why freedom of the will is mentioned in the law of Moses, seeing that it is not a principle of it insofar as it is divine.

Chapter ten explains that the general principles of divine law are three: existence of God, reward and punishment, and revelation of the Torah, and hence they are named as general roots of divine law. It is also pointed out that the Rabbis in the Mishnah, Chapter Helek, name also these three.

Chapter eleven explains that by a study of the law of Moses we can find out what are the essential bases of divine law, seeing that all agree that it is divine. Accordingly we infer that the three things mentioned are principles of divine law, seeing that they are laid down in the book of Genesis at the beginning, as the principles of every science are laid down at the beginning of that science. It is pointed out that the real beginning of the Torah is the first verse of chapter five. It explains also the meaning of the expression, “Let us make man in our image” (Gen. 1, 26).

Chapter twelve explains the reason why Maimonides does not include the dogma of creation in his list of principles, seeing that he regards it as fundamental in the law of Moses, as he says in the twenty-seventh chapter of the second part of the Guide of the Perplexed.

Chapter thirteen explains that not every law which acknowledges the three principles mentioned is therefore certainly divine, unless it acknowledges also all the principles derived from the former, in which case it may be divine. It is also pointed out that to deny a derivative principle is tantamount to the denial of an original principle.

Chapter fourteen explains that a commandment of the Torah can not be regarded either as a fundamental or as a derivative principle. This is the reason why belief in tradition is not named as a principle even though it is essential to the existence of law. The reason is given why the unity of God is regarded as a principle although it is a particular commandment. It is also explained why all the principles are not specifically stated in the ten commandments. It is maintained that the first commandment is not a principle, as Maimonides says, but a command.

Chapter fifteen explains the principles derived from each one of the three original principles. It is also explained why we classify them as fundamental and derivative, or basic and resultant, and do not regard them all alike as fundamental principles.

Chapter sixteen deals with a certain topic necessary to divine law. It explains that one of the ancient philosophers thought that it is not possible to acquire knowledge of a thing that is not known. It explains the thirty-sixth verse of chapter thirty-eight of Job, the benediction beginning with the words, “Thou in Thy graciousness givest man knowledge,” and the rabbinical expression, “If there is no knowledge there is no understanding” (Mishnah, Abot, 3, 17). This chapter is introductory to the following.

Chapter seventeen explains that every science has principles and points out the general principles of the sciences. This is done in order to make clear whence the Torah takes its principles. It explains verse one hundred and sixty of Psalm one hundred and nineteen and part of Psalm seventy-eight.

Chapter eighteen explains the difference between the genuine divine law and one that is spurious and pretends to be divine. It also explains the difference between a prophet who is not and a prophet who is a messenger of God for the purpose of giving mankind a law. It also explains the nature of the signs which prove directly the genuineness of a prophecy or a mission. It is also pointed out that any one not a prophet who makes use of the divine names is punished.

Chapter nineteen gives a definition of belief, shows to what things belief applies and when it is strongest.

Chapter twenty explains why the Torah was not given to Abraham or to Isaac or to Jacob. It also explains the statement of the Rabbis in the talmudic treatise “ ‘Abodah Zarah:” “In the time to come, the Holy One, blessed be He, will take the Torah, put it in His bosom and say: Let every one who occupied himself with this come and receive his reward!” It is also explained why the other nations will not receive reward for keeping the law which they received by tradition as the Israelites will receive reward for keeping their traditions.

Chapter twenty-one explains that belief leads man to eternal happiness more so than philosophical knowledge, pointing out that this is verified by experience.

Chapter twenty-two explains in what thing it is that belief leads to happiness, pointing out that belief in the impossible does not lead to happiness, also that the impossible is of two kinds. It explains also how the thing is known to which belief applies.

Chapter twenty-three points out that besides the general belief in the Torah, the commandments and all the miracles which are mentioned in the Torah, it is incumbent to entertain six specific beliefs which are essential for the existence of the Torah at any time, and one who denies any one of them is called a heretic.

Chapter twenty-four inquires whether a person professing a given religion is obliged or permitted to investigate the foundations of his religious belief and the principles derived from them or whether he must rely on his tradition.

Chapter twenty-five investigates whether there may be more than one divine law at the same time among different nations or in different countries.

Chapter twenty-six sums up the book by giving a list of the fundamental and derivative principles essential to divine law as is demanded by logical theory and as is declared in the law of Moses.

Here end the topics of the chapters of the First Book, with the help of God, blessed be He.

BOOK TWO explains the first principle, the existence of God, and is divided into an Observation and thirty-one chapters, as follows:

(The Observation calls the attention of the reader to the method of this book.)

Chapter one explains that existence as applied to God is not used in the same sense as when applied to other existing things. It is pointed out that the existence of God is not known from His essence, but is inferred from the existing things emanating from Him. Part of Psalm one hundred and four is explained therein.

Chapter two explains that we can not apply the word Maker to God in the sense in which it is applied to any other agent, whether natural or voluntary. It is also pointed out that we can not say of God that He acts with an eternal will, as many have thought.

Chapter three explains in what sense we can say of God that He acts with will, pointing out that the verse, Isaiah 55, 8, “For My thoughts are not your thoughts, etc.,” is intended to solve the difficulty concerning the divine will, which is greater than the difficulty concerning the divine knowledge, wisdom and the other attributes. It is explained that the divine will does not necessitate change in God as it does in us.

Chapter four explains that from the statements in the Bible of the coming into being of things at different times we derive a proof of the existence of a Maker who acts with purpose and will. It also gives a scientific demonstration of the existence of God and of the principles derived from it, based upon the things perceived by our senses.

Chapter five points out that the first two proofs of the existence of God given by Maimonides in the beginning of the second part of the Guide are neither one of them worth the attention of the religionist, and that the third proof given there by Maimonides is the best of all.

Chapter six explains the formal content of the belief, which every religionist must entertain, in the fundamental principle of the existence of God and the secondary principles derived from it. It is pointed out that there is neither a definition nor a description of God enabling us to know His true essence and existence.

Chapter seven explains that from the secondary principles derived from the fundamental principle of the existence of God flow all the attributes which may be ascribed to God or which must be denied of Him. A reason is given why the number of secondary principles is four and not more.

Chapter eight begins to treat of the attributes in order to explain the principle of the unity of God. It is pointed out that an attribute applied to a thing descriptive of its activities does not necessarily imply plurality in the nature of the agent, even though the latter, be it natural or voluntary, is the author of contrary actions. The human soul, for example, is one though it is the author of contrary actions. God also may have attributes ascribed to Him from three different points of view, no one of them necessarily implying plurality in His essence.

Chapter nine explains the point of view which denies all attributes to God, whether essential or accidental, and criticizes it on the ground that He must have some attribute or attributes, such as unity and others.

Chapter ten explains the various meanings of the term one and the sense in which we say of God that He is one. It also explains the verse, Deuteronomy 6, 4, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One.”

Chapter eleven explains the manner in which the many are derived from the One, and the emanation of existing things from the First Cause, according to the opinions of Ibn Sina and Maimonides. It explains the statement of the Rabbis: “The Sabbath said to God, Master of the Universe, to every one Thou hast given a mate, but to me Thou hast not given a mate. The Lord replied, My daughter, the congregation of Israel shall be thy mate.” It is also pointed out that the commandment of the Sabbath is a sign.

Chapter twelve treats of the existence of angels, discusses the various opinions concerning their nature and the possibility of there being many angels.

Chapter thirteen explains the manner in which the many can be derived from the Simple One, according to the opinions of Ibn Roshd and the ancient philosophers. It criticizes this view, in the manner indicated in chapter eleven, and explains in this connection the verse, “Hear, O Israel.”

Chapter fourteen begins to treat of the second derivative principle, the incorporeality of God, and explains in what manner are attributed to God such corporeal affections as anger, sorrow, vengeance and bearing a grudge; also why we ascribe to Him pride, which is a bad quality. It explains also why God is called King of Glory.

Chapter fifteen explains in what way joy is ascribed to God, as is said (Ps. 104, 31): “The Lord rejoiceth in His works,” while the Rabbis say, “Joy is in His habitation.” It also explains the verses, Psalm 36, 8–9.

Chapter sixteen explains the various uses of the word laughter and the sense in which it is said of God that He laughs. It also explains the cause of laughter in every case and the reason for the statement of the philosophers that laughter is a human property.

Chapter seventeen explains in what sense it is said of God or of the glory of God that He is in a place, seeing that He is not corporeal. It inquires whether we can say of God or of an incorporeal thing that it occupies a certain position, up or down, though it does not occupy space. The Aristotelian definition of space is explained and criticized, the author maintaining, contrary to the view of Aristotle, that space is a vacuum or void, and answering Aristotle’s criticism of this view.

Chapter eighteen begins to treat of the third derivative principle, that God is not subject to time, explaining the sense in which God is spoken of as eternal a parte ante and a parte post. It explains that there is another view of the nature of time besides that of Aristotle, namely that the unmeasured duration in the motion of the sphere is time. It also explains the expression (Is. 44, 6), “I am the first, and I am the last.”

Chapter nineteen explains that every attribute ascribed to God is eternal in both directions like Him, and that God does not change since He is not subject to time, while everything else changes. It explains Psalm 37, 25 together with the statement of the Rabbis that the Prince of the World is the author thereof. It gives a reason also for the repetition of the pronoun “I” in Is. 43, 11.

Chapter twenty explains the different meanings of the homonym kol (= all) in order to remove the difficulty arising from Psalm 9, 15, “That I may tell of all Thy praise.” It also explains the verse (Gen. 1, 31), “And God saw all that He had made, and, behold, it was very good.”

Chapter twenty-one begins to explain the fourth derivative principle, which is that God is free from defects, pointing out at the same time that we must ascribe to God some positive attributes. It explains in what sense these attributes are ascribed to Him according to the wise men learned in the Torah, maintaining that all the attributes are applicable to God in the sense only that they denote perfection.

Chapter twenty-two explains that the opinion of Maimonides is that the only attributes that may be ascribed to God are the negative or those which are derived from God’s acts, like merciful, gracious, generous. It also explains who is deserving of being called generous. It explains also the meaning of the prayer of Moses: “Show me Thy ways” (Ex. 33, 13), as well as the passage in the Talmud (Berakot 33b) wherein they say that if Moses had not used the expression, “the great, the mighty and the fearful God,” and the Men of the Great Synagogue had not subsequently incorporated it in the prayer, we should not use it.

Chapter twenty-three explains that positive attributes, according to this opinion, are unworthy of God unless they designate His acts, and therefore God must be praised from two points of view with two kinds of attributes, in relation to Himself and in relation to His acts. It is also pointed out that these two kinds of praise are alluded to in Psalm one hundred and three.

Chapter twenty-four explains that there are attributes which clearly are ascribed to God by reason of His acts, while there are others concerning which it is doubtful whether they refer to God’s essence or to His acts; in which latter case it is explained how the attributes are to be understood. It also explains the meaning of such attributes as living, wise, possessing will, powerful and the like.

Chapter twenty-five explains that from the fourth principle, namely that God is free from defects, it follows that God has an infinite number of perfections, and that every one of these attributes is infinite in two respects, in time and in worth. It is also pointed out that this matter is alluded to in Psalm one hundred and thirty-nine.

Chapter twenty-six explains the word blessed, the several meanings which it has and the sense in which it is applied to God. It explains also Psalm one hundred and forty-five, pointing out how it is possible to praise God forever, using the method that is mentioned in the preceding chapter.

Chapter twenty-seven explains the application of the words emet (truth), sheker (falsehood), and kazab (lie), pointing out that there is no existing thing to which the word emet applies in the strict sense except God. This is why the Rabbis say that the seal of God is emet. For the same reason God is called “I am that I am.”

Chapter twenty-eight explains why the tetragrammaton is called Shem ha-Meforash, pointing out at the same time that names are sometimes applied to things without there being any similarity between them. Thus the Bible calls the altar Adonai-Nissi (The Lord is my banner) (Exod. 17, 15), and applies the name of God to Jerusalem and the Messiah, also angels are called by the name of God. It is pointed out therein that the prophet thinks that the angel who speaks to him is God, and the angel too speaks in the name of God who sent him. A reason is given why Joshua bowed down to the angel, seeing that it is forbidden to prostrate oneself even to the angels. It is also pointed out that it is an error to mention the names of angels in the prayers.

Chapter twenty-nine explains the homonym or (light). It gives the various meanings of the word and explains why God is called light. It explains the verse, Ezekiel 1, 28, as well as the statement of the Rabbis that if a person looks at the rainbow his eyes become weak. It is pointed out also that the senses perceive the accidents of things only.

Chapter thirty explains that wise men differ in degree according to the difference in their comprehension of the divine attributes of perfection. It also explains the superiority of some wise men to others according to the opinion of Maimonides who says that all negative judgments about God are true and all affirmative judgments are false.

Chapter thirty-one explains that from the connection of the parts of nature with each other we may infer the existence of one cause which unites all nature, which uniting agency is the necessary existent. It points out that the vision which Elijah saw on mount Horeb was an allusion to this. It explains the meaning of the expression “a still, small voice” (I Kings, 19, 12), and the statement of the Rabbis that hashmal means “Hayyot of fire speaking.”

Here end the topics of the chapters of the Second Book, with the help of God.

BOOK THREE explains the second principle, revelation of the Torah, and contains thirty-seven chapters.

Chapter one explains that man is a more perfect creature than all the other animals, rejecting the opinion of the ancients who said that man is inferior in his formation to the lower animals. It explains also how man can learn manners and morals from the lower animals, an idea which is alluded to in Job 35, 11.

Chapter two explains that man has a special purpose different from the lower animals, namely human perfection. An explanation is given of the following verses, Cant. 2, 14; Ecc. 3, 19; Job 28, 12. It is pointed out that there are two kinds of perfection. A reason is given why in the account of the creation of man in Genesis there is no mention of the expression “that it is good,” or “after his kind,” as there is in the account of the creation of the lower animals.

Chapter three refutes the opinion of the philosophers that the purpose of the human race is the attainment of theoretical knowledge, pointing out that according to their opinion no person can realize the purpose of man and the creation of the human race would be in vain. It is pointed out that this matter is alluded to in the nineteenth Psalm.

Chapter four explains that it is easy for every existing being in accordance with its status to attain the perfection special to it according to its nature. It is pointed out that no perfection can be attained by any creature except through acts, and that the only acts which can confer perfection are those which are done with intelligence; also that man whose status is far below that of the other beings endowed with a rational soul must do many acts in order to attain his perfection.

Chapter five proves from the spheres and the angels that only those acts which are done with the intention of serving God confer perfection, pointing out that the statements of the philosophers concerning the intentions of the spheres in their motions are utter folly and nonsense. Biblical verses are cited to prove that human perfection is not attained through knowledge alone but only through acts which are agreeable to God, namely such acts as are done with the intention of performing the will of God. Such perfection embraces the entire human race or the greater part thereof. An explanation is given of Jeremiah 9, 22–23.

Chapter six maintains that human acts do not all lead to the realization of the purpose of man. The difficulty is pointed out of drawing a line of demarcation between those acts which do and those which do not lead to human perfection. It is explained how this can be done and it is maintained that the joy or the sorrow resulting from an act is a good criterion, as is proved from the verses Jeremiah 2, 19 and Psalm 119, 14.

Chapter seven calls attention to certain difficulties in the method above mentioned of defining good acts, pointing out that rational analysis is not sufficient for this purpose, much less can rational investigation determine what acts are pleasing to God. Hence it was necessary to have them defined by divine command. It is pointed out that there are some acts which reason shows to be bad and a person guilty of doing them is deserving of punishment even without a divine prohibition. This is why Cain was punished in that God had not respect to his offering. There are also acts which give perfection to the soul, but they can not all be completely determined by reason, and divine inspiration is necessary.

Chapter eight explains that prophecy does not come from the faculty of imagination as the philosophers thought, but that it is a divine inspiration which influences the rational faculty. A definition is given of prophecy and it is pointed out that the degree of Moses was higher than that of all the other prophets, because Moses’ prophecy came to him without an intermediate agency, whereas the prophecy of the others came through an intermediate agency.

Chapter nine explains why the prophets see God under various forms though God is one; also why they see different visions and give expression to different words when the subject matter is the same.

Chapter ten explains the manner in which the prophetic inspiration comes to the prophet and the conception thereof in the prophet’s mind, differently from the explanation of the philosophers. It also explains how we may conceive of the different degrees of prophecy as dependent on the mode in which the imagination is combined with the reason. The difference is pointed out between the prophecy and miracles of Moses and those of the others.

Chapter eleven points out that through the medium of a person who is fit for prophetic inspiration a prophetic message may come to one who is not fit for prophecy, as was the case when all Israel received divine inspiration at the time of the revelation on Mount Sinai through the mediation of Moses, and when Elisha received the prophetic mission through the mediation of Elijah. It is also explained why prophecy is found in Israel rather than among the other nations.

Chapter twelve explains that the purpose of the existence of prophecy in the human race is not for the sake of foretelling the future, but in order that man may attain to human perfection, pointing out that this is why prophecy is regarded as a secondary principle derived from revelation of the Torah, which is the fundamental principle, and not vice versa. It is also explained why providence is regarded as a secondary principle derived from the principle of reward and punishment, and not vice versa.

Chapter thirteen investigates whether it is possible that a divine law given to a particular nation may be changed for that same nation at different times, or whether it must be eternal.

Chapter fourteen explains that we find that divine laws do change, permitting what was formerly prohibited and prohibiting what was formerly permitted, and gives the reason therefor. The arguments of Maimonides are refuted which led him to include the immutability of the Torah as a fundamental principle. It explains the statement of the Rabbis that “neither came it into My mind” (Jer. 7, 31) refers to Isaac son of Abraham. It is also maintained that even if we should admit Maimonides’ arguments, they would prove only that we may not change the Torah or add to or diminish from it on our responsibility, but they do not exclude the possibility that the Torah may be changed by the command of God through the decree of His wisdom, as the Adamite law was changed for Noah and the Noachian law was changed for Moses.

Chapter fifteen gives a reason why meat was forbidden to Adam, permitted to Noah and again forbidden in part to Moses. It is also explained in what consisted the sin of Cain when he brought an offering to God of the fruit of the ground so that God had not respect to him or to his offering.

Chapter sixteen explains the homonym olam (eternity), pointing out that the expressions ‘olam (eternity), le‘olamim (to eternity), hukkat ‘olam (a statute forever), and ‘ad ‘olam (unto eternity), denote a fixed and finite, not an infinite time. It is pointed out that in the time of the second Temple they ceased counting the months from Nisan though it is one of the commandments of the Torah according to the opinion of Maimonides. It explains the statement of the Rabbis that the letters mem and samek on the tables of the Decalogue were held up by a miracle. It is pointed out that the characters in which the Torah is written in our day are not Hebrew.

Chapter seventeen explains that the degree of the prophet and his power of comprehension determine the strength of belief in his message and its meaning. The meaning is explained of Isaiah’s exclamation, “Woe is me! for I am undone!” (Is. 6, 5), as well as of the statement of the Rabbis that Manasseh tried Isaiah before he killed him.

Chapter eighteen points out that a message which a prophet receives from God can not be nullified by any other prophet, unless the former himself receives from God the contrary of the first message. Hence no prophet can annul any one of the ten commandments, for all Israel heard them publicly given by God. It is also explained that the statement of the Rabbis, “The first two commandments were heard by Israel from the mouth of Geburah,” does not mean that they heard them miraculously, as Maimonides maintains; also that the first commandment is not intended to teach the existence and unity of God as Maimonides says, but to remove the error of idolatry. It then explains the various errors of which idolaters are guilty and maintains that the Israelites heard all the ten commandments from God. It explains the difference between the first two commandments and the rest and points out under what circumstances the words of a prophet should be obeyed even against the commandment of the Torah.

Chapter nineteen explains that a person professing a divine law by tradition may not abandon it if it is clear to him that the principles upon which it is based are true, as we explained in the first book. It explains also the manner in which is proved the authenticity of the messenger and his mission. It explains why the Israelites followed the law of Moses although it differed from the law of the Noachites which was divine. It then shows that we may not depart from the law of Moses and believe any one who says that it is only of temporary validity, even in reference to the commandments outside of the Decalogue, unless he can prove his authenticity in the same way as Moses proved his.

Chapter twenty explains that the Law of Moses is eternal because it is impossible that there should arise another prophet like Moses. This idea does not follow necessarily from the verse, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses” (Deut. 34, 10), but rather from the answer given to Moses when he said, “So that we are distinguished, I and Thy people” (Ex. 33, 16). Maimonides is criticized for including the immutability of the Torah as a fundamental principle when he had already named the superiority of Moses’ prophecy as a fundamental principle.

Chapter twenty-one explains why the Torah is called “testimony,” pointing out at the same time that it is not permissible to interpret the biblical text figuratively and reject the literal meaning. In this connection are explained Psalm 119, 85 and following.

Chapter twenty-two explains that the Torah which has been handed down to us by tradition and which we have today is the identical one that was given to Moses on Sinai without any change, and that it was not changed in the days of Ezra. It explains also the statement of the Rabbis that certain words in the Torah were corrected by the Soferim.

Chapter twenty-three explains the necessity of an oral law accompanying a written, maintaining at the same time that no evidence concerning anything can be adduced from the consensus of the masses, but only from the agreement of wise men, for the masses often hold in common an opinion which is not the truth.

Chapter twenty-four explains that the Torah contains three parts, “words,” “statutes” and “judgments,” pointing to the fact that God is wise, possessed of will and of power. No conventional law can embrace those three things. It explains also part of Psalm one hundred and forty-seven.

Chapter twenty-five mentions the criticism directed by a Christian against the Torah of Moses, maintaining that it is not perfect. The criticism is answered and it is explained that the Torah is perfect in every respect, considering all the four causes, the material, the efficient, the formal and the final. It is pointed out that Psalm 19, 8 alludes to this, and that the Christian translator erred in his rendering of the word temimah. Allusion is made therein also to the reasons for the institution of sacrifices.

Chapter twenty-six explains that the Decalogue embraces two kinds of commandments, those governing the relations between man and God and those governing the relations between man and man. For this reason they were put on two tablets. It also explains why those particular commandments were chosen for the Decalogue and not others. An explanation is also given of the statement of the Rabbis that the words “remember” and “keep” in the two versions of the Decalogue were pronounced in one utterance.

Chapter twenty-seven points out that performance of a commandment requires intention. Hence it follows that negative commandments confer perfection upon the soul equally with positive. This is proved from the first few verses of Psalm one hundred and nineteen. It explains also why the positive commandments are 248 in number, while the negative are 365, and not vice versa.

Chapter twenty-eight points out that human perfection which depends upon the positive and negative commandments is found in every one of the three parts into which the Torah is divided, namely: opinions, judgments and statutes. Accordingly perfection may be acquired by means of any one of these parts separately. It explains how a person may acquire perfection by means of the judgments, pointing out that perfection by means of the Torah can not be acquired through theory alone nor through practice alone. Incidentally is explained Proverbs 6, 23.

Chapter twenty-nine investigates a very important question, namely whether the Torah confers perfection as a whole only, not in its parts, or whether one of its parts is sufficient to confer perfection. The conclusion reached is that even a single act if done with the intention of serving God is sufficient to confer perfection according to the opinion of the Rabbis, and it is pointed out that this is a special principle of the Law of Moses. It is also explained therein why the community is more under the protection of divine providence than the individual, the prayer of the community being more likely to be heard than that of an individual.

Chapter thirty explains that the degrees of perfection attained through the Torah are different in many ways. It also explains the statement of the Rabbis: David reduced them (the commandments) to eleven … Habakkuk reduced them to one, etc. It explains the difference between Psalms twenty-four and fifteen.

Chapter thirty-one explains the expression “serving God from fear,” pointing out that the commandment to fear God, though it is special, includes all the commandments of the Torah. Incidentally is explained Deuteronomy 10, 12.

Chapter thirty-two defines fear of God, pointing out that fear may be of two kinds, fear of punishment, and awe by reason of the dignity and sublimity of the feared object. It is pointed out that both kinds are necessary for the attainment of human perfection.

Chapter thirty-three points out that joy gives completeness and perfection to the service of God, to the performance of a commandment and to everything else. The question is raised and solved of the compatibility of joy and fear in the service of God.

Chapter thirty-four expatiates upon the question of the compatibility of joy and fear being present together in the service of God, explaining at the same time Proverbs 2, 4; 10, 27.

Chapter thirty-five points out that the degree of the person who serves God from love is the highest of all degrees. Love is divided into three kinds, love of the good, love of the useful, and love of the agreeable. A definition is given of love and it is pointed out that all love comes to an end except the love of the good. The love of God, it is said, should embrace all the three kinds, an idea which, it is pointed out, is mentioned in Deuteronomy 6, 4 ff. It is further pointed out that the life of man is divided into three parts according to the different kinds of love and according to the division of the parts of the soul. It is maintained that the love of God must be shown in thought, speech and action, and at the same time an explanation is given of Deuteronomy 6, 4 ff.

Chapter thirty-six points out that the love of God does not disturb the soul as other loves do, but gives delight only, citing in this connection Canticles 7, 7. It is pointed out that he who serves God from love must examine the act at the time of doing it and choose it in preference to other acts, not minding the inconvenience that may be incurred, for he has no other purpose except to do the will of the beloved. Such was the service of our father Abraham, who was therefore called friend of God.

Chapter thirty-seven inquires whether it is possible that love may proceed from God to man, pointing out that there are three kinds of love, love of similarity, natural love and love of relation. God’s love of man belongs to the third kind and is similar to the love of a king for his people, of a father for his son and of a husband for his wife. The love of God for Israel is like the love of a man for his sweetheart which is a peculiar love without reason. Hence it is called in the Bible heshek, “The Lord did … set His love (hashak) upon you … choose you” (Deut. 7, 7).

Here end the topics of the Third Book with the help of God.

BOOK FOUR discusses the third principle, reward and punishment. It contains an Introduction and fifty-one chapters.

The Introduction states that although freedom and purpose are not principles of divine law as such, nevertheless they must be explained before we treat of reward and punishment in the Torah. The order is explained in which the topics of this book are taken up for treatment.

Chapter one begins the discussion of God’s knowledge, pointing out the reality of the contingent. Then the question is taken up of the compatibility of God’s knowledge with the nature of the contingent. The opinions of Saadia and of some later authors are cited and found unsatisfactory.

Chapter two lays down a preliminary statement for the solution of the above mentioned difficulty. It is pointed out that the various sciences differ in their assumptions and principles, and it is maintained that the senses must be made the basis in every case.

Chapter three maintains that the theological scholar makes the senses the basis of everything even though he does not know the cause of the sense datum, in the same way as in the science of astronomy, the diurnal motion, which is visible to the senses, is taken as a basis, though we do not know the cause thereof. It is pointed out that reason is incapable of knowing the causes even of natural things. A solution follows of the above mentioned difficulty in the problem of God’s knowledge according to Maimonides.

Chapter four treats of the influence of the stars, and names two opinions on the subject neither of which is correct, then explains the correct theory.

Chapter five begins the discussion of freedom, points out how many kinds of human acts there are according to the demands of logical division, and classifies them into three kinds, compulsory, i. e., determined, free, and mixed of compulsion and freedom. What applies to one kind does not apply to the other. Job thought that everything was predetermined, while Eliphaz held that all was free.

Chapter six explains that diligence and effort are useful in all human acts even in matters which are determined. Incidentally it explains Psalm 128, 2.

Chapter seven begins the discussion of Providence, pointing out that Job denied providence because he observed the adversity of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked. It is pointed out further that the problem of the adversity of the righteous has not the same difficulty as the problem of the prosperity of the wicked. Elihu replied to Job by showing him that the adversity of some righteous persons and the prosperity of some wicked persons are compatible with divine justice and Job acknowledged the truth of this statement before God.

Chapter eight gives two arguments in proof of providence, taken from an observation of nature as a whole. One argument is derived from the fact that dry land projects above water, and the other is taken from the fact that rain falls in a well ordered manner and sometimes comes as a result of the prayer of the righteous.

Chapter nine gives three arguments in favor of providence, taken from particular phenomena in human circumstances and conduct. One argument is taken from the fact that the ideas of the wicked are not realized, the second is taken from punishments which correspond to the offence, and the third from the information which comes to one in a dream and vision of the night.

Chapter ten names two arguments in proof of providence, taken from reason. The one considers the point of view of the recipient, the other that of the agent. From the point of view of the recipient the argument is proved from Psalm eight. The argument from the point of view of the agent who exercises providence is based upon the words of Elihu (Job 34).

Chapter eleven points out that there are different kinds of providence for individuals of the human species as there are different kinds of providence for the various animal species.

Chapter twelve explains how to solve the problem of the prosperity of the wicked, pointing out four causes, any one of which may result in the prosperity of a wicked person.

Chapter thirteen explains how to solve the problem of the adversity of the righteous, pointing out causes which may result in the adversity of a righteous person without imputing wrong to God. It explains also the meaning of trial and of suffering of love.

Chapter fourteen explains why the prophets complained of these two phenomena, the adversity of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked, pointing out that Asaph has the correct idea in the solution of these problems. Incidentally is explained Psalm seventy-three.

Chapter fifteen explains why Jeremiah and Habakkuk complained since they knew that Asaph had given the correct solution, as was mentioned in the preceding chapter. Incidentally it is pointed out that a person is affected more by what he sees than by what he hears.

Chapter sixteen discusses prayer, which is related to providence, pointing out that one who believes in providence must also believe that God may bestow good upon a person by way of grace as a result of prayer, whether the person be deserving or not. It points out also that all the other celestial powers except God are limited and can not bestow any benefits unless the recipient is fit to receive them. It explains also how the influence emanating from the stars is responsible for the error existing in the minds of idolaters.

Chapter seventeen explains that no other being in the world can bestow grace except God, pointing out four conditions which must exist in the one who bestows grace. Incidentally is explained Deuteronomy 32, 39, and the question is discussed whether the impulse to pray comes from reason or desire.

Chapter eighteen explains the causes which lead some persons to doubt the efficacy of prayer, pointing out that Job was one of those who doubted the efficacy of prayer. It is pointed out also that prayer prepares a person to receive good, this being the opinion of Eliphaz.

Chapter nineteen discusses the nature of blessings which prophets or righteous men bestow upon persons, viz., whether they are prayers or announcements of future happenings. The conclusion arrived at is that blessings are intended to prepare the recipient to receive the divine influence.

Chapter twenty points out that though prayer is a particular commandment it is followed by greater reward than any other commandment. Therefore we find that it is good for all things as theriaca is good for all diseases, even though the latter be contrary in their causes and symptoms.

Chapter twenty-one discusses a difficulty attaching to the previous statement: Why was not the prayer of Moses granted when he asked to be admitted into the land of Canaan, as is told in Deuteronomy 3, 23 ff.? It explains the prayer of Moses in that section and points out that Moses’ offence involved profanation of God’s name and the sentence imposed was accompanied by an oath, hence Moses’ prayer was not granted.

Chapter twenty-two discusses the nature of Moses’ sin at the waters of Meribah, the explanations of the commentators not being satisfactory. It is pointed out that inasmuch as the sin in question involved profanation of God’s name, it could not be forgiven.

Chapter twenty-three points out that some words or attributes denote good qualities, and some bad. This leads to a statement of the kind of words which may be used in prayer. Incidentally is explained the statement of the Rabbis that God has a place, called mistarim, where He weeps. It is pointed out also that prayer must have three qualities, agreeable words, intention, and a low voice. If these three conditions are satisfied, the prayer may be accepted, though not necessarily. It is also stated that some righteous men have their requests granted by God without prayer, some require prayer, while there are some righteous men who do not even have to ask.

Chapter twenty-four explains that the purpose intended by an act of man is not always necessarily realized. Thus prayer is not necessarily always granted even if it is carried out properly, the causes being stated. The best prayer should be general in its terms and not specific.

Chapter twenty-five begins the discussion of repentance. It is pointed out that although repentance is one of the particular commandments of the Torah, nevertheless it is general in view of the reward that is attained as a result. Hence it should be treated after prayer since it is a general commandment. It is pointed out that the acceptance of repentance is a matter of divine grace. Incidentally is explained the statement of the Rabbis that the penitent is in a privileged position because his guilt is accounted to him as merit; also the meaning of Exodus 7, 3, the hardening of the heart of Sihon, Deut. 2, 30, as well as Hosea 14, 5, it being pointed out that divine grace comes to the recipient according to his request.

Chapter twenty-six explains the modes of repentance and gives a reason why Saul’s acknowledgment of sin in the matter of Amalek was not accepted, while David’s acknowledgment of sin in the matter of Bathsheba was accepted, for Nathan said to him: “The Lord also hath put away thy sin …” (II Sam. 12, 13). A reason is given also why Saul was punished by having his kingdom taken away from him, while David was not so punished. It explains the qualities that a king should have and points out that David had them all, but not Saul.

Chapter twenty-seven suggests a difficulty in connection with repentance, pointing out that logically speaking repentance ought to be of no avail. The difficulty is solved on deeper consideration, a division being made between acts done under compulsion and acts done voluntarily. It also explains what is meant by compulsion and free will.

Chapter twenty-eight explains the necessity of the institution of repentance for the attainment of human perfection, explaining at the same time the statement of the Rabbis that thinking of sin is worse than sin. Isaiah 57, 16 and following verses are explained as referring to the penitent.

Chapter twenty-nine begins the discussion of reward and punishment, which is the third principle. It is pointed out that with respect to the belief in reward and punishment people are divided into four classes: Some deny reward altogether, some believe it is corporeal only, some believe it is spiritual only, and some believe it is corporeal and spiritual. The last is the opinion of the Torah. This difference of opinion, it is pointed out, follows the difference of opinion concerning the essence of the soul. Incidentally is explained the statement of the Rabbis that it were better for man not to have been born than to have been born. The chapter discusses also the topic of transmigration as taught by the Cabalists.

Chapter thirty points out that in respect to reward after death the sages of Israel are divided into two classes. The first is represented by Maimonides, who believes that reward after death is all spiritual and is bestowed upon the soul alone. This opinion, it is maintained, is logically correct and is in agreement with the opinion of the Torah. The second is represented by Nahmanides and the Cabalists, who believe that reward after death is bestowed upon body and soul together. The chapter explains how their opinions are to be understood as Rabbi Aaron Halevi says, then it mentions the difficulties arising from this opinion.

Chapter thirty-one explains the arguments which led Nahmanides and his school to the belief that the world to come begins after the resurrection of the dead and not before, pointing out that they are invalid. It is explained and proved that the expression “world to come” embraces the two kinds of reward, that which comes immediately after death and that which comes after the resurrection.

Chapter thirty-two explains that every change from the habitual which happens to a person causes pain, hence death is painful to a person even though the soul passes to a state of wonderful delight. For this reason we find that even righteous men find death painful. In this chapter is explained also why during life the soul is in need of the senses and the feelings.

Chapter thirty-three explains the form of reward and punishment of the soul in the world to come, pointing out that the statement of the Rabbis: “God takes the soul, casts it into the body and judges them together,” means that He confines it in space, not that He places it in the body. This expression is responsible for the error of those who maintain that the body and the soul are rewarded together.

Chapter thirty-four explains that in the world to come there are different degrees of punishment. The righteous are punished differently according to the number, always small, of sins of which they are guilty, while the wicked are punished in accordance with the great number of sins of which everyone of them is guilty. Allusion is made to the secret of the “garment” mentioned by the Cabalists.

Chapter thirty-five speaks of the belief in the resurrection of the dead and explains the various opinions entertained concerning this belief. It also discusses the question whether resurrection embraces the whole world or nation or only a part.

Chapter thirty-six inquires whether reward and punishment for good deeds and sins should, in accordance with strict justice, be temporary or eternal, pointing out that there is a difference between reward and punishment. Punishment in strict justice ought to be eternal, whereas reward in strict justice should be temporary, but it is eternal by divine grace. This was hinted to Abraham in Genesis 15, 1.

Chapter thirty-seven proves that punishment should in strict justice be eternal from the statement made to Moses, Exodus 33, 3, and from the complaint that Moses makes of this ruling in Psalm ninety. This and the following Psalm are explained as indicated.

Chapter thirty-eight criticizes our statement that punishment should be eternal, on the ground that if this were the case no one would merit the world to come or spiritual reward, since there is no man on earth so righteous that he does not sin. Incidentally are explained Psalm 62, 20; Micah 7, 18; Psalm 103.

Chapter thirty-nine mentions the old question which everybody asks, namely, why are there no promises of spiritual rewards in the Torah? A few solutions are mentioned and are found inadequate.

Chapter forty names the passages in the Torah in which are given promises of corporeal reward. These, it is maintained, are intended for the nation as a whole. The spiritual promises intended for the individual are mentioned in the Torah by allusion only. Passages are cited from the Torah, the Prophets and the Hagiographa bearing out this point.

Chapter forty-one mentions a theoretical argument which proves necessarily the immortality of the soul from the Torah as a whole, pointing out that from the punishment of the sinful soul mentioned in the Torah it follows that there is reward for the soul of the righteous. A reason is given why the Torah does not expatiate upon this point and it is argued that since experience testifies that the Torah can overcome and annul natural things, it is certainly able to give punishments and rewards which are the necessary results of the commandments of the Torah.

Chapter forty-two states that the belief in the coming of the Messiah is obligatory upon everyone who believes in the Law of Moses. It discusses also the question whether the belief in the coming of the Messiah is based upon tradition or whether it follows necessarily from the biblical text.

Chapter forty-three states that there are different modes of existence of things: existence in God’s knowledge, existence in the human mind, potential existence, actual existence. It is pointed out also that astrologers can not know things as they are, for two reasons, while the prophet on the other hand gets true knowledge without any doubt.

Chapter forty-four states that the tradition which we now have of the words of the prophets is true without any doubt and there is no possibility of there being any falsehood therein. It is pointed out also that this is a sign of the covenant between us and God pointing to the redemption, and the verses Isaiah 59, 20–21 are explained in this sense.

Chapter forty-five explains the meaning of a covenant between two persons, pointing out that it denotes establishment of friendship. Incidentally is explained Psalm 55, 14–15. It is stated also that the purpose of the covenant of circumcision is in order to be saved from the judgment of Gehenna.

Chapter forty-six speaks of trust in God, pointing out that the essence of the believer’s service is to trust in God at all times, in time of trouble and adversity as well as in time of quiet and tranquillity, for this is the essence of trust in God. Incidentally are explained Psalm forty-five and part of Psalm twenty-two.

Chapter forty-seven states that hope follows from trust and is essential to a believer. It is explained that hope is of three kinds, hope of mercy, hope of honor, and hope of promise; and that the best is the hope of promise which is hope of truth. Incidentally is explained Psalm 130, 4, 5.

Chapter forty-eight states that hope may be general and particular. Particular hope may be realized if the recipient prepares himself for it, but general hope is not realized unless all recipients prepare themselves for it, hence a general hope is not realized because not everybody’s hope is proper.

Chapter forty-nine raises a question in connection with hope on the ground that it is contrary to human nature, for it confuses the soul and renders it dull and foolish. The question is answered by the statement that hope in God is better than any praise that one can give Him. Psalms 71, 14 and 65, 2 are explained in this sense. It is also pointed out that hope is the cause of hope and Psalm 37, 34 is explained in this sense.

Chapter fifty states that since we have explained that the adversity of the righteous affords no cause of criticism of God, the complaint in the Bible of the long duration of the exile must be explained in a different manner. The various modes of complaint are then given and Psalms one hundred twenty-three and eighty-nine are explained.

Chapter fifty-one explains what is the perfect good, pointing out that all the lower beings are constantly changing; corporeal goods are also constantly changing from one opposite to the other, hence joy always comes after sorrow and rest after motion, there being nothing stable except the spiritual. Incidentally are explained Genesis 49, 15 and Psalm 29, 11. It also explains the meaning of peace, as well as the priestly benediction and the meaning of the word peace which is contained therein, thus concluding the book on a note of goodness and blessing and peace.

Completed and Finished Praise be to God.

This is the Gate of the Lord,

The righteous enter therein.

Let not the foot of pride overtake me,

And let not the hand of the wicked drive me away.

In God—I will praise His word—

In the Lord—I will praise His word.

INTRODUCTION

To know the fundamental principles upon which laws in general are based is both easy and difficult. It is easy, because all the people that we know of in the world to-day possess a law, and it is inconceivable that a person should be subject to or identified with a law without knowing its principles or having some notion of them sufficient to induce belief in them, as we do not call a person a physician who does not know the principles of medicine, nor do we call one a geometrician who does not know the principles of geometry or who does not at least have some notion of them. It is clear therefore that every one subject to a law should either possess a thorough knowledge of the principles of the law with which he is identified, a knowledge such as the nature of the subject demands, or should at least have a superficial understanding, such as one gets at the beginning of the subject.

It is difficult, because in the multitude of learned works dealing with the principles of laws we find no treatment that is adequate. They agree neither in the nature of the principles nor in their number. On the contrary, they differ very widely, especially so in relation to the principles of the law of Moses. For while they all agree that it is divine, they differ not a little concerning the number of its basic principles, some saying they are thirteen, some that they are twenty-six, and some that they are only six. But there is not one of these learned men who made any effort to explain those principles which pertain to a divine law generally, principles without which a divine law can not be conceived. Nor did they take the trouble to investigate whether there can be only one divine law, or whether there may be more than one; and if there may be more than one, whether every one of these must have principles peculiar to it as being a particular divine law or not. There can be no doubt, however, that a divine law must have general principles pertaining to it in its character as a divine law generally, without which principles its divine character would disappear, and special and particular principles, the removal of any one of which would destroy this particular law, though divine law in general would not be destroyed.

I, Joseph Albo, residing here in the city of Soria, led hither by the providence of the Prime Mover, having in my humility realized the high importance and great value of this subject of investigation, and seeing the great confusion in the minds of those who have speculated concerning it, who dived in its deep waters without bringing up any pearls, the reason being that they explained the principles superficially, as occurred to their minds at first sight, instead of employing a proper method that would lead to a thorough clarification of the subject under discussion,—realizing this, I undertook to make an adequate investigation of the general principles of divine law. Hence I have composed this book and called it The Book of Principles, because it investigates the principles of laws generally, and especially the principles of divine law. It also seeks to know whether there is only one divine law, or whether there may be more than one, and if there are more than one, how they differ one from the other. Then it investigates the principles of the law of Moses, concerning the divine character of which all agree, and shows that it has general principles, appertaining to it in virtue of its character as divine, and special principles, appertaining to it as being the particular divine law that it is. It then goes on to point out that the general principles have under them other more particular principles, which may be called derivative, because they are subsumed under the general principles and are derived from them, coming out of them as branches from the stem of a tree, their relation to the former being such that if the general principles are removed, the particular disappear likewise. This book also points out that the general principles of divine law are three: the existence of God, revelation, reward and punishment. For this reason we have divided this work into four books. The first investigates in a general way how many principles there are and what they are. The second discusses the first principle, the existence of God, and the derivative principles depending upon it. The third investigates the second principle, revelation, and the topics which are based upon it. The fourth treats of the third principle, reward and punishment, and the derivative principles which follow from it, and other matters connected therewith.

The effort expended to attain to or acquire anything must be commensurate with the value of the object it is sought to attain. If the object is of great value, a great effort should be made to attain it. If it is not of great value, the effort expended must not be great, but must bear a proper relation to the object sought. For example, we do not praise a man who makes tools worth a talent of silver for the purpose of producing one iron needle, as we praise one who makes tools worth ten thousand talents of silver in order to produce an infinite number of needles in succession.

Now the subject of our investigation, namely the principles of laws, is extremely important, for the perfection of man consists in being subject to laws—all men are subject to some law, though the laws differ. It is clear therefore that we must make the greatest effort to investigate this subject as far as in our power lies and as the nature of the subject permits.

And inasmuch as this subject is so very important, it is proper that we pray to God who grants unto man knowledge and understanding that He may graciously inspire us with knowledge, understanding and good sense, so that our work may partake of the divine graciousness which attaches to all the works of God; as Moses our teacher said in his prayer: “And let the graciousness of the Lord our God be upon us; establish Thou also upon us the work of our hands; yea, the work of our hands establish Thou it.”

To understand the meaning of this expression it is necessary to point out that a work may be gracious from two aspects. The work itself may be perfect, so far as the nature of its substance permits. But it may also have an additional graciousness or perfection by reason of its relation to the agent, i. e., because it is the work of that agent. All the works of God have these two kinds of perfection. They are perfect in themselves, as perfect as the nature of their substance demands, and they have an additional graciousness and beauty, not flowing from the nature of their substance, but due to the fact that they are the work of God.

For example, the bee would not, so far as the nature of its own substance is concerned, have the intelligence to build the waxen cells containing the honey in the form of a hexagon. But it owes this intelligence to God who is the best of all agents. The advantage of the hexagonal form is that it is similar to the circle, which is the natural form. And it is superior to the circle because in the figure of the hexagon a body that is made up of adjacent hexagons has the vacant space between them all filled and there is no empty space left, whereas if the cells were circular, in the shape of a cylinder, and placed in juxtaposition, there would remain vacant space between them that would be wasted. Therefore they build them in hexagonal and not circular form. And the reason they do not build the cells square is because although in a body composed of adjacent squares the space between them is also filled up, the square is farther away from the circle, which is the natural figure, than the hexagon. This attribute the bee has because of its being the work of God, which gives it an advantage over and above the properties inherent in the nature of its substance. This is what is meant by the graciousness existing in divine works which is due to the agent.

Thus Moses prays first, “Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants, and Thy glory upon their children,” and then he prays that in our handiwork may appear the two kinds of graciousness which are found in God’s work. Hence he says, “And let the graciousness of the Lord our God be upon us.” He then indicates the graciousness and beauty which are due to the agent in the words, “Establish Thou also upon us the work of our hands.” “Upon us” means joined to us. The graciousness that is due to the work itself is expressed in the words, “Yea, the work of our hands establish Thou it.”

Therefore I pray to God who has absolute power and truth that He may grant me courage and strength to accomplish my purpose, that He may lead me in the way of truth, and teach me the paths of uprightness, for in Him I trust and for Him I wait, as the Psalmist says: “Guide me in Thy truth, and teach me; for Thou art the God of my salvation; for Thee do I wait all the day.”

Now I begin with the help of the Almighty.

BOOK ONE

Wherein is treated of the number of laws in general. It is made clear that there are three, natural, conventional and divine. The differences between them are stated, and the principles of every one of them investigated, in order that the principles of divine law may be made clear. Then is explained the test by which the genuine divine law may be distinguished from the spurious which pretends to be divine. The question is discussed whether there can be more than one divine law at the same time.

CHAPTER 1

The investigation of fundamental principles is extremely dangerous. For though laws agree in general matters, like the existence of God, reward and punishment, and so on, they are divided in particular matters. It follows therefore necessarily that laws have particular principles by which one divine law differs from another. And there is grave danger in investigating particular matters. For any one who denies one of the particular principles of a law is excluded from the group identified with that law. For example, one who denies the prophecy and mission of Moses is a denier of the law of Moses without any doubt, though it is not a general principle of divine law. Similarly one who does not believe in the coming of the Messiah, which Maimonides counts among the principles of the Mosaic law, is, according to him, put into a class with those who deny one of the principles of the Mosaic law, who are excluded from the community under that law and have no share in the world to come. Maimonides, in the book “Madda‘,” in the third chapter of the Laws Concerning Penitence, classes such a person among unbelievers. This is very strange, for in the talmudic treatise Sanhedrin, chapter “Helek,” we find a statement of Rabbi Hillel, one of the Jewish sages of the Gemara, that the Jews need expect no Messiah, seeing that they had enjoyed his benefits in the time of Hezekiah, king of Judah. According to Maimonides this sage would have to be classed as an infidel and excluded from a share in the world to come. But if this were the case, why is he mentioned in the Gemara if he was excluded from the community of Israel and did not believe in the principles of their law? We can not say that his words are cited only for the purpose of being refuted, for in that case he would not be referred to as Rabbi, nor would authoritative rules be quoted in his name anywhere.

Others explain the difficulty by saying that Rabbi Hillel did not deny the doctrine of the Messiah, far from it; but that he meant to say that this dogma does not rest on any biblical text; that all the chapters in the book of Isaiah which speak of the Messiah, like chapter eleven, beginning, “And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse,” and the like, refer to Hezekiah, king of Judah, in whose days those prophecies were fulfilled. The tenth verse of the same chapter, “The root of Jesse, that standeth for an ensign of the peoples, unto him shall the nations seek,” refers to Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, who sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah. The expression at the end of the same verse, “And his resting-place shall be glorious,” also refers to Hezekiah. It is the wont of a hero or a king to go out to meet the enemy, to risk his life for his people and gain the victory for them. To remain quietly at home would be a great disgrace, and death would be better than such shame. Thus Saul, though he knew that he would die in the war, having been told by Samuel, “And to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me,” nevertheless went to war to avoid disgrace.

Now Hezekiah was reproached by everybody because he had shut himself up in Jerusalem and did not go out to fight. But when they saw the great miracle of the death of Sennacherib and the destruction of his army, it became clear to them that the reason Hezekiah had not gone out to fight was because he trusted in God to fight his battles. His “resting,” therefore, redounded to his glory, for the whole world knew that he was a completely righteous man, beloved by God, who gave him the desires of his heart and fought for him. Not so other kings, for whom “resting” is not glorious. When this miracle spread abroad, all the Jews who had been taken captive to Assyria and those who fled to Cush and Egypt and Pathros and other lands returned to Palestine. This is the meaning of the verse in Isaiah, “And there shall be a highway for the remnant of His people, etc.” This is the way in which the whole chapter is interpreted by Rabbi Moses ha-Kohen, Ibn Bal‘am and other literalists. Accordingly it might be said that Rabbi Hillel’s opinion was that the texts of Isaiah and the other prophets can not be cited to prove the coming of the Messiah, but that he believed in the coming of the redeemer on the basis of tradition and hence was not excluded from the community of Israel and not classed as a sinner.

This explanation, however, does not seem plausible. For the Gemara goes on to say that his disputants replied, “May the Lord forgive Rabbi Hillel,” a remark which indicates that they did regard him as guilty of sin for holding such an opinion. But this could not be if he merely denied the scriptural evidence and believed in the doctrine itself on the strength of tradition, as we shall make clear in Book Four. We must therefore conclude that Rabbi Hillel did not believe in the coming of the Messiah at all, and if despite this he was not classed as an unbeliever, it is because the dogma of the Messiah is not a fundamental principle of the Law of Moses, as Maimonides thinks, for we can conceive of the existence of the Mosaic law without it. It is a special principle of the religion of the Christians, for their religion can not exist without it. However, it is a dogma which it behooves every one professing Judaism to believe, as creation of the world out of nothing is a dogma which it behooves every one professing a divine law to believe, though it is not a fundamental principle of divine law. One who believes that there is a prime and eternal matter out of which all existing things came to be through the will of God is not an infidel according to the opinion of Maimonides, who does not count creation ex nihilo among the fundamental dogmas. But he is nevertheless guilty of a sin. Similarly Rabbi Hillel was guilty of a sin for not believing in the coming of the redeemer, but he was not an infidel. This is the opinion of the modern authorities, for they do not place the dogma of the Messiah and of the creation of the world in time among the fundamental principles.

The above remarks show how dangerous it is to investigate fundamental principles. For one runs the risk of denying something that is a fundamental principle of the Torah. Thus, according to the opinion of the one who regards creation in time as a fundamental principle of the Torah, Rabbi Moses ben Maimon would be an unbeliever, God forbid! On the other hand, the one who does not regard the dogma of the Messiah as a fundamental principle, would be an unbeliever in the opinion of Maimonides, who classes it among the fundamental dogmas. The same thing applies to the other matters which Maimonides classes among fundamental principles, though they are not such, as we shall see. For this reason we said that there is grave danger in the investigation of principles. For how can one tell what those things are, the denial of which, and of their fundamental character, constitutes one an unbeliever?

CHAPTER 2

It is proper, however, to say this in justification of those Jewish scholars who deal with this subject. Every Israelite is obliged to believe that everything that is found in the Torah is absolutely true, and any one who denies anything that is found in the Torah, knowing that it is the opinion of the Torah, is an unbeliever; as the Rabbis say in chapter “Helek,” that anyone who says, the whole Torah emanates from the divine Being except one verse, which Moses said on his own authority, is liable to the imputation charged in the biblical expression, “Because he hath despised the word of the Lord,” and is classed among those who deny the divine inspiration of the Torah. But a person who upholds the law of Moses and believes in its principles, but when he undertakes to investigate these matters with his reason and scrutinizes the texts, is misled by his speculation and interprets a given principle otherwise than it is taken to mean at first sight; or denies the principle because he thinks that it does not represent a sound theory which the Torah obliges us to believe; or erroneously denies that a given belief is a fundamental principle, which however he believes as he believes the other dogmas of the Torah which are not fundamental principles; or entertains a certain notion in relation to one of the miracles of the Torah because he thinks that he is not thereby denying any of the doctrines which it is obligatory upon us to believe by the authority of the Torah,—a person of this sort is not an unbeliever. He is classed with the sages and pious men of Israel, though he holds erroneous theories. His sin is due to error and requires atonement.

We find such opinions expressed by some of the ancient sages of Israel. Thus we find a statement that temporal sequence existed before creation. What the author of this opinion meant to say is that the Torah does not oblige us to believe that time was itself created. Similarly Rabbi Eliezer the Great, in Chapter three of his treatise, endeavors to name the material out of which the heavens and the earth were made. Now even if we should understand his words in their literal sense, as indicating, namely, that the world was not created out of nothing, but out of something, namely out of a primitive matter, we should have no reason for bringing a charge against him. For his idea is that the Torah does not oblige us to believe in creation ex nihilo. He has no intention to deny anything that is in the Torah, Heaven forbid!

Maimonides also, the author of the Guide of the Perplexed, in chapter twenty-five of the second part, says that his belief in creation ex nihilo was not due to the authority of scriptural texts—texts can be interpreted—but to the fact that it is a true doctrine, and therefore the texts must be interpreted so as to harmonize with this doctrine. His meaning is that anything which is opposed to the texts must not be believed at all, provided the texts do not give expression to an absurd idea which the reason can not conceive. For the Torah does not oblige us to believe absurdities, which are opposed to first principles, or any imaginary notions which the reason can not conceive. But a thing which can be conceived by the mind, we are obliged to believe, though it is opposed to nature, for example, resurrection of the dead and the miracles of the Torah. An absurd idea, however, which can not be conceived by the mind need not be believed even if it is plainly expressed in the Torah. Thus the expression, “Circumcise, therefore, the foreskin of your heart,” must not be taken in its literal sense, but should be explained in accordance with the truth.

This is the method of Onkelos the proselyte, of Jonathan ben Uziel, and the other sages of Israel. They interpret all the expressions in the Torah and the Prophets which signify corporeality of the deity so as to harmonize with the truth. They reject the literal meaning because it expresses an absurdity. Their maxim is that “the Torah speaks in the language of man” and “in order to quiet the ear.”

The method we have been describing is precisely that which is used by some of the modern scholars, who interpret the speech of Balaam’s ass in a manner different from the interpretation of the Rabbis of the Talmud. Their idea is that the Torah does not intend us to believe that miracle except in the manner in which they understand it. We say, therefore, that a person whose speculative ability is not sufficient to enable him to reach the true meaning of scriptural texts, with the result that he believes in the literal meaning and entertains absurd ideas because he thinks they represent the view of the Torah, is not thereby excluded from the community of those who believe in the Torah, Heaven forbid! Nor is it permitted to speak disrespectfully of him and accuse him of perverting the teaching of the Torah and class him among unbelievers and heretics.

Rabbi Abraham ben David has gone even further than this. He says that even if a person understands a fundamental principle of the Torah in an erroneous manner because of a speculative error, he must not be called a heretic. We find this idea of his in his Book of Criticisms on Maimonides. Commenting on the latter’s statement that one who believes God is corporeal is a heretic, Rabbi Abraham ben David says: “It is true that God is not corporeal; nevertheless a person who believes He is corporeal by reason of biblical and midrashic expressions which he understands literally, must not be called a heretic. ”

This seems to be the correct view as held by the Rabbis of the Talmud. For in speaking of Elisha ben Abuya they quote the biblical expression, “Return, ye rebellious children,” and add by way of comment, “except Elisha Aher, who knows his Creator and deliberately rebels against Him.” They thus indicate clearly that that man alone who knows the truth and deliberately denies it, belongs to the class of the wicked whose repentance is rejected. But the man whose intention is not to rebel, nor to depart from the truth, nor to deny what is in the Torah, nor reject tradition, but whose sole intention is to interpret the texts according to his opinion, though he interprets them erroneously, is neither a heretic nor an unbeliever.

Accordingly a person who believes that those who are resurrected will not live forever in the resurrected state of body and soul, but will return to dust, as is the opinion of Maimonides in his letter On the Resurrection of the Dead, can not be regarded as rejecting the dogma of resurrection, though, according to Rabbi Moses ben Nahman, this is not the true belief. Similarly one who believes that the real retribution in the future world is imposed upon body and soul jointly, and that the soul alone has no retribution apart from the body, this being the opinion of Rabbi Moses ben Nahman and some of the wise men of the Cabala, is not a denier of the dogma of spiritual reward and punishment, though according to Maimonides this is not the true belief.

I had to write all this because I have seen insignificant men, who think they are wise, open their mouths wide in lengthy and unintelligent discourses against great men. It is clear now that every intelligent person is permitted to investigate the fundamental principles of religion and to interpret the biblical texts in accordance with the truth as it seems to him. And though he believe concerning certain things which the ancients regarded as principles, like the dogma of the Messiah and of the creation, that they are not fundamental principles, but merely true doctrines, which the believer in the Torah is obliged to believe in the same way as he believes in the earth’s opening its mouth on the occasion of Korah’s rebellion, or the coming down of fire from heaven, and similar miracles and promises mentioned in the Torah, which are true without being fundamental principles of the Torah,—he is not a denier of the Torah or of its principles. For if he were, it would follow that there are as many fundamental principles in the Law of Moses as there are miracles and promises in the Torah, an idea which has never occurred to any one.

CHAPTER 3

The word ‘Ikkar (lit. root) is a term applied to a thing upon which the existence and duration of another thing depends and without which it can not endure, as the root is a thing upon which the endurance of the tree depends, without which the tree can not exist or endure. The Rabbis of the Talmud use this term frequently. They speak, for example, of a thing which has an ‘ikkar (basis) in the Torah or not. Hence the term may be used of the basic principles upon which the existence of religious law depends, like the existence of God. For it is clear from the nature of this doctrine that it is fundamental and belief in it is essential to a divine law, for a divine law can not be imagined without belief in the existence of God. For this reason we must investigate in order to know what beliefs are properly fundamental in divine law.

Maimonides enumerates thirteen, as follows: existence of God, unity of God, incorporeality of God, eternity of God, He alone should be worshipped and none else, prophecy, Moses the greatest prophet, revelation of the Torah, immutability of the Torah, God’s omniscience, reward and punishment, the Messiah, resurrection of the dead. This list is found in Maimonides’ commentary on the Mishnah, chapter “Helek.”

Our first question concerning these principles which Maimonides laid down is, why precisely those thirteen? If it is because of the meaning of the term ‘ikkar (fundamental principle), we can see very well the reason for including such dogmas as the existence of God, prophecy, revelation, omniscience, providence in reward and punishment, because they are essential principles of a divine law, which can not be conceived without any one of them. We may also allow without difficulty the inclusion of Moses as the greatest prophet and the perpetuity of the law, because they are special principles, essential to the law of Moses, which can not be conceived without them. For if we assume that there may be a prophet greater than Moses, it follows that the law of Moses may be abolished, for the words of a greater prophet should be believed more than those of a prophet who is inferior in degree, as we shall see later. Likewise, if we do not believe in the perpetuity of the Torah, we can imagine that the law of Moses may have been repealed after the Israelites were exiled from their land. But it is difficult to see why he includes unity and incorporeality among fundamental principles. For though they are true doctrines, which every one professing the law of Moses is obliged to believe, they should not be counted among fundamental principles, seeing that the divine law would not disappear entirely if one believed otherwise. It is still more difficult to see why Maimonides included as a principle the dogma that God alone should be worshipped and none else. For, though it is one of the commandments of the Torah, as is written, “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me … thou shalt not bow down unto them, nor serve them,” nevertheless it is not a fundamental principle upon which the entire Torah depends. For if a man believe in God and His law, and introduce a mediator between himself and God, he violates, indeed, the commandment just quoted, but this does not make it a fundamental principle with which the entire law stands and falls. Why then does Maimonides count it as a principle? Likewise, if one believes in reward and punishment, but holds that the soul alone receives retribution in the future world, and denies that the body is resurrected after death, is there any reason why this should upset the Torah as a whole? We cannot see therefore why it was necessary to count resurrection as a fundamental principle of divine law, comparable to the existence of God.

If, on the other hand, we say that Maimonides did not draw up his list in accordance with the strict meaning of the term ‘ikkar, and therefore included true doctrines which every one professing the law of Moses is obliged to believe, why did he not include the doctrine that the Shekinah dwells in Israel through the medium of the Torah, in accordance with the biblical expression, “I will dwell therein among the children of Israel?” And why did he not include the dogma of creation, which every one professing a divine law is obliged to believe, as Maimonides himself explains in the twenty-fifth chapter of the second part of the Guide of the Perplexed? It is just as important a doctrine as the eternity of God, which he does include. Or why did he not include the dogma that we must believe in the miracles of the Torah in their literal sense, and other particular doctrines which every one professing the law of Moses is obliged to believe, in the same way as he includes belief in the Messiah?

And if we say that he counts principles only and not merely true doctrines, why does he not include the principle that one should follow ancestral tradition? For it is a general principle of all divine laws, which cannot be conceived without it. Or why does he not include freedom of the will? For being a true doctrine, it is at the same time a principle, seeing that in the nature of things no law can be conceived without it. Maimonides himself, in the Book “Madda‘,” chapter 5 of the Rules Concerning Repentance, writes, “Every human being is given freedom of choice; if he desires to follow the path of goodness and to be a righteous man, he has the freedom to do so …” And then he says, “This is a very important principle, and is at the basis of the Torah and the commandments, as is said, ‘See I have set before thee this day life and good …’,” expatiating upon this principle at length in that chapter. It is very strange, therefore, that he did not include it among the principles in his commentary on the Mishnah, chapter “Helek,” where the thirteen dogmas are enumerated. In fine, the number of principles drawn up by Maimonides is subject to grave objections.

I have seen a statement made that Maimonides selected the number thirteen because the divine attributes are thirteen and because thirteen is the number of the hermeneutical rules by which the Torah is interpreted. But it is extremely unlikely that Maimonides would omit such a doctrine as freedom of the will, which is a fundamental principle according to his own opinion, so that the number may not exceed thirteen. Besides this does not explain why he counts among the thirteen those which are not essential principles at all, as we have explained.

There is one writer who says that there are twenty-six principles, including in his list anything that occurs to his mind, such as the eternity of God, His wisdom, His life, His power and His will, and other attributes besides which are ascribed to God. He also counts paradise as a principle by itself, and hell as another principle, and many other things which have no sense, having taken no pains to understand the meaning of the term ‘ikkar (principle and the things to which it applies.

There is a recent writer who takes the word ‘ikkar strictly, and modifies the list of Maimonides by adding some dogmas and taking away some. According to this writer’s opinion, the principles of divine law are the following six: omniscience of God, providence, omnipotence, prophecy, freedom of will, purpose of revelation, plus the three which Maimonides proves apodictically, namely, the existence, unity and incorporeality of God. His idea is that it is clear from the nature of the six dogmas above mentioned that they are essential to divine law, which can not be conceived without them. And taken together with the three others which are subject to scientific proof, they give a complete list of the fundamental principles of divine law.

The criticism that may be made of this view is that though it is true that these are general principles of divine law, which can not be conceived to exist without them, he should have included also other special principles, peculiar to the law of Moses, as Maimonides did; or he should have included some general principle by which the genuine divine law may be distinguished from the spurious which pretends to be divine. For all religions existing in the world at the present day acknowledge these six principles, and would therefore have to be divine. Another objection to this number of principles is that though it is true that no divine law can exist without them, it does not follow that given all these principles we have all that is necessary to constitute a divine law. One more principle must be added for this purpose, viz., revelation. We can make this clearer by the following analogy. If one were to say that given nutrient and sentient we have man, because if you have man you have nutrient and sentient, he would no doubt be wrong. For though it is true that you can not have man without them, or, which is the same thing, that they are necessary for the existence of man, it does not follow that given those things we have man, unless we add rational, and say that if we have nutrient, sentient and rational body, we have man. Similarly here, revelation should be counted along with the others. For given divine omniscience, providence, power, prophecy, freedom, purpose,—revelation does not follow, though it can not be without the others.

On the other hand, his inclusion of freedom and purpose among the principles of divine law is also open to criticism. For though it be true that they are essential to divine law, they are not fundamental principles of divine law qua divine, for they pertain also to conventional law, as will appear later. Nor is purpose, taken abstractly, a principle of divine law, rather a special purpose is. In fine, the knowledge of the essential principles of divine law is very difficult. And a more serious difficulty still is that we find no clear pronouncement upon this matter in the discussions of the talmudic Rabbis. And yet they should have treated of those principles which are the bases and foundations of divine law, seeing that human happiness and spiritual reward are based upon them, as they have treated of torts and contracts which have to do with material interests merely, and are the basis of political and social order.

CHAPTER 4

It seems to me that the general and essential principles of divine law are three: existence of God, providence in reward and punishment, and divine revelation. These three embrace all the principles of the various divine laws, such as the law of Adam, the law of Noah, the law of Abraham, the law of Moses, and any other divine laws, if there be such, at the same time or in succession. Implicit in every one of these are subordinate and derivative principles coming from that principle as a branch issues from a tree. Thus from the existence of God is derived God’s eternity, perpetuity, and so on. In revelation is implied God’s knowledge, prophecy, and so on. And from providence follows physical reward and punishment in this world, and spiritual in the next.

From these three general principles issue special dogmas peculiar to the various divine laws, genuine or spurious, as follows: From the existence of God is derived His incorporeality, which is a special principle of the law of Moses, and likewise His unity. Under revelation comes the prophecy and mission of Moses. Under providence and reward and punishment comes the belief in the advent of the Messiah, which is a special principle of the law of Moses according to the opinion of Maimonides. But according to our opinion the belief in the Messiah is not a principle. And if it is, it is not special to the law of Moses, for the Christians too regard it as a principle, and that too in order to abrogate the law of Moses. It is indeed a special principle for them, for their law can not be conceived without it. All these and similar dogmas which are special to certain religions are included in the three principles which we have mentioned. The question whether there can be more than one divine law at the same time or at different times, will be discussed later with the help of God.

That these three principles are the basis of the faith by which man attains true happiness is proved by the fact that the Men of the Great Synagogue composed three blessings which they incorporated in the Additional Service for New Year, going by the name of “Kingdoms,” “Memorials” and “Trumpets.” These three blessings correspond to the three principles and are intended to call our attention to the fact that by properly believing in these principles together with the dogmas derived from them we shall win a favorable verdict in the divine judgment.

The blessing known as “Kingdoms” corresponds to the principle of the existence of God. This is proved by the words of the benediction, “Therefore do we wait for Thee, O Lord our God, that we may quickly see Thy glorious strength, when the images will be removed from the earth and the idols will be completely cut off, when the world will be established under the Kingdom of the Almighty … when all the inhabitants of the world will recognize and know that to Thee shall every knee bend, by Thee every tongue swear … and all shall accept the yoke of Thy Kingdom.”

The benediction called “Memorials” points to providence and reward and punishment, as is indicated by its contents: “Thou rememberest the works of the universe, and visitest all the creatures from the beginning; before Thee are all hidden things revealed …”

The benediction called “Trumpets” alludes to the third principle, revelation. Therefore it begins, “Thou didst reveal Thyself in the cloud of Thy glory to Thy holy people and didst speak unto them. From heaven didst Thou cause them to hear Thy voice …” This benediction is called Trumpets because at the time of the giving of the Law there was a very loud sound of the trumpet, such as never had been heard before in the world. Thunders and lightning like those seen at Sinai or of the same nature had been heard and seen before, but the sound of a trumpet without a trumpet had never been heard before, and will not be heard again until the time of the redemption. At that time the true law will be made known before the whole world. This is the time that is referred to in the words of the prophet, “And the Lord God will blow the horn,” according to some authorities.

I have seen a statement that the benediction “Trumpets” bears an allusion to the sacrifice of Isaac. But this is not correct, for if that were the case, we should expect the sacrifice of Isaac to be mentioned in this blessing, whereas mention is made of it in the benediction “Memorials.” The origin of this opinion is to be sought in the statement of the Rabbis that the ceremony of blowing the ram’s horn on New Year is in memory of the ram which was substituted for Isaac. But this does not justify the opinion. For what the Rabbis mean is that the requirement of a ram’s horn is to commemorate the ram of Isaac, not that the command itself to blow an instrument has that meaning, much less does it follow that the benediction “Trumpets” alludes to that event.

Isaiah refers to these three principles, which are the cause of happiness, in a single sentence: “For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king, He will save us.” “The Lord is our judge,” alludes to the dogma of providence, denoting the same idea that is contained in the expression, “He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand up together …,” namely that we may win a favorable verdict. “The Lord is our lawgiver (mehokek),” refers to the dogma of revelation, which is the second principle. For the word mehokek applies to a lawgiver, as we see in Deuteronomy, “For there a portion of the mehokek was reserved,” a reference to Moses through whom the law was given. The meaning is similar to that expressed in the words of the prophet, “Hearken unto Me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is My law; fear ye not the taunt of men …,” namely that though the verdict may not be favorable to us in so far as He is our judge, seeing that a judge can not go against the law that is laid down by another, nevertheless we ought to win because He is also the legislator who lays down the statutes. “The Lord is our king,” alludes to the third principle, the existence of God, who is the king of the whole world, and is especially called “the King of Israel and their Redeemer.” The thought here is that even if in His capacity of legislator He may refuse to transgress His own law, nevertheless as being our king, He must save us, for a king has the power to go against the law and to do whatever he desires in order to save his people. That is why the above text concludes with the words, “He will save us.” The meaning is that inasmuch as we have an advantage over the whole world in the possession of these three principles, upon belief in which depends man’s true happiness, it is fitting that God should save us above all others.

It may be that Maimonides has the same idea concerning the number of fundamental principles as the one we have just indicated, and that his list consists of the three chief principles that we have mentioned, plus the derivative dogmas issuing from them, being all called by him principles. Thus he lays down the existence of God, a fundamental doctrine, as the first principle. Then he enumerates along with it as principles four other dogmas which are derived from it, viz., unity, incorporeality, eternity, and exclusive worship. Then he lists as principles revelation, another fundamental doctrine, together with three other dogmas derived from it, viz., prophecy, superiority of Moses, and immutability of the law. Then comes divine omniscience and providence in reward and punishment, the third fundamental doctrine, together with three other dogmas implied in it and derived therefrom, viz., spiritual retribution, Messiah, and resurrection.

According to this explanation it is clear why he did not include the doctrine of creation, for it does not come under any of the three which we mentioned. He did not include freedom and purpose because, though they are essential to divine law, they are not essential to it qua divine, as will appear later. The question still remains, however, why he did not include under existence of God life and power and other attributes, seeing that he included eternity and other attributes. The same criticism applies to the dogmas he derives from the other fundamental principles. All this will be made clear as we go on. We must now resume our discussion of the fundamental principles, which in our opinion consist of three chief dogmas. We must, however, first explain the principles of conventional laws, and then we will treat of the principles of divine law, with the help of God.

CHAPTER 5

Three modes of life are found among animals. There are certain species that can not live in aggregation, like beasts of prey. Living together would harm them, for if many of them gathered into one place, they would kill and devour one another. There are others again of whom the contrary is true. They can not live except in companies and groups. Association is essential for their continuance, like the human species. By reason of his delicate constitution and equability of temperamental mixture man is susceptible to cold and heat and other extremes. He needs therefore clothing to protect him from heat and cold and properly prepared food suitable for his temperament. These things can not be accomplished except by the aggregation and association of many individuals who assist one another. One sews, one weaves, one makes the needle, and so with the other arts, so that every individual obtains the food and clothing that he needs for existence and support. There are other species of animal beings which occupy an intermediate place, so to speak, between the two extremes. Aggregation is not injurious to their existence as it is to wild beasts and birds of prey, nor is it essential as it is for the human species. But gregarious life is better for them than life in isolation, like many species of herbivorous animals and gentle birds going about in flocks for the sake of company and convenience and for no other reason, seeing that gregarious life is not essential to them as it is to the human species. 

It is because association and aggregation are necessary for the existence and support of the human species that the wise men have said that man is political by nature. They mean by this that it is almost necessary for man by his nature to live in a city (state) with a large group of men that he may be able to obtain what he needs for his life and support. It is clear therefore that the whole group residing in a city, or a district, or a region, or all the human beings in the world should have some order which they follow in their conduct, maintaining justice in general and suppressing wrong, so as to keep men from quarrelling in their transactions and business relations with one another. Such order would include protection against murder, theft, robbery and the like, and in general all those measures which are calculated to maintain the political group and enable the people to live in welfare. This order the wise men call natural law, meaning by natural that it is necessary for man by his nature, whether the order emanates from a wise man or a prophet.

Such a law, however, is not yet sufficient to order the needs of men and to control their social life, unless there is added to this a certain order

or convention which embraces all the social and commercial relations and transactions of the people, like the laws of the Roman emperors, and the customs of countries, and the statutes enacted by the people of a district or a kingdom to maintain conventional justice. Such an order as this is called a convention or a conventional law. Conventional law can not exist unless there is a ruler, or a judge, or a king, placed at the head of the group or city, who compels the people to repress wrong and observe the law so as to secure the welfare of the group. It follows therefore that the establishment of a king or a ruler or a judge is almost imperative for the continuance of the human species, seeing that man is political by nature, as we have explained.

CHAPTER 6

If we reflect upon the formation of the animal species and the constitution of their organs, we find that the Creator has exhibited wonderful care in ordering their affairs and their every need in a remarkable manner. He has provided not merely those things which are required for the maintenance of the species or the individual, but also those things which are not essential for this purpose, but which make their state more perfect, for example the duplication of the sense organs in animals to enable them to order their affairs in a more satisfactory and complete manner, though it is not essential for the maintenance of their existence.

If we find such provision in inferior animals, how much more reasonable is it that He should provide for the noblest species, and order its affairs in accord with its higher character in an adequate manner so as to enable it to attain its perfection. If we look more carefully into this matter we shall find that the divine influence by which those things are ordered which the human species needs for the attainment of the perfection for which it is destined, is more essential than many things which we see in the formation of the lower animals, such things as have a tendency to improve their condition, but are not indispensable for their existence. This divine influence may exist in a particular person only, yet it lends perfection to the entire species.

The meaning of this is as follows: The various species coming under the genera do not form a hierarchy of graded perfection. My meaning is that though it is true that among the various species there is one particular species that is more perfect than all the rest, yet this particular species alone is not the purpose of the whole genus, nor does it guide the genus to the perfection for which it is destined; for every species by itself contains in itself its own particular purpose and realizes its own perfection without reference to any other species. But while this is so in the relation of the species to one another under the genera, it is different within the species. It is true here again that every species contains a number of classes of differing degrees of value. Thus, the class of rulers has a greater measure of human perfection than the class of husbandmen; and the class of the wise men is more perfect than that of the rulers. And similarly within every class some individual or individuals are more perfect than the other individuals of that class, and the superior individual or individuals or class are not the purpose for which the species as a whole exists. Nevertheless the superior individual or individuals or class are the cause of the attainment by the species of the purpose for which it is intended, because they lead the species as a whole to its perfection. I mean that they are like an instrument by means of which the species is enabled to attain its normal end and perfection, though the parts of the species are unequal in degree.

The following analogy will make it clear. Every individual has many different organs, all of them necessary for the existence of the animal being, though one is more perfect than the other, and a third is still more perfect, and so on until we reach the most important organ which is the basis of the animal’s existence. This organ gives perfection to the animal, that is, it is an instrument by which perfect life flows to the animal as a whole. Thus, the heart is the basis of the animal’s existence, and it is an instrument by which life flows to all the organs, and in particular the brain, which in turn transmits sensation and motion to all the other organs. Thus the animal being maintains itself by the instrumentality, direct or indirect, of the heart. The same applies to mankind. All are equally human, yet human perfection reaches some individuals through the instrumentality of others. Just as all organs are necessary for the existence of the individual, and yet some stand higher in the scale than the others, and some receive their vital force through the instrumentality of others, so the class of wise men stand higher than the others, and it is from the wise man that emanates the order which arranges the affairs of mankind so as to enable them to attain human perfection. This order is called a conventional or positive law.

Now since, as we have said, it stands to reason that divine providence should assist mankind to receive this benefit, even as we find that it provides things of less importance in the lower animals, it follows that a divine influence must inspire some individual of the human race who is best fitted for it, that he may be an instrument by which mankind may attain the perfection for which they are destined—either a direct instrument during life, or an indirect after death, by inspiring the wise men who come after him to guide mankind everywhere and always according to the teaching they receive from him, or the ideas they derive from his writings. For the divine power is surely not unable to estimate this benefit so essential to the human race, and to perfect it continually and everywhere, any more than it is unable to award the benefit that is necessary to the lower animals. This guidance which mankind receives from this individual is called divine law. Its relation to other laws and customs is the same as that of the architectonic art to the other arts which are subordinate to it.

CHAPTER 7

The term law (Heb. dat) applies to every rule or custom in vogue among a large group of people. It may be a body of rules embracing a great many commands, as in the expression, “all that knew law (dat) and judgment,” or it may be applied to a single command, as in the expression, “And a decree (dat) was given out in Shushan.” It is applied to a divine law, as in the expression, “At His right hand was a fiery law (dat) unto them,” as well as to a positive human law, like the laws of the Medes and the Persians.

There are three kinds of law, natural, positive or conventional, and divine. Natural law is the same among all peoples, at all times, and in all places. Positive or conventional is a law ordered by a wise man or men to suit the place and the time and the nature of the persons who are to be controlled by it, like the laws and statutes enacted in certain countries among the ancient idolaters, or those who worship God as human reason dictates without any divine revelation. Divine law is one that is ordered by God through a prophet, like Adam or Noah, or like the custom or law which Abraham taught men, instructing them to worship God and circumcising them by the command of God, or one that is ordered by God through a messenger whom He sends and through whom He gives a law, like the Law of Moses.

The purpose of natural law is to repress wrong, to promote right, in order that men may keep away from theft, robbery and murder, that society may be able to exist among men and every one be safe from the wrongdoer and oppressor. The purpose of conventional or positive law is to suppress what is unbecoming and to promote what is becoming, that men may keep away from the indecent according to human opinion. Herein lies its advantage over natural law, for conventional law also controls human conduct and arranges their affairs with a view to the improvement of human society, even as natural law. The purpose of divine law is to guide men to obtain true happiness, which is spiritual happiness and immortality. It shows them the way they must follow to obtain it, teaches them the true good that they may take pains to secure it, shows them also real evil that they may guard against it, and trains them to abandon imaginary happiness so that they may not desire it and not feel its loss. And in addition it also lays down the rules of right that the political community may be ordered in a proper manner, so that the bad order of their social life may not prevent them from attaining true happiness, which is the ultimate end of the human face to which they are destined by God. Divine law is therefore superior to conventional or positive.

CHAPTER 8

Positive or conventional law is inferior to divine law in many ways. The first is the one we mentioned, namely that positive law controls human conduct in order to maintain a good political society, but it can not impart true theoretical knowledge, as we shall show in the sequel, so as to give immortality to the soul and enable it to return to the land of life from which it was taken, because positive law deals only with the becoming and unbecoming. Divine law is adequate for this purpose, because it includes both parts upon which human perfection is based, viz., conduct and theory. Divine law embraces the becoming and unbecoming, and it distinguishes between the true and the false, which constitutes the theoretical part. That is why David describes it as perfect, when he says, “The law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul.” The meaning is that the positive law is not perfect because it does not deal with true opinions, but divine law is perfect because it embraces perfection in morals and perfection in theory, which are the two parts upon which the perfection of the soul is dependent. Therefore it “restores” the soul to God who gave it, and to the place which was its original home.

Another point of inferiority of the conventional law to divine law is that the former can not distinguish between the becoming and the unbecoming in all cases. For a thing may seem becoming or unbecoming to us without being so in reality. For just as it is impossible that a man should be born perfect in all the practical arts, though he may have a natural aptitude for some, so it is impossible that one should be born perfect in all good qualities and free from all defect, though he may have a greater tendency to certain qualities than to others. But that he should have all good qualities is impossible.

It becomes clear now that it is impossible for any author of a human code not to show a natural deficiency in some direction, and regard the becoming as unbecoming and the unbecoming as becoming. His testimony concerning the becoming and the unbecoming will therefore not be true. Thus Plato made a grievous mistake, advocating the unbecoming as though it were becoming. For his idea is that all the women of a given class should be held in common by the men of that class. Thus, the wives of the rulers should be common to all the rulers, the wives of the merchants common to all the merchants, and similarly the wives of the men of a given trade or occupation should be common to the men of that trade or occupation. This is a matter which the Torah forbids; even the Noachian law prohibits it, for Abimelech was told, “Behold, thou shalt die, because of the woman whom thou hast taken; for she is a man’s wife,” and his excuse was that he did not know she had a husband. Aristotle, as is known, criticized Plato’s idea in this matter.

This shows that no human being is able to differentiate correctly between the becoming and the unbecoming, and his opinion on this matter can not therefore be relied upon. Not to speak of theoretical knowledge, where it is clear that we can not rely on a human opinion concerning profound problems, such as the creation or eternity of the world, for the human mind is not adequate to know this with certainty. But “The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple,” for it gives a reliable statement on the problem of the world’s origin, and on other important problems, including morals.

Another point of inferiority in conventional law as compared with divine is that it can not give full satisfaction to those who follow its requirements. The reason is that when a person is in doubt whether the thing he does is sufficient to lead him to the end intended, he can not feel satisfaction in what he does. But a person who follows the conventional law is precisely in this position. He does not know whether that which the law defines as just is really just or only apparently so. Hence he can not find satisfaction. He, however, who lives by the divine law knows that what is defined therein as just is really just. Hence he finds satisfaction in his conduct. This is why “The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart.”

Another point of inferiority in the conventional law as compared with the divine is this. Conventional law can not define the specific acts which are proper in the several virtues. It can only make general statements, in the same way as a definition can be given of the general only, while the particular can not be defined. Similarly conventional law can not define particular acts. Thus Aristotle in his Ethics says repeatedly in connection with the different virtues that a virtuous act consists in doing the proper thing at the proper time and in the proper place, but he does not explain what is the proper time and the proper place. It is clearly a matter which not every one is capable of determining. Aristotle also says in various places in the Ethics that the proper measure must be maintained in every act, but does not tell us what the proper measure is. It would seem therefore that his opinion was that the determination of this matter must be sought elsewhere.

Now there is no doubt that if it were within the power of a human being as such to determine this matter, Aristotle would have discussed it. The reason he leaves this matter to another agency is because human nature is not capable of determining this matter, divine help alone can do it. For this reason Aristotle speaks of the virtues in a general way only, defining temperance as a mean quality between excessive indulgence in eating, drinking, sexual and other pleasures on the one hand, and excessive abstinence on the other.	

In the matter of sexual intercourse in particular, the authors of conventional codes say that one may have sexual union in the proper manner, with the proper person and at the proper time, but they can not tell what is proper in a given case. Divine law specifies that the proper manner is such as will lead to procreation and the perpetuation of the species; the proper person is the particular person who is the man’s wife, forbidding marriage with certain women as being incestuous; the proper time is when the woman is clean, forbidding intercourse during or near the menstrual period.

Similarly divine law prohibits certain foods and permits others. It prohibits the drinking of wine when one is about to perform divine service or say his prayers. It frowns upon excessive abstinence, as is clear from the interpretation which the Rabbis put upon the expression, “And make atonement for him, for that he sinned by reason of the soul.” “By reason of what soul has he sinned?” ask the Rabbis, and they answer, “He sinned because he abstained from wine.”

In the same way the authors of conventional codes praise courage, and say that a person must not risk danger except when death would be preferable to life, but they can not tell when that is the case. Divine law, however, declares that the proper time to risk one’s life is when the name of God will be sanctified thereby, as in the case of Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah, or in order to fight with idolaters so as to destroy them and wipe off their name from under heaven.

Similarly in relation to mercy and cruelty, human law can not determine the proper measure of each to indicate when each is proper and when not. The divine law makes clear that cruelty is proper in one’s dealings with unbelievers, heretics and those who violate the religious law, who should be punished with stripes or death according to the magnitude of the offence, as the law determines; and that mercy is the proper quality to show to believers, and those who are poor and unfortunate; though it should be exercised differently according to circumstances. Thus in some cases it is proper to give by way of gift, in others by way of loan. This variety of method is indicated in the expression, “Well is it with the man that dealeth graciously and lendeth, that ordereth his affairs rightfully.” “Dealeth graciously” has reference to alms which are given to a poor man without expectation of return. “Lendeth” refers to a loan. And the one who does these two things is characterized as one who “ordereth his affairs rightfully,” and one who “shall never be moved; the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance;” because he confers benefits upon all men, by gift or by loan. Human law can not determine properly in particular cases. Hence he who follows its sole guidance walks in darkness and does not know what specific acts he should do, or what way he should follow. But “the commandment of the Lord is pure [like the sun], enlightening the eyes,” and showing those who follow it the way they should go and the thing they should do.

Again, the author of conventional law is a human being, and therefore can not determine the becoming and the unbecoming at all times. For those things which pertain to general opinion may change, and that which is now regarded as becoming may be regarded later as unbecoming and vice versa. Thus we find that in the days of Cain and Abel and the ancient times generally the marriage of a sister was not thought indecent. The same thing was true in the time of Abraham. For Abraham in excusing himself to Abimelech said, “And moreover she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother.” Later the marriage of sisters came to be regarded as indecent. For this reason the aversion from the unbecoming which is acquired through the conventional law can not last forever, because it changes with the times. But the divine law, by reason of the fact that it is determined by divine wisdom, declares the becoming and the unbecoming for all time. And therefore the aversion from the unbecoming that is acquired through the divine law is not liable to change or destruction, for it is free from all error and impurity, and can therefore exist forever like silver which is free from all dross, as the Psalmist says, “The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a crucible on the earth, refined seven times.”

The meaning of the verse is this. Impure silver made alchemically may stand one melting without betraying its impurity, but not two. In some cases it may stand two meltings, or sometimes three and four and five, but finally the impurity is discovered. In some cases the impurity is not discovered by melting it in a furnace, it requires melting in thick earth. But silver which is purified in thick earth and refined many times is free from all impurity, dross and alloy, and can never change afterwards though it be melted many times. This is why he compares the purity of the words of the Lord to pure silver which is refined in a crucible on the ground, that is to say in an open place in thick earth, refined seven times, in which there is not the slightest trace of impurity. Similarly the aversion to the unbecoming which is acquired from the Torah, is “clean, enduring forever,” because it is not liable to the change and destruction to which conventional law is liable.

Again, the conventional law can not recompense every man in accordance with his conduct or mete out punishment properly, so that one receive stripes, another be stoned, another strangled, another pay damages double, and another pay four and five-fold, to make the punishment fit the crime. But the divine law gives every one retribution according to his wrong deed, no more and no less. And though we see apparently the righteous man perishing in his righteousness, and the wicked man living a long life despite his wickedness, this appears so only if we test punishment by the standard of the goods of this world alone. But if we combine the goods of this world which the bad man gets with the evils and punishment which he gets in the next world, and similarly the evils befalling the righteous in this world with the good things he will get in the next world, we shall find that the sum of the two gives a just result though either alone is not just. This is the meaning of the Psalmist when he says, “The ordinances of the Lord are true, they are righteous altogether.” “True” refers to the measure of punishment, “righteous altogether” refers to the sum of punishment in this world plus blessings in the next, and vice versa.

I have seen a commentator explain this verse differently. We find instances in the Torah where the same thing is forbidden and permitted. For example, one may not marry his brother’s widow, yet if the brother died without issue, he may; the fat of cattle is prohibited, of certain wild animals it is permitted; the combination of meat and milk is prohibited, yet the udder is permitted, and so on. And one would think that two contradictories can not both be correct. Hence, according to this commentator’s view, the statement of the Psalmist, that “the ordinances of the Lord are true, they are righteous altogether,” i. e., the permission as well as the prohibition. But the expression “true” is not a fitting one according to this interpretation. For “true” does not apply to the laying down of a law, but rather the term “fitting” or “proper” or “right.” The word true does apply to compensation or retribution, as we find, “Execute true judgment,” judgment indicating retribution, as in the expression, “The Lord hath made Himself known, He hath executed judgment, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands;” or the expression, “only to do justly.” The word “altogether” is also unsatisfactory according to this explanation.

These are the defects of the conventional law, and a great many more might be mentioned. For example, human law can punish only a visible act, but not one that is secret, for man sees only what is visible to the eye, but the divine law lays down punishment for secret acts also, for God sees into the heart. The expression, “The ordinances of the Lord are true, they are righteous altogether,” may also be explained as referring to visible and secret acts. There is no need of expatiating upon this matter. I merely desired to enumerate those six points which are named by the Psalmist in the nineteenth Psalm, and which are contained in the expressions, “The law of the Lord is perfect,” “The testimony of the Lord is sure,” “The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart,” “The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes,” “The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring forever,” “The ordinances of the Lord are true, they are righteous altogether.”

Having explained the six points of superiority of the divine law in comparison with the conventional, the Psalmist adds that the divine law not merely gives theoretical perfection in relation to the true and the false, and moral perfection in relation to the becoming and the unbecoming, as we have said, but it also gives perfection wherever perfection is imagined to exist, namely, also in the categories of the useful and the pleasurable. Hence the Psalmist continues and says by way of rhetorical figure that in the words of the Torah are also found the useful and the agreeable, “More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold.” This refers to the useful. “Sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.” This refers to the agreeable. The meaning is that the reward that is earned through the commandments is great, and is more beneficial than gold and much fine gold, and more agreeable than the honeycomb. This is so, provided one is careful to observe them. Hence he concludes, “Moreover by them is Thy servant warned; in keeping of them there is great reward.”

CHAPTER 9

The principles of conventional law are freedom of choice and purpose. This is clear because why should the founder of a code of laws fix a punishment for those who violate the rules of the code if the violator is not his own master to do what he likes? Similarly how can a king or ruler of a country compel men to do good if a person is not his own master to do good or evil? Even those who deny spiritual reward and punishment admit that man has absolute freedom of choice which is not interfered with, and that by virtue of this freedom he can choose what he desires and can direct his activities to a given purpose. That is why it is said that a code of laws must be drawn up by a wise man or men, to define what is becoming and what is unbecoming, what is wrong and what is right in the relations of the people in the land. And a ruler and a governor must be placed over the people to compel them to maintain right among mankind and to suppress wrong, so as to realize the welfare of political society.

We can see from this that it is a mistake to regard freedom and purpose as principles of divine law. For though the latter presupposes freedom, freedom is not a principle of divine law as divine; it is a principle of divine law by virtue of being a principle of all human acts and conventions and of legal customs by which a political community is kept in order and without which it can not exist. We do not say that the axioms are principles of divine law, though the latter presupposes them, as does any branch of learning and knowledge. In the same way though freedom is an essential dogma in divine law, it is not a principle thereof in so far as it is divine. For this reason Maimonides does not enumerate it among the fundamental principles, though he believes that it is essential to divine law, as we said in chapter three. For only those dogmas are counted as principles, which are fundamental to divine law as divine.

Similarly purpose as a general concept is not a principle of divine law as such, but of all voluntary human acts. It is therefore a principle of conventional law. For as every one who does anything deliberately and voluntarily does it because he intends a certain purpose (whether the purpose be really good or one that seems to the agent good), so the founder of a code of laws intends in his commands and prohibitions that the people should attain a certain object in their acts, viz., their well-being and the perfection of political society. It is clear therefore that purpose is a principle of conventional law also, and not of divine law as divine. Nevertheless inasmuch as the purpose which results from the Torah, namely the future life, is different from the purpose resulting from conventional law and all the other purposes, Maimonides includes purpose among the principles, though he does not include freedom.

If one object that if freedom and purpose are not principles of divine law as such, why does the Torah say, “See I have set before thee this day life … therefore choose life,” an allusion to freedom and purpose which is eternal life? We say again as we said before, that though freedom and purpose are not principles of divine law as divine, the latter necessarily presupposes them, as it presupposes the axioms, though they are not principles of divine law as such. Now no one denies the truth of the axioms, but there are those who deny the reality of freedom, like some astrologers, and there are also those who deny purpose in all acts, like the Epicureans, who believe that the world came by accident, and that no act has any purpose, but that everything happens by chance. Then there are those who admit purpose in human acts, but not so lofty a purpose as spiritual immortality. For this reason it was necessary that the Torah state these principles expressly, as a protest against the opinions mentioned, which are obviously unsound, because they nullify all human acts and human purpose, not to speak of undermining all laws.

CHAPTER 10

The principles of divine law in general are three: existence of God, divine revelation, and reward and punishment. There is no doubt that these three are essential principles of divine law qua divine. For if we assume the removal of one of them the law will fall entirely. This is obvious from the nature of the principles. Thus if we do not believe in the existence of God who commands the law, there is no divine law. And if we do believe in the existence of God, and do not believe in divine revelation, there is no divine law. And if there is no corporeal reward and punishment in this world and spiritual in the next, what need is there of a divine law? If it is in order to maintain a proper order in human affairs and relations so as to have a perfect political society, the conventional law is sufficient for this purpose. It is clear therefore that if there is a divine law, it is for the purpose of leading mankind to such perfection as a human code can not attain to, viz., human perfection which depends upon perfection of the soul, as will appear later. It is clear therefore that spiritual reward and punishment is a fundamental principle of divine law without doubt. And the corporeal reward which the righteous man obtains from God in this world for his observance of the commandments is a proof of the future spiritual reward. It follows, then, that reward and punishment in general is a necessary principle of divine law.

Since these three are general principles of divine law, the Rabbis named them in the Mishnah in Chapter “Helek,” saying that one who denies any one of them is not to be reckoned among the adherents of the law, and therefore has no share in the world to come. Their words are as follows: “All Israel have a share in the world to come, as is said, ‘Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land forever.’ But the following have no share in the world to come: He who says, there is no resurrection of the dead in the Torah.” This refers to the person who denies divine retribution, symbolized in resurrection of the dead, which is a divine act in relation to body and soul, and represents all kinds of retribution. For the Rabbis indicate in their expressions that the term resurrection of the dead is used in a general and a particular sense. It may mean specifically the resurrection of the dead, and it may be used in a broader sense to denote the world of souls, the world to come and the day of judgment. They also make clear that the idea of the Messiah, which is a physical reward, represents all kinds of reward.

Then they specify the one who says there is no divine Torah, which is a second principle. Then they mention the “Epicurean.” According to the testimony of the ancients, Epicurus was a person who believed that the world came by accident, and denied the existence of God as the maker of the world. Those who followed his teaching were called Epicureans. We see therefore that they mention these three principles and say that he who denies any one of them has no share in the world to come because he is excluded from the community of adherents of the law.

It is true that in chapter “Helek”, “Epicurean” is interpreted as one who holds the wise in contempt, but the reason they say so is because no man can know the existence of God by his own ratiocination. He gets this knowledge either by tradition or by demonstration, through the wise men. But he who holds in contempt the wise men who declare the existence of God to all, leaves himself no way by which he can know God, and hence is like one who denies the existence of God, and is therefore called an Epicurean. From the fact that in the Mishnah of chapter “Helek” these are the only ones who are denied a share in the world to come, it is clear that these are the three fundamental principles common to all divine law, which every adherent of divine law is obliged to believe. It is true that in the Gemara they name others who have no share in the world to come. But they are enumerated as being derived from the three chief ones, not as being themselves chief principles.

CHAPTER 11

Since all agree that the law which Moses gave to the children of Israel is divine, it is fitting that we should make it a test for divine laws, and prove them by it. Just as we use one individual of a given species as a type if we desire to know the things which are essential and necessary to the existence and duration of every other member of the species, so it is proper that we should take the law of Moses as a type and assume that those things which are necessary for the existence and duration of the law of Moses are also the things which give existence and duration to divine law.

Now since we find that the law of Moses lays down in the beginning the three principles above mentioned, namely the existence of God, divine revelation and reward and punishment, it follows that they are necessary principles of divine law. The reason they are laid down in the section “Bereshit” is to indicate that they are principles of divine law. Just as in every science the principles are first laid down upon which the science turns and by which are proved all the other propositions that come in that science, so in the section “Bereshit” are recounted three matters, different from each other, every one explaining one of the principles to indicate that they are the fundamental principles of divine law upon which all its contents turn.

Thus, the passage from “In the beginning” to “These are the generations of the heaven,” deals with one subject, and the purpose of this section is to teach the first principle, which is the existence of God, who produces all things by His will, and to refute the opinion of the Epicurean sect who thought that the world came by chance and has no efficient cause. The entire narrative from “In the beginning” to “These are the generations of the heaven” turns upon this principle. For the order of succession of created things of different degrees and the successive appearance of plant, animal and man, point to the existence of a voluntary agent, as will be explained in the second book.

This section also makes clear that the human species is the choicest of all the lower existences, and that man is the main purpose of the creation of the lower world; for man is related to the other classes of being, like plant and animal, as form and entelechy is to matter. As in the arts those that are pre-requisite to a given art are in the position of preparatories and as matter to the art in question, which stands in the relation of form to the former, so all the forms of being preceding the human, are as it were preparatory to it and in the position of matter to the human species, which is to them in the relation of form.

This is the reason why the formation of man came later than that of the lower animals and is ascribed to God Himself, to show that the purpose of the Agent in creating the earlier species of plant and animal was the existence of the human forms. For man alone of the lower existences knows the existence of God. As soon as man made his appearance, creation was complete, and we read, “And the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them;” for the purpose of a thing always comes at the end of the work. Man is thus the end of creation, as the principal art is the end of all the arts which come before it and exist for its sake. This entire portion was written for no other purpose except to teach the first principle, the existence of a Being who made all existing things. This is the reason why throughout this section the name Elohim alone is used (Elohim denoting one who has power to produce all things), to show that the only purpose of the entire narrative in this section is to teach the existence of a Being who made all existing things, which is the first principle.

From “These are the generations of the heaven” to “And the man knew Eve his wife,” is another subject, intended to bring out the second principle, the existence of prophecy and divine revelation. This is why we find that the entire narrative turns about divine law. Thus the first conversation God had with man was, “And the Lord God commanded the man, saying …” Then comes the reason why man was given divine commandments rather than all the lower animals: “And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto the man, to see what he would call them.” The meaning is that seeing that man has an intelligence and knows the definitions of the animals better than any other creature, all the sublunar existences are subject to him and exist for his sake. But the purpose of man is to observe the commandments of his Maker. For this reason he was placed in this world, symbolized by the Garden of Eden, that he may eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the garden, an allusion to the Torah, concerning which it is said. “She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her.” But if he violates the command of his Maker he will be driven out of the garden.

The whole narrative of Adam and Eve and the serpent is a symbolic allusion to man’s fortunes in this world. The serpent, whom our Rabbis call Samael, is the evil inclination which, with the assistance of woman, hinders man from attaining his perfection, and causes him to be driven out of the garden. This is the reason why in this narrative the expression Lord God (Jhvh Elohim) is used. It is meant to indicate that in order for man to attain his perfection it is not sufficient that he believe in the existence of a Creator, which is the conception of an agent who brings into being the things of nature, and is designated by the word God (Elohim). But he must also believe in prophecy and divine revelation. This is a higher conception than that of a creative agency bringing into being the things of nature. In possession of the faith that the commandments come from the “Lord God,” man may eat of the tree of life and live forever. He can not attain to this by virtue of the first knowledge alone, namely that there is a Creator, but he must have in addition the belief in prophecy and the divine origin of the Torah, which commands the doing of those things which God wills, though natural reason may not dictate it. This is something higher than the things of nature.

To prevent the thought that the Creator and the Revealer of the Torah are two different persons, the introduction of the ten commandments reads, “And God spoke all these words, saying,” and the first commandment begins, “I am the Lord, thy God,” to indicate that He who gave the Law, who is represented by the tetragrammaton (Jhvh = Lord), is the same as the one who brought all things into being, and who is called God (Elohim) in the chapter on the Creation. This is also the reason why in Deuteronomy Moses says, “These words the Lord spoke unto all your assembly,” to indicate that though the introductory words of the ten commandments in Exodus say, “And God spoke all these words,” the speaker is the same as is represented by the tetragrammaton. Thus the entire narrative from “These are the generations of the heaven” to “And the man knew Eve his wife,” uses the expression, Lord God, to allude to the principle of prophecy and divine revelation. All the penalties mentioned in this section embrace the whole human race and are not confined to Adam and Eve alone.

From “And the man knew Eve his wife,” until “This is the book of the generations of Adam,” the text treats of another topic, and has an allusion to the third principle, namely individual reward and punishment and divine providence as extending to particular incidents occurring in the world, such as quarrels between man and man like those between Cain and Abel. The penalty mentioned in this chapter is of a different nature from that mentioned in the preceding chapters which deal with Adam and Eve. There Adam was punished because he violated the command of God, which is a lesson to the whole human race. The essential cause of the punishment was the transgression of the divine command, and the purpose of the story is not to tell the particular things that happened to Adam and Eve. Therefore all the punishments mentioned in the story of Adam and Eve embrace the whole human race.

But in the section dealing with Cain and Abel, the topic is individual providence as concerned with the particular circumstances of every individual. Thus we are told that God took account of Cain and punished him because his intention when he brought an offering was not sincere, and because he did violence to Abel, not merely because he violated a divine command. This is intended to show that God takes cognizance of evil doers and punishes them for their evil intentions and for their violent deeds. And though He may prolong His anger as He did in the case of Cain, ultimately He exacts punishment from them as He did from Cain, paying him in his own coin. As Cain killed Abel and cut off his progeny, so was Cain killed and all his descendants were wiped out by the flood, not one remaining alive. And though among Cain’s descendants there were great, wise and intelligent men, inventors of the arts and the sciences, as we read, “the father of the forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron,” “the father of such as dwell in tents and have cattle,” “the father of all such as handle the harp and pipe,” nevertheless God showed them no favor.

This is the purpose of this third section, and for this reason the word Lord alone is used, to show that the individual providence touching all things that happen in the world, by reason of which everyone’s fortune corresponds to his deeds, is not simply a natural result of the existence of a Creator who brings into being the things of nature, nor is it merely a result of the existence of a divine law, but it is due to the fact that God’s perfection and goodness prompt Him to look out for the lowly and the weak, and to save them from their oppressors. The prophet alludes to this when he says, “I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit.” The meaning is that because of His goodness and exalted station it is becoming in Him to look out for the lowly so as to show them His great power “and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.”

The story of Cain and Abel also makes clear that God’s providence is pervaded by the quality of mercy, and that He opens to the wicked the ways of repentance, as He opened them to Cain, when He said, “If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted up?” This is more than strict justice. For this reason the name God is not used in this story at all.

Having explained the three dogmas, which are fundamental principles of divine law, he now begins the narrative over again and gives a list of the sequence of the generations as before, beginning his account with the words, “This is the book of the generations of Adam.” The meaning is that here is the beginning of the book, all that has come before being the introduction stating the principles upon which the book is based, but not forming part of the book itself.

Every author in the beginning of his book gives its contents, so here the words just mentioned tell us that the book of Genesis deals with the generations of Adam and the descent of mankind from him. These words indicate that all that comes before is not part of the book, but expresses the principles of the book, in the same way as the principles of a science are laid down in the beginning of the science. Thus the verse, “This is the book of the generations of Adam,” is the beginning of the Torah, and it tells us that the book of Genesis is the account of the generations of Adam. The author continues, “In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made He him; male and female created He them …” Now it would have been sufficient if he had said, “In the day that God created man, male and female created He them.” The reason he adds, “in the likeness of God made He him,” is in order to allude to an important matter which is essential for the existence of the Torah. The point is that individual reward and punishment, which we said is one of the principles of the Torah, can be attained by man by reason of his rational soul which is in the image of God. For it is by virtue of the rational soul that man attains to a permanent life as an individual and is thought worthy of reward and punishment as an individual, but not by virtue of the permanence he enjoys as a member of the species, an attribute which he has in common with the other animals. Thus the verse in question, which is the beginning of the Torah, makes reference to the two kinds of continuity which man has. The expression, “in the likeness of God made He him,” alludes to the fact that man has an individual continuity like the celestial beings, because he is “in the likeness of Elohim,” i. e. the angels, who have individual continuity. The expression, “male and female created He them,” alludes to the continuity man enjoys in the species, which he shares with the lower animals.

There is an allusion to this idea in Bereshit Rabbah. Commenting on the verse, “Let us make man in our image,” the Rabbis say, “With whom did He consult? says Rabbi Joshua son of Levi, He consulted with the domains of heaven and earth.” The meaning is this. Up to the sixth day, before man was created, there were two different kinds of created things in the world, the celestial things, which have permanent existence as individuals, and the sublunar things, which enjoy permanent existence in the species, but not as individuals. Then God consulted with the celestials and the sublunars and said, “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness,” i. e., a being in whom both powers are combined, individual and specific permanence, individual permanence, like the celestials, due to his rational power, and specific permanence, like the sublunars, by virtue of his material side. This will explain why the singular is used in the expression, “And God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He him,” while in the expression, “male and female created He them,” the pronoun is in the plural. The former refers to his permanence as an individual, which he enjoys over and above the other animals. The latter refers to the specific permanence, which is due to the union of male and female.

But there is a difficulty here. We find in Bereshit Rabbah the following story. When God dictated to Moses the verse, “Let us make man,” Moses objected and said, “Why should you give the heretics an occasion for error?” And God said, “Write as I dictate, and if any one desires to err, let him do so.” Now it is clear that a thing which is good ought to exist; a thing which is bad ought not to exist; while a thing which is composed of good and evil, should or should not exist according as the good or the evil predominates. Now from the expression attributed to God, “Write as I tell you, and if any one desires to err, let him do so,” it seems like a case of submitting to a small loss for the sake of a great benefit arising from the use of the expression “let us make.” But what can possibly be the great benefit resulting from the plural, “let us make”? If we say it is the moral lesson that the great should not disdain the advice of the small, as God consulted with the denizens of heaven and earth, His own creatures, though He had no need to do so, the benefit is not so great as to counterbalance the evil arising from the occasion for error which the expression furnishes to heretics. And even if we say that the benefit is the idea which we mentioned in the name of Rabbi Joshua son of Levi, viz., the knowledge that man has a rational faculty like the celestials and a material power like the lower existences, and that the rational faculty gives man individual permanence, namely immortality for the soul of the individual person, which doctrine is essential to the Torah, as we have seen, we must say in reply to this that although the teaching of such doctrine is indeed of great benefit, counterbalancing the harm arising from the possibility of error by heretics, the question still remains, what necessity was there for writing “let us make,” with the pronoun in the plural, the text might have read, “And God said to the celestials and the terrestrials, I will make a man in your image?” In this way the aforementioned benefits would be realized and there would be no room for heretical error.

My own opinion in the matter is, that though the benefits aforementioned would be realized if the text read “I will make man,” the actual reading is “let us make,” in order to make allusion to another point more profound, and at the same time essential. The existence of the celestials which have individual continuity indicates that they are caused by a being who has the ability and the power to endow individual things with permanent existence, as in the case of the celestial beings. The existence of the terrestrial beings shows that they are caused by a being who has power to perpetuate species but not individuals. This might give rise to the erroneous opinion that there are two creative Powers, as Elisha, surnamed Aher thought. Hence the text reads, “Let us make man in our image,” as if the two Powers who gave existence to the two different kinds of beings, the celestial and the terrestrial, said, “let us make man,” meaning that they agreed to make a single creature, man, in which shall be united the two powers, the general power that gives specific permanence and the particular power that bestows individual permanence. This single being would from his combined nature make it clear to all that all existences, celestial as well as terrestrial, are the product of one being who possesses all powers. In this way we explain the expression, “And God said, let us make man.” God (Elohim), who has all powers, general and particular, united the two in agreement, and made man in whom are combined the two qualities, general and particular permanence, general, due to matter; particular, due to soul. This points to a single Being in whom all the powers are united absolutely, and shows that He who made the things which are permanent as individuals and the things which are permanent as species, is the same one.

This shows too that God’s knowledge embraces particular things as well as general. This latter idea is also indicated in other ways. Thus when God reveals Himself to the righteous men in the Bible, He mentions their names twice, Abraham, Abraham! Jacob, Jacob! Moses, Moses! Samuel, Samuel! to indicate that He knows the individual in his individuality. Similarly the verse in Genesis, “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made He man,” shows that God knows man as an individual. For if God’s knowledge extended only to the species, as His providence in respect to the other animals extends only to the conservation of the species, what reason is it for punishing a murderer with death because “in the image of God made He man,” since in killing one individual he has not destroyed the species? The Bible therefore says that because man was made in the image of God, he has permanence as an individual, and he who kills him should be punished. For God knows him as an individual by reason of the rational faculty which he possesses like the celestial beings, who also have individual permanence and are known by God individually by reason of their rational faculty. This is a reason, too, why man deserves individual reward and punishment, as is promised in the Torah.

Now both of these things are essential to the existence of the Torah. The one has reference to God, that there are not two gods as the heretics used to say, that the God of the heaven is not the same as the God of the earth. This is the belief in the unity of God which Abraham spread abroad in the world, as we find, “And I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the earth.” The second has reference to man, that God’s knowledge of generals and particulars was united in the creation of man. And therefore man deserves reward and punishment, because God knows him as an individual, since he is in the image of God. This, too, Abraham published abroad, as we find him saying, “The Lord, the God of heaven, who took me from my father’s house, and from the land of my nativity.” The meaning is that though He is the God of heaven, He nevertheless knew me as an individual, spoke to me and made me a promise. This is the reason for the expression, “Let us make man.” And the statement of the Rabbis is now clear, that God said to Moses, “Write as I tell you, and if anyone chooses to make a mistake, let him do so.” The meaning is, that the benefit arising from this expression is great and essential to the Torah, pointing out as it does that He who made the individuals of the celestial world and has a knowledge of them is the same one who made the terrestrial species, and He knows them too. There are not two Powers, nor two different knowledges. With one knowledge He knows all.

This is what Rabbi Ammi meant in the passage in Bereshit Rabbah. In reference to the expression, “Let us make man,” the question is asked: “With whom did He consult?” Said R. Ammi: “He consulted with His knowledge.” The meaning is that He did not consult any one else, but His own general and individual knowledge, for the purpose of making a single being whose nature should clearly indicate that the divine knowledge is one. This will be accomplished by uniting in the new creature the general and the particular knowledge, in other words, by making him a human being. Being in the image of God like the celestial beings, he shows clearly that God knows him individually. And being male and female, he shows that God looks out for him as a species, also. This shows that God is absolutely one, and that man deserves individual reward and punishment, because he is in the image of God. This is why in this verse, which is the beginning of the Torah, as we said before, we read, “In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made He him.”

CHAPTER 12

Creation ex nihilo is a dogma which every one who professes a divine law is obliged to believe, in the same way as he who professes the Law of Moses is obliged to believe that the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up Korah and his congregation, because they rebelled against Moses. But it is not one of the fundamental principles of divine law, whose existence can not be conceived without it. The story of creation at the beginning of the Torah is not intended to teach that creation ex nihilo is a fundamental principle of the Torah, as many authorities have thought. It is true that if one believes in the eternity of the world after the manner of Aristotle, it follows that God can not lengthen the wing of a fly, nor create an ant having only four legs. Moreover, he who entertains such belief must deny all the miracles of the Torah. For he can not believe that God has the power to change a rod into a serpent momentarily, or water into blood, or dust into vermin. More than that, he would have to deny the existence of Moses and the Messiah, because an individual whose existence must be preceded by the existence of an infinite number of individuals can never exist, for the infinite can never be completed. Thus the whole Torah falls to the ground. But one may believe that there is a primary eternal matter, from which the world was created when and as God willed. Such an opinion as this does not contradict the miracles and wonders of the Torah. For all those miracles, which consist in a change of natural law and custom, are instances of something coming from something and not something from nothing, for example the rod turning into a serpent, or water, though a simple substance, changing instantaneously into blood. A simple substance can not change into blood. This is the reason why water is not nourishing to an animal. Yet God through Moses gave to one portion of the water the form of fire, to another portion the form of air, to a third the form of earth. Then these portions were mixed together, so that they combined and were transubstantiated instantaneously into blood. The change was not merely apparent, for if it had been only in appearance and not in substance, the fish would not have died, nor the river become foul. Similarly all the transubstantiatory miracles of the Torah and the Prophets are instances of something coming from something and not of something coming from nothing. Much more is this true of those miracles in which there is no transubstantiation but merely a change in quality or accident, like the instance of Moses’ hand turning leprous and as white as snow.

It follows therefore that though a person who believes in the eternity of the world as Aristotle conceives the doctrine, is a denier of the Torah and its miracles, one who conceives the doctrine of eternity in the manner mentioned before, does not deny the Torah or its miracles, for belief in the Torah and the miracles does not imply belief in creation ex nihilo. This is why we said in the preceding chapter that the purpose of the first section of Genesis is merely to teach the existence of the Maker, which is the first essential principle of the existence of a divine law, without which it can not be conceived. As to creation ex nihilo, it is indeed a dogma which every one professing the Torah is obliged to believe, as he is obliged to believe that Moses split the rock so that the water flowed, that he caused the quails to fly and the manna to descend, but it is not one of the fundamental principles of divine law. For this reason Maimonides did not include it among the fundamental dogmas of the Torah. This becomes even more significant if we observe that in “Madda‘,” in the third chapter of the treatise On Repentance, he enumerates five classes of heretics, one of them being the person who denies that God alone is the first and the Creator of all. For it is clear that one who believes in a primary eternal matter, by implication denies that God alone is the first, for primary matter is coeval with God according to this notion. We see then that though Maimonides calls that one a heretic who does not believe in creation ex nihilo, yet he does not include this doctrine among the fundamental principles, because it is not a principle without which divine law can not be conceived. It follows therefore that the purpose of beginning the Torah with the creation story is to teach the existence of the Maker, which is the first fundamental and essential principle of divine law, as we said before.

CHAPTER 13

Not every law which maintains the three principles mentioned, viz., existence of God, reward and punishment, and divine revelation, which are the general principles of divine law, as we have seen, is divine in the full sense of the word, so that a believer in it can be called a believer in divine law without qualification and has a share in the world to come. The truth of the matter is that these three are general principles of all divine law in the sense that one who denies any one of them is excluded from the class of those who profess divine law, and has no share in the world to come, because he does not believe properly in divine law. But one may acknowledge these principles and yet have no share in the world to come. He must in addition believe in the derivative principles which branch out of them. If he denies any of the subordinate principles, it is tantamount to a denial of the fundamental principle from which the former is derived.

Thus one who believes in the first principle, the existence of God, must also believe that God is one and incorporeal in any sense, and other such corollaries as follow from or are dependent upon the first principle. Similarly one who believes in divine revelation, which is the second principle, must believe in the reality of prophecy, and in the genuineness of the divine representative’s mission. Likewise one who believes in the third principle, reward and punishment, must believe in God’s knowledge and providence, and in retribution, spiritual and corporeal. To deny any of the secondary principles which are derived from the fundamental principles or based upon them, is tantamount to a denial of the fundamental principle itself.

Thus one who denies the reality of prophecy, which is a corollary of the principle of revelation, or the genuineness of the alleged divine messenger through whom the law is given, is virtually denying the principle of revelation. Similarly one who believes that God is body is virtually denying the principle of the existence of God. For belief in the existence of God means the belief that there is a necessarily existent Being, who is the cause of all existing things, all of which receive influence from Him and are in need of Him, while He is in need of nothing outside of Himself. Now if the necessarily existing Being were corporeal, He would stand in need of another, for all body is composite, as Maimonides explains in the twenty-second proposition, and all that is composite has need of another, the composer and agent, who brings about the combination of its parts. The necessarily existing Being would therefore exist not through Himself, but through another, and would not be self-sufficient, but would stand in need of another. That other would then be greater than He and the author of the latter’s being. The necessarily existing Being would then exist not through Himself but through another. But a being whose existence depends upon another is a possible and not a necessary existent. It follows therefore that one who says that God is body or a corporeal power, virtually denies the principle of the existence of God, as will be explained completely in the Second Book.

Similarly one who denies providence or God’s knowledge, or who says that all things are the result of fate, called in Arabic al kada and al kadr, virtually denies the principle of reward and punishment, or else attributes to God wrong and injustice (God forbid!), since He punishes a sinner without fault, who could not do other than what he did. The same applies to all the secondary dogmas derived from the fundamental principles. To deny any one of them is to deny the principle itself. This is very important, for it is necessary in this way to examine carefully all the secondary dogmas which follow from the fundamental principles, and to guard against error. Only when one believes in these absolutely can he be called a believer in the three principles which we mentioned.

CHAPTER 14

We will now explain the method of deriving the secondary principles from these three fundamental principles, in order that we may be able to tell who is a denier and who is a believer. We will observe in the first place that none of the commandments of the Torah should be counted as a principle, whether fundamental or derivative. A person who violates a commandment of the Torah is called a transgressor, and is liable to the penalty prescribed in the Torah for that commandment. But he is not excluded from those who profess the Torah, and is not regarded as a denier of the Torah who has no share in the world to come; unless his violation of the commandment is due to the fact that he is in doubt whether it is a command of God, given to Moses on Sinai, or not. If this is his attitude he falls into the class of those who deny the divine origin of the Torah, as the Rabbis of the Talmud explain in chapter “Helek.” All the commandments of the Torah are alike in this respect. The command to send away the mother bird is as important as any other. If we should count specific commandments as dogmas by reason of the last consideration, we should have as many principles as there are commandments. And even if we restrict the term principle to those commandments which are based upon the three fundamental principles mentioned above, it would still follow that all those commandments which are found in the treatises on Idolatry and on the Foundation of the Torah in Maimonides’ code are principles, for they are based upon the first principle, the existence of God.

The truth of the matter is that none of the specific commandments of the Torah should be regarded as principles, fundamental or derived. It follows from this that the duty to worship God alone, which is in Maimonides’ list, should not be counted as a principle, primary or secondary, for it is a specific command: “Thou shalt have no other gods before Me. Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, nor any manner of likeness … thou shalt not bow down unto them, nor serve them; …” Hence a person who violates it, is not a denier of the Torah or of its principles, though he be guilty of a grave sin. The Rabbis, it is true, say that he who acknowledges belief in an idol is like one who denies the whole Torah. But the expression is significant—“like one who denies,” they say, not that he actually denies. Ahab is a good example. He was a worshipper of idols and yet did not deny the principles; for he believed Elijah and acknowledged that the rain was withheld because of Elijah’s oath. For he said to Elijah, “Is it thou, thou troubler of Israel?” The explanation of his error in worshipping idols is either that he introduced a mediator between God and himself, or that he thought that God looked out only for the good and loyal like Elijah and the other righteous men, whereas the rest of mankind, he thought, were subject to the accidental influence of the heavenly bodies. Hence he made statues and worshipped idols in order by means thereof to receive the influence of the heavenly bodies.

There is no doubt that the punishment of one who denies a fundamental or derivative principle is not the same as that of one who violates one of the commandments of the Torah. Thus as long as the Cutheans were ignorant of the Torah and no doubt denied it, the lions devoured them. But as soon as they were taught the Torah, though they continued to worship idols, as the Bible testifies, the lions ceased to harm them. The same holds true of the punishments of the future world, for God uses scales and a balance of justice and inflicts punishment upon every one according to the magnitude of his disobedience. The punishments of this world may be used as proof of the mode of the punishments in the next world, as will be explained later. This may be shown, too, from the fact that our Rabbis count among those who have no share in the world to come, tale bearers, those who separate themselves from the community, and one who humiliates his neighbor in public, even as they count heretics, Epicureans and unbelievers. Now there is no doubt that the punishment of one who humiliates his neighbor is not the same as that of one who denies the Torah. In the same way it follows that the punishment of one who violates a commandment is not the same as that of one who denies a principle. It is clear therefore that none of the specific commandments of the Torah should be reckoned as principles, fundamental or derived.

For the same reason tradition is not regarded as a principle under the head of revelation. By tradition I mean the duty to follow what has been handed down by our ancestors and religious authorities. Such a duty is essential to divine law, but it is a specific commandment. The same reason would lead us to say that the doctrine of the immutability of the Torah should not be reckoned as a principle if it is a specific command, as Maimonides thinks. In reality, however, it is not a command, but an opinion which is implied in the belief of the genuineness of the alleged divine messenger, as will be made clear in Book Three.

The reason the unity of God is regarded as a principle, though it is a specific command, is because the belief in unity involves two things—the belief that there is only one God and there is no second who is equal or similar to Him, and the belief that the necessarily existing Being, though He is one and without any plurality or composition whatsoever, is nevertheless our God, i. e., He is the cause of the plurality of existing things. The first conception of unity is a principle derived from the existence of God; the second is a specific command given to us, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.”

According to Maimonides, who includes specific commandments among his principles, counting in his list the first of the ten commandments, “I am the Lord thy God,” which he interprets as a command to believe that there is a necessarily existent Being, it is strange that the other principles are not mentioned in the ten commandments. But according to our view there is no difficulty here. For our idea is that no specific command is a principle. And the first commandment, “I am the Lord, thy God,” being a specific command, is not a principle. The meaning of it is that we should believe that the same God who took us out of Egypt, from the house of bondage, gave us the Torah on Mount Sinai. Or the first commandment may be introductory to what comes after: “Thou shalt have no other gods befor Me.” And the meaning would be: Since I cared for you and took you out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, you shall have no other gods before Me, i. e., you should not abandon My worship for the worship of another.

Many authorities are of the opinion that the words “I am the Lord, thy God, etc,” are not part of the ten commandments, but introductory to the two commandments which follow: “Thou shalt have no other gods, etc,” and-“Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image.” The verse, “Thou shalt not bow down unto them nor serve them,” is merely the explanation of these two. Their idea is that the reason the verse, “I am the Lord, thy God …” is placed at the head of the ten commandments is to encourage believers by indicating that divine providence inclines to the side of mercy, even though the recipient is not worthy. Thus God took care of Israel when they were in Egypt, worshipping idols, and took them out of the house of bondage for the merits of their fathers. This is the meaning of the concluding words, “Showing mercy unto the thousandth generation of them that love Me and keep My commandments.” We may take it then as proved that a specific command is not reckoned as a principle.

CHAPTER 15

The secondary principles, based upon the three primary which we have mentioned, and derived from them, are eight. From the first principle, existence of God, are derived four secondary principles, including all those things implied in the existence of God, who is a necessary existent. They are as follows: Unity, as we explained it above; incorporeality—God is neither a body nor a corporeal power; independence of time; and freedom from defects.

It is clear from the nature of every one of these four principles that they follow essentially from the principle of the existence of God. For if God is not one, without any composition, He is not a necessary existent. Similarly if He is a body or a corporeal power. Likewise if He is dependent upon time, existing in one time and not in another, time is either prior to Him or posterior, as we shall see later, and He is neither eternal nor perpetual. This is our reason for counting independence of time as a principle, rather than eternity, as Maimonides does, for independence of time includes both eternity and perpetuity. Maimonides, who counts eternity as a separate principle, should have counted perpetuity also as a separate principle.

God’s freedom from defects we lay down as a principle in order to show that the necessary existent is not liable to sleep or forgetfulness or fatigue, and the like. Also to indicate that all those attributes which God must have, like power, will and others, without which He would be defective, are ascribed to Him in a manner that will not result in a defect in His nature. Precisely in what way these attributes and others are to be ascribed to God, will be made clear in the Second Book.

The dogmas based upon the second principle, divine revelation, are three: God’s knowledge, prophecy, and the genuineness of the divine messenger. And it is clear from the nature of these three that they necessarily follow from revelation. For if God does not know terrestrial existences, prophecy can not come from Him, nor a revealed Torah. And even assuming that God does know terrestrial existences, there will be no divine Torah unless there is prophecy and information communicated by God to man. And even if there is such a thing as prophecy by which man is informed of the future and given specific commandments to be followed by him and his descendants, like the command of circumcision given to Abraham, men would not have to obey the alleged prophet unless it is proven that he is a divine messenger sent to communicate to the people the commands of God. For this reason belief in the genuineness of the messenger is a principle common to all divine laws. For if we are convinced that the messenger is genuine, whether he be a man of the greatest ability or not of the greatest, it is possible that a general and adequate code should be given through him by God, to lead mankind to eternal happiness. This is the meaning of divine revelation.

This is the reason why we did not include the superiority of Moses as a prophet among the principles, primary or secondary, as Maimonides did. For nothing should be regarded as a fundamental principle unless a divine law can not be conceived without it, nor as a secondary principle, unless it follows necessarily from a fundamental principle. But the superiority of Moses as a prophet does not necessarily follow from a belief in the genuine character of the messenger, though it may be compared to a branch issuing from it. If we are to count it at all, it would be as a special principle of the law of Moses. But inasmuch as a conviction of the genuine character of the particular messenger of a given religion is a special dogma of the religion in question; and the intensity of belief in the given religion varies with the intensity of conviction in the genuine character of the messenger, we did not find it necessary to count the superiority of Moses as a special principle of the law of Moses. For as long as the genuineness of his mission has been verified, it is not necessary to verify the rank he holds among prophets. The question of the manner in which the authenticity of the mission must be verified beyond all doubt, will be discussed later on. The question why we regard divine revelation as a fundamental principle, and prophecy as a derivative principle following from the former, will be explained in the Third Book.

As to the third principle, reward and punishment, the secondary principle which is prior and essential to it is providence. For although we have already assumed God’s knowledge, viz., that He knows the deeds of men and orders their affairs by means of a divine law so that their social life may be permanent and well conditioned, it might still be said that by reason of man’s inferiority and little esteem in the eyes of God, the individual is ignored and not recompensed for his specific conduct in relation to his Maker, and that he is taken account of merely as a part of the whole, and not as an individual. For this reason we regard providence as a principle that is prior to reward and punishment, in order to call attention to the fact that divine providence extends to every individual, and recompenses him for his individual relations to God, as we are told that God “did not have respect unto Cain and his offering,” and more especially for his dealings with his fellowmen, as the Prophet says, “Great in counsel, and mighty in work; whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.”

Retribution is of two kinds, corporeal and spiritual; the principle therefore includes both. We did not think it proper to name corporeal and spiritual retribution as two separate principles, for the reason that some of our Rabbis say that the reward given for obedience to God’s commandments is not in this world. Corporeal retribution, therefore, should not be counted as a separate principle, according to my opinion. Hence I laid down reward and punishment as one principle, including both kinds. It will represent spiritual recompense to those who think that the main retribution is spiritual and not corporeal; and to those who believe in both kinds, it will stand for both together.

Thus the number of primary and secondary principles of divine law in general, according to this, are eleven: existence of God, and the four secondary principles derived from it, viz., unity, incorporeality, independence of time, freedom from defects. Then divine revelation and the three secondary principles depending upon it, viz., God’s knowledge, prophecy, and the authenticity of the prophet’s mission. Finally, reward and punishment, and the secondary principle based upon it, viz., providence. If we combine divine knowledge and providence into one, as Maimonides does, the number will be ten.

It is clear that they should not all be called fundamental principles, because they are not equally essential to divine law. Thus if one were a dualist or believed in the corporeality of God or that God is subject to time, this would not overthrow the divine law entirely; except for the fact that they are based upon the principle of the existence of God, and one who denies any one of them is virtually denying the fundamental principle, since he does not believe it in the proper manner. For this reason we did not treat them all alike as fundamental principles, as Maimonides does.

The superiority of Moses and the immutability of the law we regard as neither fundamental nor derivative principles, because they are not essential to divine law. They are merely like branches issuing from the belief in the authenticity of the prophet’s mission. If they are principles at all, primary or secondary, they are peculiar to the law of Moses, and not common to all divine law. Thus, belief in the Messiah and in the resurrection of the dead are dogmas peculiar to Christianity which can not be conceived without them. But the law of Moses can be conceived as existing without the belief in the superiority of Moses and the immutability of the law. It is better to say therefore that they are like branches issuing from the belief in the authenticity of the lawgiver’s mission, and not independent principles. Similarly, resurrection and the Messiah are like branches issuing from the dogma of reward and punishment, and not independent principles, primary or secondary, common to all divine law or peculiar to the law of Moses. Nor do we count the duty of worshipping God alone as a principle, because it is a specific command, and must not be counted as a principle, primary or secondary, as we have explained in the preceding chapter. On the other hand we count God’s knowledge and providence as two separate dogmas, because they are different, as Maimonides explains in the Guide, and as all later authorities agree, though Maimonides himself combines them into one.

We do not include freedom of choice and general purpose among principles fundamental or derived, though they are essentia to divine law, which can not be conceived without them, because they are not essential to divine law qua divine, as was said before. But the special purpose of divine law, namely spiritual reward and punishment, we do count among fundamental principles, because it is essential to divine law. Freedom of choice, however, is not essential to divine law qua divine, and therefore is not counted among principles, whether fundamental or derived. Nevertheless, inasmuch as it is essential to divine law, and is presupposed by it, we will explain it in the Fourth Book. So much concerning the number of dogmas, fundamental and derivative. Blessed be the One who gives aid and determines. Amen, Amen.

CHAPTER 16

Some ancient thinkers have denied the possibility of knowledge. It is impossible, they say, to know a thing as it really is. And this for two reasons. First, because all knowledge comes from antecedent knowledge. But this antecedent knowledge in turn was an object of investigation and came from antecedent knowledge, and the same thing applies to the latter, and so the thing goes on ad infinitum. But where there is an infinite regress, no knowledge can comprehend it. The second reason is this. Anything that is known through syllogistic demonstration was either known before it was proved or not. If it was known before, it needs no proof. If it was not known before, how could one know that it might be ascertained by proof? For these two reasons they said that there is no such thing as knowledge, and that one can never acquire knowledge which he does not possess.

The true philosophers, however, refuted their arguments. The first argument, they say, does not hold. There is no infinite regress, as the skeptics think, for not all knowledge comes from antecedent knowledge which in turn is the result of investigation. Knowledge may come from antecedent knowledge which is not in turn acquired by investigation or deduction. It may come from knowledge which a person has inherent in his reason. Certain knowledge man has by his rational nature, and it is not derived from other knowledge. This knowledge which is rooted in reason is called “first principles.” They are “first,” because they are not derived from other knowledge, but are innate. These principles are the bases of science, and from them is knowledge derived.

The second argument they answer as follows: It is not true that what is not known can never be known. It may be ascertained by syllogistic proof. Before the syllogism is constructed, the thing is known potentially in the premises. The conclusion of the syllogism makes the knowledge actual. And reason itself declares that knowledge arrived at in this way is certain and absolute. These two ways of acquiring and perfecting knowledge are innate in human reason, and one does not know how he comes to have them.

That this is a true conception of knowledge is proven also from Job. Job complains of God’s ways and finds fault with God for the imperfect order of nature, as he thinks. “Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul?” he exclaims. God answers Job by saying, How dare you criticize God’s work and God’s knowledge as if you knew more than He? And you have the hardihood to say that the order of nature would be better arranged on another plan! You do not even know the causes of those natural things which are in your own body, and you venture to speak about things higher up! You presume to pass judgment on God’s knowledge and conduct, when you do not even know how you came by that power which enables you to acquire your own knowledge! This is the meaning of the words used by God in His first answer: “Who laid down the security of wisdom? Or who hath given understanding to the mind?” I think that the bet of the word battuhot is part of the root, and not a prefix, as in the expression, “And they that provoke God are secure (battuhot).” The word sekvi (mind) is derived from the same root as ve’istakke, which is the Aramaic translation of the Hebrew vayyashkef, “he looked,” and signifies the human mind. So the best commentators understand the word. The first principles or axioms are called battuhot hokmah, securities of wisdom, because they are the foundations of science, giving man the assurance of acquiring knowledge which can not be gotten without them. Sekvi denotes the human intellect, the inventor of the syllogism, by which the conclusion is derived from the premises, the faculty which in Hebrew is called binah (understanding), and which the Rabbis explain as the power of inferring one thing from another.

The meaning of the passage in Job is that God upbraided Job by pointing out to him that he does not even know how he came by the first principles, which are the security of knowledge, i. e., man acquires knowledge through them, but he does not know how they came to him and whence, except that he has them through the will of God, as David said, “Behold, Thou desirest the truth of battuhot.” This, then, is the meaning of the words in Job, “Who laid down the security (battuhot) of truth?” i. e., who put them originally in man, or what natural law demands it that they should exist in man rather than in all the other animals? And He says further in His criticism that assuming the existence of the first pinciples in man, he does not know who gave the human mind intelligence to understand that the conclusion which follows from the premises constitutes knowledge. This, too, exists in man through the will of God. This is what David meant when he said, in allusion to the two kinds of knowledge, “Behold thou desirest the truth of battuhot; make me, therefore, to know wisdom of the hidden.” The words, “thou desirest … battuhot,” refer to the first principles, which exist in man through the will of God. The words, “Make me … to know wisdom of the hidden,” refer to the fact that the knowledge which is acquired concerning a thing formerly hidden is also due to the will of God. Likewise King Solomon said, “For the Lord giveth wisdom, Out of His mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.” The meaning is that wisdom (science) comes from God because out of His mouth, i. e., through His will, come knowledge, i. e., the first principles, and understanding, i. e., the ability to draw a conclusion from premises. These two powers exist in man, but we know not how they come to be there and whence they come. But we know that they are in man by divine grace, in order that by means of them man may have knowledge and understanding.

This is the meaning also of the benediction instituted by the Rabbis, beginning, “Thou in Thy graciousness givest man knowledge, and teachest intelligent man understanding.” The first principles are called “knowledge” simply. Hence it says, “Thou in Thy graciousness givest man (Heb. adam) knowledge,” meaning that this knowledge is found equally in all mankind, requiring no learning, but exists by divine grace. The sequel, “And teachest intelligent man (enosh) understanding,” refers to the ability to draw a conclusion from premises, this being the meaning of the term “understanding.” This ability, he intimates, is based upon natural learning; and it is ascribed to intelligent man (enosh), to indicate that not all mankind (adam) make use of understanding, but enosh alone. The benediction concludes with the words, “Thou who grantest knowledge,” alluding to the kindness of God which includes the entire species, i. e., the gift of the first principles, and not to the special kindness, which is not shared by all. But it is proper that we should pray for more even than knowledge and understanding, we should pray also for intelligence (haskel). This latter refers to divine things, as we read, “That he understandeth (haskel) and knoweth Me.” That part of the above benediction, therefore, which contains words of prayer includes all the three, “And grant unto us graciously from Thee, knowledge, understanding and intelligence.” We pray that the first principles may avail us so that through them we may acquire understanding and intelligence. So also the Rabbis say, “If there is no knowledge, there is no understanding,” i. e., if not for the first principles, man would not be able to draw conclusions from premises. “And if there is no understanding there is no knowledge.” The meaning is, if man is not to make use of his understanding to infer one thing from another so as to acquire knowledge, the first principles (knowledge) are given him in vain.

This is also the meaning of Solomon when he says, “For wisdom shall enter into thy heart, and knowledge shall be pleasant unto thy soul; discretion shall watch over thee … to deliver thee from the way of evil.” The meaning is, when wisdom (science), based upon true premises, shall enter into thy heart, and knowledge shall be pleasant unto thy soul, i. e., if you make proper use of the first principles, then shall discretion watch over thee, “discernment shall guard thee,” that thou mayest not be misled by erroneous ideas. This is expressed in the sequel, “To deliver thee from the way of evil, from the men that speak froward things; who leave the paths of uprightness …” The meaning is that understanding if properly used, and based upon true premises, will guide man in the path of uprightness, and he will not stumble.

CHAPTER 17

Every science makes use of principles and postulates which are not self-evident, but are assumed as true and borrowed from another science in which they are proved. Upon these principles are built all the proofs of the science in question. Thus the geometrician borrows the conception of line and point from the physicist. The arithmetician borrows the conception of unity and the physicist the conception of substance and accident from the first philosophy. The first philosophy in turn borrows from the physicist the conception of the first mover. So every theoretical science necessarily assumes at the beginning certain principles and postulates which are proved in another science, as is explained in the Posterior Analytics. Upon these principles or upon the first principles (axioms) are built all the proofs occurring in that science.

This being so, it is proper to inquire where divine law takes its principles. An inquiry like this is more appropriate in relation to divine law than to any conventional law. For the principles of conventional law, viz., freedom and purpose, as we said above, are explained by the Philosopher in his Politics. But where does divine law take its principles? For though the existence of God is proved by the Philosopher on the basis of premises ultimately derived from first principles (axioms), the Philosopher does not believe in prophecy and providence, which are also fundamental principles of divine law. Where, then, are they proved, seeing that they are not self-evident, nor are they proved from premises derived from axioms? For the Philosopher does not believe in prophecy and providence in the manner in which the religionist believes in them. We must therefore explain where the Torah takes its principles. There are four kinds of things which are known without proof: 1. First principles (axioms). For example, we know that the whole is greater than the part; that things equal to the same thing are equal to each other; and that the affirmative and the negative can not be true at the same time in reference to the same thing, in the same relation. 2. Things perceived by the senses. For example we know that fire makes hot, and snow makes cold; that opium makes cold, and pepper makes hot. This knowledge we get through our senses. When we eat pepper we feel hot, when we taste opium we feel cold. We judge then that pepper heats because the fiery particles in it predominate, and that opium cools because the cold particles predominate in it. 3. Things known by experience. For example we know that the magnet draws iron; that scammonium is a purgative, etc., because we observe it to be so, not by reason of the qualities of the elements of which these substances are composed, but by reason of their specific form. 4. Things known by the continuity of history. Thus we know that Rome and Jerusalem and Babylon were great inhabited cities, though they are so no longer. Things known in this way we believe even though we have not perceived them with out senses as if we had so perceived them, by reason of the reports which come from many people, and which no one disputes.

Every one of these four kinds of propositions may be used as a principle in a demonstration. Just as the proofs in geometry which are all based upon axioms, and the demonstrations in physics, which are based upon sense perception, are true without any doubt because their causes are known, so the proofs which are based upon experience, though their causes are unknown, must not be doubted, since our senses testify to their existence. To illustrate, just as it can never be that the angles of a triangle should not be equal to two right angles, or that pepper should not cause heat, as their causes are known and understood, so it can never be that the magnet should not draw iron, though the cause is not known or understood, for a thing to which experience testifies can not be other than it is.

The fundamental dogmas and principles of the Torah can not be apprehended by way of the axioms; nor are they at any time objects of sense perception like the heating of pepper and the cooling of opium, for their causes are unknown. For this reason God in His wisdom indicated the truth of the principles of the Torah by experience, so as to remove all doubt concerning them. For that which is proved true by experience, like the property of the magnet in attracting iron, is not subject to doubt, though its cause be unknown, in the same way as there is no doubt concerning natural things observed by the senses whose causes are known.

This is the case in all divine laws. Thus through the law which was given to Adam he became aware of the existence of God, who spoke to him, of prophecy, revelation and reward and punishment. For God revealed Himself and spoke to him and gave him a law, as we read, “And the Lord God commanded the man, saying …” The Rabbis say that in this verse all the commandments given to Adam are alluded to. He also verified by experience that there is retribution for obeying or disobeying the commandments. For he was punished because he violated the command of God and allowed himself to be tempted by the serpent through Eve. And the punishments of this world, as we have said, are evidence of the punishments in the world to come.

Noah, too, had evidence of prophecy and of the existence of God, who spoke to him. He realized that there is reward and punishment through the flood, when he and his sons were saved, while the others were punished. This is the reason why he received permission to eat flesh which was prohibited to Adam.

Similarly when Abraham was given the command of circumcision, he became aware of the existence of God, who spoke to him, and through the same command he realized prophecy and revelation. When the Torah was given, all Israel became convinced of the general principles when through the prophetic spirit they observed that God was speaking to them and that He gave them a law. The exodus from Egypt proved to them that there is providence and reward and punishment. Thus we see that the principles of the Torah were proved beyond a doubt by experience. It follows, then, that the Torah is true and everlasting, without a doubt, in the same way as in a syllogism if the premises are true, the conclusion resulting from them is true without a doubt. The Torah will never change, for truth is unchangeable.

This is the meaning of the Psalmist, “The beginning of Thy word is truth; and all Thy righteous ordinance endureth forever.” The meaning is, as the “beginning of Thy word,” i. e. the premises, which are stated first, in order to derive from them the conclusion, i. e. the “ordinance,” is true beyond doubt, the “ordinance” which comes from them is also true, and hence must endure forever, because truth never changes—“All Thy righteous ordinance endureth forever.” Therefore the Torah, whose principles are proved by observation of the senses, is true and everlasting, and the tradition proceeding from it is also true without doubt.

To prevent the idea that the principles of the Torah are now known to us by tradition alone, Asaph explains in the Psalm beginning, “Give ear, O my people to my teaching,” that somè of the principles are known to us by theoretical speculation, some by the continuity of history, viz., those which no one disputes, and some are purely traditional. This is the meaning of the words in the Psalm, “Give ear, O my people, to my teaching (Torah), incline your ears to the words of my mouth … I will utter dark sayings concerning days of old. That which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.” “That which we have heard” alludes to the principle of revelation, which belongs to the category of the historical, heard among all nations, which no one disputes, like the former existence of Egypt and Babylon, which can not be denied, though we ourselves have not seen them. Revelation is mentioned first because the author is admonishing us to obey the Torah, “Give ear, O my people, to my Torah.” The expression which follows, “and known,” alludes to the principle of the existence of God, and the dogmas derived from it. These are acquired by theoretical investigation, based upon the observation of the senses and the axioms. “Our fathers have told us” points to the principle of spiritual reward and punishment, which we know by tradition alone.

To prove this principle he cites the miracles and other instances of special providence experienced by our ancestors, as we learn by tradition; these being evidence of the reward in the world to come, as we shall explain in chapter twenty-one of this Book. He explains further that this tradition must be continuous from father to son. Therefore he says, “We will not hide from their children.” He also makes clear that the basis of these principles known to us by tradition was observation by the senses. Then it was handed down to us by a continuous tradition. This is the meaning of the words, “For He established a testimony in Jacob.” The meaning is, through the testimony of the senses which our ancestors had, God caused the Torah to be handed down continuously by tradition.

CHAPTER 18

As there are many laws called divine, and the devotees of every one of them have a continuous tradition, the problem arises how to distinguish between the genuine divine law and the spurious, which claims and pretends to be divine, but is not divine.

The divinity of a law may be proved in two ways, from the law itself and from the lawgiver. So far as the law itself is concerned, we must examine it with reference to the three principles mentioned above and the dogmas derived from them, as we have seen. If the law in question is not opposed to any of the fundamental or derived principles, it is divine; if it is, it is spurious and its claim is a pretence. Viewing the matter from the side of the lawgiver, we must prove in a direct manner that the lawgiver received a prophetic message, and that he was sent by God to give mankind a law. A thing may be proved in two ways, directly and indirectly. A thing is proved directly from its causes or essential properties. It is proved indirectly if the proof comes from accidents and not from the causes or the essential properties of the thing.

The following illustration will make the matter clear. Two apothecaries were charged by physicians with the preparation of the great theriaca. One said that he would make a good preparation that would protect from all poisons, warm and cold, and from all kinds of snake bites. He undertook to prove his promise by exhibiting to them the flesh of the viper and all the drugs which go into the composition of theriaca. He tested in their presence the properties and virtues of all the simple drugs, showing that there was no adulteration of any kind. Now there is no doubt that theriaca made in this manner is absolutely genuine, because the apothecary gave a direct verification of the fact. Similarly if the apothecary undertook to prove the correctness of the preparation by showing that it cures all cases of disease and poison which are treated by theriaca, this mode of proof would also be satisfactory because it makes use of the essential properties of the thing. To be sure this proof is not as good as the first, which proves the thing from its causes, nevertheless both are direct modes of proof, showing that the theriaca is well prepared and has no adulteration.

The second apothecary also promised to make theriaca that would counteract all deadly poison, and cited as proof of his ability that he would walk through fire without being burned, or walk on the water without sinking. Now though he should do this in the presence of everybody and of great men and men of science, it is no direct proof that the theriaca which he made or will make is good. For though he walks through fire without being burned, the theriaca may not have the properties necessary to counteract deadly poisons. For the proof is not direct, and there is a possibility that the theriaca may be adulterated.

The same thing applies to the proof of the genuineness of a prophet or divine messenger. The fact that a person claiming to be a prophet can walk on the water, or divide a river and walk through it, or walk through fire without being burned, or can cure the sick or the lepers, is evidence of the fact that he is a worthy instrument for the performance of miracles. But it is not a direct proof that he is a prophet, much less is it evidence that he was chosen to give a law. For we find instances of miracles performed by incantation and magic, or by righteous men who are not prophets. See the story in “Baba Mezi‘a,” concerning the dispute with Rabbi Eliezer. He caused a bread-fruit tree to be uprooted from its place, and the water in a canal to turn back its course and other things besides. And yet the others with whom he disputed refused to make his opinion law, because those miracles did not stamp him as a prophet.

And so we shall find that all the miracles which Moses performed before the revelation of the Torah on Sinai, merely proved that he was a worthy instrument for the performance of miracles, but not for the transmission of a law. This is all that the Israelites believed about him. And they followed his directions because they believed that God heard his prayer and granted his requests. He did so in Marah, as we read, “And the Lord showed him a tree;” also in the war with Amalek. On account of Moses’ prayer, God caused the manna to descend, and the sea to be divided, as we read, “Wherefore criest thou unto Me?” This is the meaning of the expression used in the narrative of the division of the Red Sea, “And they believed in the Lord, and in His servant Moses.” They believed that he was the servant of God, that God performed miracles through him, and that He granted all his requests. We find in the case of other good men too that God performed miracles through them, though they were not prophets. Thus it is told of Rabbi Phinehas son of Yair that he divided the waters of a river on three occasions. Miracles were also performed by Rabbi Hanina son of Dosa and Honi ha-Me‘aggel. The sun shone for Nakdimon son of Gorion, and Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah were saved from a fiery furnace.

Seeing therefore that miracles are not a direct proof of prophecy, the people doubted whether Moses was a prophet, despite the miracles he performed, which were numerous and of a remarkable character in changing the laws of nature. It is only after the revelation on Sinai that the people said to Moses, “We have seen this day that God doth speak with man, and he liveth.” This shows that until that time they were still in doubt about the reality of prophecy, though they believed that Moses was the servant of God, and that miracles were performed by him, as we read, “And they believed in the Lord and in His servant Moses.”

This is the reason why at the time of the revelation on Sinai, God said to Moses, “Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and may also believe thee forever.” The meaning is, I desire to prove to them directly the reality of prophecy, and also that you were sent by Me to give them the Torah. I will make them experience the prophetic spirit themselves. This will convince them that prophecy is a reality. And they will hear Me speaking to you, and indicating a desire to give them a law through you. This constituted a direct proof of prophecy and of the authentic character of the messenger, and there could no longer be any doubt or the least suspicion of fraud after that sublime experience; for through it were verified the two elements essential to prove the reality of revelation. The reality of prophecy was proved, because they were all prophets at that time, and heard the voice of God speaking the ten commandments. The second element was proved when they heard the voice saying to Moses, “Go say to them: Return ye to your tents. But as for thee, stand thou here by Me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land …” In this they had a direct proof that Moses was a divine messenger through whom a perpetual law was to be given.

The difference between a prophet and a messenger is this: The veracity of a prophet is proved either when he truly foretells the future in all particulars, or when he performs miracles. If a prophecy is verified in this way, the Torah specifically commands us to obey the prophet no matter what he tells us to do, even if, as a temporary measure, he bids us violate a law of the Torah, as Elijah did on Mount Carmel, unless he bids us worship idols. For since he has been tried many times and has been proved reliable, whether in the performance of miracles or in unfailingly foretelling the future, the presumption is that he is a prophet and we are bidden to obey him, as we read about Samuel, “and [the Lord] did let none of his [Samuel’s] words fall to the ground. And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord.” It is like the case of an apothecary who prepared theriaca three times and it was found to be good. The presumption is in favor of his reliability until he is tried again and the theriak is found to be adulterated. Similarly if a prophet foretells the future or performs a miracle to substantiate his prophecy, he should be believed so long as no untruth is discovered in what he says. The Bible tells us, “When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken.” It is possible that one may be a true prophet and yet on a particular occasion say an untruth on his own initiative, not by prophetic inspiration, for “God is not man that He should lie.” An occurrence of this kind happened to Hananiah the son of Azzur, who was a true prophet, as the Rabbis say in the treatise Sanhedrin. But he made a mistake and spoke untruth when he took the bar from off Jeremiah’s neck, and broke it. He was punished for this, as we are told in Scripture. Jeremiah said to him, “The Lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.” Then again, “This year thou shalt die, because thou hast spoken perversion against the Lord.” And further we read, “So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.”

A messenger, however, i. e., a person who is sent by God to communicate a law, can not say an untruth. For one is not called a messenger unless his mission is verified directly, i. e., when all the recipients are convinced of the reality of prophecy, as was the case of all Israel at the time of the revelation on Sinai, or when the genuine character of the messenger is proved, as was that of Moses; not by foretelling the future or the performance of miracles, for the test of foretelling the future is not a direct proof of the authentic character of the messenger as a lawgiver. And he may tell an untruth sometimes, as happened to Hananiah the son of Azzur, as we saw before.

Similarly the performance of miracles is doubtful as a test, for something like them may be performed by some natural science or device. But if his mission is authenticated as was that of Moses, falsehood can not possibly enter, whether by his own choice or through some one else. Not by his own choice, for God would not authenticate his mission in the manner aforesaid, if he was likely to say an untruth later. Not through some one else, because as long as his mission has been authenticated directly, there is no longer room for any kind of doubt.

This is the meaning of the words of Maimonides in the book “Madda‘ ” in the eighth chapter of the treatise on the Foundations of the Torah. The Israelites did not believe in Moses, he says, because of the miracles he performed. For those who believe on the ground of miracles, still have a reservation in their minds that perhaps the miracle could be performed by sorcery or magic … The ground of their belief in Moses was the revelation on Mount Sinai, when their own eyes saw and their own ears heard the fire and the thunder and the lightning. Moses came near to the cloud, the voice spoke to him and the people heard: “Moses, Moses, Go say to them: Return ye to your tents. But as for thee, stand thou here by Me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandment, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which thou shalt teach them …” That the experience at Sinai is the only real and indubitable proof of Moses’ prophecy, is shown in the words, “Go, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and may also believe thee forever.” This shows that hitherto their belief was not an enduring one, but one that is accompanied by doubt and reservation. So far Maimonides.

His meaning is that the miracles which are performed by the prophets, like the revivification of the corpse by Elisha, and the cure of Naaman’s leprosy, and the passing of Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah through the fiery furnace without being burned, and Daniel’s coming out of the lions’ den unhurt, and Jonah’s deliverance from the bowels of the fish, and all the other miracles performed by all the prophets, and the prognostication of the future—all these things are not essential proofs of prophecy, for one may foretell the future through astrologers or by means of familiar spirits. Some of the miracles could be performed for good and pious men who are not prophets, like Rabbi Hanina the son of Dosa, Rabbi Phinehas the son of Yair, and his associates; or they might be performed by means of natural devices, as the Rabbis say concerning Hezekiah, the king of Judah, that Ahaz his father caused him to pass through the fire, and yet he was saved, because his mother anointed him with oil of the salamander; or they might be performed by magic and sorcery, as the magicians of Egypt did, or by means of one of the sacred names of God. The divine names are like His instruments, having the virtue of performing miracles. Any one who uses them with God’s permission, like the prophets, or in God’s honor, like men of piety, is beloved in heaven and esteemed on the earth. He does not die before his time and does not fall into the hand of his enemies. As God said to Jeremiah, “And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” But he who uses them of his own accord and not for the honor of God, will be cut off prematurely, will fall into the hand of his enemies, and his ultimate end will be bad; as the Rabbis say, “He who uses the crown will perish.” He is like a person who has stolen the king’s ring or garments or seal for his own use, who deserves death. Even Isaiah, who was a true prophet, was punished with death because he used a divine name for his own benefit; as the Rabbis say: “He pronounced a divine name and disappeared into a cedar tree.” His punishment was that he was captured by his enemies and put to death.

This is worthy of notice because herein lies the test of one who uses divine names without God’s permission, viz., he dies an unnatural death or is prematurely cut off. The matter has caused perplexity to many who could not understand how it is that bad men can perform miracles by means of divine names, since we are told by ancient authorities that the prophets made use of them, as is indicated by allusion in the three verses in Exodus, beginning respectively with the words, “And the angel of God … removed,” “And it came,” “And Moses stretched out.” The explanation is that everything depends upon the end. It is thus clear that a miracle is no real proof of prophecy, not to speak of the authenticity of the messenger. Therefore the miracles which Moses performed before the Sinaitic revelation were not direct evidence that he was a prophet, much less that he was sent to communicate a law. This was proven first when the people stood at Mount Sinai.

CHAPTER 19

Belief in a thing means a firm conception of the thing in the mind, so that the latter can not in any way imagine its opposite, even though it may not be able to prove it. Examples are, belief in the axioms, the opposite of which the mind can not conceive; or those things which a person firmly embraces in his thought; or things which he has by nature, not knowing how he came by them; or things apprehended by the senses, or verified by experience, the opposite of which the mind can not conceive though it does not understand the causes of their being as they are.

Belief also applies in relation to a thing which the believer himself did not observe with his senses, but which some one else—a popular and reliable person, or a number of prominent persons—observed at a given time, and which has come down to the believer from the man or men who observed them, by a continuous tradition from father to son. This is worthy of belief almost as much as that to which the believer’s own senses testify, though he can not prove it by reason. An example is the testimony of experience to the fact that God may inspire with the prophetic spirit any person He pleases, though he does not possess those natural qualities which the Rabbis enumerate as essential for prophecy. Thus, they say in the treatise “Nedarim” that the prophetic spirit does not rest upon a person unless he is wise, brave, rich, tall, handsome, etc. And yet experience showed at the time of the Sinaitic revelation that all Israel, the wise and the foolish, the short and the tall, the timid and the courageous, the rich and the poor, all attained the degree of the prophet and heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as Scripture testifies, “These words the Lord spoke unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice, and it went on no more.”

Moses, calling attention to this wonderful phenomenon, says, “Did ever a people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?” Though reason rejects it, it is absolutely true, since experience testifies to it, and it has been handed down by tradition continuously from father to son. It can not therefore be denied. For it is clear that no one loves a person more than his father. Hence a matter which has been continuously handed down from father to son properly takes such a firm hold upon the mind of the son that he can not imagine it not to be so, as if he himself perceived it with his own senses, for it is clear that no father desires to leave falsehood behind to his children. So the Psalmist says, “O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us … Thou with Thy hand didst drive out the nations, and didst plant them in … For not by their own sword did they get the land in possession … Thou art my King, O God; command the salvation of Jacob.” The sequence of thought in the above is this: Since we have learned by tradition that Israel’s victory over the nations was not a natural thing, that it was not by their own sword that they got the land in possession, “neither did their own arm save them;” and since this tradition was related to us by our fathers, and it is not possible to have any misgivings or suspicions that they would hand down to us falsehood; since, therefore, Thou wast the cause of the beginning of their success, command now also the salvation of Jacob, since Thou art my King, O God, and canst do this. All this shows that tradition handed down from father to son should be accepted.

And since a divine law can not exist without it, Scripture commands us concerning it: “Ask thy father, and he will declare unto thee, thine elders and they will tell thee.” And the penalty that is set for the one who violates the tradition of the wise is death—“Thou shalt not turn aside from the sentence which they shall declare unto thee, to the right hand, nor to the left. And the man that doeth presumptuously, in not hearkening … even that man shall die.” We are also admonished to honor our parents and to punish the rebellious son, because that which is handed down by a father is almost as trustworthy as that which we perceive with our senses; belief therein is obligatory though to the reason it seems unlikely. Thus we see that belief applies to things which we have not perceived with our senses at the time of their occurrence, nor proved with our reason, but have only on the authority of continuous tradition.

CHAPTER 20

A thing perceived by an unusually popular and trustworthy person or by a number of persons of superior powers of comprehension or by an unusually large number of persons, is more likely to satisfy the mind of its reality and to be firmly believed than a thing not so accredited. For this reason God desired that the Torah should be given through Moses with great publicity and in the presence of a mighty multitude of six hundred thousand people. For according to the wise men of the Cabala this number includes all physiognomies, hence the publicity could not be greater, though the number of persons had been multiplied many times.

According to the Rabbis, the revelation was published before the whole world. Commenting on the verse, “The Lord came from Sinai, and rose from Seir unto them; He shined forth from mount Paran …,” they say, “Why Seir and why Paran? The answer is, that God offered the Torah to all the world, who refused to accept it. Then Israel came and accepted it.” The meaning is that since there were then seventy nations in the world and the text of the Bible mentions only Seir and Paran, it is clear that the reference is not to mount Seir and the wilderness of Paran, but to the whole world. Knowing that founders of religion were to arise in the future in Seir, i. e., the people of Edom and those associated with them, and in Paran, i. e., the people of Ishmael and those related to them,—two nations including the whole world, and both descended from Abraham, the first true believer, God published before these nations His revelation of the Torah to Israel, pointing out to them that the revelation of a divine law must be published very widely, else it is not divine. This is so because an order which passes between God and the prophet alone leaves a suspicion or doubt in the minds of others, even of those living in the same generation, not to mention those who come after. Thus even in the case of Moses, the Israelites did not fully believe in his prophetic character until the day of the revelation on Sinai, when they heard the voice speaking to him, as we saw before.

This is the reason why the Torah was not given completely to Abraham, Isaac or Jacob that they should command their children after them to keep the way of the Lord. For though the tradition should be handed down by them continuously from father to son, some suspicion or doubt might occur to those who came after in future generations, because those who received the law first were individuals. The case is different where the thing is clearly perceived by a very great number of persons embracing many wise and intelligent men, representing a great variety of opinions. This is the reason why the Torah was given through Moses with such great publicity, in order, namely, as I said before, that no suspicion or doubt should remain in the minds of the recipients and their associates, nor in the minds of those who come after, so that the tradition may be as firm and true as it is possible to make it.

This is the meaning of the saying of the Rabbis in the treatise “Abodah Zarah,” “In the future God will take the Torah in His bosom and say, ‘Let all those who occupied themselves with this, come and get their reward.’ At once all the nations of the world will come crowding before Him, pell mell, as is said, ‘All the nations are gathered together, and the peoples are assembled; who among them can declare this …?’ ‘This’ means the Torah.” The Rabbis mean to say that in the future God will bring all the idolatrous nations to justice because they did not fulfil the divine law. Then we are told in the sequel that God will say to them, Wherewith have you busied yourselves? And they will reply that they concerned themselves with social welfare, as is recounted at length in the haggadic passage above cited. Finally God says in reply, All that you did was not for social welfare, but for your own selfish ends. Is there any one among you who can declare this?, i. e., is there any one among you who can say that he fulfilled the divine Torah? They will then reply in turn that as the Israelites are to be rewarded for observing the Law which they received by tradition, so they should be rewarded for fulfilling their law, which they also received by tradition. God will then reply, “Who among you can declare this, and announce to us former things? Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be justified ” The meaning is that the nations who claim that they relied on their tradition, must tell us former things, i. e., they must tell us the principles of their religion, which they accepted and upon which they relied. They must tell us whether they were perceived by the senses with great publicity, as were the principles of the Law of Moses. Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be justified, that those who received that law may hear and say, it is truth; as those who received the Law of Moses can produce their witnesses, because the principles of their religion were published before an assembly of six hundred thousand persons, who received the Torah. And then the text concludes, “Ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord,” i. e., all Israel are witnesses of the divine revelation of the Torah, for they heard the voice of the Lord God, speaking to them the Ten Words. The words, “And My servant whom I have chosen,” refer to Moses, who is called the servant of the Lord. All of you are witnesses that the Torah is divine.

This is a wonderful interpretation of these verses according to the idea of the Rabbis that the text cited deals with the reward that follows upon the fulfilment of the Torah as a whole. And it is true. For since the principles of the Torah were declared with great publicity, no doubt can possibly occur concerning the truth thereof. Hence one should have a firm faith in the law of Moses, especially so since its principles are so clear that no doubt is possible, as we explained in chapters seventeen and eighteen of this book.

CHAPTER 21

Belief in God and in His Torah brings man to eternal happiness and causes his soul to cleave to the spiritual substance. This is proved by experience, as we know from continuous tradition. We know of no instance of a philosopher or other investigator attaining to the degree of the prophet, which means the union of the divine spirit with the human intellect. We do find that the devotees of the Torah came into such close intellectual union with God that they were able to change the laws of nature, cause the latter to do their bidding and perform miracles against the laws of nature. Thus we find that the prophets proposed and God carried out their proposals. Elijah caused fire to descend, which is contrary to its own nature. He said, “If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven …,” and it was so. He also divided the waters of the Jordan. Elisha cured Naaman’s leprosy and brought a dead body back to life during his own life time and also after his death. Many such incidents happened to him and the other prophets. The same thing is true of all believers. Pious men, even if they are not prophets, can change the laws of nature by prayer. Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah were cast into the fire and were not burned. Rabbi Hanina the son of Dosa and Rabbi Phinehas the son of Yair made certain temporary changes in the nature and conduct of the world.

This shows that one who believes in God and in His Torah is above nature and not subject to natural law. On the contrary, the laws of nature are subject to him, and he can change them as he pleases.

This is strong and convincing proof that the Torah is divinely revealed, since God shelters, protects and shields those who trust in Him and who observe His covenant and commandments. This is what David meant when he said, “The word of the Lord is tried; He is a shield unto all them that take refuge in Him.” The meaning is that the proof of the divine Torah being pure and free from all dross and defect and suspicion is that He is a shield to those who trust in Him, that He performs the will of those who fear Him, that He hears their cry, fulfils the word of His servant, and carries out the plan of His messengers.

This is also a proof that the soul after death is united with spiritual beings. For union during life is a proof of union after death. Moses alludes to this when he says, “But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day.” He is speaking with reference to the philosophers, who believe that only the perfect individual can unite with the spiritual beings, but not an entire congregation; but you, he says, do all of you cleave unto God. Moreover, the philosopher believes that such union is possible only after death in the spiritual life; whereas you have attained this union this day while enjoying material life, much more certain is it that you will attain it after death. He proves that such union is attainable during life from the fact that God accepts the prayer of those who ask Him to change the laws of nature in the conduct of existence. This is the meaning of the verse in the sequel, “For what great nation is there, that hath God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is whensoever we call upon Him?”

All this shows that belief in God and in His Torah gives perfection to the soul, causes it to unite with the celestial beings, and subjects nature to its will. Through faith the soul rises high above the things of nature, and can therefore control them. This is why Abraham’s faith is praised, “And he believed in the Lord; and He counted it to him for righteousness.” Moses and Aaron were punished because they did not believe, “Because ye believed not in Me, to sanctify Me … therefore ye shall not bring …” We also read in the Bible, “Believe His prophets, so shall ye prosper,” showing that belief is the cause of prosperity and happiness. It is also the cause of eternal life, as Habakkuk says, “But the righteous shall live by his faith.” This can not mean physical life, for the righteous man lives no more than the wicked. The reference is to eternal life, the life of the soul, which the righteous enjoy, and which they trust that God will enable them to attain, as we read, “But the righteous, when he is brought to death, hath hope.” The meaning is that the righteous hopes to attain that good when he dies, but when the wicked dies, his hope perishes, as we read in the Bible, “When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish.” For the wicked can not attain spiritual life after death, and they do not enjoy union with God during life. Therefore they are always accounted as dead, as our Rabbis say, “Righteous men are called living even after death; wicked men are spoken of as dead even while they are alive.” This is why we find that miracles are performed for men of faith, and not for men of speculative knowledge, so as to show that faith stands higher than speculation and the things of nature. Therefore one may through it attain true union with God during life and after death, which is higher than nature.

CHAPTER 22

All belief does not lead to happiness. Thus belief in the impossible does not produce happiness. No one doubts that belief which makes a man happy must be belief in the truth, not belief that a non-existing thing exists or that an existing thing does not exist. The question therefore arises, how can we tell whether a thing is true and demands implicit belief or is not true and should not be believed. If we say that the question must be determined by reason, it will follow that ratiocination stands higher than faith, which contradicts what was laid down before. This is a difficult matter which we must endeavor to solve.

There are two kinds of impossibility. There is the essentially impossible, which we can not conceive that even God can make possible. For example, the whole is greater than the part, and the diagonal of a square is greater than the side. Now we can not conceive that God can make the part equal to the whole, or the diagonal of a square to the side, or the angles of a triangle equal to more than two right angles, or two contradictory propositions to be true at the same time about the same subject, or the affirmative and the negative to apply at the same time to the same thing in the same relation. Such impossibilities can never be accredited by tradition. Nor can our senses ever testify to their reality or the reality of anything similar, because the mind can not conceive the existence of any such thing. Such things therefore should not be believed. Thus it can never be accredited by tradition that God can create another being like Him in all respects. For the one would necessarily be the cause and the other the effect, and they would no longer be similar in all respects.

There is another class of impossibility which it is conceivable that God may make possible—namely that which is merely impossible according to the laws of nature. Such things are not impossible for God, even though they are impossible according to the laws of nature, for example, resurrection of the dead, a human being who can live forty days and forty nights without food and drink, and other wonderful things of the same kind which are impossible by the laws of nature. This second kind of impossibility may be believed, since the mind can conceive of its existence. We may lay it down as a rule, therefore, that any thing which the mind can conceive, though it be impossible by the laws of nature, may be believed to have existed in the past, to be existing now, or to come to exist in the future. This is particularly true if experience testifies to the existence of the thing, though the mind denies its existence because it does not know the cause. Such a thing may be believed, for example the property of the magnet by which it attracts iron. The mind can not explain the cause, and is inclined to deny the reality of the phenomenon. But since experience testifies to it, and it is something that the mind can conceive, though it can not explain the cause, it is true without doubt. Similarly those things to which the senses testify, like the miracles of the Bible, such as the revival of the dead by Elisha during life and after death; remaining forty days and forty nights without food and drink, as Moses and Elijah did; the descent of fire from heaven; the presence of the Shekinah in Israel, and the other miracles which were observed in the past, and which the mind can conceive though it can not explain them—all such things may be believed as being possible to the Omnipotent Being.

CHAPTER 23

There are six dogmas which every one professing the law of Moses is obliged to believe. They are connected with the three fundamental principles that we laid down, but they are not derivative principles.

1.	Creation of the world in time out of nothing. It is clear from its nature that it is a dogma common to divine law generally and belonging especially to the Law of Moses, though it is neither a fundamental nor a derivative principle, because we can conceive a divine law in general and the Law of Moses in particular without the idea of creation ex nihilo, as we explained in chapter twelve of this book. But it may be likened to a branch issuing from the first principle, which is the existence of God. We explained above that God is free from defects. Now if He can not create out of nothing, this would be a defect in His nature. We can not say that creation ex nihilo is ipso facto an impossibility, that creation must be out of something. For since the mind can conceive it, it may be believed, and comes within the power of the Omnipotent Being. Even those who believe in the eternity of the world, admit that God, though a simple intellect, is the cause of all things. Therefore matter is caused by God through the instrumentality of the Separate Intelligence which is also caused by God. But how can a Separate Intelligence be a cause of matter if there can be no coming into being ex nihilo? There can be no greater creation ex nihilo than this. If you say that the reason they maintain the eternity of the world is because they can not conceive that He should create or produce at one time rather than at another, our answer is that this difficulty is valid only in the case of an agent who acts by necessity, but not in an agent who acts by will, for it is the nature of the will to act at one time rather than at another, as Maimonides explains in the Guide of the Perplexed, Book II, chapter 18. Now since God, being the best of agents, must act voluntarily and not through necessity, as will be explained in the Second Book, it follows that He must produce the world at a particular time; since this follows necessarily from the nature of will.

2. The second dogma is the superiority of Moses’ prophecy to that of all other prophets who ever were or will be. Though this dogma is not essential to divine law in general nor the Law of Moses in particular, nevertheless since the Torah says explicitly, “And there hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses” (the meaning is that there has not arisen and there will not arise, indicating the high value of the law that was given through him, as we will explain in the Third Book), every one who professes the Law of Moses is obliged to believe it as a dogma issuing like a branch from the principle of revelation.

3.	The third dogma is that the Law of Moses will not be repealed nor changed nor exchanged for another by any prophet. This dogma, too, though it is not essential to divine law in general or the Law of Moses in particular, as we explained above, nevertheless it is like a branch issuing from the dogma of the authenticity of the messenger, and therefore it is incumbent upon every one who professes the Law of Moses to believe it, as we will explain in the Third Book.

4.	The fourth dogma is that human perfection may be attained by fulfilling even a single one of the commandments in the Law of Moses. If this were not so, it would follow that the Law of Moses hinders man from attaining human perfection, which the Rabbis call “the life of the world to come.” For mankind attained some degree of future life through the Noachian law, as the Rabbis say, “The pious men of the Gentiles have a share in the world to come.” This means that those who observe the seven Noachian commandments have a share in the world to come. Now if every one professing the Law of Moses must fulfil all the many commandments mentioned therein before he can attain any degree of future life, then the Law of Moses would hinder man from the acquisition of perfection rather than help him. But this can not be the purpose of the Law, as the Rabbis say, “God desired to bestow merit upon Israel, therefore He gave them many laws and commandments.” Therefore it seems that this dogma is a special principle of the Law of Moses, as we shall explain in the twenty-ninth chapter of the Third Book.

5.	The fifth dogma is the resurrection of the dead. Some of our Rabbis say that only those who are perfect will have this privilege. According to this opinion, since it is not a species of reward promised to all mankind, since all mankind can not be perfect, one who disbelieves this dogma is like one who denies some one of the great miracles performed for righteous men, which are within the limits of logical possibility. This dogma would then come under the first principle. But if resurrection embraces all persons, as some of the authorities hold, then a person who disbelieves it is like one who denies a part of reward and punishment which is promised to all mankind or to the whole nation. In that case the dogma comes under the third principle. But it is not itself either a fundamental or a derivative principle of divine law in general or of the Law of Moses in particular, for they can be conceived without it. As long as one believes in reward and punishment generally, whether corporeal, in this world, or spiritual, in the world to come, he does not deny a principle of the Law of Moses if he disbelieves in resurrection. Nevertheless it is a dogma accepted by our nation, and every one professing the Law of Moses is obliged to believe it, as will be explained in the Fourth Book.

6. The dogma of the coming of the Messiah is of the same nature as the one before. It comes under the third principle, reward, and is an accepted dogma, which every one professing the Law of Moses is obliged to believe, as will be explained in the Fourth Book. But it is not a principle, fundamental or derived, of the Law of Moses, because the latter with its principles, fundamental and derivative, can be conceived without it.

We did not include among these dogmas, beliefs which are based upon specific commandments, like repentance, prayer, etc., for example the dogma that God hears the prayer of those who supplicate Him, or that He receives those who turn to Him in repentance, and other such dogmas based upon specific commandments, because no one commandment should be counted as a dogma rather than another. Nor did we include such beliefs as that the Shekinah dwelt in Israel, that fire came down from heaven upon the altar of the burnt-offering, that the priests received answers from God through the Urim and the Thumim, and so on, because they are included in the belief in the biblical miracles generally, and there is no reason for naming these rather than others, such as the dividing of the Red Sea, the opening of the earth and the swallowing of Korah and his congregation, their going into Sheol alive, and the still more wonderful phenomenon of the earth closing up again after they went down, as we read, “And the earth closed upon them,” so different from an opening made by an earthquake, which remains that way forever,—all these are included in a belief in the Torah and in the miracles told therein. We did enumerate specially the six beliefs above mentioned, because they are accepted dogmas among our people necessary for the maintenance of the fundamental and derivative principles of the Torah. The fulfilment of the Torah is dependent upon them, though they are not essential principles, since the Law can exist without them, as we explained above. He who denies them is called a heretic, though he does not deny the Torah, and has no share in the world to come.

CHAPTER 24

We must call attention here to a question concerning religious belief. Is a person who professes a given religion permitted, or obliged, to investigate the principles of his religion in order to see whether they are true and in agreement with what we have laid down concerning the principles of divine law or not? And assuming that he is permitted to do this, has he the right to choose that religion which seems to him the truer or not? Whichever alternative we adopt offers great difficulties.

In the first place, if we say that one professing a religion is obliged to investigate the principles of his religion, or is permitted to institute a comparison between the principles of his religion and those of another, the result will be that no religionist will be firm in his belief, and will therefore deserve no reward for belief, if he is not firm therein and free from doubt. For we can not call a thing belief except when the mind can not conceive the thing being otherwise, as we explained before. But if he investigates, he shows thereby that he is in doubt. And if we grant that he is permitted to investigate, suppose he has investigated and compared the principles of his religion with those of another, and found the principles of the other religion truer than those of his own, is he permitted to exchange his religion for the other? If he is permitted, the result will be that no man professing a religion can be made happy or be saved by his belief. For if, having compared the principles of his religion with those of the other and found the latter truer than his own, he has exchanged his religion for the other, it is still impossible for him to be firm in the belief of the other religion which he has chosen, because it is possible that after another investigation and a comparison between the second religion and a third, he may find the principles of the latter more satisfactory, and will have to change the second for the third, and in the same way the third for the fourth and the fourth for the fifth, and so on indefinitely. The result will be that no man will be firm in his belief until he has completed his investigation of all the religions in the world and chosen one in preference to all the rest. But there is the possibility that there is a religion at the extreme end of the inhabited world which is unknown to him, and which is truer than all the rest. No man therefore can be saved by his belief. For he can not have perfect faith until he has investigated all religions, and he can not investigate all religions, as we have seen. It would seem then that a person should not be allowed to investigate the principles of his religion so as to reach sure belief.

But if our conclusion is that one is not allowed to investigate the principles of his religion, then one of two things must be true. Either all religions lead to human happiness, and one has no advantage over the other in the matter of reward and punishment, since no one is allowed to investigate the principles of his religion nor to change it for another. But it is quite impossible that religions which are directly opposed, the one affirming what the other denies, the one trinitarian, the other monotheistic, should equally lead to happiness. On the other hand, if we say that they do not both lead to happiness, but one of them only, a great absurdity will follow, namely that God is guilty of injustice (Heaven forbid!) in punishing those who profess a false religion, claiming to be divine, since the believer has no right to budge from his religion, or to change it for another, or to entertain any doubt concerning it. This difficulty applies to all divine religions and we must try to solve it.

Our solution of this question is as follows: If it were true that all the known religions of the world are opposed to one another, every one saying that the other is not divine, the question we raised would be a difficult one indeed and hard to solve. But since all religions agree in accepting the divinity of one of them, the only objection to it being that, according to them, it was temporary in character and its time has passed, our opinion is that every one should investigate the principles of his religious belief.

This applies without any doubt to those religions which are opposed to the one divine law, for no one should allow himself to be persuaded to believe something in opposition to the admittedly divine law, except after an investigation of the law, the second or the third, which he is inclined to believe, and the principles thereof, as we explained in the eighteenth chapter of this Book.

As for the admittedly divine law, one who professes it should also inquire whether it is temporary or eternal; and if it should turn out not to be eternal, wherein the change is likely to occur.

This is also Maimonides’ reason for saying in the fortieth chapter of the second book of the Guide of the Perplexed that it behooves every one to investigate the religion which he professes. He says there that the investigation should embrace two aspects. First, the religion itself. He must examine the commands and prohibitions, and if he finds that their sole purpose is to remove wrongdoing and violence and to maintain order in the affairs of the state, he must know that it is a conventional and not a divine law. If, on the other hand, he finds that in addition to removing wrongdoing and violence, it also takes care to inculcate true ideas about God and the angels, and endeavors to enlighten mankind and to awaken them to the nature of truth in relation to all things, that shows it is divine. The second aspect of investigation is that of the founder of the law in question. The alleged prophet or messenger who claims that the law is transmitted through him by God must be examined with a view to determine whether his claim is genuine or whether the contents of his law are borrowed from some one else. The thing to examine is the man’s character and conduct. The best test of genuineness is that he abstains from corporeal indulgences and holds them in contempt, especially the sense of touch, which is a disgrace to us, as Aristotle said. This is the gist of Maimonides’ words in that chapter.

When he says that a test of the law itself is, if it takes pains to inculcate true ideas about God, etc., he is alluding to that religion which ascribes to God corporeality and trinity. And when he speaks of testing the moral qualities of the founder of the religion, he is alluding to that man who claimed that he was a prophet of the Arabs. According to Arab accounts he was addicted to physical and sexual indulgence. But this is not sufficient to enable us to differentiate a law laid down by a wise man, containing true principles such as a divine law might have, the founder himself being a man of noble character and conduct, from a divine law. There is no way of telling whether it is really a divine law or a human law which resembles a divine.

My opinion therefore is that the two-fold examination of which Maimonides speaks is to be understood in the following way. First, the principles of the religion in question must be examined, to see whether they agree with the principles of divine law which we have mentioned. Also the secondary principles derived from the first must be examined, as we explained in the fifteenth chapter of this Book. If we find that the religion in question is in agreement with, or at least not in opposition to, the primary and secondary principles, and at the same time it endeavors to suppress wrongdoing and to inculcate true ideas among the people instead of the foolish fancies in vogue among women and common people, and to arouse them to a desire for human perfection, that shows it is divine.

Similarly our Rabbis say in “Torat Kohanim:” Rabbi Akiba said, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself” is a great principle of the Torah. Ben Azzai said, “This is the book of the generations of Adam” is a greater principle of the Torah than that. By this is meant to indicate that a divine law must embrace both topics, the suppression of wrongdoing and violence among the inhabitants of the land, as alluded to in the expression, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” and the directing of the attention of the people to true ideas and to human perfection, which is alluded to in the verse beginning, “This is the book of the generations of Adam,” which continues with the words, “In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made He him,” indicating that man has a human form which is in the likeness of God. And therefore he must be careful not to disgrace it, either in his own person or in the person of his neighbor, and he must see to it that it should survive death and unite with the celestial beings in the place from which it originally came. All this a divine law should contain.

But it is still possible that it is the work of a wise man or wise men. We must therefore examine it from another aspect, namely the manner in which the messenger proved his authenticity, as one sent by God to transmit a law. If this matter is proved in a direct manner, as we explained in the eighteenth chapter of this book, the law is divine; if not, it is spurious and merely pretends to be divine, even though it acknowledges all principles, primary and derived, much more so if it opposes them or any one of them.

CHAPTER 25

We shall now inquire whether there must be one divine law for all mankind, or whether there may be more than one. It would seem that there can be only one, whether we consider the matter from the point of view of the giver or from that of the receiver. So far as the giver is concerned, it would seem that since God who orders all things is one in every respect, the order which comes from Him must also be one in every respect, for the relation of God to all human beings is the same. So far as the receiver is concerned, it would seem likewise that since the human species is one so far as their humanity is concerned, that order which guides them to attain their human perfection must also be one. From this it would seem that there can be only one divine law for all mankind.

However, on more careful consideration we shall find that though we may admit that so far as the giver is concerned there should be only one, the same result does not follow if we consider the receiver. It is clear that the temperaments of men are different either because of the difference of temperament in their ancestors or for some other reasons. No two men can have the same temperament and disposition, as Ibn Sina says in the first fen of the first book of the Canon. The differences are so great that we find persons whose qualities are the direct opposites of one another. One man is cruel in the extreme, going so far as to kill his youngest child, and another is so tender-hearted that he would not kill a mouse or an ant.

The differences in character and disposition are also due to difference in habitat. Different lands differ in respect to air, mountains, waters, and so on. There are lands in which the fruits are coarse and hard, because the air in which they grow is not pure. Then you find another land whose fruits are not sweet or wholesome because the water by which they grow is not good. The temperament of the animal beings who are nurtured on such fruits necessarily partakes of the character of the food on which they live. Another land whose fruits have a quality opposite to that of the other will produce animals with temperaments opposite to those of the other. This is why we find in one city or district sharper and cleverer men than in another. And it follows from this that the conventions and customs of the two lands are different as the temperaments of their inhabitants are different. The one land must therefore have a different law from the other at the same time. Since, however, the difference is due to the receiver and not the giver, it must relate to things which have to do with the receivers, namely in reference to the customs and conventions concerning what is becoming and unbecoming. What is becoming in one place will be unbecoming in another. But there can be no difference in the general fundamental principles or those derived from them, because these are things which depend upon the giver.

For this reason you will find that the Noachian and the Mosaic laws, though differing in matters of detail, as we shall see, agree in the general matters which come from the giver. They both existed at the same time. While the Mosaic law existed in Israel, all the other nations had the Noachian law, and the difference was due to geographical diversity, Palestine being different from the other lands, and to national diversity, due to difference in ancestry. And there is no doubt that the other nations attained human happiness through the Noachian law, since it is divine; though they could not reach the same degree of happiness as that attained by Israel through the Torah. The Rabbis say, “The pious men of the other nations have a share in the world to come.”

This shows that there may be two divine laws existing at the same time among different nations, and that each one leads those who live by it to attain human happiness; though there is a difference in the degree of happiness attainable by the two laws. This difference in the laws can not concern fundamental or derivative principles. Therefore the examination of the law itself is always of the same kind. But the examination relating to the messenger may undergo change. At all events the verification must be direct, though the verification of one religion may be different from that of another. The question whether a given divine law may change for the same people in the same land, we shall examine in the Third Book.

CHAPTER 26

The result of our discussion in this Book is that the number of fundamental principles of a divine law is three, existence of God, revelation, and reward and punishment. Without these we can not conceive of a divine law.

Subordinate to these three are other secondary principles derived from them and related to them as species are to their genera, namely that if you remove one of the derivative principles you do not remove thereby the fundamental principle, but if you remove the fundamental principle, the derivative principles disappear also, as we have explained.

The derivative principles coming under the existence of God, as demanded by reason and by the Law of Moses, are: unity, incorporeality, independence of time, freedom from defects. Under revelation we have prophecy and authenticity of the messenger. Under reward and punishment are: God’s knowledge and providence in reward and punishment, in this world or in the next, spiritual or corporeal.

There is no need of laying down any other principle of the Law of Moses, fundamental or derived from these, except those mentioned. We have already explained that the duty to worship God exclusively is a commandment, and that a commandment is not a principle, either fundamental or derived. The irrepealability of the Torah and the superiority of Moses as a prophet come under the authenticity of the messenger, as will be explained in Book Three. The coming of the Messiah and the resurrection of the dead are implied in the belief in reward and punishment, such as every one professing the Law of Moses should believe.

This is also the opinion of my teacher Rabbi Hasdai Crescas, that all these as well as creation are true doctrines which every one professing the Law of Moses should believe, but they are not principles of this law, derivative or primary, general or special. One special principle of the Law of Moses is that one single commandment is sufficient to enable one to acquire perfection and some degree of future life, as we explained in the twenty-third chapter of this Book.

The other laws, called divine, lay down other derivative principles under the fundamental ones, the removal of one of which makes the law fall. Thus the Christians put under the existence of God trinity and corporeality. But it is clear that this is opposed to the derivative principles which follow from the existence of God. Under reward and punishment they place the coming of the Messiah and resurrection of the dead. Without these it is clear that their religion can not exist. Similarly the Mohammedans place fate and predestination, called in Arabic al kada and al kadr, under providence. But it is clear that if this were true, there would be an end to freedom of choice, and there would be no room at all for reward and punishment. The reason we did not include freedom of choice among the fundamental principles of divine law, though it is essential to it, is because it is not a principle of divine law qua divine, but it is necessarily presupposed in any code of law, whether human or divine.

Accordingly the number of principles, fundamental and derived, is eleven: existence of God, unity, incorporeality, independence of time, freedom from defect, prophecy, authenticity of the messenger, revelation, God’s knowledge, providence, reward and punishment. If we count God’s knowledge and providence as one, as Maimonides does, the number of principles will be ten. And if we count freedom among the principles of divine law, since it is necessarily presupposed by it, though it is not essential to it as divine, the number of principles will be twelve or eleven. We did not include purpose in general as a principle of divine law, although it is presupposed in any system or code of law, human or divine, like freedom, because the special purpose of divine law is the reward that is promised, and that has already been included as a principle.

Here ends the First Book which inquires into the number of fundamental and derivative principles and the attributes common to divine laws. Praise be to God who has helped us thus far. This was all that I had intended to say in this work concerning the fundamental and derived principles. At the request, however, of my friends, orthodox believers as well as philosophers, who asked me to explain to them the meaning of these principles and other matters following from and related to them in a proper manner which is in agreement with the opinion of the Torah, I added the three Books which follow. Therefore I promised at the beginning of the book to explain them, with the help of God who is above all praise. Amen.