Negaim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Nine

Mishnah Nine
If one had a scall the size of a split bean and it spread over all his head he becomes clean.   
The head and the beard do not prevent [one another], the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Shimon says: they do prevent. 
Rabbi Shimon said: Is there not a logical inference: if the skin of the face and the skin of the body, between which something intervenes, do prevent [one another], the head and the beard, between which nothing intervenes, should they not also prevent [one another]? 
The head and the beard do not combine, nor is a spreading from one to the other effective.    
What exactly counts as the beard? From the joint of the jaw to the thyroid cartilage.

Explanation
Section one: Just as a body nega (a bright spot) that spreads over one's entire body becomes pure (see 8:1) so too a scall that spread all over one's head causes him to be pure. 
Section two: According to Rabbi Judah, if the scall spreads all over his head but not his beard, or all over his beard but not his head, he is pure. This is the meaning of "do not prevent"—one doesn't need the scall to spread all over the other for him to be pure.
Section three: Rabbi Shimon holds that they do prevent one another from becoming pure. He now argues this out using a logical inference. The skin of the face and the skin of the body are separated by the head and beard. Nevertheless, if one has a nega on his entire body and it doesn't cover his face, or vice versa, he is still impure. This means that they do "prevent one another"—they do prevent the other from causing him to be clean. All the more so, the head and the beard, two parts of the body with nothing in between them, should "prevent one another" from becoming pure if one and not the other is covered with a scall. 
Section four: If there is a scall half the size of a split bean on the beard and an adjacent scall half the size of a split bean on the head, the two half-sized scalls do not combine to form one scall large enough to be impure. Similarly, if there is a scall on the beard and it spreads to the head or vice versa, this is not considered spreading and the person is not impure.
Section five: This section gives the dimensions of what is considered the beard and what is considered the head. Obviously, to be able to determine the halakhah in the scenarios in sections 1-4 we would need to know exactly where the beard and head begin and end. 

