Negaim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a person who removes the white hairs from a nega or burns the quick flesh in a nega. In other words, he tries to remove the signs of uncleanness. 

Mishnah Four
One who plucks out signs of uncleanness or burns quick flesh transgresses a negative commandment.   
And as regards cleanness: 
If they were plucked out before he came to the priest, he is clean; 
But if after he had been certified as unclean, he remains unclean. 
Rabbi Akiva said: I asked Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua while they were on the way to Narbata, "What is the ruling if the plucking occurred while he was isolated?"
They said to me, "We did not hear anything [about this case], but we have heard that if they were plucked before he came to the priest he is clean, and if after he had been certified as unclean he remains unclean." 
I began to bring them proofs: whether the man stands before the priest or whether he is isolated, he is clean unless the priest had pronounced him unclean. 
When does he attain cleanness [after he has been certified unclean]? 
Rabbi Eliezer says: after another nega arises in him and he has attained cleanness  after it.
But the sages says: only after another nega has spread over his whole body or after his bright spot has been reduced to less than the size of a split bean.

Explanation
Section one: Deuteronomy 24:8 states, "In cases of skin affection be most careful to do exactly as the levitical priests instruct you." The rabbis read this as a prohibition against removing the signs of impurity. 
Section two: The mishnah now deals with the consequences of one who transgresses and removes the signs of impurity. In other words, even though he should not have done what he did, the signs are gone and therefore we must determine whether he is pure or not.
If he did so before the priest examined him, he remains clean. However, if he removes them after he is already impure, his removal doesn't help and he remains impure. 
Section three: This is a fascinating glimpse of how the sages discussed these matters with each other. Rabbi Akiva, the young intellect, catches Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua while they are making their way to Narbata, which is on the eastern side of Caesarea. He seems to have used the opportunity to ask them a question which was troubling him. He asks them about a case where the man plucked the signs out of the nega after he had been isolated but before he had been pronounced unclean. Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua respond conservatively—they never heard any answer to this question. All they know is what happens if he plucks the signs before the priest saw the nega or after he pronounced it unclean, the two situations presented in section two. These sages refuse to answer a question if they don't have a tradition concerning the answer. Not so the young whippersnapper of a rabbi, Rabbi Akiva. He presents them with proofs that as long as the person has not been pronounced unclean, he is pure. The mishnah does not present what the argument that Rabbi Akiva makes is. Such an argument is presented by the Tosefta and there we learn that the other sages agree with him.
Section four: This section deals with a difficult problem. Normally, when one is pronounced impure because of a nega, he becomes pure when the signs disappear. However, this person removed the signs himself and therefore this can't be the sign of impurity. 
Rabbi Eliezer says that he is not pure until he gets another nega and then it becomes pure. It seems that the purification from this second nega is an opportunity to purify him from the first nega as well.
The other sages say that this doesn't work. He has to have the nega spread to his entire body at which time he would become pure even if the signs of impurity were still there. 
The other way for him to become pure is for the nega itself to disappear. This would make him pure even if the white hair or quick flesh was still there. 
