Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah One

Introduction
Up until now the Mishnah has been dealing with negaim that appear on the body. Chapter eleven deals with negaim that occur in clothing. This is addressed in Leviticus 13:47-59. 

Mishnah One
All garments can contract the uncleanness of negaim except those of non-Jews.  
One who buys garments [with signs of negaim] from non-Jews they must be inspected as if the signs had then first appeared. 
The hides [of animals] of the sea do not contract the uncleanness of negaim. 
If one joined to them anything which grows on land, even if it is only a thread or a cord, as long as it is something that is susceptible to uncleanness, they also become susceptible to uncleanness.

Explanation
Section one: The laws of negaim, including the laws concerning the negaim that appear on garments, apply only to Jews. However, they do apply to all Jews, women, men and children.
Section two: If one buys a garment from a non-Jew, it now becomes a garment owned by a Jew (duh!). A nega that is already in it is treated as if it just appeared, and it must be inspected as would be any nega at the outset of its appearance.
Section three: Leviticus 13:47-8 states: "When an eruptive affection occurs in a cloth of wool or linen fabric, in the warp or in the woof of the linen or the wool, or in a skin or in anything made of skin." Cloth (wool), linen and skin (animal) garments are clearly susceptible to negaim. Just as wool, linen and skins come from things grown on the land, so too anything "grown" on the land is susceptible to negaim. But hides made of animals of the sea, such as whale or dolphin, are not susceptible to negaim. 
Section four: If one connected a piece of wool or linen that is susceptible to impurity, meaning it is large enough to be subject to the laws of impurity, the entire composite piece of clothing becomes susceptible. For instance, if I made a garment out of dolphin skin, but then I wanted to put a lining of wool in it, the entire garment would become susceptible to negaim.   
   

