Negaim, Chapter One, Mishnah Four
 
Mishnah One
Rabbi Hanina, the vice-chief of priests, says: the colors of negaim are sixteen.   
Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas says: the colors of negaim are thirty-six.   
Akaviah ben Mahalalel says: seventy-two.   
Rabbi Hanina the vice-chief of priests says: negaim may not be inspected for the first time at the end of Shabbat, since the end of that week will fall on Shabbat;   
Nor on a Monday, since the end of the second week will fall on Shabbat; 
Nor on a Tuesday, in the case of houses, since the end of the third week will fall on Shabbat.   
Rabbi Akiva says: they may be inspected at all times, and if the time for the second inspection falls on Shabbat it is postponed to after Shabbat; and this procedure leads sometimes to a leniency and sometimes to a stringency. 

Explanation
Section one: The three rabbis in this mishnah sub-divide the four colors of negaim into either sixteen, thirty-six or seventy-two different colors. The same rules would apply as we learned in mishnah three. Evidently, these rabbis were simply more attuned to color than the other rabbis.
Section two: If a priest examines a nega on Sunday (here called the end of Shabbat), then the end of that week, when it will be determined whether or not the person should be isolated, will fall on Shabbat, and it is forbidden to examine negaim on Shabbat. 
The same problem will occur if one examines the nega on Monday. The end of the first week will be on Sunday, and Sunday will count as both the end of the first week and the first day of the next week. Therefore, the end of the second week will fall on Shabbat.
When it comes to the negaim that infect houses, there are three weeks of isolating. If the house is first examined on Tuesday, then the second week will begin on Monday and end on Sunday, and the third week will end on Shabbat. 
Section three: Rabbi Akiva agrees that a priest cannot examine negaim on Shabbat. However, he disagrees as to whether this means that we need to adjust the original exam. Rabbi Akiva prefers to conduct the original exam on the day upon which the person/house is brought to the attention of the priest. If the seventh day falls on Shabbat, we simply delay the examination until after Shabbat. Sometimes this will lead to a leniency and sometimes to a stringency. The following two mishnayot will explain what these leniencies/stringencies are.        

