Negaim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
If a bright spot the size of a split bean had within it quick flesh the size of a lentil and there was white hair within the quick flesh: if the quick flesh disappeared the spot is unclean on account of the white hair; if the white hair disappeared it is unclean on account of the quick flesh. 
Rabbi Shimon makes it clean, since it was not the bright spot that caused it [the hair] to turn [white].   
If a bright spot together with the quick flesh in it was of the size of a split bean and there was white hair within the spot: if the quick flesh disappeared the bright spot is unclean on account of the white hair; if the white hair disappeared it is unclean on account of the quick flesh. 
Rabbi Shimon says that it is clean, since it was not a bright spot the size of a split bean that caused the hair to turn [white]. 
He agrees that if where the white hair was, was the size of a split bean, that it is impure.

Explanation
Section one: There is a bright spot which is large enough to be impure and inside it there is quick flesh, itself large enough to be a sign of impurity, and white hair, one (the quick flesh or white hair) of which is necessary to cause the bright spot to be impure. If one of these two signs disappears, the bright spot is still impure on account of the second sign.
Rabbi Shimon disagrees if the quick flesh disappears because it is not the bright spot (the actual nega) that caused the hair to turn white but rather the quick flesh. In other words, the white hair must be caused by the nega and not by the sign that the nega is impure.
Section two: In this case the bright spot is not large enough to be impure on its own. Rather together with the enclosed quick flesh the entire region adds up to a split bean. There is also white hair. If the quick flesh disappears and the bright spot fills its place it is impure because the bright spot is now the size of a split bean. If the white hair disappears it is also impure because the bright spot is large enough with the quick flesh.
Rabbi Shimon says that if the quick flesh disappears it is not impure because the hair didn't appear in a bright spot that was itself the size of a split bean.
Section three: Rabbi Shimon agrees that if the bright spot is the size of a split bean and it has in it quick flesh the size of a lentil but the white hair is in the bright spot (and not in the quick flesh) that the nega is impure if the quick flesh disappears. This is because the bright spot itself caused the hair to turn white, whereas in the other cases the white hair was found in the quick flesh. Rabbi Shimon holds that the bright spot must cause the hair to turn white and not something else. He derives this from a close reading of Leviticus 13:4, "and its hair did not turn white"—"its" refers to the bright spot and not the quick flesh.    


