Negaim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In today's mishnah two sages argue whether the thin yellow hair that is a sign of impurity in a scall must appear only after the scall has already appeared or whether it can precede the scall.

Mishnah Two
Yellow thin hair causes uncleanness whether it is clustered together or dispersed, whether it is encompassed or unencompassed, or whether it came after the scall or before it, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Shimon says: it causes uncleanness only when it came after the scall. 
Rabbi Shimon said: Is it not logical: if white hair, against which other hair affords no protection, causes uncleanness only when it comes after the nega, how much more should yellow thin hair, against which other hair does afford protection, cause uncleanness only when it comes after the scall? 
Rabbi Judah says: Whenever it was necessary to say, "it turns" Scripture says, "it turns." But the scall, since about it Scripture says, "there is no yellow hair in it," it causes uncleanness whether it came before or after it.

Explanation
Section one: The two yellow hairs that cause a scall to be unclean can either be clustered together, i.e. right next to each other, or they can be at opposite ends of the scall. They can be encompassed completely by the scall or they can be unencompassed, at its edges.
According to Rabbi Judah, it doesn't matter whether they come before or after the scall. In all cases they are a sign of impurity.
Rabbi Shimon disagrees and says that the hairs must appear after the scall.
Section two: Rabbi Shimon now explains his logic. When it comes to the white hairs that are a sign of impurity in a regular nega, one that appears on the body, they cause uncleanness only if they appear after the nega. For these hairs the rule is more stringent—no other hair will "afford protection" for them. This means that if black hairs are also there, the nega is still impure, as long as there are at least two white hairs. The rule with regard to yellow hairs is more lenient—other hairs of other colors "afford protection" such that if there are two yellow hairs and two black hairs, the nega is pure. Therefore, the rule with regard to which comes first should also be lenient—only if the scall precedes the yellow hairs should they be a sign of impurity.
Section three: Rabbi Judah prefers a more literal reading of the verse. Leviticus 13:3 says, "and the hair in the nega turned white." Clearly, the nega precedes the white hairs. When it comes to the scall, the Torah doesn't use the word "turned yellow" rather it states, "and there is no yellow hair in it." This means that it doesn't matter whether the yellow hair came before or after the scall.
We should note that these are two different ways of deriving halakhah. Rabbi Shimon employs a rabbinic type of argument. We know the halakhah in one situation (white hairs in a nega) and we compare them with yellow hairs in a scall. Rabbi Judah employs a more literal reading of the Torah. Indeed, this is typical of Rabbi Judah who is more often known as the literalist. 


