Negaim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
If a bright spot was the size of a split bean and quick flesh the size of a lentil encompassed it, and outside the quick flesh there was another bright spot, the inner one must be isolated and the outer one must be certified unclean.   
Rabbi Yose says: the quick flesh is not a sign of uncleanness for the outer one, since the inner bright spot is within it.   
If it decreased or disappeared: 
Rabban Gamaliel says: if its destruction was on its inner side it is a sign of spreading of the inner bright spot while the outer one is clean, but if its destruction was on its outer side, the outer one is clean while the inner one must be isolated. 
Rabbi Akiva says: in either case it is clean.

Explanation
Section one: There are three levels inside this nega. An inner bright spot which is large enough to be impure, surrounded by quick flesh, surrounded by another bright spot. The outer bright spot has quick flesh in it, so it is impure. But the inner one does not have quick flesh in it, so it is only isolated (and if this is at the end of two weeks, it is pure). 
Rabbi Yose says that since the quick flesh has a bright spot within it, it is considered a divided piece of quick flesh, which is not a sign of impurity, even for the outer nega. Even it is not impure.
Section two: The mishnah now deals with a case where the quick flesh disappears or becomes smaller than a lentil. 
Rabban Gamaliel says that if the inner bright spot took over the quick flesh, then we consider the inner one as having spread and it is unclean. The outer one is pure because its quick flesh either disappeared or grew too small to be a sign of impurity. 
If the outer bright spot spread into the quick flesh, the outer one is also pure because its quick flesh disappeared or grew too small. The fact that the inner bright spot is now part of the outer one is not considered to be "spreading." The inner one has not changed so it still requires isolation, as in section one.
Rabbi Akiva says that even if the inner one takes over the quick flesh (the quick flesh was destroyed to the inside), the nega is not considered to have spread and it is clean because a nega can't spread into another nega. The Tosefta adds that if this occurs after the first week of isolation, he would be isolated again based on the inner nega because it is still present. He is only pure if it doesn't spread after two weeks. 

