Negaim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with various rules concerning the two white hairs that appear in a nega. 

Mishnah Four
If the two hairs were black at the root and white at the tip he is clean.
If they were white at the root and black at the tip he is unclean. 
How much whiteness must there be?   
Rabbi Meir says: any amount. 
Rabbi Shimon says: enough to be cut with a pair of scissors. 
If it was single at the root but split at the tip, and it looks like two hairs, he is clean. 
If a bright spot had [two] white hairs or black hair he is unclean, for we are not concerned that the place of the black hair lessened the space of the bright spot, since the former is of no consequence.  

Explanation
Section one: Only white hairs are a sign of impurity; black hairs are not. The color of the hair is determined by the color at the root. Thus if the tips are white, he is clean but if the roots are white he is not.
Section two: How much of the tips must be white for them to be a sign of uncleanness? Rabbi Meir says that even the smallest amount is a sign of uncleanness, whereas Rabbi Shimon says that there must be enough for it to be cut by a pair of scissors.
Section three: One hair that is split still counts as one, even if it looks like there are two.
Section four: If there is a bright spot (a type of nega, called a baheret) and it is the minimum size of a barleycorn and there are many white hairs there, we do not consider them as reducing the size of the bright spot to less than the barleycorn. Since there are white hairs, he is impure.
The same is true for black hairs inside a bright spot. These black hairs mean that he is to be isolated. We do not consider them as reducing the size of the nega such that he need not even be isolated.  
Another interpretation of this line is that if black hairs are mixed in with the white hairs in the nega (the bright spot), we don't consider the black hairs as reducing the overall size of the nega, for the black hairs are of no consequence. 

