Negaim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Today's mishnah explains the following verses from Leviticus 14:

26 The priest shall then pour some of the oil into the palm of the priest's left hand, 27 and with the finger of his right hand the priest shall sprinkle some of the oil that is in the palm of his left hand seven times before the Lord. 28 Some of the oil in his palm shall be put by the priest on the ridge of the right ear of the one being cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, over the same places as the blood of the guilt offering; 29 and what is left of the oil in his palm the priest shall put on the head of the one being cleansed, to make expiation for him before the Lord.

Mishnah Ten
[The priest] then took some [of the contents] of the log of oil and poured it into his colleague's hand;
And if he poured it into his own hand, the obligation is fulfilled. 
He then dipped [his right forefinger] in the oil and sprinkled it seven times towards the Holy of Holies, dipping it for every sprinkling. 
He then approached the metzora, to the same places that he applied the blood he now applied the oil, as it is said, "Over the same places as the blood of the guilt offering; 29 and what is left of the oil in his palm the priest shall put on the head of the one being cleansed, to make expiation for him before the Lord." (Leviticus 14:28-29).   
If he "put upon," he has made atonement, but if he did not "put upon," he did not make atonement, the words of Rabbi Akiba. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: these are but the remainders of the mitzvah. Whether he "put upon" or did not "put upon," atonement is made, only it is accounted to him as if he did not make atonement.   
If any oil was missing from the log before it was poured out it may be filled up again; if after it was poured out, other oil must be brought anew, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
Rabbi Shimon says: if any oil was missing from the log before it was applied, it may be filled up; but if after it had been applied, other oil must be brought anew.  

Explanation
Section one: Verse 26 seems to imply that the priest should pour some oil onto another priest's hand. That is why the verse says "into the palm of the priest's left hand." The Torah would not repeat the word "priest" if it didn't mean another priest. However, since the word "priest" may refer to the original priest, the mishnah states that if he pours it into his own hand, he has fulfilled the obligation (this also seems to be the simple interpretation of the verse). 
Section two: The mishnah clarifies that every time he sprinkles the oil, he dips his finger in his palm again. 
Section three: See verse 28.
Section four:  The end of verse 29 reads, "to make expiation for him before the Lord." According to Rabbi Akiva this means that if he doesn't put the oil on the meztora's head he has not fulfilled the mitzvah and the metzora has not achieved atonement. Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri points to the word "and what is left" with which the sentence begins. Putting the oil on the metzora's head is only the "leftover" part of the mitzvah and atonement can be achieved even without doing so. However, if he doesn't fulfill this "remainder" part of the mitzvah, the verse treats him as if he didn't achieve atonement at all. In other words, he should put it on the metzora's head, but if he doesn't the metzora is atoned for.
Section five: The priest takes from the log (a measure of oil) and pours it into his hand and then applies it to the metzora. The rabbis ask the question: up until what point must there be a full log of oil in the flask? According to Rabbi Akiva, as long as there is a full log before he pours it into his hand, he has fulfilled the mitzvah. If there is less after this point, he need not fill up the measure. Rabbi Shimon says that the full log must be there until he puts the oil onto the metzora. If the measure is diminished after this point, it need not be filled up.  

