Negaim, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with how a person is to be positioned when examined for a nega, such that his modesty is [at least to a certain extent] preserved. The verse we used in yesterday's mishnah "wherever the priest's eyes can see" also serves as the basis for today's mishnah. The priest's eyes should not examine parts of the body that should not be seen due to modesty. The exact parts will differ for men and women.

Mishnah Four
What is [the posture] of examining negaim? 
A man is inspected in the posture of one that hoes or one that gathers olives.
And a woman [is inspected in the posture] of one who is arranging dough and one who nurses her child, and one that weaves at an upright loom if the nega was in the right armpit. 
Rabbi Judah says: also in the posture of one that spins flax if it was within the left armpit. 
Just as [is the posture] for examining for the nega, so too [is the posture] for shaving hair. 

Explanation
Section one: If the nega is in between a man's legs, when being inspected he must stand as one who is hoeing would stand. He spreads his legs a bit and the priest can see the nega. But the priest doesn't have to look at the parts between his legs that he can't see when one is hoeing. I'm assuming that he is wearing some sort of cloak, but clearly not pants. 
The other private part that is dealt with here is under the armpits. The person would lift up his arms as if he is picking olives, and any part that still can't be seen need not be inspected. 
Section two: If a woman has a nega in between her legs, she is inspected while in the posture of a woman who is arranging dough to go into the oven. This seems to require a very minimal amount of leg-spreading. 
If the nega is under her breast, any flesh that can be seen while nursing must be examined. I suppose that this implies that a woman would only uncover part of her breasts in order to nurse.
When it comes to a nega found under the arm, if it is on her right arm, whatever part of her arm that she exposes while weaving on a loom is inspected by the priest. The rest is considered private.
Section three: Rabbi Judah says that when it comes to the left armpit, whatever she exposes when spinning flax is inspected.
We should note that the mishnah ascribes to men and women work that each typically performed. Men typically worked in the field and women typically baked bread, took care of their children and made clothing. Their posture when examined is determined by their typical posture at work.
Section four: A metzora (one who had a nega) must shave his/her body when completing the period of impurity (see Leviticus 14:9). The parts of the body that must be shaved are the same as those that are inspected in the first place. In other words, private parts need not be shaved (sigh of relief!).  
