Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with the reappearance of a nega in a patch that was put on a garment after the nega faded or the reappearance of the nega in the garment itself. The relevant verses are Leviticus 13:56-57:

56 But if the priest sees that the affected part, after it has been washed, is faded, he shall tear it out from the cloth or skin, whether in the warp or in the woof; 57 and if it occurs again in the cloth — whether in warp or in woof — or in any article of skin, it is a wild growth; the affected article shall be consumed in fire.

Mishnah Six
If the nega reappears on the garment, the patch is protected.  
If it reappears on the patch the garment must be burned.   
One who makes a patch from a garment that was isolated and then pronounced pure, and then the nega reappeared on the garment, the patch must be burned.
If it reappeared on the patch, the first garment must be burned, and the patch serves the second garment while the two signs are under observation.

Explanation
Section one:  If the nega returns to the garment, the garment itself must be burned. This is stated explicitly in verse 57. However, the patch that was placed on the garment need not be burned.
Section two: If the nega reappears on the patch, then the entire garment, including the patch, must be burned. 
Section three: In this case, a person makes a patch using cloth from a garment that had already been isolated because of another nega, and then had been declared pure. If the nega returns to the garment, the patch must also be burned. Just as one burns a garment if a nega returns to it after it has already been isolated, so too here one must burn the patch and the garment after the nega returns to it.
Section four: This section addresses the same situation as in section three, except here the nega returns to the patch and not the garment. The first garment, the one from which the patch had been taken, must be burned. Even though the nega returned to a piece of the garment that had already been removed, since the patch came from the original garment, the whole original garment must be burned. 
As far as the second garment goes, it will be isolated as if this was the first appearance of a nega in the garment. They will now wait to see if signs of impurity appear in the second garment. If they do, then the whole garment will be burned. If they do not, the garment is pure, although the patch must be burned in any case.  
