Negaim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with the two birds that are brought by the metzora. One is slaughtered and its blood is spilled into a bucket and then sprinkled onto the metzora. The other is eventually set free.

Mishnah Five
With regard to the two birds: the commandment is that they be alike in appearance, in size and in price; and they must be purchased at the same time. 
But even if they are not alike they are valid; 
And if one was purchased on one day and the other the next they are also valid. 
If after one of the birds had been slaughtered it was found that it was not wild, a partner must be purchased for the second, and the first may be eaten. 
If after it had been slaughtered it was found to terefah, a partner must be purchased for the second and the first may be made use of.   
If the blood had been spilled out, the bird that was to be let go must be left to die. 
If the one that was to be let go died, the blood must be spilled out. 

Explanation
Section one: Ab initio the two birds must be the same in appearance, size and price and they must be purchased at the same time. However, if the birds are different or not bought on the same day, they are still valid.
Section two: The birds are supposed to be wild. If after one has been slaughtered it turns out that it was not wild, he can buy a second bird to pair it up with the remaining bird. In other words—although one of the birds was not valid, the second bird is still usable. Since the first bird was slaughtered in a kosher manner, it may be eaten. 
Section three: Similarly, if the slaughtered bird was found to be a terefah, an animal with a physical flaw such that it is not kosher, they can still buy another bird to go along with the remaining bird. The bird that was already slaughtered can't be eaten because it's not kosher. But use can be made of it, as is always the case with regard to a terefah.
In both of these cases, the second bird is still valid because it is retroactively determined that the first bird was not its proper pair. It is as if no first bird had yet even been bought. 
Section four:  If the blood of the slaughtered bird spilled out and didn't go into the earthenware vessel, the second bird cannot be used. This is because the first bird was a proper pair, its blood just wasn't dealt with correctly. The second bird must be left to die, because no benefit may be derived from it. 
Similarly, if the second bird dies after the first bird has already been slaughtered, the blood of the first bird cannot be used. It must be spilled out.    

