Negaim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah continues to deal with Leviticus 13:37 which states, "But if the scall has remained unchanged in color, and black hair has grown in it, the scall is healed; he is clean." 

Mishnah Three
[Black hair] that sprouts up affords protection against yellow hair and against a spreading, whether it was clustered together or dispersed, whether it was encompassed or unencompassed.  
And that which is left [over from before the scall] affords protection against yellow hair and against a spreading, whether it is clustered together or dispersed, and also when encompassed, but it affords no protection where it is at the side unless it is distant from the standing hair by the place of two hairs. 
If one hair was yellow and the other black, or if one was yellow and the other white, they afford no protection.

Explanation
Section one: As we learned in yesterday's mishnah, if a black hair grows in the scall, he is pure. According to the rabbis this is true even if there is yellow hair or the scall spreads. This is true whether the black hairs were clustered together or dispersed, or whether they were totally encompassed by the scall or they were unencompassed and found at the edge of the scall. In all cases, if black hairs sprout up in the scall, he is pure.
Section two: This section deals with hairs that appear after the scall has already formed. These hairs were there and then remained when the rest of the hair on the head or beard fell out. Basically, the same laws that applied in section one apply here. This is implied explicitly Leviticus 13:31. The one difference between the two situations is when the two black hairs appear at the side. In this case they afford protection only if they are two hairs distance away from the hairs that already exist in the netek (the scall).
Section three: In order to afford protection from impurity there need to be two black hairs. If one hair is black and one is yellow, the scall is impure if there is a spreading or another yellow hair.   
