Negaim, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Ostensibly, this mishnah deals with the procedure in which a house is inspected for negaim. However, most of the mishnah actually inteprets a few biblical verses that discuss this procedure. 

Mishnah Five
What is the procedure for the inspection of a house?   
"The owner of the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, "Something like a plague has appeared upon my house" (Leviticus 14:35). Even if he is a learned sage and knows that it is definitely a nega, he may not speak with certainty saying, "A plague has appeared upon my house," but rather, "Something like a plague has appeared upon my house." 
"The priest shall order the house cleared before the priest enters to examine the plague, so that nothing in the house may become unclean; after that the priest shall enter to examine the house."  
Even bundles of wood and even bundles of reeds [must be removed], the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Shimon said: clearing keeps him occupied.   
Rabbi Meir said: But which [of his goods] could become unclean? If you were to say, his articles of wood, of cloth or of metal, he could immerse them and they will become clean. What is it that the Torah has spared? His earthenware, even his cruse and his bucket.  
If the Torah thus spared a man's humble possessions, how much more so would it spare his cherished possessions! 
If for his material possessions, how much more so for the life of his sons and daughters! 
If for the possessions of a wicked man, how much more so for the possessions of a righteous one!

Explanation
Section one: Leviticus 14:35 contains a curious phrase—"Something like a plague" as opposed to simply "a plague." The mishnah emphasizes that this phrase must be recited. Even if the resident is a sage, and knows that what has appeared in his house is indeed a nega, he must still come to the priest and say "something like a plague."
Section two: The Torah dictates that everything must be cleared from the house before the priest examines it. This prevents anything in the house from becoming unclean. Rabbi Judah interprets since the Torah says that "everything" must be removed, even things that are not susceptible to impurity, like bundles of wood and reeds, must be cleared from the house. 
Rabbi Shimon says that there is no real reason to clear out bundles of wood and reeds from the house since they can't become impure. The purpose is not to protect their purity. Rather it is to keep the owner busy clearing out his house, for perhaps the nega will disappear while he is in the process of doing so. We can see here that the rabbis pick up on the cues that the Torah itself gives—it is desirable to preserve the purity of the items in the house as much as possible.
Section three: Rabbi Meir again asks—what items is the Torah referring to when it says that everything must be cleared from the house? If it is anything made of wood, cloth or metal, even if it becomes impure, it can be cleansed by immersion in a mikveh. So what exactly is it that the Torah is protecting? The answer is that it is protecting earthenware vessels, which are the cheapest, most dispensable type of vessels. Now, if the Torah goes so far out of its way to protect such small, not particularly valuable items, all the more so the Torah is concerned with protecting a person from larger financial loss. And if the Torah is concerned with financial loss, all the more so it is concerned with the loss of life, which is obviously much more valuable. And according to the rabbis, negaim are a result of "lashon hara" the evil tongue. Negaim, according to rabbinic thought, afflict those who are morally corrupt. Nevertheless, the Torah offers protection to the afflicted person's possessions. And if the Torah protects the possessions of a wicked person, all the more so it will protect the possessions of a righteous person.     

