Negaim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
Any doubt in negaim in the beginning is regarded as clean before uncleanness has been established, but after uncleanness has been established a doubt is regarded as unclean. 
How is this so? If two men came to a priest one having a bright spot the size of a split bean and the other having one of the size of a sela, and at the end of the week each had one the size of a sela, and it is not known on which of them the spreading had occurred,
Whether this occurred with one man or with two men, each is clean. 
Rabbi Akiva said: if one man is involved he is unclean, but if two men are involved each is clean. 

Explanation
Section one: In the first mishnah of this chapter we learned that if there is a doubt concerning a nega, it is considered pure. Today's and tomorrow's mishnah clarify that this is only before any impurity has been established. Once some impurity has been established, doubtful cases are impure.
Section two: The mishnah first explains cases where the doubt comes before the purity is established and therefore he is pure. Two men come to a priest (yes, this does sound like the beginning of a joke) and both have a bright spot. One has a nega the size of a split bean and another has a nega that is larger, the size of a sela. Both are isolated for a week, and at the end of the week one person's nega has spread to be the size of a sela, and the other's has not spread. The problem is that the priest can't remember who had one the size of a sela and whose was the size of a split bean, meaning he doesn't know which spread and which did not. Since no impurity has yet been established, both are considered pure. 
The rabbis add that this is true even if both negaim are on one man. Although we know that one nega spread, we don't know which, and therefore he cannot be deemed impure.
Section three: Rabbi Akiva disagrees with this latter statement. If both negaim are on one person, then he is unclean because we can be certain that one of his negaim spread.    

