Negaim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah lists negaim that are clean because when they were formed they couldn't count as negaim. 

Mishnah One
The following bright spots are clean: 
Those that one had  before the Torah was given,  
Those that a non-Jew had when he converted;
Or a child when it was born, 
Or those that were in a crease and were subsequently uncovered. 
If they were on the head or the beard, on a boil, a burn or a blister that is festering, and subsequently the head or the beard became bald, and the boil, burn or blister turned into a scar, they are clean. 
If they were on the head or the beard before they grew hair, and they then grew hair  and subsequently became bald, or if they were on the body before the boil, burn or blister before they were festering and then these formed a scar or were healed:  
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob said that they are unclean since at the beginning and at the end they were unclean, 
But the sages say: they are clean.    

Explanation
Section one: The halakhot concerning negaim were in effect only after the Torah was given. If an Israelite had a nega before the Torah was given the nega is not considered impure. The same is true if an individual had a nega before the Torah was given to him/her as an individual. This would include a non-Jew who converted and a child who was born. Since they were not governed by the laws of negaim when the nega formed, the nega is not impure even when they becomes subject to these laws. 
Section two: We learned in 6:8 that if there is a nega in a crease in one's skin, it is not impure. This is true even if the nega becomes uncovered. 
Section three: This section also refers to yesterday's mishnah. As we learned there, if negaim appear on the head or beard, or in a boil, burn or blister which are still festering, they are not impure. Our mishnah adds that even if these areas become susceptible to negaim by losing their hair or by healing, the nega that appeared when they were not susceptible is not a sign of impurity.
Section four: In these cases the nega was first formed in a place that was susceptible to negaim (before hair grew or before the boil, burn or blister was festering or perhaps had even formed) and then the place became unsusceptible, and then it returned to being susceptible. Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says it is impure because it began in a place susceptible to impurity and ended in a place susceptible to impurity. The other sages say that since in between those two moments it was in a place that was at the time unsusceptible, the nega remains forever unsusceptible. 

