Negaim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah contains a fascinating discussion between Rabbi Eliezer and the other sages, which reveals Rabbi Eliezer's personality as the arch-conservative sage. 

Mishnah Three
They asked R. Eliezer: "[What is the ruling concerning] one who had a bright spot the size of a sela form on the inside of his hand and it covered up the scar of a boil?"   
He replied: "He should be isolated."
They said to him: "Why? Since it is neither capable of growing white hair nor can it effectively spread nor does quick flesh cause it to be unclean?"
He replied, "It is possible that it will contract and then spread again."   
They said to him, "But what about when its only the size of a split bean?'   
He said to them: I have not heard anything. 
Rabbi Judah ben Batera said to him, "Can I teach something about this?" 
He replied, "If you would thereby confirm the ruling of the sages, go ahead." 
He said, "Lest another boil would arise outside it and spread into it. 
He replied: "You are a great scholar for you have confirmed the words of the sages."

Explanation
Section one:   The sages ask Rabbi Eliezer about someone who had a nega form on the palm of his hand and it covered up a smaller boil that had already scarred over.
Section two: Rabbi Eliezer answers that he should be isolated to see if it will develop a sign of impurity.
Section three: The other sages point out that this is problematic. Hair does not grow on the palm of one's hand so he can't become impure for that reason. It cannot be considered to have spread for a nega formed in a boil or burn must spread into the area of the burn or boil, and in this case it already fully covers the burn or boil. Nor is quick flesh a sign of impurity inside a burn or boil. Therefore it seems that there is no reason to isolate this person for he cannot become impure. 
Section four: Rabbi Eliezer says it is possible that after the first week the nega will retract a bit and then the priest will declare him pure. If the nega would then spread back into the burn or boil, he would be impure.
Section five: The problem with Rabbi Eliezer's answer is that it only works if the burn/boil underneath the nega was originally the size of a sela, which is larger than a split bean. If the burn/boil was the size of a split bean then when the nega retracts and then spreads it will still spread into regular skin, which doesn't count as spreading.
And if the nega retracts to being smaller than a split bean, the nega is considered to have disappeared. The priest will pronounce him pure and if it spreads again, this is not considered "spreading" but rather a new nega.
Section six: To this Rabbi Eliezer has no answer. He knows that the sages said that he should be isolated, but he doesn't know why. 
Rabbi Judah ben Batera asks permission to give an answer. Fascinatingly, Rabbi Eliezer says that he can give an answer but only if it explains the sages' opinion that he should be isolated. He is not allowed to disagree with this reason. Here we see Rabbi Eliezer's conservative tendencies. He allows a new explanation, but only if it upholds the older halakhah.
Rabbi Judah ben Batera says he is isolated lest another boil appears outside of the first boil, and then the latter nega spreads into the former. A nega from one boil can spread into a nega from another boil.
Rabbi Eliezer seems to be overjoyed at his student's answer, not for its inherent wisdom, but because it explains the words of the sages. 
   

