Negaim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Yesterday's mishnah discussed a case where there is a bright spot which is inside some quick flesh which is in a larger bright spot. Rabbi Akiva says that if the inner bright spot spreads into the quick flesh it is pure, because a nega that spreads into another nega is not considered as having "spread."  In today's mishnah Rabbi Shimon qualifies Rabbi Akiva's statement. 

Mishnah Six
Rabbi Shimon said: when is this the case?  When the quick flesh was exactly the size of a lentil. 
But if it was larger than a lentil, the excess is a sign of spreading of the inner one, and the outer one is unclean.   
If there was white scurf less that the size of a lentil, it is a sign of the spreading of the inner bright spot but it is not a sign of spreading of the outer one.

Explanation
Section one: Rabbi Akiva's rule that if the inner nega spreads into the quick flesh both the inner and outer nega are pure is true if the quick flesh was exactly the size of a lentil. Once the quick flesh is smaller than a lentil, it is no longer a sign of impurity. However, if the quick flesh was larger than a lentil but then the inner nega (the bright spot) spread into it but the quick flesh remained at least the size of a lentil, the inside nega is impure. This is because the excess part of the quick flesh is not considered part of the nega but rather flesh. Therefore the inner nega spread into flesh and not into quick flesh and any time a nega spreads into flesh, it is impure. The outer nega is also impure because the quick flesh is large enough to be a sign of impurity. 
To summarize: the excess part of the quick flesh is not considered "nega," and thus the inner nega is considered to have spread. But since a lentil's worth of quick flesh remains, the outer one is also impure.
Section two: In this case instead of quick flesh being in between the inner and outer nega (bright spot) there is white scurf (mentioned in 1:5-6; it is a darker shade of white than that required for a nega). White scurf need not be the size of a lentil. If the inner nega spreads into the white scurf it is considered to have spread because white scurf is not a nega (it is not a sign of impurity, see 1:5), rather it is flesh. Thus even Rabbi Akiva would agree that the inner nega is impure. However, if the outer nega takes over the white scurf it is not considered to have spread, for spreading towards the inside of itself is not considered spreading (see above, mishnah three and five).      

