Negaim, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
The remaining mishnayot of chapter three all deal with various types of negaim, what their signs are and how long their period of impurity lasts. The Mishnah will go into greater detail concerning these negaim later on in the tractate. These are just introductory mishnayot. The pattern and meaning of these mishnayot is quite repetitive so I will comment more on the first few examples and then reference those comments as we proceed. 
 
Mishnah Three
The skin of the flesh becomes unclean for two weeks and by one of three signs: by white hair or by quick flesh or by a spreading. 
"By white hair or by quick flesh" in the beginning, at the end of the first week, at the end of the second  week, or after it had been pronounced clean. 
"Or by a spreading," at  the end of the first week, at the end of the second week,   or after it had been pronounced clean. 
It becomes unclean for two weeks which are thirteen days.   

Explanation
Section one: A person can be isolated and then declared impure within a period of two weeks based on a nega seen on his skin. Such a nega is determined by one of three signs: by a white hair, by some quick flesh, or by some sort of spreading. One of these signs will cause him to be declared impure.  
Section two: A white hair or quick flesh will cause him to be declared impure whether seen during the first examination, after the first week of isolation, after the second week of isolation or even after he has been declared pure. In other words, these two signs will always cause him to be impure.
Section three: In contrast, the spreading of the nega will cause him to be declared impure only if it is seen after the first week, after the second week or after he has been declared clean. If the nega has spread before he was even isolated, he is still pure. 
Section four: The impurity lasts for thirteen days, and not the full two weeks because the last day of the first isolation count towards the first week and to the second week, as we learned in1:4.  
   

