Eduyoth, Chapter Four, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
This entire chapter contains cases where Beth Shammai was lenient and Beth Hillel was strict.  Generally speaking the opposite is true, hence these are exceptional cases.
Most of the examples in these mishnayoth are from the laws concerning festivals.  There is a halakhic concept in Judaism called “muktzeh”.  There are many forms of “muktzeh”;  I will explain the one form germane to these two mishnayoth.  [For more information you can look at the Steinsaltz reference guide].  Anything consumed on Shabbat or a festival has to have been available before the day begins.  This “availability” must be both physical and mental.  In other words the thing must have been physically available before the day began and the person must have known the day before that he might use the object during the Sabbath or festival.  Anything that is not available before the day began is considered “muktzeh”.  We will see some examples as we proceed.

Mishnah One
The following cases are [examples] of the lenient rulings of Beth Shammai and of the rigorous rulings of Beth Hillel.  
An egg which is laid on a festival — Beth Shammai says: it may be eaten, and Beth Hillel says: it may not be eaten.  
Beth Shammai says: yeast as much as an olive [in quantity], and leavened food as much as a date, and Beth Hillel says: as much as an olive [in quantity] in both cases.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  An egg which is laid on a festival is considered by Beth Hillel to be “muktzeh” something which was not available to be consumed on the eve of the festival and therefore is forbidden on the festival itself.  Beth Shammai holds that since the chicken was available on the eve of the festival, the egg is as well, for if the person had slaughtered the chicken he could have eaten the egg inside.
Section two:  On Passover it is forbidden to eat either leavened products or the leaven itself, which is yeast.  According to Beth Shammai if one eats as a much as olive’s worth of yeast or a date’s worth of leavened food, he is liable for having transgressed the laws of Passover.  Beth Hillel holds that in both cases one who eats an olive’s worth is liable.  Note that smaller amounts are not permitted either.  A smaller amount is still forbidden but one who consumes a smaller amount has not transgressed the Biblical prohibition of eating yeast or leavened food on Passover.

Mishnah Two
A beast which was born on a festival — all agree that it is permitted; and a chicken which was hatched from the egg — all agree that it is forbidden.  
He who slaughters a wild animal or a bird on a festival — Beth Shammai says: he may dig with a pronged tool and cover up [the blood] , but Beth Hillel says: he may not slaughter unless he has had earth made ready.   
But they agree that if he did slaughter he should dig with a pronged tool and cover up [the blood, and] that the ashes of a stove count as being prepared for the holiday.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  This section contains an elaboration of the dispute that was in the first section of the previous mishnah.  There we saw that a dispute with regards to an egg born on a festival:  Beth Shammai permitted its consumption and Beth Hillel forbid.  In this mishnah we learn that there are two other similar instances where the two houses do not disagree.  They both hold that a beast that was born on a festival is permitted.  Although the beast was not born before the festival, and therefore might have been thought to be “muktzeh”, it in reality was available since if the mother had been slaughtered, the unborn young could have been eaten as well.
The two houses also agree that a chicken hatched on the festival is forbidden.  Even though Beth Shammai permits an egg that is laid, the chicken that is hatched is different because it was still in its shell the day before.  Unlike the beast which was in its mother who could have been slaughtered and eaten, the chicken was not part of another animal that could have been eaten.
Section two:  According to Leviticus 17:13, when one slaughters an undomesticated animal or any type of foul the blood must be poured out of the animal and covered with earth.  One who slaughters an undomesticated animal or foul on the festival has a problem.  Although it is permitted to slaughter if he doesn’t have any prepared earth to cover the blood, newly dug earth is “muktzeh” and cannot be used.  Nevertheless, Beth Shammai permits one to dig up new earth and cover the blood.  Beth Hillel says one cannot slaughter unless one has earth already prepared.  
However, they all agree that if he had already slaughtered the animal, even though Beth Hillel says he should not have done so without already prepared earth, he may still dig new earth to cover the blood.  This is because the principle of “muktzeh” is only rabbinically ordained and the obligation to cover the blood is Biblical.  When one has two competing commandments, one rabbinic and one Biblical, the latter takes precedence.  The two houses also agree that the ashes in the oven are considered prepared for the festival, in other words they are not “muktzeh”.  Since people used these ashes for different purposes, we can make the assumption that before the festival began he knew in his mind that he would use these ashes.   
