Eduyoth, Chapter Two, Mishnayoth Nine and Ten

Introduction
Mishnayoth nine and ten contain further statements of Rabbi Akiva.  These statements are not about halakhah, but rather about aggadah, or Jewish legend. 

Mishnah Nine
He used to say: the father transmits to the son beauty, strength, wealth, wisdom and years.
And the number of generations before Him, that shall be their appointed end:   For it is said, “calling the generations from the beginning” (Isaiah 51:4)   
Although it is said, “And shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years” (Genesis 15:13), it is also said, “And in the fourth generation they shall come hither again” (Genesis 15:16).

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Section one:  This mishnah contains a popular saying by Rabbi Akiva, that a son inherits from his father, beauty, strength, wealth, wisdom and years, which is length of life.
Section two:  This section has been explained in many different ways and is very difficult to understand.  I will explain it the way that Albeck explains.  Rabbi Akiva is dealing with the issue of fate:  if a father controls the number of years that his son will live, how is that God has already determined how long the world will last.  The answer that Rabbi Akiva gives is that the number of generations is fixed, as the verse in Isaiah says, but the number of years in each generation is not fixed.  Although one verse from Exodus seems to say that God counts years, a few verses later generations are mentioned.  According to Rabbi Akiva’s interpretation of these verses and his theology, a person’s years are determined by his actions and by his father’s actions, and not predetermined by God.  It is only the number of generations until redemption that is known by God.  Of course, human beings do not know this number.
It is important to note that when we deal with issues such as fate and the end of the world, we are dealing with issues about which many different Jewish answers have been given.  This is not an issue that human beings can fully understand.  

Mishnah Ten
Also he used to say that there are five things that last twelve months: 
The judgment of the generation of the flood [continued] twelve months;   
The judgment of Job [continued] twelve months;   
The judgment of the Egyptians [continued] twelve months;   
The judgment of Gog and Magog in the time to come [will continue] twelve months;
The judgment of the wicked in gehinom [continues] twelve months, for it is said, and “It will be from one month until its [same] month” (Isaiah 66:23).   
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: “[As long as] from Passover to Shavuoth, for it is said, “And from one Sabbath until its [next] Sabbath” (ibid.).

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
There are five heavenly judgements which according to Rabbi Akiva were meted out for one year.  
Section one: The judgement of the generation of the flood lasted one year.  According to Genesis 7:11 the flood began on the seventeenth of the second month of the 600th year of Noah’s life.  According to 8:14, the earth was dry one year and ten days later.  The extra ten days are the adjustment for the difference between a lunar and solar calendar.
Section two:  Job’s trial lasted a year.  This is learned from Job 7:3 which states, “So have I been allotted months of futility; nights of misery have been apportioned to me.”  According to a midrash the months of futility are the days of the summer which are long and the nights of misery which are also long.  Together, it can be concluded that Job suffered for one whole year.
Section three:  The ten plagues lasted a year, according to Rabbi Akiva.  This is learned through a midrash on Exodus 5:12.  According to this verse the plagues began only after the Egyptians forced the Israelite slaves to search for their own straw.  Since straw is found in the month of Iyyar, May, and the Israelites left Egypt in Nissan, April, the conclusion can be drawn that the plagues lasted one year.
Section four:  Gog is a King and Magog is his country.  According to Ezekiel 38-39, at the end of time Gog will fight a battle with Israel, at which point God will bring judgement upon Gog and his people.  According to Rabbi Akiva, this judgement will last one year.  This is learned in the midrash from Isaiah 18:6, “The kites shall summer on them and all the beasts of the earth shall winter on them”.  This verse is understood as referring to the war of Gog at the end of days.  The verse states that they will be punished for a summer and a winter, meaning for an entire year.
Section five:  The wicked are judged in Gehinom, which is a Jewish word for hell, for one year.  This is learned from Isaiah 66:24 which states, “They shall go out and gaze on the corpses of the men who rebelled against Me.”  The previous verse states that “Month after month and Sabbath after Sabbath all flesh shall come and worship me.”  How can all flesh come and praise God if the corpses of the rebellious are being punished.  To solve this problem, the Rabbis reverse the order of the verses, understanding that the wicked are first punished and then allowed to return to praising God.  From the words “month after month” Rabbi Akiva concludes that the wicked shall be judged from one month until the next appearance of the same month, meaning twelve months.  As an aside, this is where the Jewish custom of saying Kaddish over a parent for 11 months originates.  If one were to say Kaddish for a full twelve months, it would be assuming that the parent was wicked.  Since no one would want to make such a statement, we say Kaddish for eleven months. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri learns from the words “Sabbath after Sabbath” in the above verse that the wicked are judged for a time period equal to the time between one holiday and the next. (Sabbath can sometimes mean holiday, as opposed to its usual meaning, the seventh day of the week).   The shortest such period is the time between Passover and Shavuoth, which is seven weeks.
