Eduyoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today contain disputes between Beth Shammai, Beth Hillel and Shammai.  

Mishnah Seven
Beth Shammai says: “A quarter-kav of any bones, even from two limbs or from three.”   
And Beth Hillel says: “A quarter-kav of bones from a corpse, either from [the bones which form] the greater portion of the [body’s] build, or from the greater portion of the number [of the body’s bones]. 
Shammai says:  “Even from a single bone.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Numbers 19:14 teaches that if a person dies in a tent things that are in the tent, including the people, can become impure, even though they have not touched the dead body.  Our mishnah discusses how many bones must be in the tent for them to be considered a dead body which will cause ritual impurity.  
According to Beth Shammai, a quarter-kav of bones will transmit impurity, as long as they come from at least two or three different bones.  Beth Hillel agrees that a quarter-kav of bones is enough to cause impurity but they state that the bones must either come from the greater portion of the body (the hips, thighs, rib cage and spine) or from a majority of the number of bones in the body, considered to be 248.  If there is a quarter-kav but they come from only one limb or many limbs but not a majority of the number or from the greater portion, they do not transmit impurity.
Shammai himself is even stricter than Beth Shammai, for he holds that a quarter-kav from one bone transmits impurity.

Mishnah Eight
Vetches of terumah: Beth Shammai says, “They must be soaked and rubbed in purity, but can be given for food in impurity.”   
And Beth Hillel says: “They must be soaked in purity, but can be rubbed and given for food in impurity.” 
Shammai says: “They must be eaten dry.”   
Rabbi Akiva says: “All actions in connection with them [can be carried out] in impurity.”  

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
In order to understand this mishnah we must first explain several rules.  
Terumah (heave offering) is a portion of produce separated to give to the priests.  It is only given from human food and not from animal feed.  Vetches, a type of bean, are generally given to animals, but can be eaten by humans in time of need.  
It is forbidden to cause terumah to become impure.  A person who touches terumah must have previously ritually washed his hands.
Food can receive impurity only once it has been made wet.  While it is dry it cannot receive impurity.
Our mishnah discusses the preparation of vetches of terumah.  According to Beth Shammai they must be prepared (both soaked and rubbed) with pure hands, lest the person decide to eat them himself, in which case it would be forbidden to make them impure.  However, they may be given to animals by a person with impure hands, since animal food is not really terumah.
According to Beth Hillel, they must be soaked by a person with pure hands, since getting them wet enables them to receive impurity.  However, when he rubs them or gives them to an animal it is obvious that they are not intended for humans, and therefore he can do so with impure hands.  
Shammai himself is again, stricter than Beth Shammai.  He holds that vetches must be eaten dry so that they will not be able to receive impurity.  Assumedly, Shammai would agree that a person might also eat them with clean hands.
Rabbi Akiva’s opinion is the most lenient.  He holds that vetches are not fit for human consumption and therefore one may do anything with them while his hands are impure.  Since vetches are animal food the rules of the purity of terumah do not apply to them.

