Eduyoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Nine, Ten and Eleven
   	
Introduction
Mishnayoth ten and eleven continue the pattern of mishnah seven and eight, whereby Beth Shammai, Hillel and Shammai disagree. In all of these mishnayoth Beth Hillel is the most lenient position and Shammai the strictest. Mishnah nine does not fit this pattern, for Shammai is absent.  This mishnah was probably a later addition to Eduyoth, brought over from another tractate of the Mishnah.  

Mishnah Nine
One who changes for a sela copper coins from second tithe:   
Beth Shammai says: “Copper coin for the whole sela.” 
And Beth Hillel say:  “Silver for one shekel and copper coin for one shekel.”   
Rabbi Meir says: “Silver and fruits may not be substituted for silver.”  
But the sages allow it.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Second tithe, the second ten percent of agricultural products, was to be taken to Jerusalem and consumed there.  If it was inconvenient to carry all of the second tithe produce to Jerusalem, one could redeem the produce with money and bring the money to Jerusalem.  Our mishnah discusses a person who has already redeemed some second tithe and wishes to exchange his small copper coins for a larger more valuable silver coin, a sela, which will be easier to carry to Jerusalem.    
According to Beth Shammai, in order to do this he must have a whole sela’s worth of copper coin.  If he has only half a sela’s worth of copper (=shekel) and he has a silver shekel (=1/2 sela) which is also of second tithe, he may not exchange the shekel and shekel’s worth of copper for a sela since it is forbidden to exchange silver second tithe for other silver second tithe.  
According to Beth Hillel, one is permitted to exchange a silver shekel and a shekel’s worth of copper coins for a sela.  Although it is in general forbidden to exchange silver second tithe for other silver second tithe, since part of this exchange is copper, it is permitted.
Rabbi Meir limits Beth Hillel’s opinion.  Although it is permitted to exchange silver and copper for silver second tithe, it is forbidden to exchange fruit and silver for other silver.  However, the Sages allow even this.

Mishnah Ten
One who exchanges a sela from second tithe in Jerusalem:   
Beth Shammai says: “Copper coin for the whole sela.”
And Beth Hillel says: “Silver for one shekel and copper coin for one shekel.” 
The disputants before the Sages say: “Silver for three denars and copper coin for one denar.” 
Rabbi Akiva says: “Silver for three denars and for the fourth silver, copper coin.”   
Rabbi Tarfon says: “Four aspers in silver.” 
Shammai says: “He must leave it in the shop and eat on the credit thereof.”

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
This mishnah discusses the person who arrives in Jerusalem with his silver sela of second tithe and wishes to exchange it for copper coins so that he can buy small quantities of food.  
According to Beth Shammai he must exchange the entire sela for copper.  This is consistent with Beth Shammai’s opinion in the previous mishnah: one cannot exchange silver second tithe with silver, but only with copper. 
According to Beth Hillel, he may exchange half of the sela for a silver shekel and the other half for copper.  Again, Beth Hillel holds that since he is exchanging part of the sela for copper he may also exchange part for silver.
Rabbi Akiva takes Beth Hillel’s position even further.  A person may exchange even ¼ of the sela (denar) for copper and the rest (3/4) for silver.  A sela is worth four denars. 
Rabbi Tarfon goes even further.  For the fourth denar he may even take four aspers of silver and one asper’s worth of copper.  An asper is 1/5 of a denar.
Shammai again is strictest.  He holds that he shouldn’t exchange the sela at all.  Rather he should leave it at a store and eat on credit.

Mishnah Eleven
A bride’s stool from which the covering-boards have been taken:   
Beth Shammai pronounces it [liable to become] unclean, 
And Beth Hillel pronounce it not [liable to become] unclean.   
Shammai says: “Even the framework of a stool [by itself is liable to become] unclean.” 
A stool which has been set in a baker’s trough: 
Beth Shammai pronounces it [liable to become] unclean, 
And Beth Hillel pronounces it not [liable to become] unclean.   
Shammai says: “Even one made therein [is liable to become unclean].”

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
According to Leviticus 15:4, any object on which a person who has had a discharge sits is impure.  The Rabbis taught that things that are not made to sit upon or are not fit to sit upon, do not receive impurity.  Our mishnah discusses two types of stools and whether or not they can receive impurity.  
Section one:  An ordinary stool was made of four legs held together by four boards (the framework), on which were placed covering boards for sitting. A bride’s stool had, in addition, three upright covering boards (also called ‘covering-boards’), against which the occupant leant.  The question in our mishnah is with regards to the status of a bride’s stool that does not have its special covering boards.  According to Beth Shammai, since this stool can still be sat upon, it can receive impurity.  According to Beth Hillel, since it does not fulfill its intended function as a bride’s stool, it cannot receive impurity.   Shammai, again taking the strictest position, holds that even a simple framework with no coverings can receive impurity.  Since one could potentially sit on the framework, it is considered enough of a stool to potentially become impure.  
Section two: If someone took a stool and put it into a kneading trough, in order to put flour or dough upon it, Beth Shammai would still rule that it is a stool and therefore susceptible to impurity.  Beth Hillel rules that the stool is now part of the trough, and since the trough can’t become impure, neither can the stool.  The reason that the trough can’t become impure is that it was not made for sitting.  Shammai rules that even a stool that was made from the outset as part of a trough, and therefore was never intended for sitting, can become impure.  Although it was not intended for sitting, since one could sit on it, it can become impure.  


