Eduyoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
These two mishnayoth answer in different ways the same thing:  why are minority opinions recorded in the Mishnah, if there is a rule that the halakhah (the law) is according to the majority opinion.

Mishnah Five
And why do they record the opinion of a single person among the many, when the halakhah must be according to the opinion of the many? 
So that if a court prefers the opinion of the single person it may depend on him. 
For no court may set aside the decision of another court unless it is greater than it in wisdom and in number.   
If it was greater than it in wisdom but not in number, in number but not in wisdom, it may not set aside its decision, unless it is greater than it in wisdom and in number.  

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Generally speaking, when there is a dispute in the Mishnah between an individual Sage and the rest of the Sages, the halakhah is according to the Sages.  This is due to a “majority rules” principle.  Our mishnah asks why then, does the Mishnah record the minority opinion, if that is not to be the accepted halakhah?  Before we begin to discuss the answer, which is somewhat difficult to decipher, we should recognize the importance of the question.  The Mishnah is not purely a book of halakhah, Jewish law, because it contains a plurality of opinions.  In my mind this makes an important statement about Judaism and Jewish law:  the first great work of the Oral Torah, that work which continues to shape Judaism to this very day, is not a recording of what one is supposed to do.  It records a dialogue between the Sages, meant to be learned and extrapolated.  This is the process of “Talmud Torah” that continues to this day.  Furthermore, the Mishnah teaches that minority opinions are not necessarily “wrong” even though they may not be accepted.  
The answer the mishnah provides to its question is slightly cryptic.  I will explain it in one way, but there are others who have explained it differently.  The mishnah records the opinions of individual Sages so that future courts might rely on their opinions and decide halakhah according to them.  Although at the time of the Mishnah these opinions were not accepted by the majority, since they are not “wrong”, in the future other courts may accept them.  
If a future court were to disagree with the opinions of an earlier court, and there was no recorded minority opinion, they could only change the decision if they were both wiser and greater in number than the earlier court.  In other words there are two ways, according to our mishnah, that a future court can overturn an earlier decision:  1)  by relying on a minority opinion; 2) by being greater in number and wisdom.

Mishnah Six
Rabbi Judah said:  “If so, why do they record the opinion of a single person among the many to set it aside?   So that if a man shall say, ‘Thus have I received the tradition’, it may be said to him, ‘According to the [refuted] opinion of that individual did you hear it.’”

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Rabbi Judah asks the same question that was asked in the previous mishnah:  why does the Mishnah record minority opinions.  His answer, however, is the exact opposite of the previous answer.  According to Rabbi Judah, minority opinions are recorded so that future Rabbis will not be able to rely on those opinions.  If a person in the future should say that he learned the tradition in a certain way, a Rabbi could point to the Mishnah and tell him that that is a minority opinion and is therefore not accepted as halakhah. Halakhah according to Rabbi Judah will continue to follow the majority.  
Note the irony that the Mishnah records a dispute about why it preserves minority opinions, and in this very discussion there is a recorded minority opinion.  If we were to look at this dispute in these two mishnayoth through the eyes of those who gave the first answer, they would have to say that in the future Rabbi Judah’s answer might be acceptable!  In other words those who allow for a change in the halakhah, must admit that in the future such change might not be acceptable.  If we were to look at the same dispute through Rabbi Judah’s eyes, we would have to say that this opinion is unaccepted now and forever!  Meaning, Rabbi Judah himself would have to admit that minority opinions are acceptable in the future, in which case, perhaps, even his minority opinion would someday be accepted.

Questions for Further Thought:
What might be some of the underlying conceptual differences between Rabbi Judah’s and the Sages’ (mishnah five) reasons why minority opinions are preserved in the Mishnah? 
