Eduyoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Thirteen and Fourteen

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth contain two more disputes between Beth Hillel and Beth Shammai in which Beth Hillel changed their mind and taught like Beth Shammai.

Mishnah Thirteen
Whoever is half a slave and half a free man should work one day for his master and one day for himself, according to Beth Hillel. 
Beth Shammai said to them:  “You have set matters in order with regards to his master, but you have not set matters in order with regards to himself. He is not able to marry a slave-woman, nor is he able [to marry] a woman who is free.   Is he to refrain [from marrying]? [How can he] for is it not the case that the world was created in order for people to be fruitful and multiply?  For it is said, “He did not create it to be a waste; but formed it for inhabitation” (Isaiah 45:18).  But for the rightful ordering of the world his master is compelled to make him free, and he writes out a bond for half his value.” 
Then Beth Hillel changed their mind and taught according to the opinion of Beth Shammai.

Explanation—Mishnah Thirteen
This mishnah discusses the case of a slave who is half free and half a slave.  This situation could arise if a slave was owned by two masters and one of them set his half free.  Beth Hillel allows such a situation to persists and rules that one day a week he should work for his master and one day a week he works for himself.  In other words, this person can remain a half-slave. 
Beth Shammai remarks to Beth Hillel that this is a fine arrangement for the master, but does not solve an essential problem for the slave.  A slave is permitted to marry a female slave but a regular Jew is not allowed to marry a female slave.  The half of this person who is a slave could marry a female slave but not a free Jewish woman, and the half of this person who is a Jew (when slaves are freed they become Jewish) could marry a Jewish woman but not a slave woman.  Since this problem is irreconcilable, he could not marry anyone.  Beth Shammai points out that this is also not an acceptable situation, and contradicts the existence of the entire creation.  God created people so that they could establish families and not so that they could remain celibate.  
The only solution is that he must be freed by the one remaining master, who writes him a manumission document. The slave then accepts upon himself a debt to pay back his owner and the slave goes free.  
When Beth Hillel heard Beth Shammai’s argument they accepted it, and taught like them.
We should note how truly remarkable this mishnah is.  Slavery was an accepted institution in the ancient world, and in every society slaves were amongst the lowest of the social classes.  Nevertheless, Beth Shammai is concerned that even slaves should have the opportunity to fulfill the purpose of the creation of the world:  procreation.  

Mishnah Fourteen
A vessel of earthenware can protect everything [in it from contracting impurity], according to Beth Hillel. 
But Beth Shammai says: “It protects only food and liquids and [other] vessels of earthenware.”
Beth Hillel said to them: “Why?” 
Beth Shammai said to them:  “Because it is [itself] impure with respect to an ignoramus, and no impure vessel can screen [against impurity].” 
Beth Hillel said to them:  “And did you not pronounce pure the food and liquids inside it?” 
Beth Shammai said to them:  “When we pronounced pure the food and liquids inside it, we pronounced them pure for him [the ignoramus] only, but when you pronounced the vessel pure you pronounced it pure for yourself and for him.” 
Then Beth Hillel changed their mind and taught according to the opinion of Beth Shammai.

Explanation—Mishnah Fourteen
According to Numbers 19:15, a clay vessel that is covered with a lid prevents impurity from entering inside of it.  If this vessel is found in a room with a dead body, which would normally cause everything in the room to be impure, the clay vessel and all that is inside of it does not contract the impurity.  Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel argue about what types of things which may be inside the clay vessels are not impure.  According to Beth Hillel any object inside the vessel is pure.  Beth Shammai holds that only food, liquids and other clay vessels remain pure; non-clay vessels would be impure.
Beth Shammai explains that we can assume that the clay vessel has been touched by an ignoramus (am haaretz), a person who does not strictly know or observe the laws of ritual purity.  It is assumed that the am haaretz makes the vessel impure.  Since an impure vessel does not prevent the impurity from entering, the things inside of it are impure.  
Beth Hillel responds to Beth Shammai by pointing out that they did indeed accept that the food and liquids inside the vessel were pure.  If the clay vessel does not prevent impurity from entering, why should anything inside of it remain pure?
To this question Beth Shammai responds that when they stated that the food and liquids were pure they meant for the am haaretz himself and not for the haver (a person who scrupulously observes the laws of purity and indeed eats only pure food). Beth Shammai assumes that a haver will not borrow any of these things from an am haaretz, since they cannot be made pure (a clay vessel cannot be cleansed of its impurity).  Therefore Beth Shammai can pronounce these things clean, knowing that they will never come into the hands of a haver.  However, when Beth Hillel pronounced everything inside pure, they were in essence declaring it pure for both the am haaretz and the haver.  Beth Hillel had implied that even metal vessels, inside the clay vessel, remained pure.  A haver might borrow metal vessels from an am haaretz, with the intent of immersing them to cleanse them of their impurities.  However, this immersion will only cleanse them from light impurities and not from impurity contracted from a dead body.  Therefore, an am haaretz might borrow them thinking that he could cleanse them and in reality he could not.  Due to this problem, Beth Hillel retracted their opinion and taught like Beth Shammai.  

