Eduyoth, Chapter Two, Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnah seven contains three things that other Sages said in front of Rabbi Akiva:  two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and one in the name of Rabbi Joshua.  Mishnah eight contains three statements of Rabbi Akiva.  The Sages agreed with two of these statements and disagreed with the other.  

Mishnah Seven
They said three things before Rabbi Akiva, two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and one in the name of Rabbi Joshua. 
Two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: 
A woman may go out [on the Sabbath adorned] with a “golden-city”;   
And they that fly pigeons are unfit to bear evidence.   
And one in the name of Rabbi Joshua: 
If there was a creeping thing in the mouth of a weasel when it walked over loaves of terumah, and it is doubtful whether it touched them or whether it did not touch them, that about which there is doubt remains pure.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Two things were said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer in front of Rabbi Akiva.
Section one:  A woman may go out of her house on the Sabbath wearing a tiara of gold, stamped with the imprint of Jerusalem.  This is called a “golden city”.  The general reason why women are not allowed to wear jewelry in the public domain on the Sabbath is that she might take off the piece to show it to others and will thereby transgress the prohibition of carrying in the public domain on the Sabbath.  However, Rabbi Eliezer holds that since a woman who has such a tiara must be wealthy, and wealthy women do not take off their jewelry to show it off, we need not be concerned that they will do so.  By the way, this phrase is reminiscent of the “Jerusalem of Gold”, the “Yerushalayim shel Zahav” given by Rabbi Akiva to his wife, and made famous by the modern song.  Evidently it was a well known piece of jewelry in ancient times.
Section two:  Those that race pigeons are unfit to testify, since this is a form of gambling.  We learned this law in Sanhedrin 3:3.
Section three:  There was one law stated in the name of Rabbi Joshua.  If a weasel has a dead creepy crawly thing (which is a source of impurity) in its mouth, and the weasel walks on loaves of terumah, and we are unsure whether the creepy crawly thing touched the terumah, the terumah remains pure.  This is due to a general rule that if a source of impurity is moving, and it is doubtful whether it touched anything, the thing it might have touched remains pure.  Since the weasel was moving and it is doubtful whether what was in its mouth touched the terumah, the terumah remains pure. 

Mishnah Eight
Rabbi Akiba declared three things; about two they agreed with him, and about one they disagreed with him. 
About a lime-burner’s sandal, that it is liable to contract midras impurity;   
And about the remains of a [broken] oven, that they must be four handbreadths high [in order to retain impurity], whereas they used to say three and [when he said four] they agreed with him. 
And about one they disagreed with him
About a stool, from which two of its covering-boards had been removed, the one beside the other, which Rabbi Akiba pronounces able to contract impurity, but the Sages declare unable to contract impurity.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  A lime-burners sandal is a special sandal that he wears over his feet in order to protect them for the burning lime.  The question being raised is are these sandals normal footwear, such that they receive midras impurity.  Midras impurity is a kind of impurity imparted by a zav (someone who had an abnormal genital discharge) to things which are normally walked upon.  For instance if a zav steps upon a carpet it is impure, for carpets are made to be walked upon.  However, if he steps upon a book it does not receive midras impurity, since people don’t normally walk on books.  Rabbi Akiva teaches that although lime-burners are not made to be walked in, since they are put on a person’s feet, they can receive midras impurity.
Section two:  If an object that has contracted impurity breaks and is therefore no longer useful, it is no longer impure.  The question is into how small pieces must an oven break for it to become pure.  According to Rabbi Akiva pieces which are smaller than 4 handbreaths (about a foot) retain impurity.  Before the Sages heard Rabbi Akiva’s opinion they had held that a piece 3 handbreadths retains impurity.  When they heard Rabbi Akiva’s opinion, they agreed with him.
Section three:  The disagreement between the Sages and Rabbi Akiva is over a chair which had two adjoining cover-boards removed.  We discussed this issue in chapter one, mishnah eleven, when we discussed the special bridal chair.  Here we learn that according to Rabbi Akiva, once two adjoining cover-boards are removed, it is no longer useful as a chair, and therefore it is not receptive to impurity.  The Sages hold that since the chair could still be used if there was great need for it, it can still receive impurity.  In other words, it is still a chair.
