Eduyoth, Chapter Two, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three contains the final two testimonies of Rabbi Hananyah, chief of priests.  Mishnah four contains three testimonies of Rabbi Yishmael, which he gave in front of the other Sages in Yavneh.  As I stated in the introduction to Eduyoth, this is where the Sages gathered after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem.

Mishnah Three
He also testified concerning a small village in the vicinity of Jerusalem in which there was an old man who used to lend to all the people of the village and write out [the bond] in his own handwriting and others signed it.  And when the fact was brought before the Sages they pronounced it legal.  
Hence, incidentally, you may infer that a wife may write her own bill of divorcement, and a husband may write his own receipt; for the legality of a document depends only on those who sign it. 
And [he testified] concerning a needle which was found in flesh of a [sacrifice], that the knife and the hands [which had been employed on the flesh] are clean, but the flesh itself is defiled; and if it was found in the excrement, all are clean.  

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  The third thing about which Rabbi Hananyah testified is about the manner in which documents may be written.  He testified that he saw an elder in a town near Jerusalem who used to write out his own loan documents and have others sign them and the Sages pronounced it legal, even though the witnesses did not write out the entire document themselves.  Without Rabbi Hananyah’s testimony we might have thought that the lender is not allowed to write out the document himself, for fear that he would forget a document and thereby falsely claim that someone owed him money.  
From Rabbi Hananyah’s testimony we learn that a woman is allowed to write out her own divorce document and a man might right out his own receipt for having paid the woman’s ketubah (marriage payment).  Even though the divorce document is given by the man to the woman and the receipt is given by the woman to the man, since the legality of a document depends solely upon the witnesses, it does not matter who writes it out.  As long as these documents are witnessed properly, they are valid.
Section two:  The final issue upon which Rabbi Hananyah testified is with regards to a needle which was found in the body of a sacrifice after it had been slaughtered.  The needle was known to have been made impure by a dead body and the question is being asked, are the knife that had been used to slaughter the animal and the person who slaughtered the animal impure from having had contact with the impure needle.  Rabbi Hananyah testifies that the knife and slaughterer are not impure but the flesh of the sacrifice is impure, for the needle surely came into contact with it.  The reason that the knife and slaughterer are still pure is that doubtful cases of impurity in the public domain are considered pure.  The flesh does not make the knife impure because food does not impart impurity to vessels.  
If, however, the needle was found in the feces of the animal, the knife, slaughterer and even the flesh are pure, because we cannot be sure that the animal’s flesh touched the needle.  Although we could assume that the animal swallowed the needle and therefore it touched the flesh, this is not certain and therefore, since this happened in the public domain, the rules are lenient.

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Yishmael declared three things before the Sages in the vineyard at Yavneh: Concerning an egg which was beaten together, and placed on vegetables of terumah — that it acts as a connection; but if it was in the form of a helmet it does not act as a connection. 
And concerning an ear of corn in the harvesting, the top of which reached the standing corn — that if it can be reaped together with the standing corn, it belongs to the owner; and if not, it belongs to the poor.   
And concerning a small garden which was surrounded by a row of vines — that if it has space for the grape-gatherer and his basket on one side, and space for the grape-gatherer and his basket on the other side, it may be sown with seed; but if not, it may not be sown with seed.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  In the situation in this section a mixed egg is on top of a vegetable which is terumah (only eaten by priests).  If a tevul yom, one who was been in the mikveh (bath of ritual purity), and who is considered to carry second degree impurity (see above mishnah one) touches the mixed egg it is as if he also touched the vegetable, and he conveys third degree impurity to the vegetable.  In other words, the egg is part of the vegetable and touching the egg counts as touching the vegetable.  Since third degree impurity makes terumah impure, the vegetable is impure.  If however the egg has been cooked and rose to form a type of covering over the vegetable, it does not connect the tevul yom with the vegetable and the vegetable remains pure.  In other words the central question asked is:  does touching the egg make the vegetable impure.
Section two:  When a farmer is harvesting his wheat, if he forgets a stalk he may not go back and reap it.  Rather he must leave it for the poor (see Deuteronomy 24:19).  Rabbi Yishmael defines what is a forgotten stalk.  If a person leaves a stalk and it is close enough to another stalk at which he has not yet arrived, that if he were to bend the first stalk it could touch the other stalk, then it is not considered to have been forgotten and he may reap it.  If it is not close enough to bend it and touch the other stalk, it is considered forgotten and he must leave it for the poor.
Section three:  According to Deuteronomy 22:9, it is forbidden to plant seeds in a vineyard.  Rabbi Yishmael testifies that if a small garden surrounded by one row of grape vines is big enough on each of its sides for a grape-gatherer to stand there with his basket then he may plant the garden with seeds.  In such a case the garden is large enough to be considered separate from the vineyard.  If, however, the garden is smaller, then it is merely a bald patch inside a vineyard, and it is forbidden to plant there seeds. 
