Eduyoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnayoth seven and eight both list cases in which one Sage declares something pure and the other Sages declare it impure.

Mishnah Seven
Four  cases of doubt Rabbi Joshua pronounces impure, and the Sages pronounce them pure. 
How is this so? 
If the impure person stands and the pure person passes by him;
or if the pure person stands and the impure person passes by him; 
or if impurity is in the private domain and something pure is in the public domain;   
Or if something pure is in the private domain and something impure is in the public domain;   
If it is doubtful [in all of these case] whether one touched or did not touch the other, or if it is doubtful whether one formed a tent over the other or did not form a tent over the other, or if it is doubtful whether one moved or did not move the other—
Rabbi Joshua pronounces such a case impure, and the Sages pronounce it pure.  

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
In this mishnah are listed four situations in which there is a doubt whether or not the pure person was touched by the impure person, or one of them formed a tent over the other (which would cause impurity to be transmitted, even without contact) or one of them moved the other (which would also transmit impurity, even without contact).  In all of these situations Rabbi Joshua rules that the previously pure person is now impure, whereas the Sages hold that he is still pure. 
The cases are:
i + ii)  A case where one of the people is moving and one is stationary.  In this case Rabbi Joshua pronounces the person impure due to the general rule that doubtful cases of impurity which occur in the private domain are ruled impure.  The Sages say that he is pure. Although there is a general rule that doubtful cases of impurity that occur in the private domain are ruled impure, this is true only when the pure and the impure are either both moving or both stationary.  If their status is different, then the rule is not applicable.
iii + iv)  The pure and impure are in different domains, one in the public domain and one in the private domain.  According to Rabbi Joshua, since at least one of the two is in the private domain, he is impure, due to the above mentioned rule.  According to the Sages, since one is in the public domain, the rule that doubtful cases of impurity in the private domain does not apply.

Mishnah Eight 
Three things Rabbi Zadok pronounces [liable to receive] impurity and the Sages pronounce them not [liable to receive]: 
The nail of the money-changer;
And the chest of grist makers; 
And the nail of a stone dial.   
Rabbi Zadok pronounces [liable to receive] impurity and the Sages pronounce them not [liable to receive].

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Rabbi Zadok and the Sages disagree with regards to the liability of three items to receive impurity.  Again, in order to receive impurity something must be considered “a vessel”, which in the Mishnah can include any manmade usable object which a has a specified purpose to it.  According to Rabbi Zadok the items listed in our mishnah fit the definition of “vessel” whereas according to the Sages, they do not.
The items are:
The nail of a money-changer.  According to Maimonides, this was the nail used to hang the scales that the money-changer would use to weigh the money.
The chest used by a grist-maker to store the grist.  Others explain that this is the nail of a chest used by a grist-maker, which is used to attach the chest to a wagon to bring the grist to market.  If this is the correct explanation, then our mishnah lists three different types of nails.
The nail used to measure time in a sundial.    
