Introduction—Tractate Eduyoth

Tractate Eduyoth is a unique tractate in the entire Mishnah.  Instead of being organized by topic, as is every other tractate, Eduyoth is organized by the names of the Sages transmitting the mishnah.  Eduyoth begins with disputes between Shammai and Hillel, it continues with disputes between the House of Hillel and the House of Shammai, and follows this type of pattern throughout its eight chapters.  Most of the mishnayoth in Eduyoth are found in other tractates which discuss those specific topics discussed in each individual mishnah.  
Eduyoth is probably the first tractate of the Mishnah to have been composed.  The Tosefta, which is a collection of material that accompanies the Mishnah, provides the following background to the compilation of Eduyoth:  “When the Sages gathered in the vineyard of Yavneh, they said, ‘In the future a person might look for something from the words of the Torah and not find it, from the words of the Soferim (Rabbis) and not find it.’ … They said, ‘Let’s begin with Hillel and Shammai.’  In other words, after the Temple was destroyed (70 C.E.) the Sages of Israel gathered in Yavneh to put some organization to the ever-growing Oral Torah.  The original organization created in Yavneh was not topical.  Rather the Mishnah was organized by the name of the teacher.  Later Sages, most notably Rabbi Akiva, began to organize the material of the Mishnah into topical orders and tractates.  As they did so they took mishnayoth from Eduyoth and put them into their proper context.  With this topically organized work, one could truly search for a topic in the Oral Torah.
Due to its eclectic nature, Eduyoth is a difficult work. There will be many background laws to some of its mishnayoth, and it will take longer to explain them.  There are also many issues of ritual purity and impurity which will arise in Eduyoth.  The details of these laws are not easy and will seem foreign to someone not familiar with them.  Nevertheless, with patience and effort, we will continue to learn.

Eduyoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth One and Two

Mishnah One
Shammai says: “For all women [who begin to menstruate] it suffices [to reckon their impurity from] the time [of their discovering it].”  
And Hillel says: “[Their impurity is reckoned backwards] from the [last] examination to the [previous] examination, even if this covers many days.”  
But the Sages say:  “Neither according to the opinion of this one nor according to the opinion of this one, but [they are considered impure for] the past twenty four hours  when this lessens the period from the [last] examination to the [previous] examination, and for the period from the [last] examination to the [previous] examination when this lessens the past twenty-four hours.”  
Any woman who has a regular period, it suffices [to reckon her impurity from] her set time.  
She who uses testing-cloths [when she has sexual relations], behold this is like an examination: it lessens either the period of the [past] twenty four hours or the period from the [last] examination to the [previous] examination.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  This mishnah discusses a woman’s ritual impurity as a menstruant.  When a woman menstruates she makes impure certain things which she touches.  The problem is that a woman may not always know when she begins to menstruate, in order to know which things that she touched are impure.  Shammai is not concerned with this problem; he states that only things that they have touched after they discover that they are menstruating are impure.  Hillel is very considered about this problem; he states that anything touched after the last time she checked herself is impure.  In other words, since we cannot be certain when she began menstruating after the last time she checked, we are strict and anything from this time and onwards is impure.  The Sages, who probably lived after Shammai and Hillel, found a compromise position.  The things a menstruant touched before she discovered that she was menstruating are impure either within the last twenty-four hours or since she last checked, whichever was more recent.   For example if it is now Tuesday afternoon and she checked herself on Tuesday morning, anything she touched between the morning and the afternoon is assumed to be impure.  If however, it is now Tuesday afternoon and she checked herself Monday morning, anything she touched in the last twenty-four hour period is impure.  
Section two:  Any woman who has a regular cycle, begins to make things impure only from the moment she realizes that she is menstruating.  It can be assumed that this woman did not begin menstruating at an earlier time since she has a regular cycle.
Section three:  If a woman wipes herself clean after having relations with her husband, this counts as checking herself.  If within the next twenty-four hours she should realize that she is menstruating, she has made impure only those things which she touched since she had relations and cleaned herself.  

Mishnah Two
Shammai says:  “[Dough] of a kav or more is subject to the law of hallah.”   
And Hillel says: “Of two kavs or more.” 
But the Sages say: “Neither according to the opinion of this one nor according to the opinion of this one, but [dough of] a kav and a half is subject to the law of hallah.” 
And after they increased the measures they said:  “[Dough of] five quarters is subject. 
Rabbi Yose said:  “Five are exempt, five and more are liable.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  Numbers 15:20-21 commands Jews to set aside some of their dough and give it to the priests.  This is called “hallah”.  The question is how big of a batch of dough makes a person liable to separate hallah?  According to Shammai, if one mixes one kav of dough he must separate hallah to give to the priests.  A kav is about 1 ½ liters. According to Hillel, two kavs of dough make one obligated to separate hallah.  The Sages compromise between the two positions and state that 1 ½ kavs is sufficient to obligate for hallah.
Section two:  Later in the Mishnaic period, in Tsippori which is in the Galilee, the measure of weights were increased so that a kav was now larger than it used to be.  Therefore, the amount that obligates one to separate hallah became 1 1/5 kavs.  According to Rabbi Yose, exactly 1 1/5 kavs does not obligate one to separate hallah, but anything over that amount does.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah two:  Why should there be a minimum amount of dough to make one liable to separate hallah?  Why shouldn’t a person have to separate hallah from even a small amount of dough?     

  
