Eduyoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today continue to list the disputes between Rabbi Dosa and the Sages.  The first one dispute deals with terumah, heave offering.  The rest of the dispute are about issues of purity.

Mishnah Three
The insides of a melon and the discarded leaves of a vegetable of terumah: 
Rabbi Dosa permits [their] use to non-priests, and the Sages forbid it.   
Five ewes, their fleeces weighing each a mina and a half, are subject to [the law of] the first of the fleece, according to Rabbi Dosa. 
But the Sages say: “Five ewes [are subject] whatever [their fleeces weigh].”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  Terumah, one of the agricultural offerings, may be eaten only by priests.  According to Rabbi Dosa, the parts of terumah produce that are not commonly eaten are permitted to non-priests.  Since these are not considered food, and the laws of terumah are only applicable to food, these things may be eaten by non-priests.  The Sages forbid this.  Presumably, according to the Sages since people do occasionally eat these things, the laws of terumah apply to them as well.
Section two:  According to Deuteronomy 18:4, the first shearings of a sheep must be given to the priest.  In our mishnah Rabbi Dosa and the Sages disagree about the minimum weight of the fleeces of the sheep which would cause them to be subject to these laws.  According to Rabbi Dosa a person is not liable to give these shearings to the priest unless he has five female sheep and each fleece weighs a mina and a half, about 150 grams.  Less than this is not even considered “shearings”.  The Sages disagree.  According to them as long as five female sheep are sheared, he must give the first shearings to the priest, no matter what the weight of the wool.    

Mishnah Four
All mats are [liable to become] impure by “corpse” impurity, the words of Rabbi Dosa. 
But the Sages say: “[Also by] “midras” impurity.   
All network is unsusceptible to impurity except a [network] girdle, the words of Rabbi Dosa. 
But the Sages say: “They are all liable to uncleanness, except those used by wool dealers [for carrying raw wool].”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  Rabbi Dosa and the Sages disagree with regards to the susceptibility of mats to midras impurity.  Midras impurity is a type of impurity which is received by a zav sitting or lying down on an object.  Only things that are typically sat on or lied down upon can receive this type of impurity.  According to Rabbi Dosa, mats can receive corpse impurity by coming into contact with a dead body, or a part thereof.  However, since the mats under discussion are not used for sitting or for lying down, they cannot receive midras impurity.  The Sages hold that they can, since they are occasionally used for such a purpose.
Section two:  Network, things made of nets (not computer networks, which I suppose cannot receive impurity), are not considered by Rabbi Dosa to be clothing and therefore they cannot receive impurity.  As we learned on several occasions, only things that are formed vessels or clothing can receive impurity.  Since network is not really clothing, it cannot receive impurity.  The only exception to this rule about things made of nets is a type of girdle which is a piece of clothing and therefore can be made impure.  The Sages disagree.  They hold that network is considered clothing.  The only exception is a bag used by wool dealers to hold wool.  Since this is definitely not clothing it cannot be made impure.

Questions for Further Thought:
We have now learned several disputes between Rabbi Dosa and the Sages.  Do you seen any consistency to their opinions?
Mishnah four:  What modern items might be similar to the mats and network under discussion in this mishnah?   
