Makkot
מכות
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Mishna: How are witnesses [which come before a rabbinical court to testify] made zominein, [for example, wittnesses come before rabbinical court and they say] "we testify in regard to ploni that he is a ben grusha or ben chalutza [the witnesses are then made false and the rabbinical court,] they [the rabbinical court] don't say "it will be made [that these witnesses now have the status of a] ben grusha or a ben chalutza in his [the individual who they are testifying about i.e. ploni's] stead, rather [as a punishment] they [the false witnesses] are lashed forty times. [In a case where witnesses] testify about ploni that he is obligated to go to exile, they [the rabbinical court] don't say "it will be that [the false witnesses] be exiled in his stead, rather [as a punishment] they [the false witnesses] are lashed forty times. 


Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a











Mishnah: These are the ones [who are liable for] exile: The one who kills another unintentionally. One who was rolling with a roller (a stone or piece of wood to smooth and flatten roofs), and it fell on him (someone on the ground) and it kills him [or] one who was lowering a barrel and it falls on him and it kills him, [or] one who was descending on a ladder and he fell on him, and it killed him, this one is [liable for] exile [to the city of refuge]. But if he was pulling on the roller, and it fell on him and it killed him, [or] if he was raising a barrel and the cord [he was using to raise it] split and it fell on him, and it killed him,

Daf 7b

[Or] if he was ascending on a ladder and if he fell and killed him, this one is not [liable for] exile. This is the general rule: Anyone on his way down, [that person is liable for] exile. Anyone that is not on its way down, [that person is liable for] exile.
Gemara: From where is it derived [that downward motion that kills someone is punished by exile]? Shmuel said that the verse said: “And he cast it upon him, and he died” (Numbers 35:23) [meaning] until it falls in the way of falling. 
Our Rabbis taught [in a baraita]: “Through error” (Numbers 35:11) this excludes acting willfully. “Without awareness” (Deuteronomy 19:4) this excludes intentionality. 
Acting willfully is obvious! He is liable for death. Rather Rava said: Say [instead: “Through error”] excludes the one who says it is permitted [to do a prohibited action]. Abaye said to him: If he is one who says it is permitted, [then he falls into the category of] one who had no choice. [Rava] said to him: It is because I say that the one who said it is permitted [falls into the category of] one who was grossly negligent. 
“Without awareness” (Deuteronomy 19:4) excludes intentionality. Intentionality is obvious! He is liable for death. Rabbah said: this excludes [when] he intends to kill an animal and kills a person, [when he intends to kill] a Cutite and kills a Jew, [when he intends to kill] a stillbirth and kills a viable infant. 
Our Rabbis taught [in a baraita]: “If he came upon him suddenly” (Numbers 35:22) this excludes a [case when someone turns quickly] around a corner. “Without hatred” (Numbers 35:22) excludes the one who hates [their victim]. “He pushed him” (Numbers 35:22) [means] when he pushed his body. “Or hurled upon him” (Numbers 35:22) includes downward motion that is for a need of upward motion. “Without lying in wait (tz’diyah)” (Numbers 35:22) excludes the one who intends [to throw something] to one side (tzad) and it goes to the other side. 
“And if one does not lie in wait (tzadah)” (Exodus 21:13) excludes the one who intends to throw [something] two cubits and he threw [it] four cubits. ...
“When a person comes upon his friend in a forest” (Deuteronomy 19:5) Just as in a forest it is permitted for the perpetrator and the victim to enter there [because it is public space], so too [the same rules apply in] any [place where it is] permitted for the perpetrator and the victim to enter there.
R' Abahu asked R' Yohanan a question: If a person was ascending a ladder and a rung broke under him and it fell and struck someone below and killed him, is this a situation of ascent (where he would be exempt) or descent (where he would be held liable? 
 He said to him: You've already touched on this (in an earlier baraita)-in a case of descending for the purpose of ascent (here, we mean that the rung is going downward for the purpose of the person ascending). 
He challenged him-this is the general rule: anything that is within a downward movement, (that person) is sent to exile. Anything not in a downward movement(that person who initiated the act) is not exiled. And what does this "anything not in a downward movement include?" Does it not include this case?!(where the rung is downward and you are moving up, where, according to this general rule, that person would not be culpable for the rung falling)
But according to your reasoning, (the rule that) anything that is in the way of descent includes what?! Does it not include a butcher? Here too, it also comes to include the case of the butcher-as it is taught in a baraita: a butcher who was cutting meat. One tanna teaches that (if he struck someone who was standing) before him, he would liable and (if the person was behind him), he would be exempt. Another tanna teaches that (if he struck someone behind him) he would be liable and if (he struck someone before him), he would be exempt. Another tanna teaches that whether the person was before him or behind him, he would liable. And another tanna teaches that whether he was before him or behind him, he would be exempt.
This is not a difficulty. Here (where he would be liable for the person standing before him but exempt if he were behind him) is when the knife is descending in front of him and ascending behind him. Here (where he is he is exempt for the person standing before him but liable for the person standing behind him) is when the upward motion is in front of him but the downward motion is behind him. Here (where he is liable in both situations) is when the downward motion is both in front of him and behind him. And here (where he is exempt in all cases) is when the upward motion is both in front of him and behind him.
(Now we return back to the debate between R' Abahu and R. Yohanan about the case of the fallen rung) Let us say this same issue was the matter of a Tannaitic debate: One who is ascending a ladder and a rung falls. One tanna taught that he is liable and another taught that he is exempt. (about this case) Was it not about this that they were disagreeing? One of them held that it was a case of descent(where he is liable) and one of them holds that he is ascending(where he is exempt). No(that's wrong), everybody agrees that it is a case of ascent. And this is not a problem(they still have a disagreement). Here(one is talking about the issue of) damages(where he would be obligated to pay the compensation for damages caused) and the other(is talking about the issue of exile) from which he would be exempted. If you want, say that both cases are talking about exile and there is still not a difficulty. They are disagreeing about it being rotten. Here, (where he would be obligated for exile) is when (the rung) is rotten. Here(where he would be exempt from exile) is when it is not rotten. And if you want, say that they both agree that the wood was not rotten and it is still not a difficulty: Here(where he would be exempt from exile) is when the rung has been fastened. Here, (where he would be liable) is when he did not fasten it. …
If the iron axe head slipped from its handle and it killed someone, Rebi says he isn't exiled, and the Sages say that he is exiled. If (a wood chip) from the tree broke off (and that wood chip killed someone), Rebi says he is exiled, and the Sages say that he isn't exiled.
It was taught: Rebi said to the Sages: Does it say, "and the iron (flies off) from its wood?" Does it not only say "from the wood?" And furthermore, the word "wood" is said below and the word "wood" is said above. Just as the word "wood" is said above (and refers to wood that comes) from the tree being chopped, so too the word "wood" is said below (and refers to wood that comes) from the tree being chopped.
Rav Chiyah bar Ashi said in the name of Rav: Both (the Sages and Rebi) interpreted one verse. The iron breaks off from the wood (Ve'neshal). Rebi holds that the transmission (how the written word appears in the text) is what matters, and 'Ve'Neyshal' it is written (the form of which implies that the phrase should be understood as meaning that the axe blade caused something else - i.e., a wood chip - to come loose), but the Sages hold that the pronunciation (how we actually read the word) is what matters and "nashal" we read (the form of which implies that the actual axe head flew off). 
But does Rebi hold that the  the transmission (how the written word appears in the text) is what matters?...
.....




Daf 8a

But it was stated: Rav Yitzhak bar Yoseph said (in the name of) Rabbi Yochanan: Rebi, and Rabbi Yehudah ben Roetz, and the School of Shammai, and Rabbi Shimon, and Rabbi Akiva, all of them hold that the pronunciation (how we actually read the word) is what matters! This is why Rebi said "and furthermore!" (He needed to give another reason because in general he does hold that pronunciation is what matters.) 
Rav Pappa said: One who threw a clod of dirt at a palm tree, and (the clod of dirt) knocked dates, and the dates fell and killed someone - (in this case) we have arrived at the disagreement between Rebi and the Sages! But this is obvious! Since you might have said that (the death in this instance is) like a case of secondary force, therefore this teaches you that this is not the case (and that this is a case where the death is a result of primary force, and therefore this case is parallel to the Mishnah).
However, where can we find a case where Rebi (would exempt someone from exile) in an instance of secondary force? This is like (a case where) someone threw a clod of dirt and it struck a twig and the twig then went and hit a cluster of dates and the dates then fell and killed. 
Mishnah: The one who throws a stone into the public domain and killed [someone], behold, he is exiled. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: If, from when the stone left his hand, another person stuck out their head and received [the stone and was killed], behold, he is exempt [from exile].  
The one who threw a stone into his courtyard and he killed [someone], if there was permission for the victim to enter there, [the thrower] is exiled. And if [the victim does] not [have permission], he is not exiled. As it was said: “When a person comes upon his friend in a forest” (Deuteronomy 19:5), Just as in a forest it is permitted for the perpetrator and the victim to enter there [because it is public space], so too [the same rules apply in] any [place where it is] permitted for the perpetrator and the victim to enter there, except the courtyard [in which] the owner has not given permission to the victim (or the perpetrator) to enter there.
Abba Shaul says: Just as cutting wood is optional [for someone and therefore he should not be punished], so too, anything that is optional [should not receive punishment] except the father who strikes his son, the teacher who rebukes his student [through beating], and the messenger of the court [who gives punishments through lashings].
Gemara: [The one who throws a stone] into the public domain is an intentional [sinner]!
Rav Shmuel bar Yitzchak said: [Rather this is in a case when] he is taking down his wall.
He should have been paying attention!
[Rather this is in a case when] he is taking down his wall at night.
At night also, he should have been paying attention!
[Rather this is in a case when] he is taking down his wall towards the garbage heap.
This garbage heap, what is the case?
If it is common for many [people] to be in it (the garbage heap), he is [considered] a criminal. If it is not common for many [people] to be in it, it is [considered a situation of] one who had no choice (meaning that it was a freak accident or totally unexpected).
Rav Papa said: This is only necessary to teach [a case of] a garbage heap that is regularly used [as a bathroom] at night, and not one that is regularly used during the day, because it is possible that someone will be sitting there, [therefore] he is not a [considered] a criminal. [In a case] that it is not regularly used during the day, it is also not [considered] totally unexpected, because it is possible that someone will be sitting there.
Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says, etc.
Our Rabbis taught [in a baraita]: And “and found [his neighbor]” (Deuteronomy 19:5) excludes the one who places himself [in danger]. From here [it follows that] Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: if, from when the stone left his hand, another person stuck out their head and received [the stone and was killed], he is exempt [from exile].
Is that to say that “found” [means that the person] was already there from the outset?
And pit them against each other [this baraita and the baraita that follows]: “and he found” (Leviticus 25:26) (This verse describes a case in which someone has a third party redeem a field because they do not have funds. If that person is trying to subvert the system and already has the money to redeem, he is not permitted to go through this process of including a third party) excludes [what was already] found, because he may not sell a far [field] and redeem it with [a field that is] close, [nor a field that is] bad and redeem it for a good [quality field].
Rava said: here, the verse [in the second baraita] is according to its context, and there, the verse [in the first baraita] is according to its context. There, according to the context of the verse, “he found” is the same as “he obtained it in his hand” (Leviticus 25:26). Just as he obtained it in his hand from now (meaning already in the past) so too, he also found from now (meaning already in the past). Here, according to the context of the verse, “he found” is the same as the forest. Just as the forest something was there from the outset, so too, also [in the case of] “he found” something was there from the outset. 
The one who throws the stone, etc.
One of the rabbis said to Rava: From what [basis are we stating the case] that he is cutting wood because it is optional? Perhaps he is cutting wood because [it is for a] sukkah or cutting wood [for the altar] (which would be a requirement and not an option), and even this, Scripture said, he should be exiled [for doing something required]?!
He (Rava) said to him: since he found it cut and he does not cut [it himself], it is not a mitzvah, also now [regarding cutting wood] is not a mitzvah.
Ravina challenges this to Rava: [this case] excludes the father who strikes his son, the teacher who rebukes his student, and the messenger of the court, lets say, that since [the child is already] learned, it is not a mitzvah [to strike his son], also now [regarding cutting wood] is not a mitzvah [and therefore not required]. There, even though he is learned, it is a mitzvah [to strike him], as it is written: “correct your son and he will please you. He will give delight to your soul.” (Proverbs 29:17).


Daf 8b


There are those that teach this on the following(Rava's statement, instead of being related to inadvertent killing will now be compared to laws of shemitah). "From the reaping and the plowing you shall rest. "Rabbi Akiva says the text did not need to speak of reaping and plowing of the 7th year as it already said, "your field, do not plant and your vineyard do not prune."Rather, it is teaching(the first verse) that even the plowing of the year before shemitah(is forbidden as its produce) will go into the 7th year and the (sanctity of shemitah is applied) for the reaping of the 7th year that will go out(continue to grow) after the 7th year.
Rabbi Yishmael says(his response because he sees the verse as referring to Shabbat): Just as plowing is optional(not a Mitzvah) so too reaping is optional(i.e. these acts are only forbidden on Shabbat if they are done voluntarily as opposed to for Mitzvah reasons). It excludes the reaping for the omer(offering) as it is a Mitzvah. A certain Rabbi asked Rava: From where do you know(Really R' Yishmael) that this plowing is voluntary? Maybe it is plowing for the Mitzvah of the Omer and even in this case, God said(Torah), "you shall desist."
He answered him: If he were to find the (field) already plowed, then he would not have to plow again.(Therefore), plowing is not a Mitzvah. 
Ravina challenged Rava(all the cases to follow are where the person is in pursuit of a Mitzvah so they would not be punished with exile): This excludes the case of a father who strikes his son(and kills him inadvertently), and the teacher who rebukes his student(and inadvertently kills him) and the court agent(who inadvertently killed). So, why(is this a mitzvah to hit one's son, etc?) Let us say that since he was already learned(the son), it's not actually a Mitzvah to strike him(again) so here too, it is also not a Mitzvah. 
(Rava:)There, despite the fact that he's already learned, it is still a Mitzvah to hit him, as it is stated, "rebuke your son and he will bring you rest." (Now, another solution for their challenge) He returned and said: That which I said before is not a thing(I could have given a better answer). Reaping is similar to plowing. Just as with plowing, if one found already plowed material, he does not have to plow another, so too with reaping, if he found it reaped, he does not have to reap again. And if you should think(that reaping, as brought by the verse) is a Mitzvah, if he found grain, (would he) not have to still reap? (Rather), it is a Mitzvah to reap and bring(new grain).
Mishnah: A father is exiled because of (killing b'shogeg) his son and the son is exiled by way of (killing b'shogeg) his father. Any person is exiled by way (killing b'shogeg) an Israelite and an Israelite is exiled by way of (killing b'shogeg) them except for a foreign resident. A foreign resident is only sent to exile for a (killing a fellow) foreign resident. 
Gemara: "The father is exiled for his son."  But didn't you say (in an earlier Mishnah) that a father who strikes his son is not exiled. But he was already learned in that situations(which is why he would be exiled, since it was not a hit of a Mitzvah). But you said, even when he is learned, it actually is a Mitzvah that he is doing(so he would not be exiled). (Here, we're talking about a father who's son) is the apprentice of a carpenter(so he is just teaching him a trade-and he would not be exiled). Learning (to be) a carpenter's apprentice is a livelihood that he is teaching him. (Actually) he is teaching him another trade(that is not necessary-so striking and killing him inadvertantly will result in exile). 
"And the son is exiled by way of (killing b'shogeg) his father...
And they pitted the following:"one who strikes a person," excludes one who strikes his father! Rav Kahana says: it is not a difficulty. This, (is the opinion) of R' Shimon and this (is the opinion) of the Rabbis. According to R' Shimon who says strangulation is more severe than decapitation(in the realm of punishment). So, for the unwitting sin (in which, if he committed it intentionally, he would be punished with) beheading, he is given atonement(through exile). But, an unwitting sin(which, if were done intentionally, would be punished with) strangulation, is not given atonement(through exile). For the Rabbis who say beheading is more severe than strangulation: one who inadvertently kills his father, this is inadvertent sin(that would be punished, if done intentionally, with) beheading, so such an inadvertent sin would be given atonement(through exile[so this is the opinion of our Mishnah]). Rava says:(this case of non-exile for a son) is when he just hits(wounds) his father inadvertently. Since, you may have thought that if he would have killed him intentionally, he would be executed, then let him also be so in a case of inadvertent striking, this comes to teach us(that no, in fact, exile is specifically in cases of inadvertent killing and not striking/wounding)....
Everyone is exiled by way of (killing) an Israelite...
What does this phrase(above) come to include? 
To include a slave and a Cutean. We have already taught about this as they taught in a Baraita: A slave and a Cutean are exiled or lashed by way of an Israelite. And an Israelite is exiled or lashed by way of a slave or Cutean. This works out well if a slave or Cutean is exiled by way of an Israelite or lashed. (He is exiled) because he killed him and lashed because he cursed him. But an Israelite who is exiled or lashed by way of Cutean?! It works well with exile because he killed him. But lashing, why? (If you say) because he cursed him, it states in (Shemot 23, 27) "the chieftain of YOUR NATION do not denigrate." So this has to be an action directed toward one of your people(and a Cutean would not fall under that category). ...
Rather, Rav Aha son of Yaakov said: It's a case where he testified against him(Israelite against Cutean that he would be liable for lashing) and he was found guilty of falsely testifying(so he would not be lashed on account of a Cutean!). Similarly regarding a slave who testified against an Israelite(that would be punished with lashes) and was found to be a false witness, can a slave even give testimony?!(In order to retain the parallel from the Baraita above where a slave and Cutean can be exiled or lashed, we plug the situation of the slave back in but it does not work, so we must find another way to understand this). ...
Rather, Rav Aha son of Rav Ika said: here is what we are dealing with(where slave and Cutean are lashed because of Israelite): a case where he struck him with a wound...

Daf 9a

that does not have the value of a Perutah(so he is lashed and not made to pay the compensation). As Rabi Ami said Rabi Yohanan said: one who strikes and makes a wound that is not worth a Perutah is lashed(since it is not equal the amount of what would result in compensation, we lash him for transgressing a negative commandment). And we do not equate from striking to cursing(this is the end of R' Yohanan's statement, and it reflects the idea that even though in cursing, we do not lash him because of the issue of not being part of the same people, in striking someone, he would be lashed.)
(Everyone gets exiled to a City of Refuge for killing an Israelite, and vice versa) except in the case of a foreign resident. 
Therefore, a foreign resident is (considered) an idol worshiper! But say that the end (of the Mishnah, which says,) a foreign resident is exiled on account of (killing) a foreign resident (which would imply that they aren't like idol worshipers as they actually get exiled)! Rav Kahanah said: this (apparent contradiction) is not difficult! Here (where the punishment is exile), is where a foreign resident kills a foreign resident, and here (where he does not get exile) is where a foreign resident kills an Israelite.
Some say that at first they contrasted the two verses together. (In one verse) it's written: "for the children of Israel, and for the resident foreigner in your midst (there shall be) six cities." (But in a different verse) it is written: "there shall be for you all cities of refuge." For you all - not for the resident foreigners. Rav Kahanah said: this (apparent contradiction) is not difficult! Here (where he does not get exile) is where a resident foreigner killed an Israelite, and here (where he does get exile) is where a resident foreigner killed a resident foreigner.
But an objection was raised to this! Therefore, a resident foreigner and a idol worshiper who killed are themselves killed (as punishment). This teaches that a resident foreigner is comparable to an idol worshiper! Just as in the case of an idol worshiper, there is no difference if he killed one of his own kind or if he killed one who was not his own kind, he is killed (as punishment either way), so too (in the case) of a resident foreigner, there is no difference if he killed one of his own kind or if he killed one who was not his own kind, he is killed (as punishment either way).
Rav Chisda said: this is not difficult! Here (where he is exiled) is where he killed in a downward motion, and here (where he is not exiled) is where he killed in an upward motion. If (he killed him) in a downward motion, (in which case) an Israelite would be exiled, then exile should be enough for the (resident foreigner) as well. If (he killed him) in an upward motion, (in which case) an Israelite is exempt, then the resident foreigner is killed (as punishment). 
Rava said to him (Rav Chisda). Is it not that using a verbal analogy (we can disprove this)? If just as (in the case where he killed him using) a downward motion (in which case) an Israelite would be exiled, exile should be enough for a resident foreigner too, then (if he killed him with) an upward motion, (in which case) an Israelite is an exempt, should (the resident foreigner really) be killed?
Rather, Rava said (this is an instance where the resident foreigner) that he was under the impression that it was permitted (to kill someone).
Abaye said to him (Rava), someone who was under the impression that (killing someone is okay) is a case of a freak accident.
He (Rava) said to him (Abaye): I say that someone who was under the impression that it was permitted is actually close to intentional!
And they (Rav Chisda and Rava) go according to their usual line of reasoning, as it was stated: (if when a resident foreigner killed someone) and he held that it was an animal and (afterwards) it was found to be a person, or if he thought it was a Canaanite and (afterwards) it was found to be a resident foreigner, Rava says he is liable (for execution, for he holds that) something that is permitted is close to intentional Rav Chisda says he is exempt (because he holds that) something that is permitted is a freak accident.
Rava raised an objection to Rav Chisda (from the following verse): "Behold, you should die because of the woman you have taken." Does this not mean that he should die at the hands of humans? No, (it means that he should die) at the hands of heaven. However, the language is precise, as it says, "(I stopped you) from sinning against Me (the Me in this sentence is God, which would imply that obviously God is the one who actually punishes)." But according to your opinion, (regarding the verse about Joseph speaking of adultery says) "I sinned against God," this means against God and not against man! Rather, the judgment comes through humans! So too here, it is where judgment comes through humans!
Abaya raised an objection to Rava. (In the verse referring to Avimelech, he says to God), "would You execute a nation that is righteous?" There (God) responded to him, "and now return the man's wife for he is a prophet!"

Daf 9b

Could it be that it is only (in the case of ) the wife of a prophet that you must return her, but one who is not a prophet you don't need to return (his wife)? Rather, it is like that which was said by Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachamni! For Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachamni said in the name of Rabbi Yonatan: this is what was said (by God to Avimelech) "but now return the man's wife" - in any instance. And regarding that which you said, "would You execute a nation though he is innocent? Did he not tell me, 'She is my sister!'" He (Avraham) is a prophet, and from you one should learn, when a visitor comes to a city, regarding maters of food and drink you should ask him, but you should not ask him "is this your wife or your sister?" From here we learn that a person subject to the Noahide laws is executed, because he should've learned, but he did not learn. 