READINGS: EXODUSREADINGS: EXODUS/HN/KAEXODUS THEMESDuring the last two thousand years, Jews have never wearied ofreferring to the Exodus. In the morning and evening prayers, inthe thanksgiving benediction after each meal, and in theKiddush inaugurating Shabbat and Festivals, Jews have thankedGod for having delivered their ancestors from Egypt. And everyyear with the return of the Festival of Pesaḥ they have recountedto their children the story of that redemption. The main motivewhich has kept alive the memory of the Exodus during the lasttwo thousand years has undoubtedly been the hope that, as Godhad wrought miracles for Israel in the past, had been graciousto them and had delivered them from bondage, so will God,when the time comes, once again manifest power on behalf ofthe Jewish people, free them from oppression and restore themto their land.Changes, however, have taken place in human life which renderthat simple version of Exodus and its meaning no longeradequate. Jews are still the victims of oppression. But they haveentered into such intimate relationship with the life of the worldabout them that they can no longer envisage their owndeliverance except as a phase of general human deliverance. Ifmiracles are to be enacted as part of the future redemption, theycannot be conceived as similar to those which tradition associateswith the Exodus. The new redemption to which Jews lookforward involves the redemption of society in general frompresent ills. It implies the transformation of human nature andsocial institutions through the divine power of intelligence andgoodwill. There can be no question that in the Torah the storyof the Exodus has the connotation that to help the oppressed isan essential attribute of godhood.Mordecai M. Kaplan (adapted)So pharaonic oppression, deliverance, Sinai, and Canaan are stillwith us, powerful memories shaping our perceptions of thepolitical world. The "door of hope" is still open; things are notwhat they might be--even when what they might be isn'ttotally different from what they are....We still believe, or manyof us do, what the Exodus first taught, or what it has commonlybeen taken to teach, about the meaning and possibility of politicsand about its proper form:--first, that wherever you live, it is probably Egypt;--second, that there is a better place, a world more attractive, apromised land;--and third, that "the way to the land is through thewilderness." There is no way to get from here to there exceptby joining together and marching.Michael Walzer/KAI Shall Sing to the Lord a New SongI, Miriam, stand at the seaand turnto face the desertstretching endless andstill.My eyes are dazzledThe sky brilliant blueSunburnt sands unyielding white.My hands turn to dove wings.My armsreachfor the skyand I want to singthe song rising inside me.My mouth openI stop.Where are the words?Where the melody?/PIIn a moment of panicMy eyes go blind.Can I take a stepWithout knowing aDestination?Will I falterWill I fallWill the ground sink away from under me?The song still unformed--How can I sing?To take the first step--To sing a new song--Is to close one's eyesand diveinto unknown waters.For a moment knowing nothing risking all--But then to discoverThe waters are friendlyThe ground is firm.And the song--the song rises again.Out of my mouthcome words lifting the wind.And I hearfor the firstthe songthat has been in my heartsilentunknowneven to me.Ruth H. Sohn/KASinaiThe men rushed aheadThey always doin battle, to defend usin eagerness, to get the best viewto be there with each otheras a communityWe followed latersome of us waitedtill we were done nursingothers waited to go togetherwith those who were still nursingmost of us were herding several childrencarrying a heavy two year oldOn one hip(it's hard to move forward quicklywith a heavy two year old on one hip)last came the very pregnant oneswhen you're that far alongit's your instinct to be afraid of crowdsafraid of being jostledyou hang backyou feel safer being lastAnyway, I was one of the oneswith a heavy two year old on one hipsuch a sweet body he hadwarm soft delicious fleshhe was afraid of the noisehe clung to me so tightlyhis fingers in my neckhis face buried in my neck/PII showered him with little kissesnot so much to comfort himas out of habitand my pleasureThe earth shook, it vibratedand so did Imy chest, my legsall vibratingI sank to my kneesall the while with this little boy attached to metrying to merge himself back into meI closed my eyesto be there more intenselyit all washed over mewave upon wave upon wave...And afterwards, the stillnessof a nation, a peoplewho had been flattenedforever imprintedslowly raising themselvesrising again from the earthHow to hold onto that momentwashed cleanrebornholy silenceMerle Feld/KASOCIAL ACTIONWe cannot merely pray to God to end war;For the world was made in such a wayThat we must find our own path of peaceWithin ourselves and with our neighbor.We cannot merely pray to God to root out prejudice;For we already have eyesWith which to see the good in all peopleIf we would only use them rightly.We cannot merely pray to God to end starvation;For we already have the resourcesWith which to feed the entire worldIf we would only use them wisely.We cannot merely pray to God to end despair;For we already have the powerTo clear away slums and to give hopeIf we would only use our power justly.We cannot merely pray to God to end disease:For we already have great mindsWith which to search out cures and healingsIf we would only use them constructively.Therefore we pray insteadFor strength, determination, and will power,To <i>do</i> instead of merely to prayTo <i>become</i> instead of merely to wish;That our world may be safe,And that our lives may be blessed.Jack Riemer (adapted)We cannot actually picture goodness. It is not a being; it is aforce, like electricity. Nobody ever actually saw electricity. Weknow that it exists. We can see and feel what electricity does. Ifwe have an electric heater and connect it, we get heat. If wehave an electric motor and attach it to a vehicle, we get thevehicle to move. In other words, we get to know what electricityis by what it does. In the same way, we get to know what Godis by what God makes us do: when people are, so to speak,connected with God, they do good things. We call such peoplegodly and their acts godly. Whenever this force is active, we saythat God has exercised influence and power.Belief in God, therefore, has to do...with human nature, withthe way individual men and women act, with their attitudes,their ideas of what is good and what is bad, with their ideals.Belief in God has to do with our attitude toward life itself. Dowe find life good? Is life worthwhile? If we believe that life isworthwhile, that it is good, that, in spite of sickness andaccidents, in spite of poverty and war, in spite of all the sad anddifficult conditions in the world, the world is a wonderful placeto live in and can be made a still better place, then we believein God. When we believe in God, we cannot be discouragedbecause we believe that all the misery in the world is due, notto the fact that misery must be there, that it is a necessary partof life, but to the fact that we have not yet discovered how todo away with that misery.Ira Eisenstein (adapted)In Germany, the Nazis first came for the Communists, and I didnot speak up because I was not a Communist. Then they camefor the Jews, but I did not speak up because I was not a Jew.And then they came for the trade unionists, and I did not speakup because I was not a trade unionist. Then they came for theCatholics, but I was a Protestant, so I did not speak up. Andthen they came for me, and by that time there was no one leftto speak up for anyone. To make sure this does not happen again,the injustice to anyone anywhere must be the concern ofeveryone everywhere.Quoted by Martin NiemollerIn religion, we try to find answers to the elementary questionsthat confront each of us every morning. What meaning andwhat value is to be ascribed to our life? What am I to this world?What is my purpose in it? What may I hope for in this world?I do not want to consider my existence merely as one that risesand perishes among the multitude of beings that constitute theuniverse, but as a life that has value.Albert Schweitzer/KAPEACE THEMES"A Prayer for Peace" can be found on pages 422-423.<i>Shalom</i> is one of the many names by which God is known inJudaism. It is the name by which God will bless you if youdedicate yourselves to each other in accordance with the divinewill. The name <i>Shalom</i> embraces everything that is calculatedto render life happy, useful and holy. It denotes, in the firstplace, love--love that is binding and everlasting, love that doesnot fade with the flowers or pass with the sunshine. <i>Shalom</i> isthe peace that is secured when we have done our share towardour companions, whenever we bring light into hearts that aredark with despair and cheer into souls overcast with gloom. Nolanguage possesses a word that so accurately describes theserenity of the soul which we experience whenever we have thusmade God's presence real to men and women. By seeking topromote the happiness of your neighbor, by engaging in everyeffort to be of help to your companion and by emphasizing thataspect of life that we call holy, you will realize the full blessingof love and peace, the blessing of <i>Shalom</i>.Mordecai M. Kaplan (adapted)When the blessing of <i>shalom</i>Is lacking,However much we haveOf other blessings--Wealth or power,Fame or family,Even health--These all appearAs nothing.But when <i>shalom</i>Is present,However little else we haveSomehow seemsSufficient.Hershel Matt/HYּCּAשְׁלוֹם בַּרXּXלֹא זֶה שֶׁל שְׁבִיתַת ֽֽֽנֶשֶׁק,אֲּפִילוּ לֹא שֶׁל חֲזוֹן זְאֵב עִם גְּדִי,ּֽֽֽאֶלָּא,ּכְּמוֹ בַּלֵּב אַחַר הַהִתְרַגְּשׁוּת:לְּדַבֵּר רַק עַל עֲיֵפוּת גְּדוֹלָה.אֲנִי יוֹֽֽֽדֵע שֶׁאֲנִי יוֹֽֽֽדֵעַ לְהָמִית,לָּכֵן אֲנִי מְבֻגָּר.ּוּבְנִי מְשַׂחֵק בְּרוֹבֵה צַעֲצוּעִים שֶׁיּוֹֽֽֽדֵעַלִּפְֽֽֽתֹּחַ וְלַעֲצֹם עֵיֽֽֽנַיִם וּלְהַגִּיד, אִמָּא.שָׁלוֹםּבְּלִי ֽֽֽרַעַשׁ כִּתּוּת חֲרָבוֹת לְאִתִּים, בְּלִי מִלִּים, בְּלִיקּוֹל חוֹתָמוֹת כְּבֵדוֹת; שֶׁיִּהְיֶה קַלמֵּעָל, כְּֽֽֽקֶצֶף לָבָן וְעָצֵל.מְּנוּחָה לַפְּצָעִים;אֲּפִילוּ לֹא אֲרוּכָה.)ּוְזַעֲקַת יְתוֹמִים נִמְֽֽֽסֶרֶת מִדּוֹרלְּדוֹר, כְּמוֹ בְּמֵרוֹץ שְׁלִיחִים: מַקֵּל לֹא נוֹפֵל.(שֶּׁיִּהְיֶהּכְּמוֹ פִּרְחֵי בַּר,ּפִּתְאֹם בְּֽֽֽכֹרַח הַשָּׂדֶה:שְּׁלוֹם בַּר./HN/KAWildpeace / Shelom BarNot that of a cease-fire,let alone the visionof the wolf and the lamb,but ratheras in the heart after a surge of emotion:to speak only about a great weariness.I know that I know howto kill: that's why I'm an adult.And my son plays with a toy gun that knowshow to open and close its eyes and say Mama./PIA peacewithout the big noise of beating swords into plowshares,without words, withoutthe heavy thud of the rubber stamp; I want itgentle over us, like lazy white foam.A little rest for the wounds--who speaks of healing?(And the orphans' outcry is passed from one generationto the next, as in a relay race:that baton never falls.)I want it to comelike wildflowers,suddenly, because the fieldneeds it: wildpeaceYehuda Amichai (translated by Chana Bloch and Ariel Bloch)/HY/CAתוֹסֶפֶת לַחֲזוֹן הַשָּׁלוֹםלֹּא לְהַפְסִיק אַחַר כִּתּוּת הַחֲרָבוֹתלְּאִתִּים, לֹא לְהַפְסִיק! לְהַמְשִׁיךְ לְכַתֵּתוְּלַעֲשׂוֹת מֵהֶם כְּלֵי נְגִינָה.מִּי שֶׁיִּרְצֶה לַעֲשׂוֹת שׁוּב מִלְחָמָהיִּצְטָרֵךְ לַחֲזֹר ֽֽֽדֶּרֶךְ כְּלֵי הָעֲבוֹדָה./HN/KAAn Appendix to the Vision of Peace /Tosefet Laḥazon HashalomDon't stop after beating the swordsinto ploughshares, don't stop! Go on beatingand make musical instruments out of them.Whoever wants to make war againwill have to turn them into ploughshares first.Yehuda Amichai (translated by Glenda Abramson and Tudor Parfitt)/KAWe MothersWe mothers,we gather seeds of desirefrom oceanic night,we are gatherersof scattered goods,We mothers,pacing dreamilywith the constellations,the floodsof past and future,leave us alonewith our birthlike an island.We motherswho say to death:blossom in our blood,We who impel sand to love and bringa mirroring world to the stars--We mothers,who rock in the cradlesthe shadowy memoriesof creation's day--the to and fro of each breathis the melody of our love song.We mothersrock into the heart of the worldthe melody of peace.Nelly Sachs (translated from the German by Ruth and Matthew Mead)