READINGS: FAMILY WORSHIPREADINGS: FAMILY WORSHIP/HN/KAFAMILY WORSHIPFirst a Spark    <i>(For Candlelighting)</i>First a sparkthen candle glow.I watched you at sunset timeeyes sparkling in Shabbat light.Circling above the flames,my hands pulledthe warmth of Shabbat peace inside.Praying for a good week and for blessing.Take time--the lights beckonfor dreams and wonder,for the candles grow smaller,the children taller,even as we pray.Hold this sunset moment and let it gointo morning light.Another generation's candlesticksreceive the next generation's lights.And somewhere in the middlewe stand, holding handswith yesterday and tomorrowlinking echoes of ancient melodieswith the breath of our children.Finding God and hope in their embrace,renewing days of creation.In ordinary time--remember--First a sparkand then candle glow.Sandy Eisenberg Sasso<i>(Creation)</i>He doesn't know the world at allWho stays in his nest and doesn't go out.He doesn't know what birds know bestNor what I want to sing about,That the world is full of loveliness.When dewdrops sparkle in the grassAnd earth's aflood with morning light,A blackbird sings upon a bushTo greet the dawning after night.Then I know how fine it is to live.Hey, try to open up your heartTo beauty; go to the woods somedayAnd weave a wreath of memory there.Then if the tears obscure your wayYou'll know how wonderful it isTo be alive.An anonymous child in theTerezin Concentration Camp, 1941We give away our thanksto the earth,which gives us our home.We give away our thanksto the rivers and lakes and oceans,which give away their water.We give away our thanksto the trees,which give away fruit and nuts.We give away our thanksto the wind,which brings rain to water the plants.We give away our thanksto the sun,which gives away warmth and light./PIAll beings on earth--the trees, theanimals, the wind and the rivers--give away to one another--So all is in balance.We give away our promise to beginto learnhow to stay in balance--with all the earth.A Native American Prayer/KAGod's WheelGod says to me with kind of a smile,"Hey how would you like to be God awhileAnd steer the world?""Okay," says I, "I'll give it a try.Where do I set?How much do I get?What time is lunch?When can I quit?""Gimme back that wheel," says God,"I don't think you're quite ready yet."Shel SilversteinO our Mother the Earth, O our Father the Sky,Your children are we, and with tired backsWe bring you the gifts you love.Then weave for us a garment of brightness;May the warp be the white light of morning,May the weft be the red light of evening,May the fringes be the falling rain,May the border be the standing rainbow.Thus weave for us a garment of brightness,That we may walk fittingly where birds sing,That we may walk fittingly where grass is green,O our Mother the Earth, O our Father the Sky.Tewa (Native American)<i>(Redemption)</i>When the people of Israel crossed through the Red Sea, theywitnessed a great miracle. Some say it was the greatest miraclethat ever happened. On that day they saw a sight more awesomethan all the visions of the prophets combined. The sea split andthe waters stood like great walls, while Israel escaped to freedomon the distant shore. Awesome. But not for everyone.Two people, Reuven and Shimon, hurried along among thecrowd crossing through the sea. They never once looked up.They noticed only that the ground under their feet was still alittle muddy--like a beach at low tide."Yucch!" said Reuven, "there's mud all over this place!""Bleecch!" said Shimon, "I have muck all over my feet!""This is terrible," answered Reuven. "When we were slaves inEgypt, we had to make our bricks out of mud, just like this!""Yeah," said Shimon. "There's no difference between being aslave in Egypt and being free here."And so it went, Reuven and Shimon whining and complainingall the way to freedom. For them there was no miracle. Onlymud. Their eyes were closed. They might as well have beenasleep.Lawrence Kushner/KAThe Wolf and the DogOnce there was a wolf who was very skinny because he neverhad anything much to eat. One day as he was looking for foodhe met a dog. The dog said, "What are you looking for?"And the wolf said, "Food."The dog laughed and said, "I don't have to look for food. Mymaster gives me food and a place to sleep. I lead a good easy lifeand I'm taking a walk."/PIThe wolf said, "May I come home with you?"The dog said, "Sure, my master would like to have you."Just then the wolf saw the mark on the dog's neck. "What isthat mark on your neck?" he asked."Oh, that's just the collar chain I wear during the day. You'llget used to it."But the wolf stopped and ran in the opposite direction. Callingover his shoulder to the dog, he said, "You may have your goodfood. As for me, I'll keep my freedom."And the wolf never came there again.Moral: Freedom having hardships is better than being in chains.Carmen Rosario, Age 12<i>(Peace)</i>Anne Frank was a young girl in Amsterdam, Holland during theterrible days of Nazi occupation.Two weeks before she died--one of the six million Jews whoperished in the Holocaust--she wrote the following words inher diary:It's really a wonder that I haven't dropped all my ideals, becausethey seem so absurd and impossible to carry out. Yet I keepthem, because in spite of everything I still believe that peopleare really good at heart. I simply can't build up my hopes on afoundation of confusion, misery and death. I see the worldgradually being turned into a wilderness. I hear approachingthunder....I can feel the suffering of millions, and yet, if I lookup into the heavens, I think that it will all come out right, thatthis cruelty will end, and that peace and tranquility will returnagain. In the meantime, I must hold on to my ideals for perhapsthe day will come when I shall be able to carry them out.Anne Frank (translated from the Dutch by B.M. Mooyaart-Doubleday)/HYּCּAתְּפִלָּהXּXמָּה אֲבַקֵּשׁ מִמְּךָ, אֱלֹהִים?יֵּשׁ לִי הַכֹּל,/דָבָר לֹא חָסֵר לִי.רַּק דָּבָר אֶחָד אֲבַקֵּשׁ,וְּלֹא בִּשְׁבִילִי בִּלְבַד;הּוּא בִּשְׁבִיל הַרְבֵּה אִמָּהוֹת, יְלָדִים וְאָבוֹת_וְּלֹא רַק בָּֽֽֽאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, ֽֽֽאֶלָּא גַּם בַּאֲרָצוֹת זָרוֹת וְאוֹיְבוֹת:הָּיִיתִי רוֹצָה לְבַקֵּשׁ שָׁלוֹם:/כֵן, שָׁלוֹם אֲנִי רוֹצָה,וְּהֵן לֹא תְּסָרֵב לְבַקָּשָׁה יְחִידָה שֶׁל יַלְדָה:אַּתָּה בָּרָאתָ אֶת ֽֽֽאֶרֶץ הַשָּׁלוֹם,אֲּשֶׁר בָּהּ עִיר הַשָּׁלוֹם,ּוּבָהּ הָיָה מִקְדַּשׁ הַשָּׁלוֹם,וְאֵין עֲדַיִן שָׁלוֹם...מָּה אֲבַקֵּשׁ מִמְּךָ אֱלֹהִים, וְיֵשׁ לִי הַכֹּל?אֲּבַקֵּשׁ רַק שָׁלוֹם,רַק שָׁלוֹם!/HN/KAA Prayer / TefilahWhat shall I ask You for, God?I have everything.There's nothing I lack.I ask only for one thingAnd not for myself alone;/PIIt's for many mothers, and children, and fathers--Not just in this land, but in many lands hostile to each other.I'd like to ask for Peace.Yes, it's Peace I want,And You, You won't deny the single wish of a child.You created the Land of Peace,Where stands the City of Peace,Where stood the Temple of Peace,But where still there is no Peace...What shall I ask You for, God? I have everything.Peace is what I ask for,Only Peace.Shlomit Grossberg, Age 13, Jerusalem (translated by Dov Vardi)When will peace take over?When will it come, the day?When with armies and bombs will they do away,When all this hostility cease,A day on which battleshipsWill become palaces of leisure and funFloating on the seas.A day on which the steel of gunsWill be melted into pleasure cars,A day on which generals will begin to raise flowers.When peaceWill include all the peoples of these neighboring lands,When Ishmael and IsraelWill go hand in hand,And when every JewThe Arab's brother will be.When will it come, the day?Mahmud Abu Radj, Age 12, Kfar Sachnin (Arab Village)May I ever learn to find my place among the people of Israel.May my heart be a Jewish heart,my mind a Jewish mind,my soul a Jewish soul.May all my actions bring a good name to the word Jew.May the works of my hand and the ideas I designBe kind and gentle.May I find my home in the House of Prayer,My life in the tasks of my people,My words in the words spoken truly in the name of all that isgood,My deeds a credit to my people.May law rule over all the earth; and justice and mercybe everlasting.May the Messianic days come soon and in my own life, bringingpeace and hope to all.And may I take my place beside those who love and serve all thatis good and righteous.Seymour Rossel (adapted)/KAMEDITATIONS FOR ELULGod, help me through the days of Elul to prepare myself for theNew Year with its promise of new life for my body and my soul.Help me face questions I wish to avoid!Help me accept truths that do not comfort!I wish to journey to the light, but the path to it is hidden byall the promises I never kept, by the goodness I deserted.May the words from the past show me the way of return.I begin the road of repentance. Meet me, God, as I journeyon it.#/HYּכִּי הַכֹּל ֽֽֽהָבֶל    "For everything is emptyXּXלְּבַד הַנְּשָׁמָה הַטְּהוֹרָה:    except the pure soul."XּX/HNThe impulse to evil is like one who runs about the world witha tightly closed hand. Nobody knows what is inside of it.Everyone asks: "What do you have in your hand?" And they allthink that just what they want most of all is hidden there. Andeveryone runs after the impulse to evil. Then the hand isopened, and it is empty.#/HYאַּיֵּה מְקוֹם כְּבוֹדוֹ:    "Where is the place of God's glory?"XּX/HN"Where is the dwelling of God?"This is the question with which the Rabbi of Kotzk surprised anumber of learned Jews who happened to be visiting him.They laughed at him: "What a thing to ask! Is not the wholeworld full of God's glory?"Then he answered his own question:"God dwells wherever people let God in."Martin Buber (adapted)/HYוְּיַחֵד לְבָֽֽֽבֵנוּ לְאַהֲבָה    "Give us integrity toXּX/ולְיִרְאָה אֶת-שְֽֽֽׁמֶךָ:    love you and fear you."/HNWhen R. Yoḥanan ben Zakai was on his death bed, his disciplescame to visit him. Before leaving they said, "Master, give us afarewell blessing." He said to them, "I'll pray that fearing Godmay be as important to you as fearing people." His disciplesasked, "But should we not fear God more than people?" Hereplied, "If only you can attain this! When you think ofcommitting a transgression, you say: `I hope no one sees me!' Ifthe fear of God is no more than this, it will be enough to keepyou from many sins."Talmud Beraḥot 28b#/HYשְּׂאוּ שְׁעָרִים רָאשֵׁיכֶם    "Gates, lift up your heads!XּXוְּהִנָּשְׂאוּ פִּתְחֵי עוֹלָם:    Be raised, you everlasting doors!"/HNIn the future you will be asked "What was your occupation?" Ifyou reply, "I fed the hungry," then they reply, "This is the gateof God; you who feed the hungry shall enter." (Psalm 118:20)So with giving drink to the thirsty, clothing the naked, withthose who look after orphans, and with those, generally, whodo deeds of loving-kindness. All these are God's gates, and thosewho do such deeds shall enter within them.Midrash Psalms/KASHABBAT SHUVAHFreedom Is A HabitFreedom is a habitand a coat wornsome born to wear itsome never to know it.Freedom is cheapor again as a garmentis so costly[some] pay their livesrather than not have it.Freedom is baffling:[some] having it oftenknow not they have ittill it is gone andthey no longer have it.What does this mean?Is it a riddle?Yes, it is first of allin the primers of riddles.To be free is so-so:you can and you can't:walkers can have freedomonly by never walkingaway from their freedom:runners too have freedomunless they overrun:eaters have often outeatentheir freedom to eatand drinkers overdranktheir fine drinking freedom.Carl SandburgCertain sages include repentance among the entities createdbefore the world itself. The implication of this remarkablestatement is that repentance is a universal primordialphenomenon; in such a context it has two meanings. One is thatit is embedded in the root structure of the world; the other, thatbefore we were created, we were given the possibility ofchanging the course of our lives. In this latter sense repentanceis the highest expression of our capacity to choose freely--it isa manifestation of the divine in human. By repenting, we canextricate ourselves from the binding web of our lives, from thechain of causality that otherwise compels us to follow a path ofno return.Adin Steinsaltz/KASUKKOTTake for your own sake...[a cluster including] the product of goodlytrees, branches of palm trees, boughs of leafy trees, and willows of thebrook (Leviticus 23:40), the product of goodly trees [the <i>etrog</i>]standing for some in Israel: even as the <i>etrog</i> has aroma and hasedible fruit, so the people Israel have in their midst those whohave knowledge of Torah and also have good deeds. Branches ofpalm trees also stand for some in Israel: as the palm tree has ediblefruit but no aroma, so the people Israel have in their midst thosewho have knowledge of Torah but have not good deeds. Boughsof leafy trees also stands for some in Israel: as the myrtle tree hasaroma but has not edible fruit, so the people Israel have in theirmidst those who have good deeds but have not Torah. Andwillows of the brook also stands for some in Israel: even as thewillow has neither edible fruit nor aroma, so the people Israelhave in their midst those in whom there is neither knowledgeof Torah nor good deeds. The Holy One says: In order to makeit impossible for Israel to be destroyed, let all of them be boundtogether as plants are bound into a cluster, so that the righteousamong them will atone for the others. Hence Moses chargedIsrael: <i>Take for your own sake on the first day a cluster</i> (Leviticus23:40).Pesikta Rabati 51.2/KAFeast of BoothsThis was the season of our ancestors' joy:not only when they gathered grapes and thefruit of treesin Israel, but when, locked in the dark andstony streetsthey held--symbols of a life from which theywere banishedbut to which they would surely return--the branches of palm trees and of willows, thetwigs of the myrtle,and the bright odorous citrons.This was the grove of palms with its deep wellin the stony ghetto in the blaze of noon;this is the living stream lined with willows;and this the thick-leaved myrtles and treesheavy with fruitin the barren ghetto--a gardenwhere the unjustly hated were justly safe at last.In booths this week of holidayas those who gathered grapes in Israel livedand also to remember we were cared forin the wilderness--I remember how frail my present dwelling iseven if of stones and steel.I know this is the season of our joy:we have completed the readings of the Torahand we begin again;but I remember how slowly I have learnt,how little,how fast the year went by, the years--how few.Charles Reznikoff/KATU BISHVATOn Tu BishvatWhen spring comes,An angel descends, ledger in hand,And records each bud, each twig, each tree,And all our garden flowers.From town to town, from village to village,The angel makes a winged way,Searching the valleys, inspecting the hills,Flying over the desertAnd returns to heaven.And when the ledger will be fullOf trees and blossoms and shrubs,When the desert is turned into a meadowAnd all our land is a watered garden,Messianic days will be with us.Attributed to Shin Shalom (translator unknown)