READINGS: PESAḤREADINGS: PESAḤ/HN/KAPESAḤRabbi Levi Yitzḥak of Berdichev comments that the truemiracle of the Exodus, the "great" miracle, in fact took place onthe tenth of Nisan, not later. When Israel decided that theywould slaughter sheep (which according to tradition were godsin Egypt) without regard for what their Egyptian taskmasterswould say or do to them, their liberation had begun. That Godcan wreak plagues, split the sea, and all the rest--these are nosource of surprise to the person of faith. But Israel's courage todefy the Egyptians--that is truly worthy of being calledmiraculous.* *Rabbi Naḥman of Bratzlav comments on "and they made noprovisions for the way": "When you are about to leaveEgypt--<i>any</i> Egypt--do not stop to think `But how will I earn aliving out there?...' One who stops to `make provisions for theway' will never get out of Egypt." A comment to be repeatedannually for college seniors, midlife-crisis confronters, and allthe rest of us.* *How strange that we should begin the <i>seder</i> with the statement"This year we are slaves!" The point is, according to one Ḥasidicreading, that while we recognize our current enslavements, wealso recognize the great distance we have traversed fromEgyptian bondage to the sort of slavery we feel in our currentlives. Had someone come to us while we were in Egypt and said,"You know, someday you and your children will be telling thistale as though it were all in the past," we would hardly havebelieved him. See how far we have come! And for those of uswho have gone this far in the path of liberation--rememberingthat we once were carriers of bricks and mortar--nothing in theliberation that lies ahead should seem impossible to us.Arthur Green/KAIn Germany at the end of World War IIPerhaps for the thousandth time, the Jewish committee inBuchenwald was holding a meeting on the question: Where to?A Polish Jew, a German, a Czech, a Hungarian--each faced thesame burning problem: Where should the few surviving Jewsof Buchenwald go? How could we ever have believed that at theend of the war the surviving Jews would have no more worries,that everything would be fine! The world, we had thought,would welcome our few survivors with open arms! We, the firstvictims of the Nazis. They would love us!Quickly enough, we saw that the world had other things on itsmind than Jewish suffering. So where to?Comrade Posnansky put forth an idea: into our own kibbutz. Tobuild a group of Buchenwald's youth, and find a farm where wecould prepare for Palestine. A wonderful idea. There would beno lack of candidates for the kibbutz, for energy wasreawakening in the survivors and seeking an outlet.From that idea sprang Kibbutz Buchenwald.After several days of coming and going, the Jewish committeein Buchenwald possessed a document from the AmericanMilitary Government which gave it the right to make use, fora long term, of the township farm of Eggendorf, nearBlankenheim.June 3, 1945--Here we are, the first few comrades, sitting ona truck that is taking us away from Buchenwald. Finally, theBuchenwald chapter is ended. The concrete road takes us awayfrom the barracks, the watchtowers, the SS quarters; on thisstraight road, which turns neither to right nor to left, we headfor our new life. We are all determined to follow this road to aplace of our own, a Jewish settlement where we can put ourenergies into something that will belong only to us, a placewhere we can live for the future. This road must take us toPalestine.Members of Kibbutz Buchenwald/HY/KAYOM HA'ATZMA'UTּCּAרוֹעֶה עֲרָבִי מְחַפֵּשׂ גְּדִי בְּהַר צִיּוֹןXּXרּוֹעֶה עֲרָבִי מְחַפֵּשׂ גְּדִי בְּהַר צִיּוֹן,ּוּבָהָר מִמּוּל אֲנִי מְחַפֵּשׂ אֶת בְּנִי הַקָּטָן.רּוֹעֶה עֲרָבִי וְאָב יְהוּדִיּבְּכִשְׁלוֹנָם הַזְּמַנִּי.קּוֹלוֹת שְֽֽֽׁנֵינוּ נִפְגָּשִׁים מֵעַללִּבְרֵכַת הַשֻּׂלְטָן בָּֽֽֽעֵמֶק בָּאֶמְצַע.שְּֽֽֽׁנֵינוּ רוֹצִים שֶׁלֹּא יִכָּנְסוּהַּבֵּן וְהַגְּדִי לְתוֹךְ תַּהֲלִיךְהַּמְּכוֹנָה הַנּוֹרָאָה שֶׁל חַד גַּדְיָא.אַּחַר-כָּךְ מָֽֽֽצָאנוּ אוֹתָם בֵּין הַשִּׂיחִים,וְּקוֹלוֹֽֽֽתֵינוּ חָזְרוּ אֵֽֽֽלֵינוּ וּבָכוּ וְצָחֲקוּ בִּפְנִים.הַּחִפּוּשִׂים אַחַר גְּדִי אוֹ אַחַר בֵּןהָּיוּ תָּמִידהַּתְחָלַת דָּת חֲדָשָׁה בֶּהָרִים הָֽֽֽאֵלֶּה./HN/KAAn Arab Shepherd Is Searching for His Goat on Mount ZionAn Arab shepherd is searching for his goaton Mount Zion,And on the opposite hill I am searching for my little boy.An Arab shepherd and a Jewish fatherBoth in their temporary failure.Our two voices meet aboveThe Sultan's Pool in the valley between us.Neither of us wants the boy or the goatTo get caught in the wheelsof the "Ḥad Gadya" machine.Afterward we found them among the bushes,And our voices came back inside usLaughing and crying.Searching for a goat or for a child has always beenThe beginning of a new religion in these mountains.Yehuda Amichai/KANEW YEAR'S DAYEach year should be the best year we have yet lived.Each year we are more learned in the ways of life.Each year we are wiser than the year before.Each year our eyes know better the sights to seek.Each year our ears listen with a finer tuning.Every happening is a jewel, wrought about the fancy of time.All that we understand of the universe is the setting for eachsight and sound of day.The child looks with gladness each year to be one year older.Should not this welcome pursue us all our years?The piling of the years is a richness like the piling of gold.Our years are coins with which we can purchase more wisely atthe bazaars of each new season.Our love is more pliant and patient having been taught by time.This New Year is one year older than the last.The earth is more abounding in its growth.The creatures have moved another step in their unfolding.Humankind has left us one more year of art for ourcontemplation.History is one year more resonant with lessons.The sunrises are one year more familiar and promising.The sunsets are one year less fearful, and the peace of the nightis one year closer.Kenneth L. Patton/KAMARTIN LUTHER KING DAYNow is the time to make justice a reality for all of God'schildren...[And] we will not be satisfied until justice rolls downlike water and righteousness like a mighty stream....I say to you today, my friends, even though we face thedifficulties of today and tomorrow, I still have a dream. It is adream deeply rooted in the American dream. I have a dream thatone day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaningof its creed: "We hold these truths to be self-evident that allmen are created equal...." This is our hope.With this faith we will be able to hew out of the mountain ofdespair a stone of hope. With this faith we will be able totransform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautifulsymphony of brotherhood. With this faith we will be able towork together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go tojail together, to stand up for freedom together, knowing that wewill be free one day....So, let freedom ring from the prodigious hilltops of NewHampshire. Let freedom ring from the mighty mountains ofNew York. Let freedom ring from the heightening Allegheniesof Pennsylvania. Let freedom ring from the snowcapped Rockiesof Colorado. Let freedom ring from the curvaceous slopes ofCalifornia. Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia;let freedom ring from Lookout Mountain of Tennessee; letfreedom ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi--fromevery mountainside, let freedom ring.And when this happens, when we allow freedom to ring, whenwe let it ring from every village, from every hamlet, from everystate and every city, we will be able to speed up that day whenall of God's children, black and white, Jew and Gentile,Protestant and Catholic, will be able to join hands and sing inthe words of the old Negro spiritual: "Free at last! Free at last!Thank God almighty, we are free at last!"Martin Luther King, Jr.(on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial August 28, 1963)/KAPRESIDENTS' WEEKENDGentlemen,While I receive with much satisfaction your address replete withexpressions of affection and esteem; I rejoice in the opportunityof assuring you that I shall always retain a grateful remembranceof the cordial welcome I experienced in my visit to New Port....The reflection on the days of difficulty and danger which arepast is rendered the more sweet from a consciousness that theyare succeeded by days of uncommon prosperity and security. Ifwe have wisdom to make the best use of the advantages withwhich we are now favored, we cannot fail, under the justadministration of a good government to become a great and ahappy people.The Citizens of the United States of America have a right toapplaud themselves for having given to mankind examples of anenlarged and liberal policy, a policy worthy of imitation.All possess alike liberty of conscience and immunities ofcitizenship. It is now no more that toleration is spoken of, as itwas by the indulgence of one class of people, that anotherenjoyed the exercise of their inherent natural rights. For happilythe government of the United States, which gives to bigotry nosanction, to persecution no assistance, requires only that theywho live under its protection should demean themselves as goodcitizens, in giving it on all occasions their effectual support....May the children of the Stock of Abraham, who dwell in thisland, continue to merit and enjoy the good will of the otherinhabitants, while every one shall sit in safety under his ownvine and fig-tree, and there shall be none to make him afraid....George Washington. A letter to the Hebrew Congregation, in New Port, Rhode Island 1790.Most governments have been based practically on the denial ofthe equal rights...ours began by affirming those rights. Theysaid, some...are too ignorant and vicious to share in government.Possibly so, said we; and by your system you would always keepthem ignorant and vicious. We proposed to give all a chance;and we expected the weak to grow stronger; the ignorant, wiser;and all better and happier together.We made the experiment; and the fruit is before us. Look atit--think of it. Look at it in its aggregate grandeur, of extent ofcountry and numbers of population--of ship, and steamboat, andtrail.* *From the first appearance of man upon the earth down to veryrecent times, the words "stranger" and "enemy" were quite oralmost synonymous. Even yet, this has not totally disappeared.The man of the highest moral cultivation, in spite of all whichabstract principle can do, likes him whom he does know muchbetter than him whom he does not know. To correct the evils,great and small, which spring from want of sympathy and frompositive enmity among strangers, as nations or as individuals, isone of the highest functions of civilization.* *This is a world of compensation; and one who would be no slavemust consent to have no slave.Abraham Lincoln/KAMEMORIAL DAYThe Young Dead SoldiersThe young dead soldiers do not speak.Nevertheless they are heard in the still houses.(Who has not heard them?)They have a silence that speaks for them at nightAnd when the clock counts.They say,We were young. We have died. Remember us.They say,We have done what we couldBut until it is finished it is not done.They say,We have given our livesBut until it is finished no one can know what our lives gave.They say,Our deaths are not ours,They are yours,They will mean what you make them.They say,Whether our lives and our deaths were for peace and a new hopeOr for nothingWe cannot say.It is you who must say this.They say,We leave you our deaths.Give them their meaning.Give them an end to the war and a true peace,Give them a victory that ends the war and a peace afterwards,Give them their meaning.We were young, they say.We have died.Remember us.Archibald MacLeish/KAFOURTH OF JULYWe hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are createdequal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certainunalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and thepursuit of happiness. That to secure these rights, governmentsare instituted among men, deriving their just powers from theconsent of the governed. That whenever any form ofgovernment becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right ofthe people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute newgovernment, laying its foundation on such principles andorganizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem mostlikely to effect their safety and happiness....We, therefore, the representatives of the United States ofAmerica, in general congress assembled, appealing to theSupreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions,do, in the name, and by authority of the good people of thesecolonies, solemnly publish and declare that these UnitedColonies are, and of right ought to be free and independentStates....And for the support of this Declaration, with a firmreliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutuallypledge to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacredhonor.The Declaration of IndependenceMay America remain loyal to the principles of the Declarationof Independence and apply them to ever widening areas oflife.May our country be free from oppression, persecution, andunjust discrimination; may we overcome religious, racial, andclass conflicts; and may we be restored as a haven of refuge forthe victims of injustice and deprivation./PIMay we learn the art of living together, and come tounderstand how to appreciate differences, to reconcileclashing interests, and to help one another achieve aharmonious and abundant life.May we acquire the wisdom to choose honest and capableleaders who will govern us by democratic and ethical principles.And may the enterprise of our American people be blessedthat we may utilize the resources of our land for the good ofall the world.1945 Reconstructionist Prayer Book (adapted)/KAThe New ColossusNot like the brazen giant of Greek fame,With conquering limbs astride from land to land;Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall standA mighty woman with a torch, whose flameIs the imprisoned lightning, and her nameMother of Exiles. From her beacon-handGlows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes commandThe air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame."Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!" cries sheWith silent lips. "Give me your tired, your poor,Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me,I lift my lamp beside the golden door!"Emma Lazarus/KALABOR DAYIn Palestine we must do with our own hands all the things thatmake up the sum total of life. We must ourselves do all thework, from the least strenuous, cleanest, and most sophisticated,to the dirtiest and most difficult. In our own way, we must feelwhat a worker feels and think what a worker thinks--then, andonly then, shall we have a culture of own own, for then we shallhave a life of our own.It all seems very clear. From now on our principal ideal must beLabor. Through no fault of our own we have been deprived ofthis element and we must seek a remedy. Labor is our cure. Theideal of Labor must become the pivot of all our aspirations. It isthe foundation upon which our national structure is to beerected. Only by making Labor, for its own sake, our nationalideal shall we be able to cure ourselves of the plague that hasaffected us for many generations and mend the rent betweenourselves and Nature. Labor is a great human ideal. It is the idealof the future, and a great ideal can be a healing sun.Aaron David Gordon/KAFish CrierI know a Jew[ish] fish crier down on Maxwell Street with avoice like a north wind blowing over corn stubble in January.He dangles herring before prospective customers evincing a joyidentical with that of Pavlowa dancing.His face is that of a man terribly glad to be selling fish, terriblyglad that God made fish, and customers to whom he maycall his wares from a pushcart.Carl Sandburg/KAYiddish/HYּCּAדער אָפּערייטערXּXער איז אַזוי אַריינגעטון אין דעם געניֵי,ווי סóוואָלט מער קיין זאַך נישט געווען אין לעבן.ער זעט נישט פאַר די פענסטער טויבן שוועבן,און אַף די דעכער אין דער זון_דאָס שמעלצן זיך פון שניֵי.אַרום אים, איבער די מאַשינען, ריֵי נאָך ריֵי_אַסַך נאָך אַנדערע ווי ער אַליין געבויגן.סóאיז אַלץ ווי מיט אַ היַיטל שווער פאַרצויגן,אּין אויער רוישט אים פון געפּיַיניקטע סóגעשריֵי.מיט לאַנגע דוֹרות קנעכט איז ער באַשווערט.עּר זעט די קנעכט פון פּיתום אין מִצרַיִם,אּין בָּבל, רוים_די גוֹלים פון ירושָלַיִם,_אַ קיֵיט, אַן ענדלאָזע, מיט קנעכט אַרום דער ערד.און אין זיין שמאָלן, נידעריקן שטערן_אַ פייער בלאָנדזשעט אום און ברענט און בריט;און ווי ער וואָלט אָט ערשט אַליין דעם קאַמף פאַרקלערן_גייט אוף פון דעם גערויש דער קלאַנג פון פרייהייטליד./HN/KAThe OperatorHe's as absorbed in what he sews as thoughthis work is all he was created for.Beyond the pane he sees no pigeons soar,nor on the sunlit roofs the melting snow./PIAt the machines around him, row on row,bent at their work like him sit many more.As if under a heavy film they are.His ear is shattered by a cry of woe.To slaves of distant times he's brother sworn:of Egypt, Babylon, Jerusalemand Rome--an endless chain uniting himwith all the slaves that ever have been born.And deep within his low and narrow browa fire darts about and shoots up strong;as if the battle's being born inside his brain right now,out of the uproar leaps a liberation song!Naftali Gross (translated from the Yiddish)/KATHANKSGIVINGShe Was Like No Doll I'd Ever Seen...When I sat down at the table for breakfast, the doll was at myplace. Mama had made hair out of dark brown yarn and she'dembroidered eyes, a nose, and a mouth on the face. She hadcovered the yarn hair with a yellow kerchief embroidered withred flowers."She's gorgeous, Mama," I managed to murmur. "But shedoesn't look like the Pilgrim woman in the picture.""No?" Mama said."She looks like you in that photograph you have that was takenwhen you were a girl.""Of course," Mama said. "I did that on purpose. What's aPilgrim, <i>shaynkeit</i>? A Pilgrim is someone who came here fromthe other side to find freedom. That's me, Molly. I'm aPilgrim!"Barbara Cohen...at P.S. 125..., as soon as October was folded back on thecalendar, we began paying intense, if somewhat baffled, homageto the glories of Thanksgiving.Most of us were the children of immigrants from Vilna orMinsk or Odessa, who rarely budged from Brooklyn, and wehad to sing loud our praises for the gathering of the harvest andthe prodigal bounty of the land as the trolley cars clanged byunder the windows. Day after day...we devoted ourselves to thatold American holiday first conceived, we were told, in a bleakplace called New England, by the Pilgrims, also known asancestors. These ancestors spoke English without an accent, didnot have to pass through Ellis Island when they reached thegolden land, and had come to these shores to escape fromreligious persecution....We labored intently...making the first Thanksgiving--the hugePilgrim family, at an enormously long table, in the clearing theyhad courageously hacked out of the ominous New Englandforest. With crayons and paints we smeared a lavish feast....There was a song we sang only in November--"We gathertogether and ask the Lord's blessing. He chastens and hastensHis will to make known." We sang it with loud and cheerfulassurance as Miss Johnson thumped away on a piano....LikeChristmas carols...this Thanksgiving hymn had the lure of theforbidden. I would come home on November afternoons, myface hectically pink from the autumn air and the grandeur ofThansgiving, and sing "We Gather Together" until my mother,who would be working on a dress for me or one of hercustomers and never seemed to be listening, would suddenlyhear "the Lord's blessing" and exclaim, "What kind of a songis this for a Jewish girl to sing! Stop this minute, it's not nicesomebody should hear you."/PIFor weeks before the holiday I brought the same lament homefrom school every afternoon...."But Mama, <i>why</i> can't we haveturkey for Thanksgiving like everybody else?""Who's everybody?" my mother would say, without taking hereyes from the sewing machine. "The Feins eat turkeyThanksgiving? Doris Levine's mother goes on the subway tobuy a turkey God knows where Thanksgiving?""Oh, honest to God, Mama. You're always making believe youdon't understand one single word I'm saying. I meant like<i>Americans</i> have on Thanksgiving, not that dopey Doris...."I knew it was useless to argue. I knew it before I began to try.But something urged me, every November, to try just this oncemore. How easy it seemed, how easy and beautiful and right, asI pictured it, mooning in my room....the round table in theliving room swelled with the two leaves we dragged out frombehind the sofa only at Passover time....At four in the afternoon,all the guests would assemble....This day would differ fromother days because on Thanksgiving my brother and I would beglad to see our cousins, who for a change would not say, "Whatdo you have to take dopey violin lessons for?" And after we hadall kissed each other sweetly, we would sit down, with cheerfulsmiles, around the jolly table set exactly the way they showedin the <i>Ladies' Home Journal</i>. After we sang "We GatherTogether," my mother would march in from the kitchen at justthe right moment, holding the enormous, steaming brown birdaloft on a silver platter, which she placed reverently in front ofmy father, poised and ready with a carving knife handed down,of course, by ancestors. Then Papa would begin to carve withmagnificent effortless skill, an art taught him by his father whohad learned it from <i>his</i> father....Pearl Kazin