Berakhot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah begins to deal with the idea that one can recite a blessing over one piece of food and have that blessing count for other foods as well.  Today it is customary to begin every traditional meal with bread, whose blessing exempts the other foods eaten during the meal. This does not seem to have been the custom in the time of the Mishnah.

Mishnah Five 
If he blessed over the wine before the meal he has exempted the wine after the meal.   
If he blessed over the appetizer (parperet) before the meal, he has exempted the dessert (parperet) after the meal.
If he blessed over the bread he has exempted the appetizer/dessert (parperet), but if he blessed over the appetizer/dessert (parperet) he has not exempted the bread. 
Bet Shammai say: [he has not even exempted] a cooked [grain] dish.

Explanation
Section one:  Wine seems to have been drunk before the meal and after the meal but not usually during the meal.  One who blesses over the wine at the beginning of the meal need not recite another blessing over the wine at the end of the meal.
Section two:  The word in Hebrew for appetizer and for dessert is the same.  One who blesses over an appetizer that comes before the meal has exempted a similar type of food that would come after the meal.  According to most commentators, this refers to a situation where he didn’t eat bread, because if he ate bread he need not bless in any case over the parperet, as we shall in the next section.   
Section three:  In this section the word parperet can refer either to the appetizer or the dessert.  In either case, the bread is considered to be more essential than the parperet and therefore one who has already blessed over the bread need not recite the blessing over the parperet.  However, if he recited the blessing over the parperet, the less central food item, he is still obligated to recite the blessing over the bread.
Bet Shammai equates a cooked dish made with grains with the bread.  If one blessed over the parperet he must still bless over the cooked dish.  
