Berachot, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today’s mishnah proceeds to discuss when the morning Shema is recited.  The Torah says that it should be recited “when you get up,” so the debate in our mishnah is essentially over the meaning of this phrase.

Mishnah Two
From what time may one recite the Shema in the morning? 
From the time that one can distinguish between blue and white. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: between blue and green. 
And he must finish it by sunrise. 
Rabbi Joshua says: until the third hour of the day, for such is the custom of the children of kings, to rise at the third hour. 
If one recites the Shema later he loses nothing, like one who reads in the Torah.

Explanation
Section one:  Both opinions in the mishnah determine when one can recite the morning Shema by whether it is light enough to distinguish colors. This is probably connected to the wearing of tzitzit in the morning and the ability to recognize the colors of the threads.  The first opinion holds that one must be able to distinguish between blue and white, the two colors in one’s tzitzit.  Rabbi Eliezer holds that one must be able to distinguish between blue and green. Green is close to the color of tzitzit, so Rabbi Eliezer is saying that one must be able to tell that the tzitzit are blue and not green. This would require more light than distinguishing between blue and white.
Section two: According to the first opinion one must finish reciting the Shema by sunrise.  This is the time of day when most people would get up.
Rabbi Joshua holds that “when you get up” doesn’t refer to when an average working person rises, but to when the last people, the children of kings who do not have to work, get up. They rise at the third hour of the day, meaning when one quarter of the day has passed. Therefore, all of Israel has until this time to recite the Shema.
Rabbi Joshua adds that after the third hour one who reads the Shema has not transgressed. We might have thought that by reciting a prayer which he was not obligated to recite he thereby recited God’s name in vain.  However, this is not so because the Shema is in the Torah and reading the Torah and pronouncing God’s name is not considered taking God’s name in vain.  Nevertheless, one who recites the Shema after the third hour has not fulfilled the mitzvah of reciting the Shema.  
   
