Berakhot, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
The fourth and fifth chapters of Berakhot are about the “Tefillah” the central prayer which we today call the “Amidah” or the “Shmoneh Esrei”, due to its eighteen benedictions (actually nineteen, one was added in later).  The Tefillah (henceforth I will refer to it as the Tefillah, the common term in rabbinic literature) is the central piece of rabbinically created liturgy. While its precise time of creation is not known, it seems to have coalesced into full fruition and taken prominence after the destruction of the Second Temple.  The first three blessings are praises of God, the next 13 are petitions and the final three are expressions of gratitude.  On Shabbat and holidays the petitions are not recited and there is rather one, or on Rosh Hashanah, three, intermediate blessings.
The Tefillah is recited three times a day.  The earliest hint to praying three times a day can be found in Daniel 6:11.  There are various reasons to explain why thrice daily prayer but the one that strikes me as most convincing is that there are three natural times to the day: 1) sunrise; 2) midday, when the sun begins its descent; 3) nightfall.  Other reasons, such as to correspond to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are probably best seen as reasons provided after the number had already been determined. The first two tefillot, Shacharit and Minchah, correspond to the two daily Tamid offerings, the Shacharit Tamid and the Minhah Tamid.  But there was no real offering at night, so the connection between three prayers and the Temple service is weak.
Our mishnah begins by discussing when all three daily Tefillot (plural of Tefillah) must be recited.

Mishnah One
The morning Tefillah (Shacharit) is until midday.
Rabbi Judah says until the fourth hour. 
The afternoon Tefillah (Minhah) until evening.
Rabbi Judah says: until the middle of the afternoon.   
The evening prayer has no fixed time.   
The time for the additional prayers (musaf) is the whole day.
Rabbi Judah says:  until the seventh hour.

Explanation
Section one:  The sages say that the morning Tefillah can be recited until midday (the sixth hour).  Note that this is long after the Shema had to have been recited, a topic discussed above in 1:4.  According to the first opinion there, the Shema had to be completed by sunrise, and according to Rabbi Judah by the third hour.  Neither of these times would connect the Shema with the Tefillah.  It seems that in mishnaic times the two prayers were not really connected. That connection began probably in the talmudic period.  
Section two:  The Minhah Tefillah can be recited until evening, according to the first opinion. Rabbi Judah says it must be recited by the “middle of the afternoon.”  The “afternoon” begins at 9 ½ hours (this is the time that the Minhah sacrifice was offered) and continues until evening (the 12th hour).  Therefore, the middle of that time is 10 ¾ hours.
Section three:  Maariv, the evening Tefillah, has no time limit.  
Section four:  Additional prayers (Mussaf) are those recited on Shabbat, Rosh Hodesh and holidays (Pesah, Shavuot, Sukkot, Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur). According to the first opinion, they may be recited at any time during the day, and according to Rabbi Judah they can be recited only until the seventh hour.   

