Berakhot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with other categories of people who are exempt from the Shema and some other mitzvoth.

Mishnah Three
Women, slaves and minors are exempt from reciting the Shema and putting on tefillin, but are obligated for tefillah, mezuzah, and Birkat Hamazon (the blessing after meals).

Explanation
The usual explanation for this mishnah is that women, children and slaves are exempt from time-bound positive commandments and obligated for non-time bound positive commandments, as well as all negative ones. The Shema is clearly time-bound and positive, as is tefillin (it is not worn at night, and according to most, not on Shabbat or Yom Tov).  The mezuzah is clearly a positive non-time bound commandment.  Birkat Hamazon is recited whenever someone eats, so it too is not time bound. The only problem with the list in the mishnah is that tefillah seems to be time-bound, as we shall learn in the next chapter. There are several answers to this. First of all, although each tefillah is time-bound, there is no time during the day when one could not recite the Amidah. When the time for reciting the morning Amidah is over, one can recite the Minhah (afternoon) Amidah, when Minhah time is over, one can recite the Maariv (evening) Amidah. Therefore, although each tefillah has its own set time, overall the mitzvah is not considered to be time-bound.  
A different explanation is that although the mitzvah is time-bound, women, children and slaves are obligated because every person is required to make requests and ask mercy directly from God.  Tefillah is about asking for one’s needs and praising God for the needs that have already been fulfilled and women, children and slaves have needs as do free adult men.  
While I certainly don’t have the definitive answer to why women, children and slaves are exempt from these positive time-bound commandments, it seems that a strong possibility is that they don’t have full control over their own lives.  They are, for the most part, subject to the free adult men with whom they live (father, husband, master). Since they don’t have control over their own lives, they are not subject to halakhot restricted in time.  One problem with this theory is that a divorcee and a widow are still exempt, even though they are not attached to any man.  My answer would be that the halakhah is addressed to the most common situation, and women are usually in some way attached to a man.     

