Berakhot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction 
The seventh chapter is all about the invitation to recite Birkat Hamazon together.  This is the short responsive refrain recited before the first blessing of Birkat Hamazon.  This invitation is called a “zimun” which literally means, “invitation.”
Our mishnah teaches when a “zimun” is recited.  

Mishnah One
Three that have eaten together, it is their duty to invite [one another to say Birkat Hamazon].  
One who ate demai, or first tithe whose terumah has been separated, or second tithe or sanctified property which have been redeemed, or an attendant who has eaten as much as an olive’s worth of food, or a Samaritan may be included [in the three].
But one who ate untithed produce, or first tithe whose terumah has not been separated, or second tithe or sanctified property which have not been redeemed, or an attendant who has eaten less than the quantity of an olive or a Gentile may not be counted.

Explanation
Section one:  The minimum number of people required to recite a “zimun” is three.  This seems the minimum number to be considered a group.   
Section two:  In order to be part of a “zimun” four requirements have to be fulfilled, three of which are listed in our mishnah (we will see the fourth tomorrow). First of all one must eat food permitted by the Torah.  We have already encountered the list in this mishnah on several occasions (Shabbat 18:1; Eruvin 3:2; Pesahim 2:5; Sanhedrin 8:2; Makkot 3:2).  It is basically a list of foods which can be eaten, at least according to toraitic law.  One who eats them can participate in a zimun.  The opposite is contained in the following section—those foods are prohibited and hence one who eats them cannot join together with others in a zimun.
The second requirement is that one needs to eat an olive’s worth of food.  The mishnah teaches this and at the same time teaches another halakhah—that even the attendant, the one serving the food to the others, may aid in constituting the zimun, provided that he ate with them a minimum measure of food. 
The third requirement is that the person be Jewish.  For this issue, being a Samaritan counts enough toward being Jewish.
Section three: This section is the opposite of the previous one.  One who eats prohibited foods, or doesn’t eat enough food, or is a Gentile, does not count in constituting a zimun.     
