Berakhot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with three additions made to the basic Tefillah.

Mishnah Two
They mention [God’s] power to bring rain in the blessing for the resurrection of the dead.
And they ask for rain in the blessing for [fruitful] years. 
And havdalah in “Who grant knowledge.”   
Rabbi Akiva says: he says it as a fourth blessing by itself. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: in the thanksgiving blessing.

Explanation
Section one:  We mention God’s power to bring rain in the second paragraph of the Tefillah, the paragraph that ends “mehayeh hametim.”  Into this paragraph we insert the phrase, “mashiv haruah umorid hageshem”—“He causes the wind to blow and the rain to come down.” This paragraph contains praises of God’s powers and as such it is a fitting blessing in which to mention a power which is traditionally considered one of God’s most significant powers, the bringing of rain.  
Section two:  We petition God for rain in a different paragraph from the one in which we mention rain.  We petition for rain in the blessing in which we ask God for a good year, a year with a bountiful harvest.  This blessing ends, “mevarech hashanim.”  Into it we insert, “veten tal umatar”—“grant dew and rain.”  
We should note that these two insertions only go into the Tefillah during the winter, which is the rainy season in Israel.  It does not rain at all in Israel during the summer.  We don’t ask God for the unusual, just that the world should work as “it is supposed to work.”  
Section three:  Havdalah, the prayer that separates Shabbat or festivals from the rest of the week, is recited as part of the Tefillah, even though it is also recited independently afterwards.  According to the first opinion, it is part of the fourth blessing, the one that begins, “Atah honen daat,” “You grant knowledge.”  Havdalah is about having the knowledge to distinguish between different things, between that which is holy and that which is not holy. That is why it is appropriate to be stated here.  
Rabbi Akiva says that Havdalah is an independent blessing, one which comes right before “Atah Honen Daat” on Saturday night and at the end of festivals.
Rabbi Eliezer holds that it is recited as part of the “thanksgiving” blessing, which is the blessing that begins, “Modim.”   It seems that Rabbi Eliezer’s objection with the other two opinions is that Havdalah is not a petition, as are the middle 13 blessings of the Tefillah. Rather it is an expression of gratitude, so it should be placed in the blessing in which we show our gratitude.   
