Berakhot, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction 
According to halakhah it is forbidden to derive any benefit from the world without first acknowledging that the world belongs entirely to God, as it says in Psalms 24:1, “The word in its entirety is the Lord’s.”  One acknowledges God’s ultimate ownership over the world by reciting a blessing before one derives benefit, mostly before one eats.  Hence, the sixth chapter of Berakhot details what blessings one recites before eating various produce:  fruits, vegetables, bread and wine.  In my commentary I will give transliterations of the blessings, which might be familiar to many of you.  

Mishnah One
How do they bless over produce? 
Over fruit of the tree one says, “Who creates the fruit of the tree,” except for wine, over which one says, “Who creates the fruit of the vine.” 
Over produce from the ground one says: “Who creates the fruit of the ground,” except over bread, over which one says, “Who brings forth bread from the earth.” 
Over vegetables one says, “Who creates the fruit of the ground.” 
Rabbi Judah says: “Who creates diverse species of herbs.”

Explanation
Section one:  Over fruit one generally says, “Bore pri haetz.”  However, since wine is the quintessential product made from fruit, it is singled out for a special blessing, “Bore pri hagefen.”  Wine was pretty much the only beverage drunk in the ancient world and hence it was considered to be especially important.
Section two:  Over almost all foods that come from the ground one says, “Bore pri ha’adamah.”  The exception is bread, again the quintessential food that comes from the ground.  It is singled out for the special blessing of “Hamotzi lechem min haaretz.”
Section three: According to the first opinion vegetables get the same blessing as do everything else that comes from the ground.  Rabbi Judah disagrees and distinguishes between foods like grains (not eaten as bread but as cereals or in cooked dishes), over which one would say “Bore pri ha’adamah” and vegetables over which one says, “Bore minei zeraim.”  This blessing is no longer recited because the halakhah is according to the previous opinion. 
