Berakhot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This and the next mishnah are perhaps the most important mishnayot in the two chapters concerning the Tefillah.  Here we see that there was some rabbinic opposition to the institution of fixed prayers.  We should recall that in biblical times there were no fixed prayers, by which I mean prayers fixed in time and wording. Rather, all prayers are spontaneous.  
The transition from spontaneous to fixed prayer seems to have been part of the transition to a post-Temple world. While there may have been some attempts to fix prayer formulas while the Temple still stood, they don’t seem to have attained much prominence in the literature.  The sacrificial service seems to have been sufficient to fill people’s spiritual needs.
As always occurs when there is innovation, not all agree as with the innovation or with its particular details.   

Mishnah Three
Rabban Gamaliel says: every day a man should pray the eighteen [blessings]. 
Rabbi Joshua says: an abstract of the eighteen.   
Rabbi Akiva says: if he knows it fluently he prays the eighteen, and if not an abstract of the eighteen.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabban Gamaliel seems to have held a position of political leadership among the rabbis and it is he who directs a liturgist to compose the Tefillah. He therefore mandates that every person recite these eighteen blessings three times a day.  Note that this would not have been easy in a time when they did not have siddurim (prayerbooks). The first siddurim were not composed until the Geonic period (8th-11th centuries).  Nevertheless, Rabban Gamaliel mandates that each individual recite the entire Tefillah.  
Section two: Rabbi Joshua says that he need not recite the full eighteen but rather may recite an abbreviated form.  There are two different explanations to this. Both explanations hold that he must recite the first three and last three blessings in their normal fashion.  These are the blessings that are part of every Tefillah, even those on Shabbat and holidays.  One explanation holds that he recites the 12 intermediate blessings but abbreviates each one of them. The other explanation is that he combines the themes of all 12 blessings into one blessing.  In either case, while Rabbi Joshua agrees that one should recite these blessings every day, he doesn’t require the full formula.
Section three: Rabbi Akiva tries to mediate between the two previous opinions. If he is capable of reciting the full Tefillah, then he should do so.  If, however, he is not capable because he is not familiar enough with it, then he may recite the shorter version.  
