Terumot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Five

Introduction
The next three mishnayot deal with a case where there are two baskets of produce, one of terumah and one of hullin and it is unclear which basket he ate from. We should note that this mishnah is very lenient in these situations, and it always assumes that a person did not eat terumah, unless that assumption becomes impossible. 
 
Mishnah Five
If there were two baskets, one of terumah and one of hullin, and a seah of terumah fell into one of them, but it is not known into which, behold I can assume that it had fallen into that of the terumah.   
[Two baskets] and it is not known which was of terumah and which of hullin, and he eats from one of them, he is exempt, and the second basket is treated as terumah and subject to the laws of hallah, the words of Rabbi Meir.
But Rabbi Yose exempts it.   
If another person eats from the second basket he is exempt.
If one man ate of both, he must repay the value of the smaller of the two. 

Explanation
Section one: In this case the mishnah is lenient, and rules that we can assume that the terumah fell into the basket of terumah and that the basket of hullin is not a mix of terumah and hullin. 
Section two: In this case there is a doubt which basket is of terumah and which is of hullin. If a person eats from one of the baskets, then we can assume that that basket was the basket of hullin and he is exempt. This is the same rule as that in the previous section—we assume that the basket he ate from had no terumah in it. The second basket has to be treated as terumah and can only be eaten by a priest. Nevertheless, if one comes to make bread from the grain of that basket, he must separate hallah (dough given to the priest) from it, even though terumah is exempt from hallah. The reason for this stringency is that this dough may not be terumah, in which case it is liable for hallah. 
Rabbi Yose disagrees and holds that the basket is treated as terumah and it is not liable for hallah. It seems that Rabbi Yose holds that we can look at the second basket the same way we looked at the first, and we can be lenient with both.
Section three: If another person ate from the second basket, he too is exempt, because each person can say that the other basket was the basket of terumah. 
However, if one person ate from both baskets, he has certainly eaten terumah and he must make repayment. When he repays he repays according to the smaller of the two baskets, assuming he ate all of both baskets. This is again a leniency because he can assume that the terumah was in the smaller basket. 

