Terumot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah continues to discuss how to deal with a field that has been planted with terumah seeds.

Mishnah Three
And it is also subject to tithes and poor man’s tithe. 
Both Israelites and priests that are poor may accept them, but the poor Israelites must sell that which is theirs to the priest for the price of terumah and the money belongs to them.   
He who beats the grain with sticks [instead of threashing with an animal] is to be praised.
But he who threshes it [by having an animal walk on it] what should he do?   
He must suspend baskets from the neck of the animal and place in them from the same kind, with the result that he will neither muzzle the animal nor feed it terumah.

Explanation
Section one: As stated above, this field is subject to the usual agricultural offerings.
Section two: This opinion seems to match that which we saw in section two of yesterday’s mishnah. Even a poor Israelite, or in the case of tithes, a Levite, may accept these gifts, but they must then sell them to a priest because they are terumah and a non-priest cannot eat them.
Section three: Normally, threshing is done by having an animal walk on the grain. The problem is that the animal will eat the grain and the animal is not allowed to eat terumah. The only exception is a beast that belongs to a priest—that beast can eat grain that was intended to be used as animal fodder. The person cannot muzzle the animal because the Torah prohibits one from muzzling an animal while it is threshing (Deuteronomy 25:4). 
The best solution would be to beat the grain with sticks and not use an animal at all. One who does so is to be praised.
Section four: If the person still wants to thresh by the traditional method of using an animal, he should suspend baskets from the animal’s neck that contain the same type of grain that the animal is threshing. This way it won’t want to eat the grain it is threshing because it can eat the same grain even more easily from the basket. In this way he prevents both problems—the animal is not muzzled and it doesn’t eat terumah. 

