Terumot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with the difference between plants whose seeds disintegrate in the soil and plants whose seeds do not.

Mishnah Six
As for untithed produce, what grows from it is permissible if of a kind whose seed disintegrates [in the soil].
But if of a kind whose seed does not disintegrate, then even what grows from plants which grew out of it are forbidden. 
Which is the kind whose seed does not disintegrate?   Like luf, garlic and onions. 
Rabbi Judah says: onions are like barley.

Explanation
Section one: If one plants seeds that come from untithed produce, and it is a type of plant whose seed disintegrates in the soil, then the plant that grows from the seeds is “permitted.” What this in actuality means is that this plant is treated like all other plants as far as the issue of tithing. One can eat from the fruit before it becomes liable for tithes, which usually occurs when one finishes processing the grain by making it into a pile. We shall discuss in great detail when produce becomes liable for tithes in tractate Maasrot.
Section two: However, if the seed does not disintegrate in the soil then it must be treated like untithed produce even before the new fruit would normally become liable for tithes. Because the seed was liable for being tithed before it was planted, and the seed was still there, one will in all cases have to tithe this produce before it is eaten, even if it is eaten out in the field, where one can usually eat food without tithing it. The mishnah is quite strict on this issue and rules that this rule applies not only to the plants that grow from the original seeds, but the next generation of plants as well. It seems that the mishnah can be extra strict in this case because the result of their being untithed is not so drastic—all he has to do is tithe them a bit earlier than normal.
Section three: The type of produce whose seed does not disintegrate in the soil seems to be bulbous vegetables, such as luf (arum, a type of onion), onions and garlic. Grain is a type of produce whose seed does disintegrate in the soil. Rabbi Judah holds that onions are like barley and that their seed does disintegrate in the soil.   

