Terumot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In today’s mishnah, which is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua debate whether a person who finds out that s/he has begun to eat something forbidden but has not yet swallowed the food, must spit it out.

Mishnah Two 
In all the above cases, if terumah was still in their mouth:   
Rabbi Eliezer says: they may swallow it.
But Rabbi Joshua says: they must spit it out. 
[If it was said to him], “Your have become unclean”, or “the terumah has become unclean”, 
Rabbi Eliezer says: he may swallow it. 
But Rabbi Joshua says: he must spit it out. 
[If it was said to him], “You were unclean” or “the terumah was unclean”, or it became known that [the food he was eating] was untithed, or that it was first tithe from which terumah had not yet been taken, or second tithe or dedicated produce that had not been redeemed, or if he tasted the taste of a bug in his mouth, he must spit it out.

Explanation
Section one:  Albeck explains that according to Rabbi Eliezer since in these cases s/he is going to have to pay back the value and the added fifth in any case, it is not forbidden for him/her to swallow the food that is in his/her mouth. Rabbi Joshua, in contrast, held above that s/he will not have to pay back the added fifth. Since he will have to pay back less, he has to make sure that he doesn’t eat or even swallow any terumah whatsoever intentionally. 
Section two: In this case, while the terumah was still in his mouth someone told him that he had just become impure or that the terumah had just become impure. In other words, when he began to eat the terumah, he was pure and the terumah was pure, but while eating he, or the terumah became impure. In this case, again Rabbi Eliezer says he may swallow that which is in his mouth whereas Rabbi Joshua says he has to spit it out. This is similar to the previous cases because when he began to eat it was permitted for him to do so.
Section three: In this section, it is made known to him that he or the terumah was impure before he began to eat. Alternatively, it is made known to him that the food he was eating was forbidden in some way. For instance, it was not tithed, or it was tithe from which terumah had not been removed, or it was second tithe or dedicated produce that had not yet been redeemed. Or he tasted a bug in his mouth (yuk!). In these cases, he is simply one who unwittingly ate food that he shouldn’t have eaten and hence Rabbi Eliezer agrees with Rabbi Joshua that he must spit it out. The mishnah distinguishes between cases of accidentally eating something forbidden—in these cases a person should have been more careful—and cases where a person couldn’t have done anything to prevent the food from becoming prohibited—in these cases Rabbi Eliezer holds that he may swallow the rest of his food. 

