Terumot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction
A thief is obligated to pay back double the amount that he stole. Our mishnah deals with a person who steals terumah.

Mishnah Four 
If one stole terumah but did not eat it, he must return double-payment at the price of terumah.   
If he ate it, he must pay twice the value plus a fifth, one principal value and a fifth at the price of hullin, and the other principal at the price of terumah.   
If one stole terumah of dedicated property and ate it, he must repay two fifths and the principal value, for the laws of double-payment do not apply to dedicated property.

Explanation
Section one: As we have stated many times, terumah was cheaper than regular produce because terumah has less of a market. If one steals terumah he needs to pay back only twice the amount that he stole, which is the value of terumah.
Section two: However, if he ate it, our problem becomes more complex. He must still pay back twice the value, but one of those amounts is the amount that the produce would have been worth if it was hullin, non-sacred produce, because whenever a person eats terumah (that is a person who is not supposed to eat terumah) he must pay back the value in hullin. The second value he can pay back at the cheaper terumah price because that is the value of the produce which he actually stole. He must also pay back an added fifth as a penalty for eating terumah, but he doesn’t need to pay back two fifths.
Section three: In this case a person steals terumah that a priest had dedicated to the Temple. When he eats it, he transgresses two prohibitions—eating terumah and benefiting from sanctified property. For each of these transgressions he brings an added fifth, so he brings two added fifths. However, the laws of double-payment for theft do not apply here, because these laws only apply when one steals something from another person, and not when one steals from Temple property (see Bava Metzia 4:9). It turns out that in this case the person pays back one principal and two fifths.   
