Terumot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with other cases where a person has to pay back the value of the terumah that he ate or gave to someone else, yet he does not have to pay back the added fifth. 

Mishnah Three
One who feeds [terumah] to his small children, or to his slaves whether they are of majority age or minors, or one who eats terumah from outside the land, or less than an olive’s bulk of terumah, must repay the value, but not the fifth; and the repayment remains hullin. Therefore, if the priest wishes to forgive the repayment, he may.

Explanation
In this mishnah, there are three different categories of people who must repay the value of the terumah that they ate or fed to others but no one has to pay back the added fifth. 
The first is one who feeds terumah to those whom he is responsible to feed, such as his small children or his slaves, whether they are of majority age or minors. In 6:3 we learned that one who feeds his guests or workers terumah pays back the value of that which they ate and they who actually ate the terumah pay the added fifth. In these cases, since the minor child or slave who actually ate the terumah doesn’t have any money to pay back with, they don’t have to pay the added fifth. The one who gave them the food still has to pay back the amount that he gave them, as he does in all cases when he gives terumah to someone he has a responsibility to feed. 
The Torah dictates that terumah be separated only inside the land of Israel. Terumah separated outside the land of Israel has the status of “derabanan”—of rabbinic origin. Therefore, if one eats terumah from outside the land of Israel, he is liable to pay back only the principal value (after all, he did take something that belonged to someone else) but not the added fifth (he doesn’t need atonement).
The final category is one who eats less than an olive’s worth. Eating such a small amount doesn’t generally count as eating, and therefore he hasn’t transgressed a biblical commandment. While he must, as always, restore the amount he took, he need not pay the added fifth.
In all of these cases, the repayment being made is to restore the amount that he took; it is not part of atoning for having eaten terumah. The repayment doesn’t become terumah and therefore, the priest can forgive the debt (see above, mishnah one).  

