Terumot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah distinguishes between plants that grow from terumah and plants that grow from various other agricultural offerings.
 
Mishnah Four 
What grows from terumah is terumah, but that which grows from growths [of terumah] is hullin. 
As for untithed produce, first tithe, after-growths from the sabbatical year, terumah grown outside the land, mixtures of hullin with terumah (medumma) and first-fruits—what grows from them is hullin. 
What grows from dedicated produce and second tithe is hullin and it is to be redeemed [at its value] at the time when it was sown.

Explanation
Section one: As we have learned, plants that grow from terumah seeds are considered to be terumah. This is because the rabbis punished the person who planted the seeds and dictated that the new plants would be terumah as well. According to the Talmud, the reason for this punishment is that the rabbis feared that a priest would keep the seeds until it was time for planting and that he would defile them by keeping them for so long. 
However, if these plants have seeds and then they are planted, the new plants are not considered terumah. The rabbis did not punish him in this case, because the status of the seeds was only “terumah derabanan.”
Section two: In contrast with the case, the rabbis did not rule that plants that grow from other various types of agricultural offerings would retain their status. We shall see some qualifications of this rule below in mishnah six. The rabbis seem to have been stricter with terumah because it is strictly forbidden to non-priests and it is forbidden to cause terumah to become impure.  
Section three: Dedicated produce and hullin are usually redeemed for money. The money becomes holy and is either given to the Temple, in the case of dedicated produce, or used to buy food in Jerusalem, in the case of second tithe. If a person plants seeds that come from dedicated produce or second tithes, the plants that grow from them are hullin, but he must redeem the new plants according to the value of the seeds that he used to plant them. In other words, when the mishnah says that they are hullin, what it means is that the plants themselves are not treated as if they were holy and need to be redeemed, but that one must still exchange money for the value of the seeds that he used.  

