Terumot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with cases where a person was allowed to eat terumah and while they were eating it became known that their status had changed and that they were not allowed to eat terumah. The question is—do they have to make full repayment, including the added fifth.

Mishnah One
If a woman was eating terumah, and they came and said to her, “Your husband is dead”, or “He divorced you.”
Or, if a slave was eating terumah, and they came and said to him: “Your master is dead”, or “He sold you to an Israelite”, or “He gave you away as a gift”, or “He emancipated you.”
So too, if a priest was eating terumah and it became known that he was the son of a divorced woman or a halutzah (a woman released from levirate marriage): 
Rabbi Eliezer says: they must repay both the value and the fifth.
But Rabbi Joshua exempts them [from the added fifth].  
If [a priest] was standing and sacrificing on the altar and it became known that he was the son of a divorced woman or a halutzah: 
Rabbi Eliezer says: all the sacrifices he had offered on the altar are disqualified.
But Rabbi Joshua pronounces them valid.  
If it, however, it became known that he possessed a blemish, his service is disqualified. 

Explanation
Section one: When a woman is married to a priest, she is allowed to eat terumah. When the marriage is terminated upon death or divorce, she loses the ability to eat terumah, assuming that she has no children from that marriage and that she herself was an Israelite. 
Section two: A slave owned by a priest is allowed to eat terumah. When that relationship is terminated, the slave loses the right to eat terumah.
Section three: A priest whose mother is a divorcee or a halutzah (a woman who had been previously released from levirate marriage—marriage to her dead husband’s brother) cannot eat terumah because his father shouldn’t have married his mother. 
Section four: In all three of these cases, Rabbi Eliezer holds that the person must repay both the value of the terumah s/he ate and the added fifth. 
Section five: Rabbi Joshua exempts them from the added fifth (according to the explanation founding in the Yerushalmi) because there was nothing that they could have done in this situation. In normal situations when a person unwittingly eats terumah, he must pay the added fifth because he should have been more careful and made sure that the food he was eating was not terumah. In these cases, the food was not the problem, the person was. Therefore, Rabbi Joshua exempts from the added fifth, meaning there is no need for atonement.
Section six:  This is the same debate as that above. A priest whose mother was a divorcee or a halutzah is a disqualified priest and cannot serve on the altar at the Temple. If in the middle of performing Temple worship he finds out that he is disqualified, Rabbi Eliezer says that all of the sacrifices he previously offered are disqualified. Rabbi Eliezer takes a “realistic” point of view—since he was not actually a valid priest, his sacrifices are invalid. Rabbi Joshua does not disqualify his prior sacrifices.  According to the traditional interpretation, Rabbi Joshua holds that a disqualified priest’s sacrifices are still valid. I might also suggest that Rabbi Joshua takes what we might call a “legalistic” point of view—since he was at the time that he offered the sacrifices considered a valid priest, his sacrifices are valid, even though in reality he was not a valid priest.
Section seven: Both sages agree that if it turns out that the priest was blemished with one of the blemishes that disqualify a priest from serving in the Temple that all of his sacrifices are disqualified. It seems that Rabbi Joshua cannot ignore the “reality” in this situation and he must agree with Rabbi Eliezer.  


