Terumot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the special status of the daughter of a priest who marries an Israelite, the question being—to what extent has her status changed? Does she retain her genealogical status as the daughter of a priest?

Mishnah Two
If the daughter of a priest married an Israelite and afterwards ate terumah, she must repay the value but not the fifth, and her death-penalty [for adultery] is by burning.  
If she married any of those disqualified [from marrying her], she must pay back both the value and the fifth, and her death-penalty [for adultery] is by strangling, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But the sages say: in either case, she repays the value but not the fifth, and the death penalty is by burning.

Explanation
Section one: The daughter of a priest who marries an Israelite loses the right to eat terumah (see Leviticus 22:12.) If she unwittingly eats terumah, while she does have to repay the value of the terumah she ate, she does not pay the added fifth, as would a regular Israelite who unwittingly ate terumah. The Torah states, “Any foreigner (zar) may not eat it and a person who does eat kodesh (terumah) unwittingly must pay an added fifth.” According to rabbinic interpretation, the word “foreigner” implies non-priest, but only a person who was never allowed to eat terumah. One who was once allowed to eat terumah but now may not is not included in this verse and therefore she does not pay the added fifth. It seems to me that this mishnah also expresses the opinion that although a daughter of a priest who marries an Israelite loses her status as a daughter of a priest, some of her genealogical heritage stays with her.
The daughter of a priest who commits adultery is punished with the execution of burning (see Leviticus 21:9), unlike a regular Israelite who is punished with strangulation for committing adultery. Our mishnah teaches that this punishment applies to the daughter of a priest even if she marries an Israelite. Again, she retains her genealogical identity. 
Section two: In this case the daughter of the priest marries a man who was himself disqualified from eating terumah, such as a mamzer or a disqualified priest (halal) and thereby she herself becomes disqualified from eating terumah, even if he dies and she goes back to her father’s house. According to Rabbi Meir, this girl has now lost her genealogical status as the daughter of a priest and she is treated as a regular Israelite. If she eats terumah she must pay back the value of that which she ate plus the added fifth and if she commits adultery she is punished by strangulation, which is the normal execution for adultery.
Section three: The other rabbis disagree with Rabbi Meir and hold that even if she marries someone who is disqualified, she still retains her status as a priest’s daughter and she still does not pay the added fifth, and her death penalty for adultery is burning. 


