Terumot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Sometimes when one grinds up wheat the volume seems to increase or decrease, depending on the quality of the wheat. Our mishnah deals with the ramifications that this has on the ratio of a pile into which terumah fell in.

Mishnah Nine
If a seah of terumah fell into a hundred [of hullin], and they were ground together and reduced in bulk, just as the hullin was reduced so too the terumah was reduced, and it is permitted.   
If a seah of terumah fell into less than a hundred [of hullin] and they were ground together and increased in bulk, just as the hullin became more, so too the terumah became more, and it is forbidden. 
If it is known that the kernels of hullin were better than the terumah, it is permitted.   
If a seah of terumah fell into less than a hundred [of hullin], and more hullin fell in afterwards, if it was accidental it is permissible, but if intentional it is forbidden. 

Explanation
Section one: When the seah fell into the terumah the pile had the required 100-1 ratio and therefore, the seah could be taken out. However, before he succeeded in taking out the one seah the pile was ground and it was reduced in bulk. The mishnah rules that we can assume that the mixture was uniformly reduced, both the terumah and the hullin. Therefore, the mixture will be permitted to non-priests once he takes out the seah.
Section two: Conversely, if a seah of terumah fell into less than one hundred of hullin, the mixture is prohibited to a non-priest. If he grinds it and it increases in bulk, it is still forbidden to non-priests because we assume that just as the terumah increased so too did the hullin.
However, there is one situation where we would not make this assumption. If the kernels of hullin were known to be of higher quality than the kernels of terumah, then we can assume that the hullin increased and not the terumah. 
Section three: In this case, when the seah originally fell into the pile there was not sufficient hullin to neutralize it. Subsequently more hullin fell in, thereby creating the necessary 100-1 ratio. If this hullin fell in accidentally, then the mixture becomes permissible. However, if he puts it in intentionally, then it is prohibited. One cannot intentionally create the 100-1 ratio.  
   

