  


   	mishnah  . The stalks   of fresh figs and dried figs, acorns   and carobs of terumah are forbidden to non-priests.  

   	mishnah  . Kernels of terumah   are forbidden   when in the possession of a priest, but permitted when he casts them away. Similarly, the bones of holy offerings   are forbidden when [the priest has them] in his possession, but permitted when he casts them away.   Coarse bran is permitted,   but fine bran is forbidden if it is of new wheat, and permitted if it is of old wheat.   One may adopt in terumah the practice followed in hullin.   He who sifts   a kab or two [of fine flour] from a se'ah of wheat, must not abandon the rest, but deposit it in some hidden place.  

   	mishnah  . If a store-chamber was cleared of wheat of terumah, one need not sit down and collect each grain, but sweep it all up in his usual manner   and then deposit hullin therein.

   	mishnah  . Similarly, if a jar of oil   is upset, he need not sit down and scoop it up [with his fingers],   but deal with it as he would in a case of hullin.
	mishnah  . He who pours out   from jar to jar and allows three drops to drip,   may place hullin therein.   But if he inclines the jar [on its side] in order to drain it,   it is terumah. How much terumah of tithe of dem'ai   must there be for him to take it to the priest?   One eighth of an eighth.  

   	mishnah  . Vetches   of terumah may be given   to cattle, beasts or fowls.   If an israelite hired a cow from a priest, he may give it vetches of terumah   to eat, but if a priest hired a cow from an israelite, though the responsibility of feeding it is his,   he must not feed it with vetches of terumah. If an israelite undertakes the care of a cow from a priest,   he must not feed it with vetches of terumah   but if a priest undertakes the care of a cow from an israelite, he may feed it on vetches of terumah.  

   	mishnah   . One may kindle oil that has to be burnt   in synagogues, houses of study, dark alleys, and for sick people when a priest is near.   If the daughter of an israelite married to a priest regularly goes to her father's house, her father may kindle [such oil] in her presence. It may also be kindled at a banqueting house   but not in a house of mourning;   so r. Judah. R. Jose says: [it may be kindled] in the house of mourning, but not in the banqueting house.   R. Meir forbids it in both places   but r. Simeon permits it in either case.  

