Chapter 1
Line 1
From the first day of Nisan until the eighth day of the month, they established that no eulogizing could be done.
Line 2
For there were Boethusians (a sect that cut off from mainstream Judaism) who said:

Chapter 2
Line 1
In the month of Iyar:
Line 2
On the seventh of Iyar, it is forbidden to fast, in light of the dedication of the walls of Jerusalem,
Line 3
because the nations came and fought over Jerusalem but could not capture it, and so they retreated from its walls. On the day they started to build it, they established a holiday.
Line 4
In two places in this scroll, it states: " it is forbidden to fast, in light of the dedication of the walls of Jerusalem". One time is when Bn"Y ascended from the exile, and the other is when the Macedonian king breached the walls, only to have them rebuilt the Hasmonean line. As it is written, "And all of the work on the walls finished on the twenty-fifth day of Iyar... (Nehemiah 6:15)." Even though the walls was built, the gates did not stand,
Line 5
Like he (Nehemiah) says, "Also until that point, I did not put up doors in the gates (Nehemiah 6:1)."
Line 6
And it says, "He built it, and covered it, and stood up its gates, bolts and bars (Nehemiah 3:15)

Chapter 3
Line 1
In the month of Sivan:
Line 2
On the fourteenth day of Sivan, they unified (captured) Migdal Tzur.
Line 3
It is now Caesarea of Rome (descended from Edom), which sits on the coast, and it was like a hammered-in nail to Israel in the days of Macedonian rule, since they could not capture it on account of its warriors.
Line 4
And when the Hasmonean line was strong, they captured it, deported the inhabitants, and returned it to Israel.
Line 5
They established a holiday on the day that they captured it.
Line 6
On the fifteenth and sixteenth days of it (Sivan), the people of Beth- Shean and Bekata were exiled.
Line 7
They too were like a hammered-in nail to Israel during the days of Macedonian rule

Chapter 4
Line 1
In the month of Tammuz:

Chapter 11
Line 9
On the twenty-second of Shevat the decree requiring worship of idols, which the enemies intended to bring into the Temple, was nullified. No public mourning on that day. 
Line 10
Caligula had sent an idol to be placed in the Temple. The news reached Jerusalem on the eve of the chag [Sukkot]. 
Line 11
Shimon the Tzadik said to them, “Celebrate your festival with joy, for none of those words will come to pass. The one whose presence dwells in this house, just as he made miracles for our ancestors in every generation, he will also make miracles for us at this time."
Line 12
When he saw that soldiers were coming, he said to them, “Go out before they come [and stand] before them." Messengers went out and stood before them. One messenger went to Acco, the second to Tzur, the third to Tzidan, the fourth to Kaziv. 
Line 13
When the thing became known, all the notables of Jerusalem went out before [Caligula’s emissary]. They said, “We will die before accept this decree.” They cried out and beseeched the emissary. 
Line 14
The emissary said to them, “Instead of crying out and beseeching me, why don’t you cry out and beseech your God in heaven?" 
Line 15
When he arrived at each city, he saw people coming out before him from each city. When he saw them he was surprised, and thought how numerous they are. 
Line 16
They said to him, “These are the Jews who come out to confront you from every city.” 
Line 17
[But when] he entered the cities and saw people lying in the marketplaces in sackcloth and ashes. 
Line 18
He hadn’t reached Antipatris when a letter arrived announcing Caligula’s assassination. Immediately the idol was taken down and given to the Jews who dragged it [through the streets]. Shimon heard a voice from the Holy of Holies that said, “The worship of idols in the Temple is nullified. Caligula has been slain and his decrees nullified.” They wrote it at that exact hour. 
Line 19
That same day was declared a yom tov.
