Makkot, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Nine and Ten

Introduction
Mishnah nine continues to discuss the laws of witnessing capital crimes.  It deals with the question when are witnesses consider two groups and when are they considered one group.  Furthermore this mishnah deals with the requirement of the witnesses to warn the transgressor before he commits his crime.  
Mishnah ten discusses a criminal who flees after being convicted.  The final part of mishnah ten contains the famous discussion regarding how often the sanhedrins actually carried out executions.

Mishnah Nine
If two persons see him [the transgressor] from one window and two other persons see him from another window and one standing in the middle warns him, then, if some on one side and some on the other side can see one another,  they constitute together one body of evidence, but if they cannot [see one another], they are two bodies of evidence. 
Consequently, if one of these is found to be a perjurer, both [the transgressor] and those two witnesses are put to death, while other group of witnesses is exempt. 
Rabbi Yose says:  “He is never put to death unless two witnesses had warned him, as it says, “by the mouth of two witnesses..” (Deut. 17:6).  
Another interpretation:  “By the mouth of two witnesses”:  that the Sanhedrin shall not hear the evidence from the mouth of an interpreter.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Section one:  If a murder is witnessed by two sets of witnesses from two different angles we need to know if they are legally considered one set of witnesses or two sets.  If they constitute one set of witnesses then if any one of the four is caught as a perjurer, or is otherwise invalidated, all of their testimony is invalid, and none of the witnesses can be executed, unless they were all caught as perjurers .  If they are two sets of witnesses, then if one set is caught as a perjurers or otherwise disqualified, there remains a set of valid witnesses, and the transgessor is executed upon their testimony.  According to the mishnah the two sets of witnesses’ testimony is joined only under two conditions:  1)  the two sets can see each other; 2)  the person warning the transgessor stands between the two sets of witnesses such that all may see him.  If the witnesses cannot see each other or the person warning was not seen by all of the witnesses, then they are two different sets.
Section two:  Rabbi Yose states that two must warn the transgessor before he commits the crime in order to convict him afterwards.  He learns this from the verse in Deut. 17:6, which literally translates, “by the mouth of two witnesses” (which is just idiomatic for “by two witnesses”).  Rabbi Yose understands that not only the verbal testimony but the verbal warning as well must come from two witnesses.
Section three:  Another interpretation of the phrase “by the mouth of” is that testimony may not be given through a translator.  A translator would cause the testimony to come from someone else’s mouth.  If the witness does not speak a language that the sanhedrin understands, his testimony does not count. 

Mishnah Ten
If one fled after having been convicted at a court and again comes up before the same court, the [first] judgment is not set aside.  
Wherever two witnesses stand up and declare, “We testify that so and so was tried and convicted at a certain court and that so and so were the witnesses” the accused is executed. 
[Trials before] a sanhedrin are customary both in the land [of Israel] and outside it. 
A sanhedrin that executes once in seven years, is called murderous.
Rabbi Eliezer b. Azariah Says: once in seventy years. 
Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva say:  “Had we been members of a sanhedrin, no person would ever be put to death. 
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel remarked:  “They would also multiply murderers in Israel.”

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
Section one:  If the convicted felon fled and was returned before the same court, he is executed without another trial.  If he was caught and brought before a different court two witnesses must state that this person was already convicted by another court.  They must also name the court and name those who testified against the felon.  If they do so he may be executed by the new court without a full trial.
Section two:  The sanhedrin of twenty three is a communal structure that is functional both in the Land of Israel and outside of it. 
Section three:  This famous piece of mishnah testifies to some of the Rabbis’ deep hesitations with regards to the death penalty.  As we have seen throughout tractate Sanhedrin and tractate Makkoth, convicting a person of a capital crime is no easy matter.  The person must be warned beforehand and then the crime has to be explicitly witnessed by two valid witnesses.  Therefore, the first opinion in our mishnah, concludes that a court that executes once every seven years is a murderous court.  Since the laws of testimony are so strict, any court that executes more often than this is assumed to be illegally suspending the laws and is therefore, in a sense, engaging in murder itself.  Rabbi Elezar ben Azariah says that once in seventy years already makes a court murderous.  Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva brag that had they been on a sanhedrin no one would have ever been executed.  At the end of the mishnah Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel, the political leader of the Jews at the time, notes a sound of caution.  The Rabbinic tendency to be overly lenient on executing murderers can take its toll on society.  In his opinion the attitudes of the other Rabbis cause the numbers of murderers to rise.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah ten, section two: Why might one have thought that the sanhedrin was not functional outside of the Land of Israel?
Mishnah ten, section three:  Why do the Rabbis feel the need to state how infrequently a court should execute?  What is Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel’s argument with the others?


