Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Eight and Nine

Introduction
Mishnah eight is a continuation of mishnah seven which discussed the punishment for the continuous violation of a negative commandment.  Mishnah nine discusses a case where one can perform one act and thereby violate eight or nine negative commandments and therefore receive eight or nine sets of lashes. 

Mishnah Eight
If he has been defiling himself for the dead all day, he is liable for only one set of lashes. 
If they said to him, “Do not defile yourself! Do not defile yourself!” and he did defile himself [each time], he is liable on each instance. 
If he was shaving all day he is liable for only one set of lashes. 
If they said to him, “Do not shave, Do not shave” and he did shave [each time], he is liable on each instance. 
If he was wearing a garment of mixed linen and wool all day, he is liable for only one set of lashes. 
If they said to him, “Do not put it on!  Do not put it on!” and he takes it off and puts it on, he is liable on each instance.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
All three sections of this mishnah teach the same ruling, which we learned already in the end of mishnah seven.  If a person is violating a prohibition continuously over an entire day he is only punished for one violation.  In other words, even though he may have violated the prohibition several times, it is considered one continuous violation and he is only punished once.  However, if he is warned by others and continues to violate the prohibition he is obligated for each violation.  Since he was warned he cannot claim that he didn’t realize what he was doing.  
The first two sections deal with two of the prohibitions placed by the Torah on the nazirite:  ritually defile himself through contact with a dead body or shave his hair.  The other prohibition for the nazirite, drinking wine, was the subject of mishnah seven.
The final section of the mishnah deals with the wearing of a garment which contains wool and linen.  This is prohibited in Leviticus 19:19.

Mishnah Nine 
It is possible for one to plough one furrow and become liable for eight prohibited acts:
If he ploughs with an ox and donkey [yoked together] 
and these were sanctified [animals], 
[the plough being drawn over] diverse mixed-seed sown] in a vineyard,  
during the sabbatical year,  
on a festival-day,  
[the plower being] a priest 
and a nazirite and the plot being situated on a defiled area.  
Hanania ben Hakinai says:  “He may also have been wearing a garment mixed of wool and linen.”   
They said too him: “This is not of the same category.” 
He said to them:  “Even the nazirite is not in the same category.”

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Our mishnah lists a situation where a person plows one furrow in the ground and yet has violated eight different negative commandments.  We will describe all eight and their Biblical precedents.
It is forbidden to plow with an ox and a donkey yoked together (Deuteronomy 22:10).
If the animals were sanctified to the Temple then one is forbidden to use them for other purposes.  Since there are two animals that were both sanctified, he has violated two negative commandments not to use sanctified property.
It is forbidden to sew ones vineyard with other types of seeds (Deuteronomy 22:9).  If by plowing he overturns seeds in a vineyard, this is considered as if he is sewing them anew and he thereby violates this commandment.
It is forbidden to plow the land during the Sabbatical year (Leviticus 25:4).
It is forbidden to plow on the Festival (see for instance Leviticus 23:7).  It is also forbidden to plow on the Sabbath.  However, violations of the Sabbath are not punished by lashes, as are the other violations in our mishnah, but rather by death.  Since there is a principle that if one violates two commandments with one act he receives the more serious punishment, if this plowing were to have taken place on the Sabbath he would be executed and not flogged.  Hence our mishnah lists the Festival and not the Sabbath.
A priest is forbidden to defile himself by contact with the dead or with a cemetery (Leviticus 21:1).  If the plowing was done in a cemetery he will be obligated for this violation as well.  
A nazirite is also forbidden to defile himself by contact with the dead (Numbers 6:6).
Section two:  Hananiah ben Hakinai adds another possible violation to the list.  If, while performing all of these activities, he wears the forbidden mixture of wool and linen, he has now violated a ninth prohibition.  The Sages respond that this ninth violation has nothing to do with the plowing and therefore they did not list it in the first section of our mishnah.  Hananiah ben Hakinai responds that being a nazirite (or a priest) who defiles himself is also not a violation that is a result of the plowing, since a nazirite and a priest are forbidden even to enter the cemetery.  Since according to Hananiah the list already includes violations that are not a direct result of plowing, it may be expanded to other violations that are not a result of the plowing, such as wearing wool and linen.  In this way Hananiah ben Hakinai has found a way that a person can be obligated for having violated nine prohibitions in one act.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah nine:  Why would the authors of the mishnah want to list all of the possible violations involved in plowing one furrow?  What principle does this teach us?  How does it relate to the subject of the previous mishnah?
Mishnah nine, section two:  What might the Sages respond to Hananiah ben Hakinai, who received the last word in the mishnah?
