Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Five, Six and Seven

Introduction
Mishnah five discusses the various prohibitions of shaving one’s head either as a sign of mourning (Leviticus 21:5, Deuteronomy 14:1) or in general (Leviticus 19:26).  These prohibitions are punishable by flogging. 

Mishnah Five
If a man makes a baldness on his head, or rounds the corner of his head, or mars the corner of his beard, or makes one cutting [in his flesh] for the dead, he is liable [to a flogging]. 
If he makes one cutting for five dead, or five cuttings for one, he is liable for each one.
On [rounding] the head [he is liable] for two corners,  one for one side and one for the other; 
On [marring] the beard [he is liable] for two [corners] on one side, for two on the other side, and for one lower down.
Rabbi Eliezer  says:  “If they were all taken off at the same time he is liable only on one count.” 
And he is only liable if he takes off with a razor; 
Rabbi Eliezer says:  “Even if he picks off the hairs with tweezers, or with pincers, he is liable.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Section one: Making a baldness on one’s head as a sign of mourning is prohibited in Deuteronomy 14:1 and Leviticus 21:5.  Rounding the corner of one’s head and marring the corner of one’s beard are prohibited in Leviticus 19:27.  Cutting one’s flesh for the dead is prohibited in Leviticus 19:28.  All of these transgressions are punishable by flogging.  Our mishnah now proceeds to list how many violations are contained in each of these commandments.
Section one, clause a:  With regards to cutting one’s flesh, each cut for each dead counts as a violation.  If he cuts once for five dead he receives five sets of lashes. Likewise, if he cuts five times for one dead he receives five sets of lashes.
Section one, clause b: Rounding one’s head is considered two violations, one for each side of the head.  Therefore he will receive two sets of lashes.
Section one, clause c:  Marring the corners of one’s beard is considered five violations, two for marring each side and one for marring the chin.  Therefore he will receive five sets of lashes.   
Section one, clause d:  Rabbi Eliezer disagrees with the previous opinion.  In his opinion just because there are separate areas of the head to round or beard to mar does not mean that one is obligated lashes for each section.  What causes a person to receive multiple sets of lashes is his having violated the prohibition on different occasions.  If he mars one part of the beard today and another at a later time, for instance tomorrow, he will be obligated for two sets of lashes.  However, if he violates the prohibition in one sitting he is only obligated for one set of lashes.
Section two: According to the first opinion in the mishnah he is only liable for having marred his beard if he does so with a razor.  Rabbi Eliezer holds that marring even with pincers or tweezers is a violation of the commandment.

Mishnah Six
He who writes an incision on his skin [is flogged]. 
If he writes [on his flesh] without incising, or incises without writing, he is not liable, until he writes and incises with ink, eye-paint or anything that lasts. 
Rabbi Shimon ben Judah says in the name of Rabbi Shimon:  “He is not liable until he has written there the name [of a god], as it is says:  “Nor shall you incise any marks on yourselves; I am the Lord” (Leviticus 19:28).

Explanation—Mishnah Six
This mishnah is a continuation of the previous mishnah which discussed the prohibitions in Leviticus 19:27-28.  The last half of verse 28 prohibits tattooing, defined in our mishnah as incising with a knife and making a permanent mark.  If he were to incise without using permanent ink, or write on himself with permanent ink without first incising he would not be liable for lashes.  
The first opinion in the mishnah understood that one is liable to be flogged no matter what he writes.  Rabbi Shimon ben Judah disagrees and states that one is obligated only if he writes the name of another god.  This is learned from the end or verse 28, “I am the Lord”.  Rabbi Shimon understands this to mean God saying, “I am the Lord” and therefore you may not write any other god’s name.  

Mishnah Seven
If a nazirite has been drinking wine all day, he is liable for only one lashing.
If they said to him, “Don’t drink wine”, “Don’t drink wine”, and he kept drinking, he is liable for each instance.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
A nazirite is forbidden to shave his hair, drink wine or become impure (Numbers 6:1-21).  Our mishnah asks the question about a nazirite who drinks wine all day long.  Is this considered one violation or many violations?  In other words, what splits one act of violation from another, in order to make him liable on multiple counts?  
The mishnah states that it is his awareness of his crime, proven by others warning him to cease drinking, that separates counts of violations.  If he drinks all day long yet no one warns him, it is only considered one violation.  If others warn him, it is considered a violation every time he continues to drink.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five, section two:  What might be the basis of Rabbi Eliezer’s disagreement with the previous opinion?
Mishnah six:  If you have the Hebrew text in front of you, you may be able to notice that the end of the mishnah can actually be read in a different way?  How else can it be read?  
Mishnah seven:  How does this mishnah compare to Rabbi Eliezer’s statement at the end of mishnah five?  Does this mishnah go according to his opinion or not?
