Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The final chapter of Makkoth discussed those who are liable to be flogged.  There are three reasons that a person is flogged:  1)  one who transgresses a Biblical law for which the penalty is kareth (heavenly excommunication).  According to the Rabbis one who was flogged is not penalized by kareth, considered to be a more serious punishment.  2)  One who transgresses a Biblical law which is punishable by death by the hands of Heaven.  3) One who transgresses a Biblical negative commandment, provided the transgression was active.  Our chapter lists many categories of those who are to flogged but the list is not exhaustive.

Mishnah One
And these are liable to be flogged:   
One who had relations with his sister, or his father's sister, or his mother's sister, or his wife's sister, or his brother's wife, or his father's brother's wife, or a menstruant;   
A high priest who marries a widow,  an ordinary priest who marries a divorcee  or a halutzah;
An Israelite who marries a mamzereth or natinah,  or an Israelite woman who is married to a mamzer  or a  natin.   
In the case of a [woman who is both] a divorcee and a widow [a high priest] is liable on two counts.   
But in the case of a [woman who is both] a divorcee and a halutzah, an ordinary priest is liable only on one count.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  This mishnah lists sexual offenses which are not punishable by death.  In each of these cases both offenders, the man and the woman will be flogged.  These forbidden relations are discussed in Leviticus chapters eighteen and twenty.     
Section two:  This section lists marriages forbidden to high priests and ordinary priests.  They are listed in Leviticus 21:7, 13-15.  
Section three:  This section lists marriages forbidden to ordinary Israelites.  A mamzer or mamzereth (a female mamzer), mentioned in Deuteronomy 23:3, is one born of a forbidden union which carries with it a punishment of kareth or death.  A natin or natina (a female natin) is a descendent of the Gibeonites, those who tricked Joshua into accepting them as converts, upon which he declared them to be woodchoppers and water-drawers and forbade them to marry ordinary Israelites (Joshua 9:27).
Section four:  A widow who is also a divorcee, i.e. her first husband died and her second husband divorced her, is forbidden to a high priest on two counts.  If he were to marry such a woman he would be obligated to be flogged for each transgression, even though he did only one act.  A divorcee and a halutzah (one who has been rejected by her levir, her dead husband’s brother) are forbidden to an ordinary priest.  However, the prohibition of the halutzah to an ordinary priest is only a Rabbinic prohibition, not Biblical, as is the prohibition to a divorcee  Therefore, an ordinary priest who marries a divorcee who is also a halutzah is only flogged for one transgression.

Mishnah Two  
An unclean person who ate holy meat (Leviticus 7:20, 12:4);
One who entered the sanctuary while unclean (Leviticus 12:4, Numbers 5:3, 19:13); 
One who ate forbidden fat or blood (Leviticus 3:16, 7:23-27); 
Or leftover sacrificial meats (Leviticus 19:6-8); 
Or sacrifices that had been offered up with improper intention (Leviticus 7:18);
Or [an offering] that has became unclean (Leviticus 7:19);
One who slaughters, or offers up a sacrifice, outside the Temple precincts (Leviticus 17:4);   
One who ate leavened [bread] during Passover (Exodus 12:15, 19);   
One who partakes of food [or drink] or does work on the Day of Atonement (Leviticus 23:27-31);   
One who puts together the ingredients for the [anointing] oil, or the ingredients for the incense, or anoints with the oil for anointing (Exodus 30:22-28):
One who eats an animal that died a natural death (Deuteronomy 14:21); 
Or was improperly slaughtered (Exodus 22:30); 
Or any of the [creatures deemed] ‘abominable’ and ‘teeming’ (Leviticus 11:11, 40).   
One who eats non-tithed produce, or first-tithe from which heave offering has not been removed, or unredeemed second-tithe, or unredeemed sanctified property.
How much untithed produce is one to eat to become liable?   
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Any amount.”
The Sages say:  “An olive's size.”   
Rabbi Shimon said to them:  “Do you not admit that if one ate the minutest ant that he would be liable?  
They said to him: “[Only] because it is a whole creature.”  
He said to them:  “Even a grain of wheat is a whole entity.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
The first fourteen sections of our mishnah mostly lists different types of forbidden foods and a few other Temple related prohibitions for which one is to be flogged.
Section fifteen:  According to Rabbi Shimon one is liable for flogging if he eats any amount of untithed produce, even a single grain. The Sages disagree and state that only if one eats an olive’s size of untithed produce is he liable for flogging.  Less than that and he is exempt.  Rabbi Shimon attempts to prove his point by making an analogy to eating an entire ant.  All agree that if one eats an entire ant (on purpose) he is liable to be flogged, even though the ant is smaller than an olive.  The Sages respond that one is liable for eating an ant since it is an entire creature.  Since it is a distinct, full entity it is enough to make one who consumes it liable for punishment.  Rabbi Shimon responds that a single grain is also a whole entity, and therefore one who eats a single grain of untithed produce is liable to be flogged as well.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah two, section fifteen: How might the Sages further respond to Rabbi Shimon, who gets the last word in the mishnah?  


