Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Ten and Eleven

Introduction
Mishnayoth ten and eleven discuss the number of lashes a person is to receive.

Mishnah Ten
How many lashes is he given? 
Forty save one, as it says, “By number forty” (Deuteronomy 25:2-3) which means, a number close to forty. 
Rabbi Judah says: “He is given forty [lashes] in full.” 
And where does he receive the additional lash? Between his shoulders.

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
Through a clever midrash our mishnah learns from Deuteronomy 25:2-3 that a person can receive up to 39 lashes for a single crime.  The simple reading of those verses is actually that he can receive 40 lashes.  Verse 3 states explicitly, “He may be given up to forty lashes.”  The Rabbis derive 39 from the fact that verse 2 ends with the word “by number” and verse 3 with the word “forty”.  The midrash is that the “number” is before “forty” and therefore he is lashed 39 times.  Interestingly, the Rambam thinks that the midrash in our mishnah is not the derivation of the law but rather merely a Biblical support.  The real reason that he only receives a maximum of 39 lashes is that if the person counting the lashes makes a mistake of one, he will still have only received 40 lashes.  In this way the court will not violate the explicit prohibition in verse 3 not to give more than 40 lashes. 
Rabbi Judah reads the verse literally, and therefore does prescribe forty full lashes.  
In mishnah thirteen we will learn that the person receives a third of the lashes on his front and two-thirds on his back.  The end of our mishnah asks where does he receive the fortieth lash, according to Rabbi Judah who says that he gets 40 full lashes.  The mishnah teaches that the fortieth lash is between his shoulders.  

Mishnah Eleven
When they estimate the number of lashes he can stand it must be a number divisible by three. 
If they estimated him capable of receiving forty, and after receiving some they said he cannot receive forty, he is exempt [from the rest].  
If they estimated him fit to receive eighteen, and after he was lashed they said he could receive forty, he is exempt [from the rest]. 
If he committed a transgression which violated two prohibitions and they made one estimate [for the lashes for both prohibitions],  he is lashed and then exempt [from more].
And if [they had] not [made one estimate for both], he is lashed [for one transgression], is allowed to recover and then is lashed again.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
Our mishnah assumes that when the Torah states that a person is to be lashed 40 (39) times, the meaning is that this is the maximum number of lashes any person can receive.  Before a person is lashed, he is to be examined by doctors who will estimate how many lashes he can receive without his life being endangered.  This estimate is the number of lashes that he will actually receive.
Section one:  As we will learn in mishnah thirteen the lashes are divided into three sets, one set on his front and two on his back.  Since they are divided into three sets, the number of lashes that the doctors say that the person can receive must be divisible by three.
Section two:  Estimates made by the doctors are not necessarily going to be accurate.  If the doctors err the criminal always receives the benefit of the doubt.  If they prescribe a high number of lashes, and as he is being lashed they see that he will not be able to withstand the prescribed number, they stop lashing him.  If the doctors prescribe a low number, and after having finished lashing him they see that he can withstand more, they do not give him more lashes.  In other words the criminal can never receive more than the prescribed number nor more than they think he can withstand.
Section three:  If a person committed two violations with one act then there is the possibility that the lashes he receives for both will be joined together.  If the doctors give one estimate as to how many lashes he can receive, for instance they say he can receive 42, 39 for the first violation and then 3 more for the second, then he receives the 42 lashes and is not lashed any more.  However, if they make separate evaluations, for instance they say he can receive 39 for the first crime and do not state a number for the second, then he receives the lashes for the first crime, is allowed to heal, and then receives the prescribed number of lashes for the second crime.  In other words, since the lashes were not estimated together, they are considered separate sets of lashes, and he must be allowed to recuperate in between.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eleven, section three:  Do you think that the ruling might be different if instead of performing one act whereby he violated two prohibitions, he instead violated two prohibitions by performing two separate acts?
