Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnayoth three and four continue to discuss which transgressions are punishable by flogging.

Mishnah Three
One who eats of first fruits previous to the recital over them (Deut. 26:3-10); 
Of most holy things outside of the Temple curtains (Exodus 27:9); 
Of lesser holy things or of second tithe, outside the city wall (Deut. 12:17-18).  
One who breaks a bone of a ritually clean Passover offering receives forty [lashes] (Exodus 12:46); 
But one who leaves over a clean [Passover offering] (Exodus 12:10), or breaks a bone of an unclean [Passover offering], is not given forty [lashes]. 

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  First fruits were to be brought to Jerusalem and given as a gift to the priests.  The bearer of the first fruits was supposed to recite a liturgical text contained in Deuteronomy 26:3-10, which contained a brief history of Israel (the text is now part of the Passover Haggadah).  A priest who ate of the first fruits before the recitation was made was punished by flogging.
Section two:  Certain sacrifices were only to be eaten within the curtains of the Temple.  These included sin offerings and guilt offerings.  One who ate them outside of this area was punished by flogging.
Section three:  Other sacrifices could be consumed anywhere within the walls of Jerusalem.  These included thanksgiving offerings, offerings of wellbeing and the Passover offering.  The second tithe was to be brought to Jerusalem and consumed there.  One who ate any of these things outside of the walls was punished by flogging.
Section four:  The Torah forbids breaking a bone of the Passover sacrifice.  The mishnah limits this law to a Passover sacrifice brought by a ritually clean person.  Usually unclean people could not bring the Passover sacrifice and they were to wait a month and celebrate what is called Pesach Sheni, or The Second Passover (see Numbers 9:4-13).  However, if most of the congregation was impure at the time of the first Passover (the 14th of Nissan) they were allowed to sacrifice the Passover offering while impure.  Our mishnah teaches that one who breaks a bone of a Passover offering brought while the congregation is impure is not liable to be lashed.  
The Torah also states that the Passover offering must be consumed that very night.  One who does not consume the Passover offering, while having violated a commandment, is nevertheless not flogged.  We will learn why in the next mishnah.    

Mishnah Four
If one takes the mother bird with the young (Deuteronomy 22:6-7):
Rabbi Judah says he is flogged and need not [then] send the mother free; 
But the Sages say:  “He lets the mother go and is not flogged.” 
This is the general principle; any negative commandment which involves a positive deed, one is not liable (for transgressing over it).

Explanation—Mishnah Four
The last section of the mishnah states the principle that will explain the Sages’ position in the previous section as well as the last section of the previous mishnah.  According to the mishnah any negative commandment which can be immediately remedied by a positive deed is not punishable by lashing.  Our two mishnayoth illustrate commandments of this nature.  Deuteronomy 22:6-7 states:  “Do not take the mother (bird) with the young, Let the mother go”.  The Sages understand the first half of this statement to be a negative commandment and the second half a positive deed which would remedy the violation of the negative commandment.  In other words one who violates the negative commandment by taking the mother and the young can remedy it by doing a positive deed, namely by releasing the mother.  Therefore, the Sages say that since he released the mother, he is not liable to be flogged.
Rabbi Judah reads the verse differently.  He understands the second half to mean “Let the mother go” before you take her and the young.  Once the person has taken the mother bird while the young are together with her in the nest he is immediately punishable by flogging, since he cannot remedy the situation.  Since the commandment has already been violated and cannot be remedied, he is not obligated to release the mother bird. 
This same general rule is also applicable with regards to the end of the previous mishnah which discussed leaving the Passover offering until morning.  Exodus 12:10 states:  “You shall not leave any of it until morning; if any of it is left until morning you shall burn it.”  Again the first half of the verse is a negative commandment and the second half contains a remedy to the violation of that commandment.  Therefore one who violates the prohibition of leaving the sacrifice until morning is not flogged.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  Why do you think a person who breaks the bone of an impure Passover offering is not to liable for flogging?
Mishnah four:  Would Rabbi Judah disagree with the opinion in the last half of mishnah three?  Why or why not?     
