Makkoth, Chapter Two, Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of chapter two continue to deal with various law concerning the cities of refuge.  

Mishnah Seven
If the trial was concluded when there was no high priest [in office], or if one kills a high priest, or a high priest that kills, [in these cases the manslayer] can never come away from that place [of refuge].
He [the manslayer] may not go out to bear witness, neither for cases having to do with a religious observance, nor to bear witness in a monetary suit, nor to bear witness in a capital case. 
Even should [all] Israel need him, and even a general like Yoav the son of Zeruiah, he may never go out, as it is said, “to there he fled”:  ‘there’ must be his abode, ‘there’ his death, ‘there’ his burial. 
Just as the city affords asylum so does its Sabbath boundary afford asylum. 
If a manslayer went beyond the boundary [of the city] and the blood avenger found him:
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says:  “For the avenger it is a matter of obligation [to kill him]; for everyone else, a matter of option.”
Rabbi Akiba says: “It is a matter of option for the avenger, and anyone else [who kills him] is not liable for doing so.”
If a tree was standing within the boundary and its boughs extended beyond [the boundary] or if it was standing outside of the boundary and its boughs extended within, it wholly follows [the position of] the boughs.  
If he slew [someone] in that city [of refuge] he is banished from one neighborhood to another neighborhood.   
And a Levite is banished from one city to another.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  This section is a conclusion of the previous mishnah.  If the trial of the manslayer is concluded at a time when there was no high priest he can never leave the city of refuge.  Even when a new high priest is appointed, his death will not free the manslayer since he was not the high priest when the person was convicted of manslaughter.  Similarly, one who kills a high priest or a high priest that kills can never leave the city of refuge, since there would be no existing high priest at the conclusion of the trial.
Section two:  The manslayer may not leave the city of refuge under any circumstance, even to testify to a religious matter, such as the new month.  Neither may he leave to testify in monetary cases nor in capital cases.  Even if he was a general in the army and Israel needed him in war, he may not leave.  The mishnah emphatically states that “there”, i.e. in the city of refuge will be his permanent dwelling, his death and his burial.
Section three:  Just as the city proper offers the manslayer refuge from the blood avenger, so too does any area within the Sabbath limit (a boundary within which a person may freely travel on the Sabbath).  This is defined as a 2000 amot perimeter of the city. 
Section four: If he does leave the city of refuge before the high priest dies, he is liable to be killed.  According to Rabbi Yose the Galilean, the blood avenger is actually commanded to kill him and any other person is permitted to kill him.  According to Rabbi Akiva the blood avenger may kill him, and other people may not.  However, if other people do kill him they are not liable as murderers.
Section five:  A tree standing in the city and leaning out of it, or standing outside of the city and leaning in, is judged to be in our out of the city boundaries based on its boughs and not on the position of its trunk.  This will be of import if the manslayer reaches the tree and the blood avenger tries to kill him.  If the tree is in the boundaries the blood avenger may not kill him but if it is outside of the boundaries, he may.
Section six:  A person who accidentally kills someone in a city of refuge presents a legal problem since he is already in the place that protects people from the blood avenger.  The mishnah remedies this problem by stating that he is to be exiled from neighborhood to neighborhood.  A Levite who lives in a city of refuge (see Numbers 35:6) may not stay in the city if he accidentally kills someone.  Rather he must go to a different city of refuge.

Mishnah Eight
A manslayer who went to his city of his refuge and the men of that city wished to do him honor, should [refuse] by saying to them, “I am a manslayer!”. 
If they say to him, “Nevertheless” he should accept from them [the proffered honor], as it is said: “and this is the word of the manslayer.”  
They used to pay  rent to the Levites, according to the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Meir says: “They did not pay them rent.” 
And [on his return home] he returns to the office he formerly held, according to the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Judah says: “He does not return to the office he formerly held.”

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  Upon reaching the city of refuge the manslayer should initially attempt to refuse any honors that the people of the city may offer him.  However, if they insist he may accept.  This is learned from the verse, “and this is the word of the manslayer.”  The mishnah understands the verse as hinting that the manslayer need only speak one word of refusal of honor.  He need not refuse a second time.
Section two:  According to Numbers 35:6 the cities of refuge are actually owned by the tribe of Levi which was not apportioned a geographical inheritance in Israel as were the other tribes.  Therefore Rabbi Judah states that those who fled to the city of refuge must pay rent to the Levites.  Rabbi Meir hold that they need not.
Section three:  When he returns to his former home after the death of the high priest, Rabbi Meir holds that he returns to his former positions of power and honor.  Rabbi Judah holds that he does not.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eight:  What might be the connection between the two disputes at the end of this mishnah?  Are Rabbis Meir and Judah holding consistent opinions?  If so, what conception of manslaying underlies each of their words?  


