Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Twelve and Thirteen

Introduction
Mishnayoth twelve and thirteen describe the lashing procedure:  where and how the one being lashed and the one lashing should stand, the size and quality of the whip and how lashings are to be administered.

Mishnah Twelve
How do they lash him? 
His two hands are tied to a pillar on either side of it and the minister of the synagogue grabs his clothing, if they are torn, they are torn; if they are ripped open, they are ripped open, until he exposes the offender’s chest. 
And a stone is placed behind the offender, the minister of the synagogue stands on it, a strap of cowhide in his hands, doubled over into two, and redoubled, and two straps that rise and fall attached to it. 

Explanation—Mishnah Twelve
While being lashed the victim is tied to a post with his hands spread apart.  The “minister of the synagogue”, who was responsible for most of the administrative duties, would open the offender’s garments, even if this would cause them to rip. The minister would then stand upon a stone and hold a whip in his hand.  The whip was made of cowhide folded twice to make it thicker, and thereby stronger.  From the central piece came out two other straps.  According to the Talmud these two other straps were made of donkey’s hide, which was not as thick as the cowhide.

Mishnah Thirteen
The handle is a handbreadth long and a handbreadth wide, its tip reaching to the edge of the [offender’s] abdomen.   
He administers one-third [of the lashes] in front and two-thirds behind.   
He lashes him not in a standing or sitting position but stooping, as it says, “And the judge shall cause him to fall [stoop] down” (Deut. 25:2).   
He who administers the lashes lashes with his one hand and with his whole force.

Explanation—Mishnah Thirteen
Section one:  Our mishnah continues to describe the whip used for lashing.  Its handle was one handbreadth by one handbreadth.   The tip of the whip, meaning the extra straps, should be long enough to reach the offender’s abdomen when the minister strikes him.  The offender will be struck by the tip and not by the body of the whip, made of the cowhide.  
Section two:  As we learned previously, one-third of the lashes are on his front and two-thirds on his back.  The offender, when he is being lashed, is not to stand nor to sit but to lean over. This is learned from the verse which states that the judge should cause him to fall over.  The verse is understood not to mean that the judge should cause him to fall all the way down but to stoop down.  The person lashing can use only one hand but he should use all of his force.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Why do you think that one-third of the lashes are given on the back and one-third on the front?
