Makkot Chapter Two, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The second chapter of Makkoth discusses the laws regarding accidental killing.  These laws are discussed extensively in Numbers 35:9-28, 32 and Deuteronomy 19:1-13.  According to these passages, if a person killed another person by accident the victim’s relative could exact blood vengeance upon the accidental killer.  If the accidental killer wanted to avoid being killed by the blood avenger he would run to one of the cities of refuge that were to be established when the Land of Israel was conquered.  The accidental killer would have to stay in this city until the death of the High Priest at which point he could return to his former city and the blood avenger would be forbidden from killing him.
The two mishnayoth that we will learn today define what killing is considered accidental such that it allows a killer to escape to a city of refuge.

Mishnah One
The following go into banishment: one who kills in error.  
If [for instance] while he was pushing a roller [on the roof] and it fell down and killed somebody;
If while he was lowering a cask it fell down and killed somebody; 
If while coming down a ladder he fell on somebody and killed him, he goes into banishment. 
But, if while he was pulling up the roller it fell back and killed somebody; 
If while he was raising a cask and the rope snapped and the cask fell and killed somebody; 
If while going up a ladder he fell down and killed somebody, he does not go into banishment. 
This is the general principle: [whenever the death was caused] in the course of a downward movement, he goes into banishment, but [if it was caused] not in the course of a downward movement, he does not go into banishment. 
If the iron slipped from its heft and killed [somebody]: 
Rabbi says, “He does not go into banishment.” 
And the Sages say:  “He goes into banishment.”
If it flew from the log being split:
Rabbi says, “He goes into banishment.” 
And the Sages say:  “He does not go into banishment.”

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  This entire section illustrates the principle that an accidental death which will force the killer to go into exile is a case where a person is lowering a heavy object or he himself is going down a ladder and the object or the person slips and accidentally kills someone.  If however, he was bringing something up or going up a ladder and the object or he fell downward he is not obligated to go into exile.  The difference between the two is that in the first case the likelihood of injuring someone below is relatively high and he therefore should have been more cautious.  In the second case, when he is bringing something up, the likelihood that it will fall below and cause injury is unlikely.  Therefore he does not need to go into exile.  
This section illustrates an important difference in the Rabbinic understanding of exile from the Biblical understanding of exile.  In the Bible the accidental killer’s fleeing to the refuge city is to his own advantage. If he does not the blood avenger will kill him.  Exile is not a punishment for a crime or for negligence but legal protection offered to an accidental killer.  In the Rabbinic legal system exile is a punishment for negligence.  This is probably partly due to the fact that blood vengeance was not accepted in their society.  The Rabbis understand exile as a punishment for negligence.  Therefore if the killing was totally unanticipated, he need not go to the city of exile.  
Section two:  Deuteronomy 19:5 brings up an example of accidental killing whereby a man goes into the forest with an ax and the “ax flies off the handle and strikes another so that he dies”.  This phrase “ax flies off the handle” is read in two different ways. The Sages read the verse as we have translated it, that the instrument which kills is the metal part of the ax which flies off its handle.  According to Rabbi (Judah the Prince) in this situation the person is not liable for exile.  He reads the verse as if it states that the ax causes a chip to fly off from the tree and the chip kills someone else.  [Rabbi would translate the word handle as “tree”, and they are both indeed the same word.]  According to the Sages, in this situation he is not liable for exile.   

Mishnah Two
If a man threw a stone into the public domain and killed a person, he goes into banishment. 
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says:  “If after the stone had left his hand another person put out his head and caught it, the thrower is exempt [from banishment].” 
If a man threw a stone into his [own] court and killed a person, then, if the victim had a right of entry there, the thrower goes into banishment, and if not, he does not go into banishment, as it says, “As when a man goes into the forest with his neighbor” (Deut. 19:5): the forest is a domain accessible to the victim and to the slayer and it therefore excludes the court of the householder where the victim has no right of entry. 
Abba Shaul says: “Hewing of wood is an optional act and it therefore excludes a father beating his son, or a master disciplining his pupil, or an agent of the court [administering lashes].”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  One who throws a stone into the public domain has thereby committed a negligent act and is exiled if the stone kills.  According to Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob the stone must be thrown at the place where a person is standing, before the stone is thrown.  If after the stone is thrown a person moves into its way he is not liable to be exiled.  This is probably because he is less negligent, having thrown a stone to a place where no one was standing.  However, according to the first opinion in the mishnah, merely throwing a stone to a place that might kill is enough to cause the thrower to be exiled.
Section two:  If a person throws a stone into his own courtyard and it kills a trespasser the thrower is not liable to be exiled.  This is learned from the example of accidental killing mentioned in Deuteronomy 19:5, that of an accidental killing taking place in the forest.  Just as the forest is a place where anyone may enter, so too any accidental killing can only occur in a place where the victim had permission to enter.  An accidental killing which takes place on private property when the victim had not been given permission to enter will not make the killer liable for exile.
Section three:  Abba Shaul learns another law from the example given in the Torah, that of a person chopping wood.  Chopping wood is a voluntary activity and therefore any accidental killing which will force the killer to go into exile must also entail voluntary activities.  If however the striking was mandatory such as a father disciplining his son, a master his student or a court agent administering lashes, the accidental killer is exempt.  When reading this mishnah, as harsh as it sounds we must remember that corporal discipline was an accepted part of all ancient societies.   

