Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Fifteen 

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of Makkoth are in essence the final two mishnayoth of a long tractate, which at one time included both Sanhedrin and Makkoth, a total of 14 chapters.  As is typical of the Mishnah, long tractates are completed with words of “aggadah”, sermonic material, not usually of a legal nature.  Both of these mishnayoth teach how great will be the reward of those who fulfill the commandments and deal with some weighty theological issues. 

Mishnah Fifteen
All who have incurred [the penalty of] kareth, on being flogged are exempt from their punishment of kareth, for it says, “[He may be given up to forty lashes, but not more] ... lest your brother shall be dishonored before your eyes” (Deut. 25;3)—once he has been lashed he is [considered] “your brother”, the words of Rabbi Hananiah ben Gamaliel.   
Rabbi Hananiah ben Gamaliel said:  “Just as one who transgresses one transgression forfeits his life, how much more does one who performs one commandment have his life granted him.”
Rabbi Shimon says: “You can learn this from its own passage;  as it says: “[All who do any of those abhorrent things]—such persons shall be cut off from their people” (Lev. 18:29), and it says:  “You shall keep my statutes and my ordinances which if a man do, he shall live by them” (Lev. 18:5), which means that one who desists from transgressing is granted reward like one who performs a precept. 
Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi says:  Behold [the Torah] says, “But makes sure that you do not partake of the blood; for the blood is the life, and you must not consume the life with the flesh…[that it may go well with you and with your descendents to come..” (Deut. 12:23-25”--  now, if in the case of blood which a person’s soul loathes, anyone who refrains from it receives reward, how much more so in regard to robbery and sexual sin for which a person’s soul craves and longs shall one who refrains from them acquire merit for himself and for generations and generations to come, to the end of all generations! 

Explanation
Section one:  The punishment of kareth, being cut off from one’s people, while not enforced by a court of law, was considered to be a very serious punishment, one with dire consequences.  The Rabbis taught that by receiving lashes one is expiated from the punishment of kareth.  This is learned from the verse in Deuteronomy which calls the person being lashed “your brother”.  After he has been lashed his punishment of kareth is erased and he returns to his full status as a member of Israel.    
Section two:  All throughout our tractate and tractate Sanhedrin we have been learning about punishments, including such serious punishments as lashings, kareth and execution.  Rabbi Hananiah ben Gamaliel finds hope in the seriousness of these punishments.  If a person can be so harshly punished for merely one sin, all the more great will be the reward for one who fulfills even one commandment.
Section three: Rabbi Shimon claims that an even greater principle can be learned from a verse dealing with kareth itself.  The end of chapter 18 in Leviticus states that one who does one of these sins will be punished by kareth, i.e. cut off from his people.  The beginning of the chapter states that if one performs the commandments he will live through them.  In other words, the end of the chapter discusses those who transgress and the beginning of the chapter mentions those who perform the commandments.  Rabbi Shimon concludes that these are flip sides to the same coin. By merely not transgressing a person is considered as if he had actively performed a commandment and will receive his just reward.
Section four:  Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi continues to discuss how great the reward is for performing the commandments.  Deuteronomy states that one who refrains from eating the blood of an animal will merit reward, as will all of his descendents.  Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi points out that if a person receives such a great reward for refraining from doing something that he wouldn’t want to do anyway, since most people are disgusted by blood, how much greater will be his reward for refraining from stealing and transgressing sexually, sins which most people crave.  In other words, rewards are based on resistance to evil temptations.  The greater the temptation the greater the reward for resistance.  


