Negaim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Today's mishnah lists other parts of a man's body which cannot become impure even if they have a nega. There are different reasons for some of these places. Some of them are not considered "flesh." And others are considered to be in "hidden" spots, and a nega must be in a visible area for it to be a sign of impurity. 

Mishnah Eight
The following places in a person do not become unclean on account of a bright spot: the inside of the eye, the inside of the ear, the inside of the nose and the inside of the mouth, wrinkles, wrinkles in the neck, under the breast and the armpit, the sole of the foot, the nails, the head and the beard; and a boil, a burn and a blister that are festering. 
All these: 
Do not become unclean on account of negaim 
Do not combine with other negaim, 
A nega is not considered to spread into them,   
Do not become unclean on account of quick flesh,   
And they do not act to prevent a person from being considered to have turned completely white.   
If subsequently a bald spot arose in the head or beard, or if a boil, a burn or a blister formed a scar:
They may become unclean by negaim,
But they do not combine with other negaim, 
A nega is not considered to spread into them,   
And they do not become unclean on account of quick flesh. 
But they do act to prevent a person from being considered to have all turned white.   
The head and the beard before they have grown hair, and warts with thin necks on the head or the beard, are treated as the skin of the flesh.

Explanation
Section one: Most of these are self-explanatory. If a nega appears on the head or the beard it is not a sign of impurity. There are special rules governing these two areas, as we shall see below. 
With regard to a boil Leviticus 13 says, "18 When an inflammation (a boil) appears on the skin of one's body and it heals, 19 and a white swelling or a white spot streaked with red develops where the inflammation was, he shall present himself to the priest." The boil is only a sign of impurity when it is has healed. If it is still festering it is not. When it comes to the burn verse 24 states, "When the skin of one's body sustains a burn by fire, and the quick flesh (healed flesh) from the burn is a white spot, either white streaked with red, or white." Again, the burn must first heal. The same is true in the case of a blister. As long as they have not healed, they are not susceptible to negaim. 
Section two: The mishnah now goes over all of the special rules that apply to these areas of the body.
If a nega appears on them, it is not a sign of impurity. 
If a nega on an adjacent piece of flesh is less than the size of a split bean and there is a nega on this piece of flesh as well, they do not combine with the other nega to make it large enough to be impure.
If a nega is on a piece of adjacent flesh and it spreads into one of these areas, it is not considered to have spread. 
If one of these areas is inside a larger nega, and it turns into quick flesh, the larger nega is not impure.
If a person has turned completely white except for one of these areas, the absence of whiteness in these areas does not prevent him from being pure (one who has turned completely white is pure).
In short, these areas are not considered to be flesh when it comes to the laws of negaim.
Section three: A bald head or beard is subject to certain laws of negaim (this will be discussed in chapter ten). Similarly, a boil, burn or blister that has scarred over is considered flesh and is subject to some of the laws of negaim. The mishnah now discusses what laws apply in these situations. 
If a nega appears in one of these regions it is a sign of impurity.
Nevertheless, a nega that appears on a bald head or beard or on a boil, burn or blister that have not healed, does not join with a nega on regular skin to create the requisite split bean needed to be impure.
Similarly, if a nega from an adjacent piece of flesh spreads into one of these areas, it is not considered to have spread. 
Same as section D above.
But since negaim can be formed in these areas, if a person is completely white except for one of these areas, he is not considered to be completely white and he will be impure.
We could summarize that these areas are susceptible to negaim, but they don't join with others because they are considered to be separate from other areas.
Section four: A bald baby's head or face is susceptible to negaim impurity until hair begins to grow. These areas are only differentiated once hair appears.
Warts that are sort of falling from a person's face (ok, this is yukky) count as flesh as well. 
