Negaim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
The following verses from Leviticus 13 teach that if the nega (leprosy) breaks out completely over the person's entire body, he is clean. 

12 If the eruption spreads out over the skin so that it covers all the skin of the affected person from head to foot, wherever the priest can see — 13 if the priest sees that the eruption has covered the whole body — he shall pronounce the affected person clean; he is clean, for he has turned all white. 14 But as soon as undiscolored flesh appears in it, he shall be unclean; 15 when the priest sees the undiscolored flesh, he shall pronounce him unclean. The undiscolored flesh is unclean; it is leprosy. 

Chapter eight deals with the details of these laws.  

Mishnah One
If a nega broke out completely upon one who was unclean, he becomes clean;  
If the ends of his limbs reappeared, he becomes unclean until the bright spot is reduced to less than the size of a split bean. 
[If it broke out completely upon him] when he was clean, he becomes unclean;  
If the ends of his limbs reappeared, he remains unclean until his bright spot resumes its former size.

Explanation
Section one: If the person was already declared unclean, and then his entire body turned white, meaning the nega spread to his entire body, he is clean. This is the simple interpretation of the biblical verses sited above.
If any part of his body, even the ends of his limbs, returns to not being white, he becomes unclean. This is an interpretation of verse 14 above. He will remain impure until the size of the nega is reduced to less than the size of a split bean, the minimum size for an impure nega. 
Section two: In this case, the nega spreads to his entire body after he has been pronounced clean by the priest, probably because the nega had not spread. In this case, the spread of the nega is a sign of uncleanness.
He remains impure if the nega retracts and parts of his limbs return to their natural color. Note that a person with a nega over part of his body is impure—this is no different from any other situation. 
However, if the nega (bright spot) returns to its original proportion, then its "spreading" has disappeared. At this point he becomes pure again.  

    

