Negaim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Mishnah Ten deals with negaim that appear in scalp or forehead baldness, mentioned in Leviticus 13:40-44:
40 If a man loses the hair of his head and becomes bald, he is clean. 41 If he loses the hair on the front part of his head and becomes bald at the forehead, he is clean. 42 But if a white affection streaked with red appears on the bald part in the front or at the back of the head, it is a scaly eruption that is spreading over the bald part in the front or at the back of the head. 43 The priest shall examine him: if the swollen affection on the bald part in the front or at the back of his head is white streaked with red, like the leprosy of body skin in appearance, 44 the man is leprous; he is unclean. The priest shall pronounce him unclean; he has the affection on his head. 
These negaim appear in a place from which hair has already fallen out completely, whereas the scalls we have been talking about up until now appear in places with hair. 

Mishnah Ten
Scalp baldness (karahat) or forehead baldness (gabahat) may become unclean in two weeks and by two signs: by quick flesh or by spreading. 
What constitutes baldness? If one ate neshem or smeared himself with neshem or had a wound from which hair can no longer grow. 
What is the extent of scalp baldness? From the crown sloping backwards to the protruding cartilage of the neck. 
What is the extent of forehead baldness? From the crown sloping forwards to the region facing the hair above.   
Scalp baldness and forehead baldness cannot be combined, nor is spreading from one to the other effective.   
Rabbi Judah says: if there is hair between them they cannot be combined, but if there is none they must be combined. 

Explanation
Section one: Scalp and forehead baldness have some of the same rules as negaim on the body. There is a two week period of isolation in which it is determined whether he is impure. The two signs of impurity are quick flesh and spreading. Yellow hair is not a sign of impurity because there is no hair in bald spots at all.
Section two: The mishnah asks what type of baldness is referred to here. In other words, what caused the hair on his scalp or forehead to fall out? The baldness is not natural baldness but baldness caused either by a drug (neshem) or by a wound. 
Section three:  Scalp baldness is baldness on the back of the head. It begins at the crown of the head and slopes back to the neck.
Section four: Forehead baldness slopes forward from the crown, meaning it is the front of the head. 
Section five: If there is a nega on the scalp that is half the size of a split bean and it is adjacent to a nega on the forehead also the size of half a split bean, they do not combine. Nor does spreading from one region to the other count as spreading.
Rabbi Judah says that if a row of hair separates the scalp from the forehead, and then the hair falls out, then they can be combined or spread from one to the other. But as long as the hair separates them, they cannot be combined or spread from one to the other.  
