Negaim, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Eleven

Mishnah Eleven
Any object that is susceptible to corpse uncleanness, though not susceptible to midras uncleanness, is still susceptible to negaim uncleanness.
For instance: the sail of a ship, a curtain, the forehead band of a hair-net, the wrappings of scrolls, a coiled belt, the straps of a shoe or sandal that are at least as wide as a split bean,
Behold these are susceptible to the uncleanness of negaim. 
A thick cloak on which a nega appeared: Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: unless it appears on the texture and on the stuffing.   
A skin bottle or a shepherd's leather wallet are inspected in the position in which they are used, and a nega may effectively spread from its inner side to its outer side and from its  outer side to its inner side. 

Explanation
Section one: There are objects that are susceptible to corpse uncleanness, but not to midras uncleanness (the type of uncleanness conveyed by sitting, leaning or laying upon an object). For an item to be susceptible to nega uncleanness it need not be susceptible to midras uncleanness, meaning it need not be something that is meant to be sat, laid or leaned upon. It is sufficient for it to be susceptible to corpse uncleanness. Of course, this only refers to items made of wool or linen. 
Section two: This is a list of objects that are not subject to midras uncleanness and yet are subject to corpse uncleanness and therefore are also subject to nega uncleanness.
Section three: The thick cloak referred to here is made of wool and its inside is full of used pieces of cloth. Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says that for it to be unclean it must have a nega on both the inside stuffing and the outside.
Section four: One can inspect both a skin bottle (used to carry wine or water) and a shepherd's leather wallet (also used to carry water, see Kelim 24:1) without undoing the stitching. This is what it means that they are "inspected in the position in which they are used." And a nega that is originally found either inside or outside can effectively spread to the opposite side.      

