Kilayim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
The final chapter of Kilayim deals with kilayim of clothes, or shatnez, as it is called by both Leviticus and Deuteronomy.
Our mishnah also mentions several other halakhot which apply only to wool or linen, the two materials subject to the laws of kilayim.

Mishnah One
Nothing is forbidden on account of kilayim except [a mixture of] wool and linen.  
No [clothing material] is subject to uncleanness by scale disease except wool or linen.
Priests do not wear any materials to serve in the Temple except for wool and linen.  
Camel’s wool with sheep’s wool, that have been mixed together:  if the greater part is camel’s wool, it is permitted [to mix it with linen], but if the greater part is sheep’s wool, it is forbidden; if it is half and half, it is forbidden. 
The same applies to hemp and linen mixed together.

Explanation
Section one:  Deuteronomy 22:11 defines “shatnez” as being wool and linen.  Hence only a mixture of wool and linen is prohibited. Wool and cotton, for instance, is not prohibited.
Section two: The only types of clothes subject to impurity through “scale disease” (sometimes called leprosy) are wool and linen (see Leviticus 13:47).
Section three:  The priestly clothing was made only of linen and wool (see Exodus 39:27-29). It is interesting that while such a mixture was generally prohibited, while the priests were serving in the Temple, this is precisely the clothing that they would wear.   
Section four: Camel’s wool is not prohibited in kilayim, only sheep’s wool is prohibited. Therefore, if camel’s wool is mixed up with sheep’s wool such that it becomes impossible to separate them, it is permitted to use the mixture with linen if the quantity of camel’s wools is more than the quantity of sheep’s wool. If the quantity of sheep’s wool is greater than it is prohibited. If they are equal the mixture is still prohibited, because we always tend to be strict in cases of doubt when the prohibition is from the Torah, as is the prohibition of kilayim.
Section five:  Hemp can be mixed with wool, whereas linen cannot.  So if hemp and linen are mixed together, the mixture can be mixed with wool if the hemp is the majority, but if the linen is the majority or equal to the hemp, it is forbidden.     


