Kilayim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The first part of our mishnah deals with the situations in which vines or produce seeds grow so that the vines cover the produce, without them having been planted this way. 
The second half of the mishnah deals with the important question at one point it becomes possible for vines and produce to become prohibited as kilayim. 

Mishnah Seven 
If wind has blown vines [so that they hang over] grain, one should immediately fence them apart.   
If an unforeseeable event occurred to him, it [the grain] is permitted.   
If grain is bent [and the ears reach] beneath a vine, similarly in the case of vegetables, one should turn them back, and it does not prohibit [as kilayim].   
From what stage does grain prohibit kilayim? From the time it has struck root.   
And grapes? From the time they become as large as white beans.   
Grain which has become completely dried out, and grapes which have fully ripened no longer prohibit as kilayim.

Explanation
Section one:  Since the person did not hang the grapes over the grain, they are not prohibited immediately. What he needs to do is fence them apart immediately, otherwise they might, under certain circumstances, become prohibited.
Section two:  If something happens that prevents him from tending to this problem immediately and the grain grows while the vines hang over it, they are not prohibited.  However, if he is simply negligent and doesn’t separate the vines and grains, then they do become prohibited once they grow 1/200 of their size (see 5:6).
Section three:  In this case the ears of the grain grow into the area covered by the vines and not the vines into the grains (kind of reminds me of “your chocolate got in my peanut butter, your peanut butter got in my chocolate”). Since the grain’s roots are not covered by the vines and only the ears are covered, there is no prohibition.  The same holds true for vegetables which grow underneath a vineyard—only the roots cause the prohibition to take effect.
Section four:  Grain does not begin to cause a prohibition in a vineyard until the grain has struck root.  Others interpret the word for “struck root” as if it reads, “until it has grown to one third” of its eventual height.  If he uproots the grain before this point, then there is no kilayim prohibition.
Section five:  Grapes cannot be prohibited until they grow to be as large as white beans. If he harvests them before they grow to this size, then they are not prohibited.
Section six: This is the opposite of the previous two sections.  If the grain or grapes are completely ripe and only afterwards do they come to be in a potential state of kilayim, they are not prohibited. In other words, in this mishnah we learn that for grain and grapes to be prohibited as kilayim they have to be in contact during a window of time that begins when they grow to a certain size and is completed when they are done growing.    

