Kilayim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Ten

Mishnah Ten
Weaver’s mark’s or launderer’s marks [can be] prohibited because of kilayim. 
One who sticks one thread [through material], this does not constitute a connection, nor does [the prohibition of] kilayim apply and one who unties [such a connection] on Shabbat is exempt.   
If one made its two ends come out on the same side [of the material], this constitutes a connection, and it comes under the prohibition of kilayim, and one who unties such a connection on Shabbat is liable.   
Rabbi Judah said: [the prohibition does not apply] until one has made three stitches. 
A sack and a basket [one having a strip of woolen material attached to it, and the other a strip of linen] combine to form kilayim. 

Explanation
Section one: In mishnaic times weavers and launderers would put strings on the sides of clothing to help identify to whom it belonged. If these strings were of linen and the garment was of wool, or vice versa, then they are prohibited because of kilayim.
Section two: The next three sections deal with the question of how many stitches are needed for two garments to be considered sewn together.  If one sticks a needle once into two garments and brings the string out on the other side, the two garments are not yet considered to be sewn together. There are three ramifications to this:  1) if one garment is impure the other has not yet become impure; 2) if one is wool and one is linen they are still not considered kilayim; 3) one who undoes this string on Shabbat is not liable for the prohibited act of “untying” (see Shabbat 7:2).
Section three:  In this case one pulled the needle through and then brought it back up again, so that the two heads of the string are sticking out from the same side.  Now the two garments are considered tied together.  If one becomes impure, the other is impure as well.  If one is wool and one is linen then they are prohibited because of kilayim. And if one undoes such a string on Shabbat, he has transgressed the prohibition of “untying.”
Section four: Rabbi Judah says that the two garments are not considered connected until he brings the string across three times.
Section five: If there is a piece of wool attached to a sack and a piece of linen attached to a large basket and then one attaches the sack to the basket, the wool and linen join to become kilayim. 

Congratulations!  We have finished Kilayim!
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives. 
Kilayim overall was about preserving God’s world as it was created. There are many lessons that we could draw from this fascinating prohibition, but I think that the most important one is that we must have respect for creation and while we can intervene and add our own hand to the act of creation, we must have limits as well. Some of the massive environmental damage that we are only now beginning to be aware of is a result of our not respecting any limits to our own power.  I hope that the through all the myriads of details in this tractate, a larger message is allowed to shine through. 
Tomorrow we begin Tractate Sheviit.

