

Mishnah  . Until when may an orchard  be ploughed in the sixth year?  Beth shammai say: as long as such work will benefit the fruit;  but beth hillel say: till pentecost.  [in fact] the views of one [school] approximate the other. 

   	Mishnah  . What constitutes an orchard? Any field to which there are at least three trees to every se'ah.  If each tree be capable  of a yield of a talent of pressed figs, being sixty maneh  of the italian [system] in weight, then the entire area may be ploughed for their sake.  If less than this amount,   then only such area may be ploughed that is actually occupied by the gatherer when his basket   , is placed behind him.  

   	Mishnah  . Whether they be fruit-bearing trees or non-fruit-bearing trees,   they are treated as fig-trees; and if they are able to yield a cake of pressed figs, sixty maneh of the italian [system] in weight,   then the whole area of the se'ah may be ploughed on their account.   If not, only such area may be ploughed that is essential for them.  

   	Mishnah  . If one tree is capable of bearing a cake of dried figs, and the other two unable; or, if two can do so, but one cannot, then ploughing is permitted only within such area essential for each of them [this is the rule if the number of trees is] from three to nine;   but if there were ten trees or more, the whole area may on their account be ploughed, irrespective of the fact whether they bear fruit or not.   Because it says: ‘in ploughing-time and in harvest, thou shalt rest’.   Now it was unnecessary to speak of ploughing and harvesting in the seventh year,   but [what it means is] the ploughing of the year preceding, which encroaches on the sabbatical year, and the harvest of the seventh year which extends into the year after. R. Ishmael says:   just as ploughing is an optional act,   so harvesting refers to such as is optional, thus excluding the harvesting of the omer   [which is obligatory].

   	Mishnah  . If three trees belong to three persons, they are included together and the whole area of the se'ah may be ploughed on their account.   What space should there be between them?   R. Gamaliel said: sufficient for the driver of the herd   to pass through with his implements.  

   	Mishnah  . If ten saplings are scattered over the entire area of a se'ah, one may plough the whole space of the se'ah,   even until the new year;   but if they were arranged in a row and surrounded by a fence,   then only such ploughing is permitted that is essential to them.  

   	Mishnah  . Saplings and gourds may be included   within the se'ah's space. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel says: one may plough the whole space until the new year when there are ten gourds to the se'ah.  

   	Mishnah  . Till when are they termed saplings?   R. Eleazar b. Azariah says: until they are permitted for common use;   but r. Joshua says: until they are seven years old. R. Akiba says: [the word] sapling must be taken literally.   If a tree had been felled and produced fresh shoots of one handbreadth or less, they are regarded as saplings;   if of more than a handbreadth they are regarded as trees. So r. Simeon.  

Mishnah  . Until when may a grain-field  be ploughed in the sixth year? Until the moisture has dried up in the soil;  or as long as men still plough in order to plant cucumbers and gourds.  Said r. Simeon: in this case you are placing the law in the hands of each man?  No; [the prescribed period] in the case of a grain-field  is until passover, and in the case of an orchard,  till pentecost. 

   	Mishnah  . Beds of cucumbers and gourds may be manured  and hoed  until the new year;   so, too, may fields that must be irrigated.   One may remove parasitic excrescences from trees,   strip off leaves,   cover roots with powder,   and fumigate plants.   R. Simeon says: one may also remove leaves   from a grape cluster even in the seventh year itself.  

   	Mishnah  . Stones may be cleared away until the advent of the new year.   Trees may be trimmed,   nipped,   and the dry twigs lopped off until the new year. R. Joshua says: just as one may trim and snip in the fifth year [to aid growth in the sixth]. So may one perform this work in the sixth year [in preparation for the seventh];   but r. Simeon says: as long as i may legally tend the tree itself, so long may i lop off the branches thereof.  

   	Mishnah  . Saplings may be besmeared,   wrapped round,   and trimmed,   and until the new year one may also construct for them shelters   and irrigate them.   R. Eleazar b. Zadok says: the foliage may even be watered in the seventh year itself, but not the roots themselves.  
	Mishnah  . Unripe figs may be smeared with oil   or pierced   until the new year; but those of the sixth year   which remain unplucked until the seventh year, or of those of the seventh year which remain unplucked until the eighth, must not be smeared or plucked.   R. Judah says: in places where it is the custom to do so,   one may not smear [the figs], since that would be considered work; but where this was not done, then permission was given to one to do so. R. Simeon permitted any kind of work in connection with the tree itself,   because all work benefiting the tree was legal.

   	Mishnah  . One may not plant, engraft   trees, nor sink [vine-shoots]   in the sixth year   within thirty days of the new year. If he has done so, he must uproot them all. R. Judah says: any grafting that has not taken root within three days will never do so. R. Jose and r. Simeon say: two weeks.  

   	Mishnah  . Rice, millet, panic   and sesame   that had taken root before the new year must be tithed   according to the previous year,   and become permissible in the seventh year.   If they did not,   then they are forbidden in the seventh year, and are tithed according to the year following.  

   	Mishnah  . R. Simeon shezuri   said: egyptian beans sown originally as seed only,   follow a like procedure.   R. Simeon says: also large beans   follow a like procedure; but r. Eliezer says: [this is so] in the case of large beans only if they began to form pods   before the new year.

   	Mishnah  . Seedless onions   and egyptian beans   from which water has been withheld for thirty days prior to new year   are tithed in accordance with the year preceding,   and become permitted in the seventh year. In other cases they are forbidden in the seventh,   and are tithed in accordance with the year following. [a similar procedure is followed] says r. Meir, in the case of a naturally-watered field   from which two seasons   of rain have been withheld; but the sages say: three.

   	Mishnah   . If gourds had been kept for seed   and they had hardened before the new year, thus becoming unfit for human food, they may be left growing during the seventh year; otherwise, they must not be kept in the seventh year.   Their buds   are forbidden in the seventh year.   The soil of ‘a white field’ may be irrigated;   so r. Simeon; but r. Eleazar b. Jacob forbids. The soil of a rice field may be stirred   in the sabbatical year [with water]. R. Simeon says: but [the rice-plants] may not be trimmed.    

Mishnah . When may manure be brought out to the dung-heaps?  R. Meir says: till such time when the labourers have ceased;  but r. Judah opines till the manure  has dried up.  R. Jose says: till [the dung dries] into knotty excrescences. 

   	Mishnah  . What quantity of dung may be deposited?  Three dung-heaps to every se'ah, [consisting of] ten baskets [of foliage]  of a lethek  each. You may add to the number of baskets,  but not to the number of heaps.   R. Simeon says: also to the number of heaps.  

   	Mishnah  .a man may deposit in his field three dung-heaps to every se'ah-space, so r. Simeon;   more than this,   he must arrange in the form of a tripod.   The sages forbid unless he deposits [them] three [handbreadths] below or above.   A man may pile up all the manure into one [large] store;   r. Meir forbids, unless he deposits [them] either three [handbreadths] below or above [the soil].   If he had a little pile, he may constantly add to it.   R. Eleazar b. Azariah forbids   unless he deposits [it] three [handbreadths] below or above the soil, or he deposits [it] on rocky ground.  

   	Mishnah  . He who allows cattle to change folds within his fields,   must make an enclosure two se'ahs in area.   He then pulls out three sides thereof,   and leaves the middle side; he will then possess a fold of four se'ahs space   r. Simeon b. Gamaliel says: even one of eight se'ahs [may be used].   If his entire field is only four se'ahs in area, he must allow a portion thereof to remain [unenclosed] for appearance's sake.   And he may take the dung   from the enclosure, and spread across his field in the manner of those who manure their fields.  

   	Mishnah  . A man may not open a stone-quarry within his field for the first time,   unless there be therein three layers [of hewn stones], each three [cubits long], three wide and three high, together making twenty-seven stones.  

   	Mishnah  . A wall of ten stones, each a load for two men, may be removed [provided] that this wall is [at least] ten handbreadths high;   less than that,   it is regarded as a quarry, and it is to be razed   within one handbreadth of the ground.   This refers only to [the removal] from his own field;   but from that of another, he may remove whatever he wishes.   This applies only to a case where the removal [of the stones] was not begun before the sixth year; but if he had begun in the sixth year, he may remove whatever he pleases.  
	Mishnah  . Stones which the ploughshare has stirred up,   or which had been hidden and are now laid bare, may be removed if there be among them at least two, [each] the load of two men.   He who removes   stones from a field may remove only the top layers, but must leave those touching the ground.   And likewise in the case of a heap of pebbles, or a pile of stones; he may remove the top layers but must leave those touching the ground. If, however, there is beneath them rocky soil or stubble,   they may be removed.

   	Mishnah  . Steps   leading to ravines must not be constructed in the sixth year after the cessation of the rainfalls; for this would be [a case of] inproving the fields for the seventh year. In the seventh year itself, they may be built even after the rains have ceased, since such an act will benefit the field in the eighth year. They [the steps] may not be blocked with earth,   but only made in a loose embankment.   Any stone which can be taken by the mere stretching out of a hand,   may be removed.  


   	Mishnah  . Shoulder-stones may be removed from any place,   and they may be brought by a contractor   from anywhere.   These are shoulder-stones: such as cannot be held with one hand;   so r. Meir. But r. Jose says: the name is to be taken literally, namely, such stones as can be carried on a man's shoulder, either two or three at a time.

   	Mishnah   . If one makes a fence between his own property and that belonging to the public domain, he is allowed to dig down to rock level.   What should he do with the soil? He may pile it up in the public domain,   and afterwards repair it.   So r. Joshua. R. Akiba says: just as no damage may be done to a public domain, so may one not restore it to order.   Then what should he do with the soil [dug up]? He heaps it up in his own field in the manner of those who bring out dung [for manure].   It is likewise when one digs a well, a trench or a cave.    

Mishnah  . At first it was the practice to allow a man to gather the largest  wood, stones and herbs from his field as he was allowed to do from the field of his fellow.  When the transgressors multiplied,  permission was only given to collect them from another's field, provided it was not [pre-arranged] as bestowing a mutual favour.  It goes without saying that no stipulation could be made therewith for maintenance. 

   	Mishnah  . A field from which thorns had been removed  may be sown in the eighth year; but if it had been improved upon,  or cattle had been allowed to live thereon,  it may not be sown in the eighth year.  If a field had been improved upon in the seventh year, beth shammai say: its fruits may not be eaten, but beth hillel say: they may be eaten. Beth shammai say: fruits of the sabbatical year may not be eaten as a favour,   but beth hillel say: they may be eaten, whether they be regarded as a favour or otherwise. R. Judah says: the statements must be reversed; for this is one of the instances where beth shammai are the more lenient and beth hillel the more rigorous.

   	Mishnah  . Newly-ploughed land may be hired from a gentile in the seventh year,   but not from an israelite; gentiles may be encouraged during the seventh year,   but not israelites. In the interests of peaceful relationships, greetings may be exchanged with them.  

   	Mishnah  . If one thins out his olive-trees [in the seventh year].   Beth shammai say: he may only raze them to the ground;   beth hillel say: he may completely uproot. They, however, concur that if one levels his field, he may only raze it to the ground. What is the process of thinning-out [moddal]? The taking out of one or two plants. And levelling?   The removing of at least three plants close to each other. This applies to his own property only, for from the property of another, even he that levels may uproot.  

   	Mishnah  . If one cuts down an olive-tree,   he may not cover up [the stump] with earth,   but he may cover it with stones or straw.   If one fells a sycamore tree,   he must not cover [the stump] with earth, but he may cover it with stones or straw. One may not hew down a virgin sycamore   in the seventh year, for this would constitute actual labour.   R. Judah says: if [cut down] in the usual manner,   it is forbidden; but he either cuts it ten handbreadths above [the soil], or he razes it to ground level.  

   	Mishnah  . If one trims grape-vines,   or cuts reeds,   r. Jose the galilean says: he must leave [uncut at least] one handbreadth;   but r. Akiba says: he may cut them with the axe, sickle or saw in the usual manner, or with whatsoever he pleases. A tree that had split may be tied up in the seventh year, not that it may heal, but only that it should not widen.
Mishnah  . From when may one begin to eat of the fruit of the trees in the seventh year?   With unripe figs as soon as they had assumed a rosy appearance,   one may eat thereof in the field with his bread;   once they had ripened, he may also take them home. And similarly in the other years of the sabbatical cycle [when this latter stage has been reached] they are subject to tithes.  

   	Mishnah  . Unripe grapes   as soon as they contain juice,   may be eaten with bread in the field; but as soon as they have ripened,   they may be taken home. And similarly in the other years of the sabbatical cycle [when they have reached this latter stage] they are subject to tithes.  

   	Mishnah  . Olives as soon as they produce   a quarter log [of oil] to each se'ah, may be split   and eaten in a field; when they produce a half-log,   then he may crush them in a field and use their oil. When they are able to produce a third,   they may be crushed in the field   and brought home. And similarly in the other years of the sabbatical cycle [when they have reached this latter stage] they are subject to tithes.   With all other fruit of trees [the season when they become due to be tithed] is the season when they are permitted in the seventh year.  

   	Mishnah  . From when can trees no longer be felled   in the seventh year?   Beth shammai say: after they had put forth leaves.   Beth hillel say: carob-trees after they   begin to droop;   vines after they had yielded berries; olive-trees after they had blossomed, any other trees after they had produced leaves.   Any tree as soon as it reaches the season for tithes may be cut down.   What quantity shall an olive-tree yield that it be not cut down? — a quarter [kab]. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel says: all depends on the olive-tree.    
Mishnah  . White figs have the law of the seventh year  applied to them in the second year,  since they ripen once in three years. R. Judah says: persian figs have the law of the seventh year applied to them in the year following the seventh year,  since they ripen once in two years. Thereupon they said to him: this was said only of the species of white figs? 

   	Mishnah  . If lof  is placed in the soil for preservation during the sabbatical year, r. Meir says: it must be not less than two se'ahs in quantity, three handbreadths in height, and covered with earth one handbreadth deep.  The sages say: it must be not less than four kabs in quantity, one handbreadth high, and covered with earth one handbreadth deep. Moreover, it shall be hidden in ground over which men may tread. 

   	Mishnah  . If lof has remained [in the ground until] after the passing of the seventh year, r. Elie zer says: if the poor had gathered the leaves thereof,  all is well; if not,  then an account should be made with the poor.   R. Joshua says: if the poor had plucked the leaves thereof, all is well; if not, no account is necessary.  

   	Mishnah  . Lof of the sixth year   that remains until the seventh, similarly summer onions   and pu’ ah   grown in choice soil, beth shammai say must be uprooted with wooden rakes.   Beth hillel say: [even] with metal spades.   They   concur in the case of pu’ ah grown in strong soil   , that they may be uprooted with metal spades.

   	Mishnah  . From when may a man buy the lof after the going out of the seventh year?   R. Judah says: at once;   but the sages say: [only] after the new crop has appeared.  

   	Mishnah  . These are the implements which a craftsman may not sell in the seventh year:   a plough and all its appurtenances, a yoke, a winnowing-fan, and a mattock;   but he may sell a sickle used by hand,   a scythe, and a cart with all its implements. This is the general principle: any tools designed for work involving a transgression in the seventh year must not be sold; but if it is used both for a forbidden and a permissible purpose, it may be [sold].  

   	Mishnah  . The potter may sell   five oil-jars and fifteen wine-jars. For this is the usual amount one collects from ownerless produce;   but if he brought more,   this is still permitted him.   He   may also sell [more jars] to gentiles in palestine and to israelites in other lands.  
Mishnah  . Beth shammai say: one must not sell him   a ploughing-cow in the seventh year, but beth hillel permit, since he may be slaughtering it.   One may sell him fruit even at sowing-time,   and one may lend him a se'ah measure though it is known that he has a threshing-floor.   One may give him small money in change though it is known that he has labourers. But if all these things [are] expressly [known] to be required for unlawful purposes,   then they are forbidden.  

   	Mishnah  . A woman may lend to her neighbour who is suspect of transgressing the sabbatical law,   a winnow,   a sieve, a hand-mill, or an oven; but she may not [actually] winnow or grind [corn] with her.   The wife of a haber   may lend to the wife of an ‘am ha-arez   a winnow and a sieve   and may even winnow, grind corn or sift flour with her;   but once she poured out the water [over the flour],   she should not touch her, for no help must be given to those who commit transgression.   All these things were only allowed in the interests of peace.   To heathens, encouragement may be offered in the sabbatical year,   but [on no account] to israelites. In the interests of peace, one may also offer greetings to heathens.    
Mishnah  . [palestine is divided into] three countries with reference to the sabbatical law.  [the fruit of] that territory occupied by those who came up from babylon,  namely from eretz israel as far as chezib,  may not be eaten,  nor [may its soil] be cultivated.  [the fruit of] that territory occupied by those who came up from egypt, namely from chezib to the river,  and until amonah,  may be eaten, but [its soil] not cultivated. From the river till amonah and inwards, [produce] may be eaten and [the soil] cultivated. 

   	Mishnah  . In syria,  one may perform work on such produce as had been detached,   but not on such still attached [to the soil].   They may thresh,   winnow, and tread [the corn], and even bind them [into sheaves], but they may not reap [the crops], nor cut the grapes, nor harvest the olives.   R. Akiba formulated this principle: the kind of work that is permitted in eretz israel may also be done in syria.  

   	Mishnah  . Onions   on which rain had descended and which had sprouted forth, are forbidden if their leaves had turned black;   if they had become green they are permitted.   R. Hanina b. Antigonus says: as long as they can be plucked out by their leaves,   they are forbidden. In the year after the sabbatical year, the like of these   are permitted.  

   	Mishnah  . When may a man buy vegetables at the outgoing of the sabbatical year?   When the crop of the same kind begins [again] to ripen.   Where fruit ripens quickly. Even that which is late in ripening is also permissible.   , rabbi used to allow the buying of vegetables on the immediate termination of the seventh year.  

   	Mishnah  . One may not export oil [of terumah] that had to be burnt,   nor produce of the seventh year,   from the land [of israel] to other countries. R. Simeon said: i have heard it expressly stated that they may be exported to syria, but not to any other country outside the land.

   	Mishnah  . Terumah may not be imported from outside the land of eretz israel.   R. Simeon said: i have heard it expressly stated that one may bring from syria,   but not from outside the land.  

Mishnah  . An important general principle was laid down concerning sabbatical year produce. To anything that may be considered food for man or cattle, or to a species [of plants] used for dyeing, if it is not left growing in the soil,  the law of the sabbatical year is applied both to it  and to its money substitute.  [similarly] the law of removal  applies both to it and to its money substitute. Which are they?  The edible leaves of the wild arum,  of mint,  endives,  leeks,  portulaca,   and asphodel.   What is the food for cattle?   Thorns and thistles. What is species of dyeing matter?   Aftergrowths of woad   and madder.   The law of the seventh year applies to them and their equivalents and the law of removal applies to them and their money [substitutes].

   	Mishnah  . Yet another general principle was enunciated. Even such things not fit for food of man or beast, or those plants not used for dyeing purposes, if they had been left in the soil,   are subject to the sabbatical law   as are their substitutes. But the law of removal does not apply either to them or to their money substitute. Which are these? The roots of the wild arum, the mint, and the hart's tongue,   the asphodel and the hazel-wort.   What is the species of dyeing matter? Dyer's madder and sow-bread.   The sabbatical law applies to them and to their money equivalent, but the law of removal does not apply either to them or to their money equivalent. R. Meir says: the law of removal applies to their money substitute until the new year.   The sages answered: since this law does not apply to the plants themselves, how much less does it apply to their money substitute!  

   	Mishnah  . The law of the sabbatical year applies to husks and blossoms of the pomegranate, to shells and kernels of nuts, and also to their money substitutes. The dyer may use them   for himself, but not for payment   since no trade may be done with seventh year produce, or with firstlings,   or with heave-offerings, or with carrion, or with trefah,   or with reptiles   or with creeping things.   One should not gather   wild vegetables   and sell them in the market; but if he gathers them and his son sells them for him, it is well.   If he gathered them for his own use, and aught remains over, he may sell them.  

   	Mishnah  . If one buys a firstling   for his son's [wedding] feast, or for a festival, and then decides that he hath no need of it, he may sell it.   Hunters of wild animals, birds and fishes, who chanced upon unclean species, may sell them.   R. Judah says: also a man who happened to chance upon by accident   may buy or sell, provided that he does not make a regular trade of it. But the sages do not allow this.  

Mishnah  . The law of the sabbatical year is applied   to the young sprouts of the service-tree   and the carobs and their money equivalent; so also is the law of removal applied both to them and their substitutes. The law of the sabbatical year is applied to branches of the terebinth, the pistachio tree and the white thorn,   and to their substitutes; but they are not liable to the law of removal, nor is their money substitute liable to the law of removal.   But the law of removal applies to their leaves,   since they had already fallen from their stem.  

   	Mishnah  . The sabbatical law applies to the rose, henna,   balsam, the lotus tree and to their money substitutes.   R. Simeon says: the sabbatical law does not apply to the balsam, since this cannot be regarded as a fruit.  

   	Mishnah  . If a new rose   has been preserved in old oil,   the rose may be taken out;   but if an old rose   was preserved in new oil,   it is subject to the law of removal.   New carobs   preserved in old wine, or old carobs in new wine,   are subject to the law of removal. This is the general principle:   if one kind is mixed with a different kind   and it has the power to impart flavour [to the other], both kinds are subject to the law of removal; but if it is mixed with the identical kind, then [the whole is subject to removal] even if only the smallest quantity exists.   Produce of the seventh year renders similar kinds prohibited   even [if it exists] in the smallest quantity; but if they be of different species [prohibition sets in] only when flavour is imparted.    

Mishnah  . An important principle was laid down concerning sabbatical year produce. Of such produce as is designated as food for man,  one may not make a poultice  for man; and needless to say, for cattle. Such produce, however, that is not exclusively used for human food may be used as a poultice for man, but not for cattle. Such produce not usually designated either for human or for cattle food, but now intended  as food for both man and cattle, has imposed upon it the stringent laws applying both to men  and beasts.  If his intention  was to use it [only] as fuel, it must be accounted only as wood;  as, for example, savory,  hyssop, or thyme. 

   	Mishnah  . Sabbatical year produce may be used for food, drink and for anointing.   That usually eaten should be used for food only; that usually used for anointing purposes is to be used as an unguent [only], and that used usually for drinking is to be used for this purpose only.   One may not anoint with wine and vinegar, but with oil only.   So is the case with heave-offering and second tithe.   Greater leniency was applied to [oil of] the seventh year, since it can also be used for lamp-kindling.  


   	Mishnah  . Produce of the seventh year   may not be sold by measure, weight or number.   Neither may figs [be sold] by number, nor vegetables by weight.   Beth shammai say: they may not be sold, even in bundles;   but beth hillel say: products usually tied in bundles in the house   may also be tied into bundles for the market;   for example: leeks and asphodel.  

   	Mishnah  . If one says to a labourer: ‘take this issar   and gather vegetables for me to-day’, his payment is permitted;   [but if he told him thus:] ‘in return [for this issar], do thou gather vegetables for me to-day’,then his payment is forbidden.   If one bought a loaf from a baker worth a pondion   [and said:] ‘when i have gathered vegetables from the field,   then i will bring them to you’, this is permitted.   If, however, he bought it of him without any explanation,   he may not pay him his debt with the value of seventh year produce;   for no debt can be paid with the value of such produce.

   	Mishnah  . One must not pay   a well-digger,   an attendant at the public bath,   a barber, or a sailor; but he may give the well-digger [the produce] to buy therewith to drink. As a free gift, however, he may give it to all of them.  
Mishnah  . Sabbatical figs may not be cut with a fig-knife,   but with an ordinary knife.   Grapes may not be trodden in the wine-press,   but they are trodden in the kneading-trough.   Olives may not be prepared in an olive-press or with an olive-crusher.   But they may be crushed and brought into a small olive-press. R. Simeon says: they may even be crushed in the [larger] olive-press, afterwards to be brought into the smaller press.

   	Mishnah  . Sabbatical vegetables may not be cooked in oil of terumah lest they become invalidated;   but r. Simeon permits it.   The last thing exchanged is always subject to the sabbatical law,   and the produce itself   also remains forbidden.  

   	Mishnah  . Slaves, property, or unclean cattle may not be bought with money realized by sale of seventh year products; if one has done so he must [buy and] eat [food] for their equivalent.   Bird-offerings brought by a man or woman who suffered a flux,   or by a woman after childbirth,   must not be bought with the value of sabbatical produce; and if this has been done, he must [buy and] eat [food] for their equivalent. Vessels may not be anointed with oil of seventh year produce; where this has been done, he must [buy and] eat [food] for their equivalent.  

   	Mishnah  . A hide   smeared with oil of the seventh year, r. Eliezer says, must be burnt; but the sages say that he must [buy and] eat [produce] of corresponding value. They told r. Akiba that r. Eliezer used to say, a hide that has been smeared with oil of the seventh year must be burnt. He replied: ‘hold your peace; for i will not divulge to you what r. Eliezer actually said in this connection’.  

   	Mishnah   . They also told him   that r. Eliezer said: ‘he who eats bread [baked] by samaritans   is like one who eats the flesh of a pig’.   [to this, too] his reply was: ‘hold your peace; for i will not divulge to you what r. Eliezer really did say in this connection’.

   	Mishnah   . One may wash in a bath heated with straw or stubble of the seventh year;   but if he is a man held in honour, he should not wash therein.    

Mishnah  . Rue,  goosefoot,  purslane,  hill coriander,  water-parsley,  and meadow-berries, are exempt from tithes.  And may be purchased  from any man  during the sabbatical year, since such produce is not usually watched. R. Judah says: aftergrowths of mustard are permitted, since transgressors are not suspected concerning them.  R. Simeon says: all aftergrowths are permitted,   with the exception of the aftergrowths of cabbage,   since such cannot be placed within the category of wild vegetables. But the sages say: all aftergrowths are forbidden.  

   	Mishnah  . There are three distinct countries   in respect of the law of removal.   [these are]: judah, transjordania, and galilee, each of these is [in turn] divided into three territories.   Thus [galilee   is divided into] upper galilee, nether galilee, and the valley; from kefar hananiah upwards, [namely], the region where sycamores do not grow,   is upper galilee; from kefar hananiah downwards, where the sycamores do grow, is nether galilee; the neighbourhood of tiberias is the valley. Those of judah are: the mountain region, the shephelah,   and the valley.   The plain of lydda   is like the plain of the south, and its mountain region is like the king's hill-country.   From beth-horon to the sea is considered as one district.  

   	Mishnah  . Why did they speak of three countries?   So that they may eat in each country until the last of the seventh year produce in that country is ended.   R. Simeon said: they have spoken of three countries only in the case of judah, but all other countries   are to be regarded as royal hill-country;   and all other countries receive equal treatment with regard to the olive and date.  

   	Mishnah  . One may eat   [only so long as] similar produce is still regarded as ownerless   [in the fields], but not when it is being watched.   R. Jose, however, permits it also when [similar produce] is found guarded.   One may continue to eat   so long as there is still growth between the grass,   or by virtue of the trees that yield bi-annually;   but one must not eat by virtue of winter-grapes.   R. Judah permits [even by virtue of the latter] provided they began to ripen before the summer [of the seventh year] had ended.

   	Mishnah  . If three kinds of vegetables   were preserved in one jar, they may be eaten only so long as the first still remains;   so r. Eliezer. But r. Joshua says: even so long as the last remains.   Rabban gamaliel says: when the like kind is no longer to be found within the field, the corresponding kind in the jar must be removed.   And the halachah agrees with him. R. Simeon says: all vegetables are regarded as one [kind] in respect of the law of removal. Purslane   may be eaten as long as vetches   are still found in the vale of beth netopha.  

Mishnah  . If one gathered fresh vegetables,   he may eat them until the [ground] moisture is dried up;   and if he gathered dry [vegetables] [he may eat them] until the second rainfall.   Leaves of reeds and of the vine   [may be eaten] until they fall from the stems; but if they have been gathered dry, they may be eaten only until the second rainfall. R. Akiba says: in all cases,   [they may be eaten] until the second rainfall.

   	Mishnah  . Similarly, if one hires to another a house ‘until the rainfall’, [he implies thereby] ‘until the second rainfall’; or if one had vowed not to derive any benefit from his fellow ‘until the rains’. [this likewise implies] ‘until the second rainfall’. Until when may the poor enter the gardens?   Until the second rainfall.   And when may one begin to enjoy or burn the straw and stubble of sabbatical produce?   After the second rainfall.  

   	Mishnah  . If one had sabbatical produce [at home] and the time of removal had come,   he may apportion food for three meals to every one.   R. Judah says: the poor   may eat thereof, even after the removal, but not the rich;   but r. Jose says: the poor and the rich alike may eat thereof.   [even after the time of] the removal.

   	Mishnah  .if one had inherited seventh year produce,   or had received them as a gift, r. Eliezer says: they must be given   unto all who wish to eat thereof.   But the sages say: the sinner must not benefit,   but the produce should be sold to those who would eat thereof,   and its price divided among them all.   If one eats of dough of the seventh year [produce] before the hallah   was taken from it, he has incurred thereby the death penalty.    

Mishnah  . The sabbatical year cancels a cash debt,  whether it is secured by bond  or not; but shop-debts  it does not cancel. If, however, it had been converted into the form of a loan, then it is cancelled. R. Judah says: the former debt is always cancelled.  The wage of a hireling is not cancelled, but if it had been converted into a loan it is cancelled. R. Jose says: the [payment for] any work that must cease  with the seventh year, is cancelled; but if it need not cease with the seventh year, then it is not cancelled. 

   	Mishnah  . He who slaughters a cow and divides it up on the new year,  if the month had been intercalated,  [the debt incurred by then] is remitted; but if it had not been intercalated, it is not remitted. [fines for] outrages,  for seduction,   for defama tion,   and all other obligations arising from legal procedure,   are not cancelled. A loan secured by a pledge, and one the bonds of which have been handed over to a court, are not cancelled.  

   	Mishnah  . [a loan secured by] a prozbul   is not cancelled. This was one of the things instituted by hillel the elder; for when he observed people refraining from lending to one another, and thus transgressing what is written in the law, ‘beware, lest there be a base thought in thy heart’,   .... He instituted the prozbul.

   	Mishnah  . This is the formula   of the prozbul: ‘i declare before you, so-and-so,   judges of that place,   that touching any debt that i may have outstanding, i shall collect it whenever i desire’. And the judges sign below, or the witnesses.  

   	Mishnah  . An ante-dated prozbul is legal;   if post-dated, it is illegal.   Ante-dated bonds [of loans] are not valid,   but those post-dated are valid.   If one borrows from five persons, a separate prozbul must be made for each [creditor]; but if five borrow from the same person, then one prozbul only will suffice for them all.

   	Mishnah  . A prozbul is written only for [a debt secured by] immovable property; and if [the debtor] has none, then [the creditor] can give him title to a share, however small, of his own field.   If he   had land in pledge in a city, a prozbul can be written on [the security thereof]. R. Huzpeth says: a prozbul may be written for a man on the security of his wife's property,   or for an orphan on the security of property belonging to his guardian.  

	Mishnah  . A bee-hive, r. Eliezer says, is considered landed estate;   a prozbul may be drawn up on its security, and it is not susceptible to uncleanness while it remains in its place, and he who takes honey therefrom on the sabbath day is held culpable.   The sages, however, say: it is not like landed estate, a prozbul may not be drawn up on its security, it does contract uncleanness while in its place, and he who takes honey therefrom on the sabbath is exempt from any penalty.

   	Mishnah  . If one would return a debt in the seventh year, the [creditor] must say to [the debtor]: ‘i remit it’; but should [the latter] say: ‘none-the-less [i will repay it]’. He may accept it from him, because it says:’ and this is the word of the release’.   Similarly, when [an involuntary] manslayer has arrived at his city of refuge, and the citizens thereof desire to do him honour, he must say to them: ‘i am a murderer’.   If they say: ‘[none-the-less we would honour thee]’. Then he may accept [the honour] from them, because it says: ‘and this is the word of the manslayer’.  

   	Mishnah  . If one repays his debts in the seventh year the sages are well pleased with him. If one borrows from a proselyte whose sons had become converted with him, the debt need not be repaid to his sons;   but if he returns it the sages are well pleased with him. All movable property can be acquired [only] by the act of drawing them;   but whosoever fulfills his [bare] word, the sages are well pleased with him.

 
