Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral Law
משנה תורה, מסירת תורה שבעל פה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.orgAll the mitzvot that were given to Moshe on Sinai - they were given with their explanation, as it is written: "and I will give thee the tables of stone, and the law and the commandment." (Exodus 24:12) "The Law" - this refers to the written Torah; "the commandment" - this refers to the explanation. And He [HaShem] commanded to do [i.e., perform] the Law according to the commandment. And this commandment - this is called the Torah sheb'al Peh [Oral Law].
The whole Torah was written by our teacher Moses before he died, in his hand. And he gave a book [of the Torah] to each and every one of the tribes. And one scroll he placed in the ark for a witness, as it is written: "Take this book of the law, and put it by the side of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee." (Deuteronomy 31:26)...
The commandment, which is the explanation of the law, he did not write. But [instead] he commanded to the Elders [of Israel], to Joshua and to the rest of all of Israel, as it is written: "All this word which I command you, that shall ye observe to do." (Deuteronomy 13:1) And because of this it is called the Oral Law.
Even though the Oral Law was not written, Moshe our Teacher taught all of it [the law] in his Bet Din to the seventy elders. And Elazar, Pinchas and Yehoshua - [these] three received [the Law] from Moshe. And Yehoshua who was a student of Moshe our Teacher, he [Moshe] transmitted the Oral Law to him and instructed him in it. And likewise Yehoshua taught it all the days of his life.
And many elders received [the Law] from Yehoshua. And Eli received it from the elders and from Pinchas. And Shmuel received it from Eli and his court, and David received it from Shmuel and his court. And Achiya the Shilonite had left Egypt, and he was a Levi, and he heard [the Law] from Moshe, but he was a young lad in the days of Moshe. And so he received it from David and his court.
And Eliyahu received it from Achiya the Shilonite and his court, and Elisha received it from Eliyahu and his court, and Yehoyada the Priest received it from Elisha and his court, and Zekharya received it from Yehoyada and his court, and Hoshea received it from Zekharya and his court; Amos received it from from Hoshea and his court, and Yeshaya received it from Amos and his court, and Mikha received it from Yeshaya and his court, and Yoel received it from Mikha and his court; Nachum received it from Yoel and his court, and Chabakuk received it from Nachum and his court; Tzephania received it from Chabakuk and his court, Yirmiyahu received it from Tzephania and his court; Baruch ben Neryah received it from Yirmiyahu and his court. Ezra and his court received it from Baruch ben Neryah and his court.
Ezra's court was called "men of the great assembly" and comprised: Hagai, Zecharia, Malachi, Daniel, Chananiah, Mishael, Azaria, Nechemiah son of Chachliah, Mordechai, Zerubavel and a great many wise men with them to total 120 elders. The last of them was Shimon the righteous, and he was one of the 120, and received the Oral Torah from all of them. He became the High Priest after Ezra.




Our holy Teacher composed the Mishnah. From the days of our teacher Moshe until our holy Teacher they did not compose a compendium from which to teach the Oral Law in public. But in each generation the head of the Beth Din, or the prophet that lived in that generation, would write for himself reminders of that which he had heard from his teachers, and then he would teach those orally in public.































