Parah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
The final mishnah of this chapter concludes the description of the burning of the red cow.

Mishnah Eleven
He then wrapped them together with the remains of the strip of wool and cast them into the fire.
When it was burnt up they would beat it with sticks and then sift it with sieves. 
Rabbi Ishmael says: this was done with stone hammers and stone sieves. 
If there was a black coal on which there were some ashes they would crush it but if there were no [ashes] they would leave it.
A bone was crushed in either case. 
It was then divided into three parts: one part was deposited on the hel, one on the Mount of Olives, and one was divided among the priestly watches.

Explanation
Section one: After demonstrably ensuring that the cedarwood, hyssop and scarlet wool were what they were supposed to be (see yesterday's mishnah), the priest would use the extra wool to bind them up and cast them into the fire (see Numbers 19:6).
Section two: The next steps taken ensured that everything that was in the fire was actually burned. They would beat the fire with sticks and then sift through it to make sure the ashes were fine. Rabbi Ishmael says that this was done with stone instruments which are not susceptible to impurity.
Section three: Coals that had ashes remaining on them were crushed up so that the ashes would be part of the final product. Bones were crushed up even if they didn't have ashes remaining on them.
Section four: The ashes of the red cow (and the other materials) were then split and divided into three places. The first is the "hel" an area right outside the courtyard where the ashes were placed into the water to purify the priest who was to burn the next cow (see mishnah three). The second part was placed on the Mount of Olives. This part was not used (at least not on a regular basis). The third part was given out to the priestly watches who would use it to purify any Israelite who needed this type of purification. 


