Parah, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
After discussing the purity of hyssop in yesterday's mishnah, today's mishnah continues to discuss laws with regard to the type of hyssop used to sprinkle the hatat waters. 

Mishnah Seven
Any hyssop that has an accompanying name is invalid.  
"This" hyssop is valid. 
Ezovyon (lavendula) hyssop, blue hyssop, Roman hyssop or wild hyssop is invalid.
That of unclean terumah is invalid.
That of clean terumah should not be used for sprinkling, but if one had used it for sprinkling it is valid. 
The sprinkling must not be done either with the young shoots or with the berries. 
He is not liable [after the sprinkling had been done] with young shoots for entering the sanctuary. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: also not if it was done with the berries. 
The following are regarded as young shoots: the stalks before the buds have ripened.

Explanation
Section one: The hyssop must be plain old hyssop (zatar in Arabic and by extension, modern Hebrew). Any hyssop that has an accompanying or modifying name should not be used (see Zavim 14:6). "This" hyssop refers to any hyssop that a person points to and says "this is hyssop."
Section two: Obviously, unclean terumah cannot be used since anything that is unclean cannot be used because it will defile the hatat waters. The mishnah only mentions unclean terumah because it wants to discuss clean terumah. Clean terumah, meaning terumah whose purity was preserved in order to use it for the hatat ritual, should also not be used because it is prohibited to invalidate pure terumah and the hatat ritual carries a risk that the terumah will be invalidated. However, if he uses clean terumah hyssop for the sprinkling, the person who has been sprinkled upon is pure. In other words, this is a case where one shouldn't use something, but if he does, it is valid. 
Section three: The sprinkling should be done with the leafy parts of the hyssop, not with the berries or with young shoots. 
However, if the sprinkling was done with the shoots and then he entered the sanctuary, he is not liable for being impure and entering the sanctuary. Usually someone who does this (unintentionally) must bring a sin-offering as atonement. Our mishnah teaches that while the sprinkling shouldn't be done with young shoots, if it is done, it is still valid. Rabbi Eliezer says that the same is true with regard to the berries. 
Section four: The mishnah defines the meaning of young shoots.    

