Parah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Both halves of this mishnah teach that the hatat waters defile garments and shoes but they do not directly defile the person who is preparing the mixture of water and cow ash. 

Mishnah Two
One who prepares the mixture of the hatat should not wear his sandals, for were some of the liquid to fall on his sandal it would become unclean and [the sandal] would defile him. 
Behold he would say [to the sandal], "That which defiled you did not defile me, but you did defile me." 
If some of the liquid fell on his skin he remains clean. 
If it fell on his garment it becomes unclean and defiles him. 
Behold he would say [to the garment], "That which defiled you did not defile me, but you did defile me."

Explanation
Section one: When filling the trough with water to get ready to make the mixture water will spill to the ground. The one preparing the mixture will therefore be standing in water while mixing. This water is pure but it is considered impure vis a vis the preparation of the hatat mixture. Impure water defiles vessels on contact, so it will defile the sandal. The sandal will then defile him because vessels that have become impure due to contact with liquids defile a person with regard to preparing the hatat waters. 
However, the water does not directly defile him.
We should note that there are two stringencies here that are related only to the hatat. 1) Even though the water is pure, it defiles the sandal.
2) The sandal defiles the person.
Both of these measures are not true with regard to general matters of purity. We shall return to stringencies in purity for the hatat when we learn chapter ten.
The section ends with a cute discussion between the man and his sandal. He points accusingly at the sandal, noting with some iron that that which defiled you (the water) didn't defile me, but you, sneaky little sandal, did defile me.
Section two: This was noted above.
Section three: This is the same scenario as above, only with a garment instead of clothing. The only difference is that it is obviously not prohibited to wear a garment when mixing the water! 

 

