Parah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction
In mishnah one we learned that they sprinkled the priest with the ashes from all of the red cows that had ever been burned. Our mishnah reflects a legend (I think) according to which there had been seven burned red cows in Jewish history.  

Mishnah Five
If they did not find the residue of the ashes of the seven [red cows] they performed the sprinkling with those of six, of five, of four, of three, of two or of one.
And who prepared these? Moses prepared the first, Ezra prepared the second, and five were prepared from the time of Ezra, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But the sages say: seven from the time of Ezra. 
And who prepared them? Shimon the Just and Yohanan the high priest prepared two; Elihoenai the son of Ha-Kof and Hanamel the Egyptian and Ishmael the son of Piabi prepared one each.

Explanation
Section one: If they didn't have the residue of all seven red cows, then they could use as many as they found. 
Section two: According to Rabbi Meir two of the cows were prepared by two central biblical figures. Moses burned one while in the desert and Ezra burned the second when he founded the Second Temple. The remaining five were burned after the time of Ezra.
Section three: The sages say that all seven were burned from the time of Ezra and onward. They even name all seven high priests that burned them. 
Shimon the Just is a well-known figure in rabbinic literature. Scholars identify him as being either of two High Priests (grandfather and grandson) that served early in the Second Temple period, before the Hasmonean revolt. Part of the confusion as to which Shimon this is stems from the fact that Onias was the name of the father of both of them.
Yohanan the high priest was a member of the Hasmonean family (Judah's nephew).
The other three are harder to identify. There is a priest by the name of Elihoenai that appears in Ezra 8:4. 
Hanamel seems to be called Ananelos by Josephus (Wars of the Jews 15.40). He served during Herod's time.
Ishmael son of Piabi seems to have been a high priest after Hanamel. He is described as being close to the Sadduceans. Nevertheless, he is portrayed positively in rabbinic literature. 


