Mishna Challah
חלה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

The are five things that one is obligated to take Challah from: wheat, barley, spelt, oats, and rye. These are obligated in Challah, join with each other (ie. to complete a measurement), are forbidden to eat new grains from before Passover or to harvest before the Omer. If they took root before the Omer, the Omer makes them permissible (ie. to eat), if not they are forbidden (ie. to eat) until the next Omer comes.
If you eat an olives worth of Matzah on Passover, you have fulfilled your obligation. An olives worth of Chametz (leavened product) you are obligated in Karet. If you intermingle all the different types (Chametz and Matzah), behold this is an Aveirah (a Sin) of Passover. Someone who swore off bread and cereal crops, he is forbidden from them according to Rabbi Meir. The sages said: Someone who swore off wheat, he is only forbidden from eating particularly wheat. He is still required in the matters of Challah and Ma'aserot.
The following are obligated in a hallah offering, but are exempt from ma'aser offerings: leket gifts, shich'hah gifts, pe'ah gifts, abandoned sheaves, ma'aser rishon offerings whose gifts were taken, redeemed ma'aser sheni offerings and redeemed hekdesh, the surplus of an omer offering, and crops which have not yet yielded a third of their produce. Rabbi Eliezer says, crops which have not yet yielded a third of their produce are exempt from a hallah offering.
The following are obligated in ma'aser offerings, but are exempt from a hallah offering: cedar, millet, poppies, sesames, legumes, and any harvest that yields less than four fifths of flour. Dough for sponge breads, honey breads, cookies, pan loaf, and meduma dough, are exempt from a hallah offering.
A batter which starts off spongy, and ends up spongy, is exempt from a hallah offering. If it starts off doughy and ends up spongy, or starts off spongy and ends up doughy, it is obligated in a hallah offering. Crumb loaves are similarly obligated.
Beit Shammai exempts the dough-kneader (from separating challa), but Beit Hillel obligates him.  Beit Shammai obligates the one who pours hot water, but Beit Hillel exempts him.  Loaves for a Toda (thanksgiving) offering and crackers for a Nazir's offering that one made for himself are exempt.  If one buys them in the shuq (marketplace), they are obligated.
If a baker made se'or (dough) to distribute, it is chayav (obligated) in hallah. If women give the baker flour to make dough from, and if there isn't any flour of the minimum quantity for taking hallah belonging to any one of them (in the overall mass of flour), it is patur (exempt) from the requirement of taking hallah. 
Dough for dogs, as long as shepherds would eat (bread) from it, is subject to hallah. And one may make an eruv from the bread made from this dough. And one may enter into a shituf (a partnership for the sake of joining together properties for the sake of carrying), using this bread. and one recites the blessings before and after eating it, and three say the zimmun (invitation before the grace after meals after eating it), and one may  cook it on yom tov, and a person may use this dough to fulfill their Passover obligation (of eating matzah, if the dough is made into matzah). If the shepherds do not eat from it, it is not subject to hallah, nor may one use it for an eruv or enter into a shittuf with it. And one does not say the blessing over it, nor does one say the zimmun over it, nor may it be cooked on yom tov, nor does one fulfill his obligation with this dough on Passover. In either case, the dough is subject to tumat ochalin (the ritual impurity affecting food). 
Regarding Hallah and Terumah: one is hayav mitah (subject to the death penalty) for having eaten them (if they're not a kohen), and are subject to the additional repayment of one-fifth to any kohen. The hallah and temurah are forbidden to non-kohanim, and they are the property of the kohanim. If one part of either the hallah or temurah got mixed within 101 parts, the rest being other produce (non-hallah or temurah), and if they are handled, they require washing of the hands (before touching so as not to defile them). And they require waiting until the setting of the sun in order to eat them. They may not be set aside  as terumah or hallah from pure, for defiled, and they may be set aside as terumah or hallah only for that which is nearby, and from that which its preparation has been completed. If one says that all the produce on their threshing floor is terumah,
or: says that all their [rolled] dough is hallah, they have said nothing, unless they have some leftover.

Chapter 2

Produce from chutz la'aretz (outside the land of Israel) which came into the land of Israel, is obligated in hallah, (as the verse, Numbers 15:18 says), "If it went out from here to there." Rabbi Eliezer obligates one to bring hallah in such a case, while Rabbi Akiva exempts one from bringing hallah in such a case. 
If earth from outside the land of Israel came to the land of Israel on a boat, the produce grown from that earth is subject to the laws of ma'aserot (tithes) and shevi'it (the laws of the sabbatical year). Rav Yehuda said, When is the time from which this applies? When the boat touches the ground. Dough which has been kneaded with fruit juice is subject to hallaj, and it may be eaten with hands that haven't been washed. 
A woman can sit and separate hallah (and make the blessing) when she is naked, since she has the ability to cover herself (by sitting in a certain position and closing her legs). But a man may not do so. If one is in a state of impurity, and cannot knead his dough in purity, he should make it in smaller portions of separate kavim (each portion is less than the minimum quantity obligated in hallah), rather than making the dough in a state of impurity. Rabbi Akiva says: Let him defile it, and make it in a state of tumah (impurity) rather than make it in separate kavim quantities, because just as one takes hallah for a dough that is pure, so one takes hallah for a dough that is made in a state of impurity. Just as he designates the impure, and just as he designates the pure, both as hallah, it is better to take hallah, since if he makes separate kavim quantities, he cannot take hallah, as these kavim have no portion in the name of hallah at all. 
If one makes the dough in separate kavim quantities, and subsequently, they touch each other, they are exempt from hallah, unless they are attached together as one. Rabbi Eliezer says that if you remove them from the oven and place it in one basket, even though they're not attached, the basket combines them into the minimum quantity to be obligated in hallah (and the law follows Rabbi Eliezer). 
If one separates the hallah while it is still in the form of flour, it is not valid hallah, and if the kohen takes it, it is considered as if the kohen has something stolen in his hands. The dough itself, though, is still obligated in hallah, and if there is enough of a quantity of flour to be obligated in hallah, it is also subject to hallah and prohibited to non-kohanim, and these are the words of Rabbi Yehoshua. The sages said to Rabbi  Yehoshua that there was a case where hallah was mistakenly taken, and and a scholar non-kohen seized it. R' Yehoshua said to them, he too did something damging to himself, though he helped others who will think it is permitted. 
Five revaim (quarters (of a kav of flour)- the volume of 43.2 eggs) are obligated in hallah. If they and their leaven, and their light bran and their coarse bran make up the five quarters, they are subject to hallah. If their coarse bran was removed and then were returned, they are not included in this total and the dough is thus exempt from hallah. 
Shiur hallah (the minimum amount mandatory in hallah) is one twenty-fourth of the dough. If one makes dough for onself, or if one makes a dough for his son's banquet, then the shiur is one twenty-fourth. However, if a baker makes dough to sell in the market, and if a woman makes dough to sell in the market, the shiur is one-fourty eighth. If her dough became impure mistakenly, or accidentally, it is one fourty-eighth. But if it was defiled on purpose, it is one twenty-fourth, so that the sinner does not profit from his sin. 
Rabbi Eliezer says that hallah may be taken from a pure dough on behalf of an impure dough. How so? If one has a pure dough and an impure dough, he takes sufficient hallah from the dough whose hallah has yet been taken, in a quantity sufficient to discharge the obligation. and he places an amount less than the bulk of an egg in the middle, thus connecting the two doughs, so that he will be taking hallah from that which is nearby, but the hakhamim (sages) forbade this. 

Chapter 3

One may eat "arai" (casually, incidentally) from dough before it is rolled (in the case of wheat flour) or before it was mixed well, into a cohesive unit (in the case of barley flour). Once one has rolled (in the case of wheat flour), or mixed it into a cohesive dough (in the case of barley flour), one who eats from it is liable for death at the hands of the heavenly court. As soon as she puts in water, even though it is not yet liable in hallah, she should separate the hallah, provided that there is not the minimum quantity of five quarters of a kav of flour there. 
If her dough was mixed with dough from terumah and became meduma, before she had thoroughly mixed it, it is exempt from hallah. But if the dough became dimua after she mixed it, it is obligated in hallah. If there was a safek (doubt) concerning purity before the dough was thoroughly mixed, it may be completed while she is in a state of impurity. If the doubt surfaced or developed after she rolled it, however, it must be completed in a state of purity. 
If she consecrated her dough before thoroughly mixing it, and then redeemed it, it is obligated in hallah. If she consecrated the dough after thoroughly mixing it, and redeemed it, it is also obligated. But if she consecrated it before rolling it, and the gizbar (Temple treasurer) finished rolling the dough, and then she redeemed it, the dough is exempt from hallah, because since at the time the obligation to take hallah took effect, it was exempt. 
Similarly, if one consecrated their produce before the point when the obligation to take ma'aserot (tithes) takes effect, and redeems it, it is subject to ma'aserot. If one consecrated his produce after it had reached the stage for tithes, and redeemed them, it is also subject to tithes. But if one consecrated it before the stage of liability in ma'aserot was established, and the gizbar (Temple treasurer) completed it, and after, the owner redeemed it, it is exempt, since at the time the obligation to tithe was set, the owner was exempt. 
If a non-Jew gave flour to a Jew to make dough for him, it is exempt from hallah. If the gentile gave the Jew flour as a gift, if before rolling the dough, it is exempt. But if after rolling it, he is exempt. If one makes dough together with a gentile, and if the minimal shiur of five quarters kav doesn't belong to the Jew, then the dough is exempt from hallah. 
If one became a convert to Judaism and had dough, if the dough was made before he converted, it is exempt, but if the dough was made after he converted, it is liable. If he is in doubt whether he thoroughly mixed the dough before or after his conversion, he is liable to take hallah. But a non-kohen who accidentally ate of such hallah is not liable for paying an extra fifth to the kohen. Rabbi Akiva says that the liability for hallah sets in when a lighr crust forms in the oven, and it all depends on the time of the formation of a light crust in the oven. 
If one makes dough from a mixture of wheat flour and rice flour, and the dough tastes like the grain (i.e. wheat), one is liable to take hallah, and one fulfills their obligation of matzah on Passover. But if it doesn't have the taste of the wheat, it is not liable for hallah, nor does one fulfill their obligation on Passover with it. 
One who takes leaven out of dough from which hallah had not been removed and puts it into dough from which hallah had been removed:
If he has a supply from another place, he can take out [hallah] in accordance with the precise amount.   
But if he does not, he takes out one [portion of] hallah for the whole [dough]. 
Similarly, if olives of [regular] picking became mixed with olives [left over] for striking-off [by the poor], or grapes of [regular] picking, with grapes [left over] for gleaning [by the poor]:
If he has a supply from another place, he can take out [terumah and tithes] in accordance with the precise amount.   
But if he does not, he takes out terumah and terumah of the tithe for all of them. 
And as for the rest, [he takes out] tithe and the second tithe in accordance with the precise amount.  
One who takes leaven from dough of wheat [flour] and puts [it] into dough of rice [flour]:
If it has the taste of grain, it is subject to hallah, 
If not, it is exempt.   
If so, why did they say: “Untithed produce of any amount renders food prohibited”?
That is [with regard to a mixture of] a kind with its own kind, but [with regard to a mixture of a kind] not with its own kind, only when it imparts taste. 

Chapter 4

Two women who made [separate batches of dough] each of a kav, and these [batches] touched one another, even if they are of the same species, they are exempt [from hallah].
When they belong to one woman: 
If one species with the same species, they are subject.  
If of different species, they are exempt. 
What counts as a species with its same species?  
Wheat does not join together with any [species] other than with spelt; 
Barley joins together with all [species] except wheat. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: the rest of the species join together one with another.

If there are two [batches of dough] from two [separate] kavs, and a kav of rice [dough] or a kav of terumah dough between them, they do not join together.
[If there was] dough from which hallah had already been removed from between them, they join together, since it had once been subject to hallah. 

A kav of [dough made from] new grain and a kav of [dough from] old grain which are stuck together:
Rabbi Ishmael says: let him take [hallah] from the middle.
But the sages prohibit.   
One who has taken hallah from [dough made out of] one kav: 
Rabbi Akiva says: it is hallah;
But the sages say: it is not hallah.

Two [separate] kavs [of dough], this one had its hallah removed on its own, and this one [had its hallah removed] on its own, and then he went back and made of them one batch of dough: 
Rabbi Akiva exempts.
But the sages make it liable.   
It turns out that the stringency of his ruling leads to the leniency of his [other] ruling.

A man may take the requisite amount for hallah out of [clean] dough from which hallah had not been removed in order to remove it in a state of purity— in order to go on separating [hallah] from it for [unclean] demai, until it becomes putrid, since hallah for demai may be taken from clean [dough] for unclean [dough], and from [one dough for another dough] which is not in close proximity.
An Israelite who was a tenant of non-Jews in Syria:
Rabbi Eliezer makes their produce liable to tithes and to [the laws of] the sabbatical year;   
But Rabban Gamaliel makes [it] exempt.   
Rabban Gamaliel says: [one is to give] two hallah-portions in Syria;
But Rabbi Eliezer says: one hallah-portion.   
They adopted the lenient ruling of Rabban Gamaliel and the lenient ruling of Rabbi Eliezer.   
They went back and acted in accordance with Rabban Gamaliel in both respects.  

Rabban Gamaliel says: there are three regions with regard to [liability to] hallah: 
From the land of Israel to Chezib: one hallah-portion.
From Chezib to the river and to Amanah: two hallah-portions, one for the fire and one for the priest.  
The one for the fire has a minimum measure, and the one for the priest does not have a minimum measure.
From the river and from Amanah and inward: two hallah-portions, one for the fire and one for the priest.  
The one for the fire has no minimum measure, and the one for the priest has a minimum measure.
And [a priest] who has immersed himself but it is still day may eat it.   
Rabbi Yose says: he does not require immersion.   
But it is forbidden to men with flux and women with flux, to menstruants, and to women after childbirth;
It may be eaten with a non-priest at the [same] table;
And it may be given to any priest. 

These may be given to any priest:   
Devoted things;
First-born animals;
The redemption of the first born;
The [lamb substituted as] ransom for the first-born of a donkey;
The shoulder, the two cheeks and the maw;
The first of the fleece;
Oil [fit only] for burning;
Consecrated food [which must be eaten] within the Temple;
And first fruits.   
Rabbi Judah prohibits first fruits.   
Vetches of terumah:
Rabbi Akiva permits,   
But the sages prohibit.

Nittai a man of Tekoa brought hallah-portions from Beta, but they did not accept from him.   
The people of Alexandria brought their hallah from Alexandria, but they did not accept from them.   
The people from Mt. Zevoim brought first fruits prior to Atzeret (Shavuot), but they did not accept from them, because of what is written in the Torah: “And the festival of the harvest, the first-fruits of your labors, which you have sown in the field” (Exodus 23:16).
Ben Antigonus brought up first-born animals from Babylonia, but they did not accept from him.
Yoso the priest brought first fruits of wine and oil, but they did not accept from him.
He also brought up his sons and the members of his household to celebrate the minor Passover in Jerusalem, but they turned him back, so that the thing should not become an obligation. 
Ariston brought his first fruits from Apamea and they accepted from him, because they said, one who buys [a field] in Syria is as one who buys [a field] in the outskirts of Jerusalem. 
