Hullin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven 
Limbs or pieces of flesh which hang loose from a [living] animal are susceptible to food uncleanness while they are in their place.   
And [in order to become unclean] they must be first rendered susceptible to uncleanness.  
If the animal was slaughtered, they have by the blood [of the slaughtering] become susceptible to uncleanness, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Shimon says: they have not become susceptible to uncleanness. 
If the animal died, the hanging flesh must be rendered susceptible to uncleanness.
The limb is unclean as a limb severed from a living creature, but is not unclean as the limb of a nevelah (carcass), the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Shimon declares it clean.

Explanation
Section one: In the cases in this mishnah, the flesh or limb has become severed from the animal and has no chance of becoming reattached. This limb or piece of flesh is considered pure, because it is still attached to the animal. It does, however, receive food uncleanness. Food can become impure by contact with a sheretz (and other more serious forms of impurity) and food conveys impurity to other foods. 
Section two: In order for food to be rendered susceptible to impurity, it must come into contact with a liquid. This limb or flesh cannot become unclean until it comes into contact with one of seven liquids (water, blood, milk, dew, honey, oil or wine). 
Section three: If the animal is slaughtered properly, the limb or flesh that was hanging off is made susceptible to food uncleanness by virtue of the blood that leaves the animal when it is slaughtered. This is true even though the slaughtering of the animal does not permit the hanging limb or flesh to be eaten (see above 4:6). In other words, we must treat the limb or flesh as food, even though it cannot be eaten. 
Rabbi Shimon disagrees and holds that just as it may not be eaten, it is not susceptible to impurity by virtue of contact with this blood. 
Section four: If the animal died without being slaughtered, the animal becomes a nevelah but the flesh which was hanging off the animal while it was still alive is not considered nevelah. There is a rule that flesh that separates from an animal while it is still alive is not considered nevelah. Although this flesh was still attached, when it dies we consider it to have fallen off the animal.
It still is susceptible to food impurity (as it did in section three), but before it can become impure it must be rendered susceptible by coming into contact with a liquid.  
Section five: According to Rabbi Meir, the limb, attached to the dead animal, does convey uncleanness because it is considered like a limb that was detached from a living animal, which conveys impurity as does a nevelah. However, flesh that becomes separated from a limb separated from a living animal does not convey impurity. Therefore, Rabbi Meir notes that the limb is treated like a limb separated from a living animal and not like a limb from a nevelah. Should flesh become separated from this limb, it will not become impure.
Rabbi Shimon says that the limb is pure—it is neither like a nevelah, nor like the limb severed from a living animal. Since the limb didn’t fall off while the animal was alive, it cannot be considered at all like a limb that falls from a living animal. And since it is separated from the rest of the body, it is not considered like nevelah. 


