Hullin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Strictly speaking, the Torah prohibits boiling only a kid (a baby goat) in its mother’s milk. As I stated in the introduction to this chapter, all rabbis agree that the prohibition is broader. In our mishnah there are two arguments: 1) whether or not the prohibition includes fowl and wild animals; 2) how the extensions to this prohibition are derived (the midrash). 

Mishnah Four
It is forbidden to cook the meat of a clean animal in the milk of a clean animal or to derive any benefit from it. But it is permitted to cook the meat of a clean animal in the milk of an unclean animal or the meat of an unclean animal in the milk of a clean animal and to derive benefit from it. 
Rabbi Akiva says: wild animals and fowls are not included in the prohibition of the Torah, for it is written three times, “You shall not seethe a kid in its mother's milk;” to exclude wild animals, fowl, and unclean animals. 
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says, it is said, “You shall not eat any nevelah” and [in the same verse] it says, “You shall not seethe a kid in its mother's milk” (Deuteronomy 14:21) anything that is prohibited because of nevelah it is forbidden to cook in milk. Fowl which is prohibited because of nevelah, it might also be forbidden to cook in milk, Scripture says, “In its mother’s milk;” this excludes fowl which has no mother's milk.  

Explanation
Section one: A kid and its mother are both clean (kosher) animals. The rabbis use the kid as a paradigm for all other clean animals. The prohibition of meat and milk applies only to the meat and milk of clean animals. But if one boils pig meat in milk or cow meat in camel milk, he has not transgressed any violation. He may also derive benefit from it (by selling it). Of course, he can’t eat it because pig and camel aren’t kosher. But as long as he doesn’t eat the mixture, he has not transgressed. 
Section two: Rabbi Akiva’s opinion is that the prohibition does not extend to wild animals or fowl, which are in a different category from the kid. Rabbi Akiva derives this midrashically from the fact that the Torah prohibits boiling a kid in its mother’s milk three times—each time the Torah excludes something that is not similar to a kid. Note that Rabbi Akiva does not state that it is permitted to boil or eat chicken and milk. He only says that doing so is not forbidden by the Torah—it is forbidden by the rabbis.
Section three: Rabbi Yose the Galilean disagrees with Rabbi Akiva on two counts. First of all, he holds that the wild animal is prohibited by the Torah, since it is prohibited to eat a wild animal that was not slaughtered properly, meaning one that is a nevelah. He derives this from the juxtaposition of the prohibition of nevelah with the prohibition of meat and milk. 
Secondly, he seems to hold that it is permissible to eat fowl and milk, whereas Rabbi Akiva seemed to think that this was prohibited by the rabbis. Indeed, in the Talmud it states that in Rabbi Yose the Galilean’s place people used to actually eat fowl and milk. However, this is not the accepted halakhah. According to the accepted halakhah, chicken and milk is prohibited “derabanan”—by the rabbis, as was stated by Rabbi Akiva. 

