Hullin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
If a drop of milk fell on a piece of meat and it imparted a flavor into that piece, it is forbidden. 
If he stirred up the pot, then it is forbidden only if [the drop of milk] imparted a flavor into [all that was in] the pot.
The udder: he must cut it open and empty it of its milk; 
If he did not cut it open he has not transgressed the law on its account.
The heart: he must cut it open and empty it of its blood; 
If he did not cut it open he has not transgressed the law on its account.
One who puts cheese onto a table with milk has not transgressed a negative commandment.

Explanation
Section one: If milk is mixed in with meat, the mixture is prohibited if the milk imparts a taste to the meat. Thus if a drop of milk falls onto a piece of meat in a pot, the meat is prohibited only if one could taste the milk. 
Section two: If he stirs the pot, then the small drop of milk will spread out to the entire mixture. In such a case, the meat is prohibited only if there is enough milk to impart a taste to the entire pot. But if there is not enough milk to give its taste to the entire pot, then even the piece of meat onto which the drop of milk fell is permitted, because that drop of milk has now spread out to the entire pot.
Section three: The udder is a problematic part of the animal because it is flesh filled with meat. If one wishes to eat the udder, he must cut it open before cooking it and empty it of all of the milk gathered in it. Then he can cook it. If he doesn’t open it, and then he cooks it with the milk, he is not liable for cooking or eating milk and meat, since the milk that is inside the flesh is not considered to be milk until it has been expelled through the animal’s udders. 
Section four: The same problem exists when it comes to the heart—it is meat (permitted) filled with blood (forbidden). He should cut it open and empty out the blood before he eats it, but if he cooks it in its blood, and eats it, he has not transgressed the biblical prohibition of eating blood.
Section five: Mishnah one taught that it is forbidden to put meat and milk on the same table. Our mishnah points out that while this is forbidden, one who does put them on the same table has not transgressed a negative commandment.  



