Hullin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
A hide which had an olive’s bulk of [unclean] flesh clinging to it, one who touches a shred hanging from it, or a hair that was opposite to it, he becomes unclean.   
If there were two pieces of flesh attached to it, each the size of half an olive, they convey uncleanness by carrying but not by contact, the words of Rabbi Ishmael. 
Rabbi Akiva says: neither by contact nor by carrying.   
Rabbi Akiva agrees that if there were two pieces of flesh, each the size of half of an olive, that he stuck on a twig and he waved them, he becomes unclean.   
Why then does Rabbi Akiva declare him clean in the [case where they cling to the] hide?
Because the hide renders them negligible.

Explanation
Section one: This section teaches that one who touches something that is attached to a piece of flesh is considered as having touched the flesh. If there is a piece of flesh of nevelah (carrion) the size of an olive that is hanging from a hide, one who touches the hide has become unclean through nevelah uncleanness. He is also unclean if he touches the hair attached to the hide opposite the piece of flesh, for touching the hair counts as touching the hide which conveys the uncleanness from the flesh.
Section two: Here, instead of there being one piece of flesh the size of an olive, the usual size necessary to convey nevelah uncleanness, there are two pieces of flesh, each the size of half of an olive. Both are attached to one piece of hide. Everyone agrees that these two pieces of flesh don’t join together to convey uncleanness by contact, since one is touching only one at a time. However, Rabbi Ishmael holds that if one carries the hide with the two olives attached to it he has become impure through carrying, because he is, after all, carrying an olive’s worth of nevelah. Rabbi Akiva says that they don’t convey impurity even when carried.
Section three: Rabbi Akiva agrees with Rabbi Ishmael that if there are two half-olive size pieces of flesh stuck on a stick, they join together to count as one full olive. Waving counts as carrying, so if he waves this stick with the two nevelah pieces on it, he is impure. 
Section four: The mishnah now explains why Rabbi Akiva says that the two pieces of flesh attached to the hide do not join together to transmit impurity while those attached to the stick do. The two small pieces of flesh attached to the hide are negligible and nullified vis a vis the hide. However, the stick that he put them on is not considered important and therefore they are not nullified in this situation.   
