Hullin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
With regard to a thigh-bone of a corpse or a thigh-bone of a consecrated animal, he who touches it, whether it be stopped up or pierced, becomes unclean. 
With regard to a thighbone of a nevelah or of a [dead] sheretz, if it was stopped up, he who touches it remains clean, but if it was at all pierced it conveys uncleanness by contact.
From where do we know [the same rules apply] for carrying? 
Scripture says, “He that touches and he that carries” (Leviticus 11:39-40), anything that [can become unclean] by contact [can become unclean] by carrying. And anything that cannot [become unclean] by contact, cannot become [unclean] by carrying.

Explanation
Section one: When it comes to human corpses, bones convey uncleanness just as does flesh. Thus one who touches a thigh-bone (this bone can actually be referring to any large bone) is impure no matter what state the bone is in. 
Consecrated animals that are disqualified by becoming either piggul (the priest had the wrong intention while offering the sacrifice) or remnant, cause hand-impurity (see Pesahim 10:9). The bones of consecrated animals also cause such impurity, again, no matter what state the bone is in.
Section two: However, when it comes to nevelah impurity or the impurity caused by a dead sheretz (one of eight types of creepy crawly animals mentioned in the Torah), it depends on whether the bone was pierced such that the marrow could escape. The bone itself doesn’t convey impurity, whereas the marrow does. Thus, if it was not at all pierced, then the person who touches it or carries it is clean. But if it was pierced, even with a very small pierce, he is unclean.
Section three: The same rules that apply to touching a pierced or stopped up bone of a nevelah or sheretz apply to carrying such a bone. When one carries a pierced bone, he is impure. This is not the surprising aspect of this rule. What is surprising is that if one carries a non-pierced bone, he remains clean, even though he carried the marrow which counts as flesh of the nevelah. When it comes to nevelah, the same rules that apply to touching applying to carrying—if one is pure from touching a stopped up bone, then he is also pure when he carries such a bone. This is derived from the juxtaposition of the verbs in Leviticus 11.     

