Hullin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Three times the Torah states, “Do not seethe a kid in its mother’s milk.” While the Torah speaks specifically about cooking a kid in its own mother’s milk, all of the rabbis agree that the prohibition is much broader. First of all, it applies to the meat and milk of all domesticated animals (sheeps, goats and cows). Second of all, all rabbis agree that it is prohibited to eat and derive benefit from milk and meat that have been cooked together—the prohibition is not just against cooking. 
However, beyond that, there are several issues that are not clear, and about which rabbis debate. These debates and the rules concerning milk and meat are in our chapter.

Mishnah One  
Every kind of flesh is forbidden to be cooked in milk, except for the flesh of fish and of locusts.
And it is also forbidden to place it upon the table with cheese, except for the flesh of fish and of locusts.
Fowl may be placed upon the table together with cheese but may not be eaten with it, the words of Bet Shammai.
Bet Hillel say: it may neither be placed [upon the table together with cheese] nor eaten with it. 
Rabbi Yose said: this is one of the leniencies of Bet shammai and the stringencies of Bet Hillel .  
Concerning what table did they speak? Concerning the table upon which one eats; but on the table whereon the food is set out one may place the one beside the other, and not be concerned.

Explanation
Section one: There are several categories of meat: 1) Domesticated animals, sheep, goats and cows; 2) Wild animals, such as deer; 3) Fowl; 4) Fish and locusts. When it comes to the prohibition of cooking meat and milk, our mishnah draws the line before category four. Although wild animals and fowl are quite dissimilar from goats, the animal mentioned in the verse itself, it is still prohibited to cook them in milk.  Indeed, fowl and milk are prohibited even though birds don’t have milk!
In my opinion, the mishnah defines “meat” as anything that needs to be slaughtered. Since fish and locusts are not slaughtered, they can be cooked and eaten with milk. 
This rule is recognizable today because it is the rule we follow. However, we should note that not all rabbis agreed and there were some rabbis who held that it was either not prohibited by the Torah to cook and eat fowl and meat, or that it was completely permitted. This opinion was held by a few during the talmudic period, but was not accepted in later times. 
Section two: Any meat which may not be cooked with milk, may also not be placed on the same table as a dairy product, lest someone come to eat the two of them together. We can see here that the prohibition of cooking milk and meat is clearly also a prohibition of eating them together.
Section three: Bet Shammai is more lenient than Bet Hillel when it comes to fowl. It seems likely that according to Bet Shammai the prohibition of eating fowl and milk is only derabanan, of rabbinic authority. Bet Hillel might hold that it is of toraitic origin, and therefore they rule more strictly. Alternatively, they are simply stricter than Bet Shammai, but agree that fowl and cheese is only prohibited by rabbinic authority. In any case, Rabbi Yose points out that this is one of the unusual cases where Bet Hillel rules more strictly than Bet Shammai.
Section four: This section refers to the table mentioned in sections two and three. When it is prohibited to place meat and milk on the same table--that is on a table which people eat off of. Meat and milk can be placed next to each other on tables that are used to prepare foods. 


