Sotah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues to describe the neck-breaking ceremony.  It clarifies some points in Deuteronomy 21:3-4.

Mishnah Five
The elders of Jerusalem departed and went away. 
The elders of that city bring “a heifer which has never been worked” (Deuteronomy 21:3).
And a blemish does not disqualify it. 
They bring it down to a hard (etan) wadi— “etan” is understood in its literal sense of “hard”.
Even if it is not “hard”, it is valid [for the ceremony]. 
They break its neck with a hatchet from behind.   
The site may never be sown or tilled, but it is permitted to comb flax and chisel rocks.

Explanation
Section one:  Verse 2 refers to “your elders” and was interpreted in mishnah one as referring to the elders of Jerusalem, who are the elders of all of Israel.  They are the ones that measure where the nearest city is.  After having done so they leave.
Section two:  Verse three states “The elders of that city”, which means that the elders of the nearest city are those who bring the heifer.  The heifer must be one that has never been worked.  However, the Torah does not require that it be free of blemishes, a requirement typical of sacrificial animals.  
Section three:  Verse four says that the heifer is taken down to a “nahal etan”.  The word “nahal” means wadi, or a riverbed.  “Etan” is understood by our mishnah to mean “hard” or perhaps “strong”, the typical meaning of “etan”.  Some interpret this to mean that it must have a strong flow of water.  Others interpret it as hard in the sense of “rocky”.  JPS translates “everflowing”.  In any case, the requirement for the wadi to be “etan” is only a priori.  Ex post facto, if the ritual was carried out in a non-etan wadi, it is valid.    
Section four:  Once they are down at the wadi, the elders break the heifer’s neck with a type of hatchet, a large knife used for cutting meat and bones.
Section five:  Verse 4 states, “to an ever-flowing wadi, which is not tilled or sown.”  The mishnah limits this prohibition to tilling or sewing.  However, activities with things that are not attached to the ground such as flax or rocks that are detached from the ground are permitted.  Only work involving the ground itself is forbidden.    
