Sotah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The first part of our mishnah teaches that corpses found in certain places do not require a heifer’s neck to be broken.  The second section teaches that proximity of the corpse to certain cities also does not require the heifer’s neck to be broken.  
We should note that the fact that the rabbis were quite willing to limit the applicability of the neck-breaking ceremony demonstrates that they were far less concerned with blood atonement than Israelites were in ancient times.   The need for blood atonement was prominent in biblical theology and law, and played less of a role in rabbinic thinking.  

Mishnah Two
If [the corpse] was found buried underneath a heap of stones, or hanging on a tree, or floating on the surface of the water, they would not break [the heifer’s neck], as it says:
“In the earth” — and not buried underneath a heap of stones, nor hanging on a tree;
“In a field” —and not floating on the surface of the water. 
If it was found near the border, or a city whose majority of inhabitants were Gentiles, or a city in which there is no court, they would not break [the heifer's neck]. 
They only measure the distance from a city in which there is a court.
If [the corpse] was found exactly between two cities, both of them bring two heifers [between them], the words of Rabbi Eliezer; 
Jerusalem does not bring a heifer whose neck is to be broken.

Explanation
Section one:  Deuteronomy 21:1 reads, “If a corpse is found slain on the land.”   The rabbis read “on the land” to exclude corpses that are not found “on the land” but rather underneath a heap of stones or hanging in a tree.  The continuation of the verse states “lying in the field”.  From this phrase the mishnah excludes a corpse found floating on the surface of the water.  
Section two:  If the corpse was found near the border of the land of Israel, i.e. near enemy territory, or near a Gentile city (also considered to be enemies), a heifer was not brought.  The Talmud explains that these places are considered dangerous and therefore, by going near there, the victim was not acting in a safe manner.  Hence, if he is slain, assumedly by enemies, there is no communal guilt incurred by the Jewish city closest to the corpse.  
However, if the corpse was found near a city in which there is no court, they would still bring a heifer, and they would measure to the nearest city which does have a court.  Since the Torah requires members of the court of the nearest city to go out and participate in the neck-breaking ceremony, the city which brings the heifer obviously must have a court.  
Rabbi Eliezer states that if the corpse is found exactly between two cities, both cities would bring a heifer and breaks its neck.  In the Talmud a different opinion is brought, and that is that the two cities equidistant from the corpse share in bringing one heifer.  Perhaps these two different opinions have different concepts of the neck-breaking ceremony.  Rabbi Eliezer would claim that it is essential that each city which is closest must bring a heifer in order to cleanse its guilt.  The responsibility is intended for the people of the city to bring a heifer, and since we don’t know which city is closest, both must bring.  The other opinion would hold that the critical thing is that a heifer’s neck is broken in order to atone for the blood of the victim.  The act must be fulfilled and the participation of the closest town matters less.   
Section three:   The abovementioned verse states, “If a corpse is found slain on the land which God is giving you to inherit”.  Jerusalem was not given as an inheritance to any specific tribe. Rather, it belongs to all of Israel.  Therefore, it is excluded from the laws of this verse.  If a corpse is found closest to Jerusalem, a heifer’s neck is not broken.   
