
   	When the former prophets   Died, the urim and thummim   Ceased. When [the second] temple was destroyEd, the shamir and nopheth zufim   Ceased, and men of faith disappeared from israel; as it is said, help, lord, for the godly man ceaseth etc.   Rabban simeon b. Gamaliel says: r. Joshua testified that from the day the temple was destroyed, there is no day Without a curse, the dew has not descended for a blessing, and the flavour has departed from the fruits. R. Jose says: the fatness   Was also removed from the fruits. R. Simeon b. Eleazar says; [the cessation of] purity has removed taste and fragrance [frOm fruits]; [the cessation of] the tithes has removed the fatness of corn. But the sages say: immorality and witchcraft destroyed everything.
	Mishnah. During the war with vespasian   They [the rabbis] decreed against [the use of] crowns worn by bridegrooMs and against [the use of] the drum.   During the war of quietus   They decreed against [the use of] crowns worn by brides and that nobody should teach his son greek. During the final war   They decreed that a bride should not go out in a palanquin   In tHe midst of the city, but our rabbis decreed that a bride may go out in a palanquin in the midst of the city.

   	When r. Meir   Died, the composers of fables ceased. When ben azzai   Died, the assiduous students [of torah] ceased. When ben zoma   Died, tHe expositors ceased.   When r. Akiba   Died, the glory of the torah ceased. When r. Hanina b. Dosa died, men of deed   Ceased. When r. Jose ketanta died, the pious men ceased; and why was his name called ketanta? Because he was the youngest   Of the pious Men.   When r. Johanan b. Zakkai   Died, the lustre of wisdom ceased.   When rabban gamaliel the elder died, the glory of the torah ceased, and purity and abnegation perished. When r. Ishmael b. Fabi   Died, the lustre of the priesthood ceased. When rabbi Died, humility and fear of sin ceased.   R. Phineas b. Jair says: when [the second] temple was destroyed, scholars   And noblemen were ashamed and covered their head,   Men of deed were disregarded, and men of arm and men of tongue   Grew powerful. Nobody Enquires,   Nobody prays [on their behalf], and nobody asks.   Upon whom is it for us to rely? Upon our father who is in heaven. R. Eliezer the great says: from the day the temple was destroyed, the sages began to be like school-teachers,   School-teacherS like synagogue-attendants, synagogue-attendants like common people, and the common people


