Bava Batra Chapter Nine Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with the formal and legal way in which a person may transfer property.  In the first chapter of Tractate Kiddushin the Mishnah teaches these laws more extensively.  Our mishnah deals specifically with how a dying person transfers his property before s/he dies so that the property will not be subject to the laws of inheritance.  In Hebrew the formal transfer of property is called “kinyan”.  (See Steinsaltz reference guide, page 254).

Mishnah Seven
If a man divided his property orally, Rabbi Eliezer says:  “Whether he was healthy or at the point of death, property for which there is security (land) can be acquired only by money, by a document or by possession; property for which there is no security (movable objects) can be acquired only by being drawn [into the possession of the one acquiring].
They (the Sages) said to him:  “It once happened that the mother of the sons of Rokhel was sick and said, ‘Give my veil to my daughter’, and it was worth twelve hundred maneh (1,200 dinars) and she died and they fulfilled her words.
He said to them:  “May their mother bury the sons of Rokhel.”  
The Sages say:  “On a Sabbath his words remain valid, since he cannot write, but not on a weekday.”
Rabbi Joshua says:  “If they have stated this rule on the Sabbath, how much more so on a weekday.”
Similarly, others may acquire possession on behalf of a minor, but not on behalf of an adult.
Rabbi Joshua says:  “If they have stated this rule with regards to a minor, how much more so does the rule apply to an adult.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
The first two sections of our mishnah discuss a person who tries to transfer his property to another person orally without using a written document or other formal means of kinyan.  According to Rabbi Eliezer, whether the man is healthy or dying, he must perform the transaction in the usual manner that transactions are done, i.e. with kinyan.  If he wishes to cause acquisition of land he must either receive money from the acquirer, use a document or the acquirer must demonstrate physical possession of the land (see Bava Batra, chapter 3).  If he wishes to cause acquisition of movable property, i.e. things, the acquirer must actually take possession of them by drawing them towards him.  In other words, according to Rabbi Eliezer, merely saying that one is giving something to another person does not cause the acquisition to take effect.
The Sages respond to Rabbi Eliezer with a story that demonstrates through a precedent that a dying person may indeed transfer their possessions orally.  In the story the mother of the sons of Rokhel declared that her expensive veil was to go to her daughter (and not to her sons who would inherit her when she dies).  The Sages accepted her words and gave the veil to her daughter, even though no formal acquisition (kinyan) had been made.  To this Rabbi Eliezer responds that the sons of Rokhel were wicked and therefore the Sages accepted that the veil should belong to her daughter.  In other words the story is exceptional and therefore does not serve as a proper precedent.
Section two:  The sages say that a dying person can divide his property orally on Shabbat, since it is forbidden to write.  If, however, he were to do this during the week, when it is permitted to write, the transfer is invalid.  Rabbi Joshua disagrees.  He says that if they said that he could do this on Shabbat all the more so he may orally divide his property during the week.  Rabbi Joshua’s reasoning is that since he could write and transfer property during the week, he is allowed to do so even without a formal document or kinyan.
Section three:  Rabbi Joshua and the Sages have a similar dispute on another issue of halakhah.  According to the Sages, one may acquire possession on behalf of a minor but not on behalf of an adult.  In other words Reuven can legally accept a gift on behalf of Joseph who is a minor, but not on behalf of Shimon who is an adult.  Since Joseph cannot legally take possession of the gift himself Reuven may do it on his behalf.  Shimon who can legally take possession of the gift must do so on his own.  Rabbi Joshua says that if Reuven can acquire possession for a minor, all the more so may he do so for an adult.

Questions for Further Thought:
Explain Rabbi Joshua’s opinion in section three in light of his opinion in section two.  Why did the editor of the mishnah see that these two disputes between the Sages and Rabbi Joshua were similar and therefore place them in one mishnah?


