Bava Batra, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eight 

Introduction
Mishnah eight deals with the division of the inheritance when daughters inherit.

Mishnah Eight
If he left elder daughters and younger daughters, the elder daughters may not care for themselves at the cost of the younger daughters, nor may the younger daughters claim maintenance at the cost of the elder daughters, rather they all share alike.
If the elder daughters married [and took each her dowry from the common inheritance] so too the younger daughters may marry [and take each a dowry from the common inheritance].
If the younger daughters said, “We will marry in the way you married”, they do not listen to them, for what their father gave them, he has given.
A greater stringency applies to daughters than to sons, since daughters can claim maintenance at the cost of the sons, but they cannot claim maintenance at the cost of the [other daughters].

Explanation
The first three sections of this mishnah are identical to the last section of yesterday’s mishnah.  The only difference is that while the father customarily pays for the wedding of his son, to his daughter he gives a dowry.  Therefore in section two and three the daughters are arguing over dowries and not over the costs of the wedding.
Section four:  We will learn in the first mishnah of the next chapter that if a father left sons and daughters and he did not have a large enough inheritance for the daughters to be maintained and the sons to inherit, the daughters’ maintenance (food, clothing and shelter) takes precedence over the sons’ inheritance.  However, if he left only daughters, the younger daughters cannot claim maintenance at the expense of the elder daughters.  In other words, the law with regards to daughters is more strict [vis a vis the other daughters] than the law with regards to sons.

Questions for Further Thought:
Section 4:  Why do daughters receive maintenance (food, clothing and shelter) when sons inherit but not when other daughters inherit?  

