Bava Batra, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Mishnah three discusses sons who share an inheritance and some of the sons improve the value of the property.  The issue discussed is are the sons who improved the value the only ones to profit or is the profit divided equally between all of the inheriting sons.  A similar situation is discussed in which a widow improves the value of her dead husband’s property.

Mishnah Three
If a man left elder sons and younger sons, and the elder sons improved the property, they improve it to the common benefit.
If they said, “See, what our father has left us, lo, we will work and from that we will eat”, they improve it to their own benefit.
So, too, if a woman (a widow) improved the property, she improves it to the common benefit.
If she had said, “See, what my husband left to me, lo, I will work and from that I will eat”, she improves it to her own benefit.

Explanation
In the scenario mentioned in our mishnah Jacob died and left four sons, two who were older, Reuven and Shimon, and two who were younger, Levi and Judah, and Jacob owned a piece of real estate worth 1000 dollars.  If Reuven and Shimon were to take this land and improve it, thereby doubling its value, each son’s portion would double.  Even though Levi and Judah did not work to improve the value, since it was their inheritance as well, they receive some of the benefit.  If, however, Reuven and Shimon said that they were increasing the value of their portions only, than they alone receive the increase in value.  
Similarly if a widow were to increase the value of her dead husband’s estate, she would share in the increase with the sons of her husband, or the other heirs. However, if she were to state that she is improving her own lot, than she herself would receive the benefit of her work.
Note:  a widow does not inherit from her husband.  She is, however, entitled to receive maintenance from her husband’s estate.  Maintenance payments will be based on the value of the estate:  if there is a large estate she will receive better quality food, clothing and shelter.  Therefore, it is in her interest to increase the value of the estate.


