Bava Batra, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Mishnah two deals with the division of the inheritance when one of the children is not discernibly male or female and other laws concerning such a child.

Mishnah Two
If a man left sons and daughters and one that was of doubtful gender, if the property was great the males may push him (the one of doubtful gender) onto the females; if the property was small the females may thrust him onto the males.
If a man said, “If my wife shall bear a male he shall be given 100 zuz”, and she had a male, he receives 100 zuz.  
[If he said, “If my wife shall bear a] female she shall be given 200 zuz”, and she had a female, she receives 200 zuz.  
[If he said, “If may wife shall bear a] male he shall be given 100 zuz and if a female 200 zuz” and she had a male and a female, the male receives 100 zuz and the female 200 zuz.
If she had one of doubtful gender, he does not take.
But if he said, “Whatsoever my wife shall bear shall be given [such an amount], he receives.
If he [the one of doubtful gender] was the only heir, he inherits everything.

Explanation
This mishnah discusses the rights of a “tumtum” which is the Hebrew term for a child who does not have sexual signs of being a male or female. If there is a large inheritance, and therefore the sons will take their part, the sons can tell the “tumtum” that he is not a son and therefore he can only receive maintenance with the other daughters.  If, however, there is small estate, and it is not sufficient to support all of the children, the daughters can tell him that he must go begging with the other sons.  These two laws are based on the principle, common to many Rabbinic laws, that the burden of proof is on the plaintiff.  In order for the “tumtum” to take part of the inheritance he must prove that he is male, which he cannot.  In order for him to receive maintenance when the estate is small, he must prove that he is female, which he cannot.
Section two deals with a father who makes a promise to give his child a present when the child is born and bases the size of the present on the gender of the child.  Sections 2, 2a and 2b are straightforward and need no explanation.  According to section 2c if, in any of the aforementioned cases, the woman were to bear a “tumtum” the child would not be able to claim the present. Since the present was based on the child’s gender and the child cannot prove a gender, the child cannot make a claim on the gift.
If, however, the father had said that he wished to give a gift to anything that the wife had, then he has not based the gift on the child’s gender.  In such a case even a tumtum would receive the gift.  Finally the mishnah states that if the “tumtum” were the only inheritor, s/he would inherit.  
 
Questions for Further Thought:
Why does the mishnah need to state that if the “tumtum”, one of doubtful gender, was the only inheritor, s/he would inherit?  Why might this not be obvious?  
 

