Sanhedrin, Chapter Two, Mishnayoth Three, Four and Five

Introduction
The three mishnayoth which we learn today continue to discuss rules with regards to the king.

Mishnah Three
If any of his near kin die he may not go out of the door of his palace.  
Rabbi Judah says:  “If he wishes to follow the bier he may, since we have found that David followed the bier of Avner, as it says, “And King David followed the bier” (II Samuel 3:31)  
They answered, “That was only to appease the people.”
When they feed him the funeral meal all the people sit on the floor and he sits on a couch.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah deals with funeral procedure when one of the king’s near relatives dies.  Although there is no prohibition in the Torah against the king participating in funerals, the Sages did not think it respectful for a king to be seen in a state of mourning.  Rabbi Judah again finds biblical precedent for the king to participate in the funeral (as he found precedent for the king to marry another king’s widow in mishnah two).   When during the battles between the House of Saul and the House of David, Avner, Saul’s army commander, was murdered by Joab, the commander of David’s army for  having killed Joab’s brother, David goes out after Avner’s bier.  According to Rabbi Judah this is precedent for any king.  The Sages reply to Rabbi Judah that David only did so to appease the people so that they wouldn’t say that Joab killed Avner with David’s permission.  In other, normal, cases it is forbidden for the king to participate in the funeral procession.
When the people feed the king his funeral meal, they sit on the floor, to show their participation in his grief and he sits on a couch, since he is not allowed to truly mourn.  Note that the high priest was allowed to sit on a low stool.  The Sages were less concerned about the respect shown for the high priest than they were for the respect shown towards the king.  

Mishnah Four
He may send forth the people to a battle waged of free choice by the decision of the court of seventy one.
He may break through [the private domain of any man] to make himself a road and none may protest him.
The king’s road has no limit.
Whatsoever the people take in plunder they must place before him, and he may take first.
“And he shall not have many wives” (Deut. 17:17)—eighteen only.
Rabbi Judah says: “He may take many wives provided they don’t turn his heart away [from worshipping God].  
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Even one that might turn his heart away, he should not marry.  Why then does it say, “He shall not have many wives”, even if they are like Avigayil.  
“He shall not keep many horses” (Deut. 17:16)—enough for his chariot only. 
“Nor shall he amass silver and gold to excess” (Deut. 17:17)—enough to pay his soldier’s wages.
He must write a Torah scroll for himself; when he goes forth to battle he shall take it with him, and when he returns he shall bring it back with him; when he sits in judgement it shall be with him, and when he sits to eat it shall be with him, as it says, “Let it remain with him and let him read it all his life” (Deut. 17:19)

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  The king has a right to take his people out to war, but he first must receive permission from the Sanhedrin.  This is probably seen to be a check to make sure a king does not take his people out to dangerous and frivolous wars. 
Section two:  The king has a right to expropriate anyone’s property if he should need the property to make a path.  Furthermore, this path has no limits to its size.  There are some commentators who say that this section of the mishnah is applicable only if the king is going out to war.
Section three:   When the people plunder conquered cities after a victorious war, the king may have his first pick at the plunder.  
Section four:  The remainder of the mishnah is a midrash (exegesis) on Deuteronomy 16-19.  The first midrash discusses the limitation on the number of wives a king may take.  According to the first opinion he may only (!) have 18 wives.  Rabbi Judah emphasizes the continuation of verse 17 which says, “lest his heart go astray.”  According to Rabbi Judah the verse does not prohibit a certain number of wives, rather it prohibits the king from taking any wife who will lead his heart astray.  The Bible itself relates that this is exactly what happened with Solomon in his old age (See I Kings 11).  Rabbi Eliezer responds to Rabbi Judah and says that if the verse had only meant to say that he may not marry women who will lead his heart astray then why did it state a specific number.  Therefore, Rabbi Eliezer says that he may not marry many wives even if they were like Avigayil, David’s wife, who is the prototypical example of a smart and good wife (see I Samuel 25:3). 
Section five:  When the Torah states that the king may not have many horses, it means to limit him to those which he needs for his chariot only.
Section six:  The king may only have enough gold to pay his soldiers.  
Section seven:  The Torah states that the king should have a Torah scroll and learn it all the days of his life.  The mishnah emphasizes that this Torah scroll must always be with him, even when he goes out to war!  The king is to always be reminded that he serves a higher King, God.  Keeping the Torah with him at all times reminds him that his authority is secondary to the ultimate authority of God, as revealed in the Torah.

Mishnah Five
None may ride his horse and none may sit on his throne and none may make use of his scepter.
No one may see him when his hair is being cut or when he is naked or when he is in the bath house, for it says, “You shall set a king upon yourself” (Deut. 17:15)—that his awe should be over you.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
This mishnah continues the midrash on Deut. 17.  The Torah states that the people of Israel shall set a king upon themselves.  The Torah uses a typical syntax repeating the verb “to set” twice.  In usual fashion, the Rabbis see this as an unnecessary repetition of a word and therefore a legitimate basis for a midrash.  The midrash is that the Torah mandates awe of the king, and therefore one is not allowed to not sit in his place, use his scepter or see him in a position of compromise.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four, section four:  What is the difference in opinion between the first opinion (the king may take 18 wives) and Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion?
What is the mishnah’s attitude towards the institution of the monarchy?  
