Sanhedrin, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Seven, Eight and Nine

Introduction
The first half of mishnah seven deals with one who gives of his seed to Molech.  The second half of mishnah seven deals with the “Ba’al Ob” and the “Yidde’oni”.  We will explain all of these terms below.  Mishnah eight deals with one who violates the Sabbath and one who curses his parents.  Mishnah nine deals with a man who has relations with a betrothed virgin.  All of these are crimes for which one is punished by stoning.   

Mishnah Seven 
He who gives of his seed to Molech is not liable unless he delivers it to Molech and causes it to pass through the fire. 
If he gave it to Molech but did not cause it to pass through the fire, or he caused it to pass through fire but did not give it to Molech, he incurs no penalty, unless he does both.
A Ba'al Ob  is the pithom  who speaks from his armpit. 
The Yidde'oni is one who speaks from his mouth.  
These two are stoned; while he who inquires of them transgresses a formal prohibition. 

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one: “Molech” was the name given by a god worshipped by some of Israel’s neighbors.  It is mentioned in Leviticus 20:2, where it specifically states that one who gives of his seed to Molech shall be stoned.  It is also mentioned in Leviticus 18:21 and II Kings 23:10.  According to the Rabbis “giving one’s seed to Molech” involved giving one’s child to the priests of Molech and their passing him from one side of a fire to another.  The child was not consumed by the fire.  (Although some commentators hold that this was a form of child sacrifice.  For an interesting article on Biblical scholarship with regards to the cult of Molech, see the JPS Commentary on Leviticus).  Our mishnah teaches that in order for the father to be obligated for the death penalty he must both give the child to the priests of Molech and cause the child to be passed through the fire.  If he does only one of these he is not to be stoned.
Section two:  Leviticus 19:31 specifically warns that Israelites are not to make inquiry of the “Ovoth” or the “Yidde’onim”.  These were different types of sorcerers or oracles who would conjure up spirits in order to tell the future.  According to our mishnah a “Ba’al Ob”, or Master of the Ob” was a “pithom”, which in Greek means a conjurer.  According to Rashi he would place a skull underneath his armpit and use it to predict the future.  A “Yidde’oni” would also conjure up spirits but he would speak from his mouth.  If an Israelite were to act as a conjurer of this sort he would be obligated for stoning. If an Israelite were to inquire of a “Ba’al Ob” or “Yidde’oni” he would transgress a negative commandment, but he would not be obligated for the death penalty.

Mishnah Eight  
He who desecrates the Sabbath [is stoned], providing that it is an offence punished by “kareth” if deliberate, and by a sin-offering if unwitting.
One who curses His father or his mother is not punished unless he curses them by the divine name. 
If he cursed them by a nickname,  Rabbi Meir held him liable, but the Sages ruled that he is exempt.

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  According to Numbers 15:35, one who breaks the Sabbath is punished by being stoned.  However, we learn elsewhere that he is stoned only if he is warned prior to the transgression that if he violates the Sabbath in such a manner he will be stoned.  Our mishnah teaches that this is true provided that his violation was one which is punished by “kareth” (a death penalty meted out by God) if not warned (but nevertheless committed with intent to break the Sabbath).  He also must commit a transgression for which he is obligated to bring a sin-offering if he did it unwittingly (for instance he didn’t know that today was the Sabbath or that this type of work is prohibited).  The seventh chapter of Tractate Shabbat lists which types of work one is prohibited from doing on the Sabbath.  One who is warned not to do one of these types of work and does so anyway is to be stoned.  There are other types of work which are forbidden to do on the Sabbath but are not punished by stoning.
Section two:  According to Leviticus 20:9 and Exodus 21:17 one who curses his parents is liable for the death penalty.  Our mishnah teaches that he is liable only if he curses them using God’s explicit name (which we no longer know).  Although Rabbi Meir holds that he is obligated even if he uses a nickname for God, the Sages disagree.

Mishnah Nine
He who has sexual relations with a betrothed young woman is not punished until she is a young woman, a virgin, betrothed, and in her father's house.  
If two men had sexual relations with her, the first is stoned, but the second is strangled.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
Deuteronomy 22:23-24 states:  “In the case of a virgin who is betrothed to a man—if a man comes upon her in town and lies with her, you shall take the two of them out to the gate of that town and stone them.”  A man who has sexual relations with a betrothed woman is an adulterer, as is she, and they are both punishable by death.  However, unlike a regular adulterer who is punished by strangulation, one who has relations with a betrothed woman is punished with a more serious form of the death penalty, stoning.  Our mishnah teaches that in order for the two to be punished by stoning she must be betrothed and not married.  She must be a virgin, and she must be a young woman, usually defined as being from the age of 12-12 ½.   Older or younger than that and he will only be punished by strangulation. She also must still be residing in her father’s house.  If she has already moved to her husband’s house she is considered married and adultery is then punished by strangulation.  
If two men commit adultery with her the first is punished by being stoned and the second is punished by strangulation, since by the time he had relations with her she was no longer a virgin.  



