Sanhedrin, Chapter Eleven, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
These two mishnayoth continue to discuss the rebellious elder.  

Mishnah Three
There is greater stringency in respect to the teachings of the scribes than in respect to the torah:  [thus,] if [a rebellious elder] says, there is no commandment of tefillin, so that a biblical law may be transgressed, he is exempt.   
[But if he rules that the tefillin must contain] five compartments, thus adding to the words of the scribes, he is liable.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah states that a rebellious elder who teaches against a Rabbinic teaching, one not mentioned explicitly in the Torah, is dealt with more severely than one who teaches against the explicit words of the Torah.  An elder who states that there is no commandment of tefillin is not to be executed, since the commandment of tefillin is stated explicitly in the Torah (Exodus 13:9, 16, Deuteronomy 6:8, 11:18).  Anyone who hears this elder teach that there is no tefillin will be able to check the Torah and realize that the elder’s teaching is false.  However, one who states that the tefillin must be made of five boxes, instead of the four prescribed by the Rabbis, is liable for the death penalty. Since the Torah does not state how many boxes are to be in the tefillin, this is a teaching that if we didn’t know from the Rabbis we would not know at all.  Therefore, an elder who teaches against this teaching is more of a threat than the elder who teaches against something stated specifically in the Torah.
Note:  The tefillin worn on one’s head contain four boxes but the one worn on the arm contains only one box.  From the outside each is painted black and therefore looks like one box.  

Mishnah Four
He [the rebellious elder] was executed neither by his local court nor by the court at Yavneh, but rather was taken to the great court in Jerusalem and kept there until the [next] festival  and executed on the festival, for it says, “And all the people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously” (Deut. 17:13), according to the words of Rabbi Akiba. 
Rabbi Judah says:  “His judgment must not be delayed, but he is executed immediately, and proclamations are written and sent by messengers to all places, “So and so has been sentenced to death at the court.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
The execution of the rebellious elder has a deterrent quality to it, demonstrating to all who see or hear the execution that rebellion against the high court is punishable by death.  There are two opinions in our mishnah with regards to how the execution is to be carried out.  According to Rabbi Akiva, the execution must take place at the high court, where it will receive the most exposure.   Furthermore, it must take place during the festival when Jews would gather at the Temple to celebrate.  Only by bringing the person to the Temple and executing him on the holiday will the execution achieve the maximum deterrence.  Rabbi Judah seems to be disturbed by the long wait between the sentence and execution which would result from Rabbi Akiva’s suggestion. Rabbi Judah therefore states that the rebellious elder is to be executed immediately, and the deterrent will be achieved by sending letters with messengers stating that so and so had been executed.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four:  Why is Rabbi Judah so concerned that the execution take place immediately?  

