Sanhedrin, Chapter Two, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
Mishnah one contains with special rules regarding the High Priest, and mishnah two with special rules regarding the king. 

Mishnah One
The High Priest can judge and be judged; he can testify and others can testify against him.
He can perform halitzah for another’s wife and others can perform halitzah for his wife or contract levirate marriage with his widow, but he cannot contract levirate marriage since he is forbidden to marry a widow.
If any of his near kin die he may not follow after the bier, rather when the bearers are not visible, he is visible, when they are visible he is not visible, and he may go out with them as far as the city gate, according to Rabbi Meir.
Rabbi Judah says, “He may not leave the Temple, as it says, “Nor shall he go out of the Sanctuary”.  
And when he comforts other mourners the custom is for all of the people to pass by, the one after the other, while the appointed [priest] stands between him and the people.
And when he receives comfort from others, all the people say to him, “Let us be your atonement”, and he says to them, “May you be blessed by Heaven.”  
When they feed him the funeral meal all the people sit around on the ground and he sits on a stool.

Explanation—Mishnah One
This mishnah can be divided into three basic sections:  1)  the High Priest’s relationship to the court; 2)  the High Priest’s ability to perform halitzah (the release of the widow from the obligation to marry the levir, her dead husband’s brother) and levirate marriage; 3)  the High Priest’s participation in the mourning ritual.
Section one:  The High Priest is treated like a normal person with regards to the laws of the court.  As we shall see in mishnah two, this is not true with regards to the king.
Section two:  The High Priest is basically the same as any other person with regards to the laws of levirate marriage.  If he should die without children, his wife must either marry his brother or his brother must perform halitzah for her.  If his brother should die without children he must perform halitzah for his wife.  He cannot, however, contract levirate marriage with her since he is in general prohibited from marrying a widow (Lev. 21:14).
Section three:  The High Priest is severely restricted with regards to his participation in the rituals of burial.  Since contact with the dead causes impurity the High Priest cannot even participate in the burying of his own immediate family (unlike a regular priest who may) (see Lev. 21:10-12).  According to Rabbi Meir, the High Priest is allowed to semi-secretly participate in the burial procession, up until they leave the city gates of Jerusalem (people were not buried within the city confines).  Rabbi Judah states that he may not even participate this much, since the Torah states that he may not leave the Sanctuary at all.
If the High Priest needs to participate in the comforting of mourners he may do so, but the “appointed” priest would come in between him and the other people.  According to the Rambam this is to show the honor due to the High Priest, that he shouldn’t be just a part of the crowd.
When others comfort him they say, “Let us be your atonement”.  It seems to me that this is to assuage the sense of guilt that the High Priest must feel since he was not able to participate in the burying of his own dead.  When he comforts others he should give them a blessing.
When he is fed the traditional funeral meal which would normally be eaten by the mourner while sitting close to the ground, the rest of the people must sit on the ground.  This fulfills two functions:  1)  he retains a higher status than them; 2)  they are able to participate in his sorrow and grief.

Mishnah Two
The king can neither judge nor be judged, he cannot testify and others cannot testify against him.
He may not perform halitzah, nor may others perform halitzah for his wife.
He may not contract levirate marriage nor may his brothers contract levirate marriage with his wife.
Rabbi Judah says:  “If he wished to perform halitzah or to contract levirate marriage his memory is a blessing.”
They said to him: “They should not listen to him.”
None may marry his widow.
Rabbi Judah says:  “The king may marry the widow of a king, for so have we found it with David, who married the widow of Saul, as it says, “And I gave you my master’s house and my master’s wives into your embrace” (II Samuel 12:8).

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  The king cannot participate in the regular system of the court.  This is probably due to the fear that the king will threaten the existence of the court if a decision is not found in his favor.  Since he cannot be tried, it is not fitting to allow him to testify.  There is also an issue of honor at stake in this prohibition.  The king’s honor is not just an issue of personal concern but of national concern as well.  Forcing a king to participate in the legal system would, in the mind of the Mishnah, diminish his authority.
Section two:  The king also may not participate in the halitzah ceremony, since part of this ceremony is the woman spitting in front of the dead husband’s brother. This is obviously not respectful to a king.  It is also not a sign of respect for him to have to marry his dead brother’s widow (levirate marriage) in order to bring forth children under his brother’s name.  Since his widow may not remarry, his brothers do not perform halitzah for her or contract levirate marriage with her.  
Rabbi Judah says that a king can perform halitzah and levirate marriage, and it is actually praiseworthy for him to do so (but not mandatory).  In other words, according to Rabbi Judah, a king is allowed to forgo his own honor.  According to those who respond to him, he is prohibited to do so.
Section three:  According to the first opinion, the widow of a king may not remarry, since this is disrespectful to the dead king.  However, Rabbi Judah finds precedent in David who married Saul’s widow, and therefore he allows all kings to marry other kings widows (this should remind us of MacBeth!).
  
   
