Sanhedrin, Chapter Five, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today discuss how the judges examine the testimony of the witnesses.

Mishnah One
They used to examine witnesses with seven inquiries:  (1)  In what week of years? (2) In what year?  (3)  In what month?  (4)  On what date in the month?  (5)  On what day?  (6)  In what hour?  (7)  In what place?
Rabbi Yose says:  [They only asked:] On what day?  In what hour?  In what place?
[Moreover they asked:]  Do you recognize him?  Did you warn him?  
If one had committed idolatry [they asked the witnesses:]  What did he worship and how did he worship it?

Explanation—Mishnah One
This mishnah lists the questions that the judges would ask the witnesses. The purpose of the first set of questions was to make sure that the witnesses were actually there at the scene of the crime and not somewhere else.  By pinpointing the date and place, the witnesses are in essence promising that no one else could say they were somewhere else when the crime allegedly occurred.  According to Jewish law, if witnesses are found to testify about a crime and it turns out that they were not even there when the crime as committed, they receive the punishment that the accused would have received.
Rabbi Yose holds that the judges only need to ask three questions, instead of the seven asked according to the first opinion in the mishnah.  These three questions are sufficient in order to establish when and where the crime was committed.  The Sages, whose anonymous opinion is taught in section one, hold that by asking many questions they can check to see if the witness is truly confused with regards to his testimony.  If he gets confused then it is a sign that his testimony may not be accurate.
Aside from the questions of time and place the judges would also ask the witnesses if they recognized the accused, and in the case of murder they would also ask if the witnesses recognized the murdered person.  Furthermore they would ask the witnesses if they had warned the accused.  According to Jewish law a person cannot be executed or receive corporal punishment unless he had previously been warned that if he were to commit this crime the punishment would be death or flogging.
If the trial was for idol worship, which according to Jewish law is a capital offense, they would ask the witnesses what type of idol the accused worshipped and how he worshipped it.  

Mishnah Two
The more a judge examines the evidence the more he is deserving of praise.
Ben Zakkai once checked with regards to the stalks of figs.
What is the difference between inquiries and examinations?
With regards to inquiries, if one [of the two witnesses] says “I do not know”, their evidence becomes invalid.  
But if to one of the examinations one answered, “I do not know”, or even if they both answered, “We do not know”, their evidence remains valid.  
Yet if they contradict each other, whether during the inquiries or examinations, their evidence becomes invalid.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah discusses the questions regarding the circumstances of the crime itself.  Although the mishnah lists seven official “inquiries” that must be asked, with regards to “examinations” the more the judge asks the better able he is to ascertain the truth.  Ben Zakkai (who is usually called Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai) once even checked to see if the witnesses who testified that a murder was committed under a fig tree knew what the stalks of the figs looked like.
The second half of the mishnah discusses cases where one of the witnesses does not know the answer to one of the questions.  If the witness could not say where the crime took place or when it took place, both of the witnesses testimony becomes invalid.  These are called “inquiries”.  However, if one cannot answer with certainty one of the substantive questions regarding the crime, the rest of his testimony is not invalidated.  These are called “examinations”.  Even if both cannot answer the question, the other parts of their testimony are not necessarily invalidate.  In other words, not knowing a detail does not necessarily disqualify all of their testimony.  Rather the judges will have to decide when making their decision if there exists enough testimony to convict the accused.  
If, however, the two witnesses disagree with regards to a detail, then all of their testimony is invalid.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah two:  Why if one of the witnesses does not know how to answer an “inquiry” is all of the testimony invalid, whereas if one does not know how to answer an “examination” the testimony is invalid?
Mishnah two: Why is all of the witnesses’ testimony invalid if the two disagree with each other, whereas if they merely cannot answer the question their testimony is still valid?  
