Sanhedrin, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth Five, Six and Seven

Introduction
Mishnah five discusses an important Rabbinic conception of the punishment of the wayward and rebellious son, namely that he is not punished on account of the sins that he has already committed but on account of the sins that he will commit in the future.  The final two mishnayoth continue to discuss this concept of “preventive punishment” and its limited applicability in Jewish law.

Mishnah Five
A “wayward and rebellious son” is judged on account of his outcome: let him die innocent and let him not die guilty. 
For the death of the wicked benefits themselves and the world; [and the death] of the righteous, injures themselves and the world d. 
Wine and sleep of the wicked benefit themselves and the world; of the righteous, injure themselves and the world
The scattering of the wicked benefits themselves and the world; of the righteous, injures themselves and the world. 
The assembling of the wicked injures themselves and the world; of the righteous, benefits themselves and the world. 
The tranquillity of the wicked injures themselves and the world; of the righteous, benefits themselves and the world.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Section one:  One of the difficulties in comprehending the severe punishment meted out to the wayward and rebellious son is that it does not seem to fit the crime.  The Talmud itself asks, just because he ate too much meat and drank too much wine should this child be stoned.  Our mishnah provides one potential answer:  the son is not punished for that which he has already done but for that which he will do in the future.  The punishment prevents a minor criminal from becoming an even worse criminal.  The mishnah teaches that executing the potential criminal is not only good for society, but is a benefit to the criminal as well, for he will die innocent and not guilty.  Behind this idea lies a concept of reward and punishment in the world to come.  Since the wayward and rebellious son is punished before he can be guilty of a serious crime, he will not receive further punishment in the world to come.
The mishnah then continues with a discussion of things that are good for the wicked and for the whole world, and bad for the righteous and for the world.  Death is good for the wicked, for they will die before they commit more crimes, and for obvious reasons it is good for the world.  Death of the righteous prevents them from performing more good deeds and, again for obvious reasons, it is bad for the world.  Wine and sleep will prevent the wicked from committing more sins and is therefore good for them and for the world, but bad for the righteous for it prevents them from performing good deeds.  The scattering of the wicked prevents them collaboration in sinning whereas the scattering of the righteous prevents their collaboration in good deeds.  The ingathering of the wicked allows them to commit more and greater sins, whereas the ingathering of the righteous allows them to perform more good deeds.  Finally, tranquility affords the wicked the freedom to commit more crime, whereas it provides the righteous the freedom to do more good.  

Mishnah Six
[The thief] who burrows his way in [to someone’s home] is judged on account of his outcome. 
If he burrowed his way in and broke a jug, should there be blood-guiltiness for him,  he must pay [for the jug], but if there is no blood-guiltiness for him, he is not liable. 

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  Exodus 22:1-2 teaches that if a householder kills a thief who has burrowed his way into his house, the householder is not guilty of murder.  Although execution is not the usual punishment for a thief, since the householder was taken by surprise and did not know the intention of the illegal intruder, he is not held liable for having killed him.  Our mishnah understands that this preemptive killing of the intruder is to prevent him from committing more sins, specifically the murder of the householder. 
Section two:  The Torah also teaches that if the thief burrowed in during the day the householder is not allowed to kill him (unless it is in self-defense).  If the householder does kill him he will be accounted guilty.  Our mishnah teaches that if the thief broke a jug while burrowing he is liable for damages only in a case where the householder was not allowed to kill him.  If, however, the householder was allowed to kill him, i.e. at night, since the thief can be executed he is not liable for monetary damages.  This is based on a common principle in Jewish law that if on account of one act one becomes liable for two punishments, he is punished by the greater of the two punishments, in this case death (see Bava Kamma 3:10).   

Mishnah Seven
The following can be saved [from sinning] even at the cost of their lives: he who pursues after his neighbor to slay him, [or] after a male [to rape him], [or] after a betrothed maiden [to rape her].  
But he who pursues after an animal [to have relations with it], or one who would violate the Sabbath, or commit idolatry, must not be saved [from sinning] at the cost of his life.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
The principle of preventive punishment is a dangerous principle for even a court cannot tell with certainty if someone will surely commit a crime in the future. The Rabbis recognized the danger of this principle and therefore limited its applicability.  Section one teaches that one may be killed preemptively only if he was about to commit a capital crime that would violate another person.  Section two lists cases in which a person may be killed preemptively, even though he is about to commit a capital crime.  Since none of these sins are crimes against other people, the only way the criminal can be executed for having committed one of them is by a proper trial done in front of a court of twenty three.

Questions for Further Thought:
Does our society ever employ preventive punishment?  If so in what cases?  Are there circumstances in which a person is allowed to preemptively kill another person without a trial? 
