Sanhedrin, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
The third and fourth mishnayoth of Sanhedrin continue to discuss the number of judges needed to adjudicate different types of cases.  Mishnah three deals with laws that are of a religious nature, and mishnah four deals with capital crimes.

Mishnah Three
The laying on of the elders’ hands and the breaking of the heifer’s neck [are decided upon] by three, according to Rabbi Shimon.
But Rabbi Judah says:  “By five.”
The rites of halitzah and “refusal” [are performed] before three.
The fruit of fourth year plantings and Second Tithes whose value is not known [are redeemed] before three.
Things dedicated to the Temple [are redeemed] before three.
Vows of evaluation to be redeemed with movable property, [are evaluated] before three.
Rabbi Judah says: “One must be a priest.”
[Vows of evaluation], [to be redeemed] with land [are evaluated] before nine and a priest.
And similarly [for the evaluation] of a man.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  According to Leviticus 4:13-21, when the whole community of Israel commits an accidental transgression, they must bring a bull as a sin offering.  According to verse 15, before sacrificing the bull the elders would lay their hands on the bull’s head.  Our mishnah teaches that this laying on of the hands was done by three judges.  
The “breaking of the heifer’s neck” refers to Deut. 21:1-9.  These verses describe a ritual of expiation that was to be done in the case where a person was found murdered but the murderer was unknown.  Deuteronomy refers to “elders” who were to carry out the process and our mishnah teaches that there were three.
Section two:  Halitzah is the refusal of the Levirate marriage (Deut. 25:5-10).  If a woman’s husband dies and they have no offspring, his brother is obligated to marry her and bring forth offspring on his dead brother’s behalf.  This is called “Levirate marriage”.  If the brother should refuse to do so, they must go through a process called Halitzah before the woman is free to marry someone else.  This is done in front of three judges.  
“Refusal” refers to a daughter who was married off by her brother or mother.  According to the Rabbis a father has a right to marry off his daughter while she is a minor and this marriage is totally binding and the girl cannot be released from the marriage except upon the death of the husband or divorce.  However, a mother or brother’s ability to marry off the girl is less binding.  When she becomes of a majority age she may refuse her husband and thereby annul the marriage.  The “refusal” must be done in front of three judges.  
Section three:  Plants that are in their fourth year and the Second Tithe must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.  If one lived far from Jerusalem and did not wish to carry all of this produce all the way to Jerusalem he could “redeem” the produce and bring the money to Jerusalem and use it to buy food there.  The redeeming had to be done in front of three judges.
Section four:  If a person dedicated an animal to the Temple that was not fit to be sacrificed, for instance a donkey, he could redeem the animal and donate the money to the Temple (Lev. 27:11).  The redemption had to be done in front of three. 
Section five:  According to Lev. 27 a person could take a vow to donate his own value to the Temple.  In such a case the Torah gives set amounts of money that must be donated to the Temple, depending on the age and gender of the one who took the vow.  In general, since the Torah prescribes set amounts, no judges will be needed to evaluate how much the person owes.  If however, the person has no money, he will need to donate some of his property.  If the property to be donated is movable property a court of three is sufficient for its evaluation.  According to Rabbi Judah, one of them must be a priest.  If the property to be donated is land, a court of ten, including one priest is needed to determine the value of the land.  According to Lev. 27:8, if the one who took the vow could not afford to donate his own value a priest was allowed to assess how much he could afford.  According to the mishnah this assessment was done in front of a court of ten, which would include one priest.  

Mishnah Four
Cases concerning offenses punishable by death [are decided] by twenty three.
A beast that has sexual relations with a woman or with a man is [judged] by twenty three, as it says, “You shall execute the woman and the beast” (Lev. 20:16) and it says, “You shall execute the beast”.  
The ox that is stoned [is judged] by twenty three., as it says, “The ox shall be stoned and also its owner shall be put to death” (Exodus 21:29), as is the death of the owner, so too is the death of the ox.
The wolf, the lion, the bear, the leopard, the panther, or serpent [that have killed a human being] their death is [adjudicated] by twenty three.  
Rabbi Eliezer says: “Anyone who kills them before they come to court merits.”
But Rabbi Akiva says:  “Their death must be [adjudicated] by twenty three.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  Capital crimes are adjudicated by a court of twenty three.  This is certainly due to the gravity of the punishment, which is of course irrevocable.
Section two:  According to Lev. 2O:15-16 when a man or woman has sexual relations with an animal, not only are the human beings to be executed but the animal as well.  Our mishnah teaches that just as the human beings are judged by twenty three so too are the animals.
Section three:  According to Exodus 21:28-29 if an ox kills a man or woman the ox must be stoned.  If the ox was a “warned” ox, that is one that had previously gored, the owner of the ox is to be stoned as well.  Our mishnah teaches, just as the human being would be judged by twenty three, so too the animal.
Section four:  Not only are oxen who kill humans to be executed but any animal that kills a human.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, these animals are also to be judged by a court of twenty three.  Rabbi Eliezer disagrees and says that the first person who sees them should kill them.  After all, these animals which are wild and cannot be guarded as an ox can be guarded, present a hazard to the safety of the public.  Rabbi Akiva disagrees with Rabbi Eliezer and states that they must be judged in front of a court of twenty three and only then can they be executed. 
