Sanhedrin, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Our two mishnayoth continue to discuss those who are executed by stoning.  Mishnah five deals with the blasphemer and the special circumstances of his trial.  Mishnah six deals with which forms of idol worship will cause a Jew to incur the death penalty.

Mishnah Five
The blasphemer is punished only if he utters [the divine] name. 
Rabbi Joshua b. Korcha said: “The whole day [of the trial] the witnesses are examined by means of a substitute for the divine name:, ‘may Yose smite Yose.”  
When the trial was finished, the accused was not executed on this evidence, but all persons were removed [from court], and the chief witness was told, ‘State literally what you heard.’ 
Thereupon he did so, [using the divine name]. 
The judges then arose and tore their garments, which were not to be resewn. 
The second witness stated:  “I too have heard thus” [but not uttering the divine name], and the third says: “I too heard thus.”

Explanation—Mishnah Five
With regards to the blasphemer the Torah states (Lev. 24:15):  “Anyone who blasphemes his God shall bear his guilt.  If he also pronounces the name of the Lord, he shall be put to death.”  From these verses the Rabbis learned that the blasphemer was obligated for the death penalty only if he used God’s four letter name.  
The problem with putting the blasphemer on trial is that when the witnesses testify and repeat what they heard, they too will be blaspheming God’s name.  Although they certainly would not receive the death penalty for doing so, it was nevertheless seen to be unacceptable for even a witness to repeat what he heard, especially in a public trial.  Therefore, during the court’s deliberation they used a code word, “may Yose smite Yose”.  However, in order to complete the trial the witnesses needed to state what they heard explicitly at least one time.  Therefore, at the end of the trial they would remove everyone from the court and only the witnesses and the judges would remain.  They would then ask the eldest witness to say explicitly what he heard.  So painful was it for the judges to hear God’s name being blasphemed that they would tear their clothes and not repair them.  This was a typical sign of mourning.  The remaining witnesses would not need to say exactly what they heard, thereby repeating the blasphemy.  Rather they would merely say that they heard what the first person heard.

Mishnah Six
He who engages in idol-worship [is executed].  This includes the one whoserves it, sacrifices, offers incense, makes libations, bows to it, accepts it as a god, or says to it, “You are my god.”
But he who embraces, kisses it, sweeps or sprinkles the ground before it, washes it, anoints it, clothes it, or puts shoes on it, he transgresses a negative commandment [but is not executed]. 
He who vows or swears by its name, violates a negative commandment. 
He who uncovers himself before Baal-Peor  [is guilty and is to be stoned for] this is how it is worshipped. 
He who casts a stone on Merculis [is guilty and is to be stoned for] this is how it is worshipped. 

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Our mishnah describes what types of idolatrous activities are punished by death and what types are forbidden but not punishable by death.  Basically we can summarize that activities that are performed solely in worship of the idol, such as bowing to it, sacrificing to it, or specifically stating that the idol is a god, are punished by death.  However, ancillary actions that are not done with the purpose of worship are forbidden but not punishable by death.  
The final two clauses of our mishnah mention two idols who were worshipped by strange types of actions.  Baal-Peor is worshipped by the idolater’s exposing himself.  Merculis (Mercury) is worshipped by throwing stones at it.  Since these are considered to be worship, the one who performs them is obligated for the death penalty.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah six:  Why does the mishnah have to explicate which actions are punished by death and which are not?  What might one have thought without this mishnah?

