Sanhedrin, Chapter Eleven, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of the tractate discuss the other people who are to be executed by strangling, mentioned already in the first mishnah of this chapter.

Mishnah Five  
‘A false prophet’; he who prophesies what he has not heard, or what was not told to him,  is executed by man. 
But he who suppresses his prophecy, or disregards the words of a prophet, or a prophet who transgresses his own word , his death is at the hands of heaven, as it says, “[And if anybody fails to heed the words he speaks in my name] I Myself will call him to account (Deut. 18:19).   

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Deuteronomy 18:20 states that any prophet who “presumes to speak in My name an oracle that I did not command him to utter” shall be killed.  Our mishnah teaches that a false prophet is one who states a prophecy that he either did not hear at all, or that he heard from another person and not straight from God.  However, a prophet who hears the words of God but does not tell others (like Jonah) or one who ignores the words of another prophet (see I Kings 20:35-36) or one who ignores even his own prophecy (see I Kings 13:26) is killed not by a human court but by God.  This exegesis presents an interesting twist on the verse quoted from Deuteronomy.  The simple meaning of the verse is that a member of the tribe of Israel who ignores the true words of the prophet is not to be executed by the court but God will take His own revenge.  The mishnah interprets the verse to refer not to a normal person, but to the prophet himself.

Mishnah Six
“He who prophesies in the name of an idol”:  this is one who says, “Thus has the idol declared” even if he directed the teaching to declare the unclean, unclean, or the clean, clean. 
“One who has sexual relations with a married woman” after her entry into her husband's home for marriage, though she did not have sexual relations with her husband, the one who has relations with her is strangled. 
“Witnesses who testified falsely [to the adultery of] a priest’s daughter, and the one who has had sexual relations with her”, for all false witnesses are led forth to meet the same death [which they sought to impose,] save witnesses who testified falsely [to the adultery of] a priest’s daughter, and the one who has had sexual relations with her.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  One who prophesies in the name of an idol is liable for the death penalty even if his teaching agreed with the accepted halacha.  The very act of attributing a teaching to an idol is punishable by death regardless of the content of the teaching itself (see Deuteronomy 18:20).
Section two:  Adultery with a married woman is punishable by strangling whereas adultery with a betrothed woman is punishable by stoning (see chapter 7, mishnah four).  Our mishnah defines the moment that a woman is transformed from being a betrothed woman to being a married woman.  That moment is defined as her entering her husband’s house, after having left her father’s house, regardless of whether or not she has yet had sexual relations with her husband.  Henceforth anyone who has adultery with her will be punished by strangling and not stoning.
Section three:  Generally, when a witness is found to have testified falsely, he is punished with the same punishment that he tried to impose on the accused (see Deuteronomy 19:16-21).  We will learn about this law in greater length in the next tractate, Makkoth.  Witnesses who testify falsely with regards to a priest’s daughter who committed adultery, punishable by burning, (see chapter nine, mishnah one) and the one who had relations with her, punishable by strangling, are not burned as they tried to impose on her but rather strangled as they tried to impose on him.  Since with one act of false testimony they testify that she is to be burned and he is to be strangled, they (the false witnesses) are punished by the lesser of the two, which is strangling.    

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  Why do you think that the mishnah interprets Deuteronomy 18:19 to be referring to a prophet and not to an ordinary person?

Congratulations!  We have finished Sanhedrin.  
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us to finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.  
For those of you who have learned with us the entire tractate, a hearty Yasher Koach (congratulations).  You have accomplished a great deal and you should be proud of yourselves.  Indeed we have now finished together four tractates of Mishnah, and are more than halfway through the entire order of Nezikin.  Of course, we have much more to learn.  We will begin Makkoth tomorrow!

