Sanhedrin, Chapter Four, Mishnayoth Two, Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah two contains more information regarding the differences between capital and non-capital cases.
Mishnayoth three and four discuss the physical arrangement of the sanhedrin, the scribes who would record the decisions and the disciples of the Sages who observed the proceedings and learned.  

Mishnah Two
In non-capital cases and those concerning uncleanness and cleanness [the judges declare their opinion] beginning from the eldest, but in capital cases they begin from [them that sit at] the side.
All are qualified to try non-capital cases, but not all are qualified to try capital cases, only priests, levites and Israelites that may give [their daughters] in marriage to priests.

Explanation---Mishnah Two
This mishnah contains an additional two differences between non-capital cases and capital cases.  (We learned of eight differences in mishnah one.)
In all types of non-capital cases the eldest judge may state his opinion first, but in capital cases the decision stating process begins from the side of the room, where the younger members of the court would sit.  This is to prevent the youngest judge from being unduly influenced by the opinion of the eldest judge.
A person of any lineage may judge non-capital cases, even mamzerim (those born of illicit unions) and even converts.  However, only those who can marry their daughters to priests, meaning priests, levites and Israelites can judge capital cases.  This law certainly reflects the import that the Rabbinic society ascribed to familial relations.  

Mishnah Three
The Sanhedrin was arranged like the half of a round threshing-floor so that they all might see one another.  
Before them stood the two scribes of the judges, one to the right and one to the left, and they wrote down the words of them that favored acquittal and the words of them that favored conviction.
Rabbi Judah says:  “There were three:  one wrote down the words of them that favored acquittal, and one wrote down the words of them that favored conviction, and the third wrote down the words of both them that favored acquittal and them that favored conviction.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
The sanhedrin of twenty three that would try capital cases and the sanhedrin of seventy one would sit in a half circle.  This was the seating arrangement that would best allow all of the judges to see each other.  A full circle would mean that the one testifying before the court would have his back to some of the judges.
The second half of the mishnah describes the court stenographers.  According to the first opinion, there were two scribes who recorded the court procedure, one which recorded the opinion of those that favored acquittal and one those that favored conviction.  Rabbi Judah claims that there was a third scribe who recorded all of the opinions.  In this way there would be two copies of all of the decisions made.

Mishnah Four
And there were three rows of disciples of the Sages who sat before them, and each knew his proper place.
If they needed to appoint [another as a judge] they appointed him from the first row, and one from the second row came into the first row, and one from the third row came into the second row, and they chose another from the congregation and set him in the third row.  
He did not sit in the place of the former, but he sat in the place that was proper for him.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
This mishnah describe the seating arrangement of the disciples of the Sages (talmidei hachamim) who would sit and observe the proceedings of the Sanhedrin.  There were three rows of official disciples, those waiting in the ranks to one day become judges.  This was somewhat of an apprenticeship.  If one of the judges had to leave or died, one of the disciples would take his place.  The disciples themselves sat in rows according to their rank and when one would move up to be a judge, everyone behind him would move up in place.  When the one from the second row moved up to the first, and the one in the third moved up to the second, and the one from the congregation moved up to the third, they would not sit in the beginning of the row but rather at the end of the row, which was their proper place.
   

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  Why was it so important for all of the judges to see each other?
Mishnah four:  Why do you think there was such a formal process for appointing judges and moving the disciples up through the ranks?
