Sanhedrin, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction 
Chapter Three begins to discuss the court procedure in cases of financial matters, which only require three judges.  The two mishnayoth which we will learn today discuss the selection of the judges.

Mishnah One
Cases concerning property [are decided] by three [judges].
This [litigant] chooses one and this [litigant] chooses one and then the two of them choose another, according to Rabbi Meir.
But the Sages say:  “The two judges choose the other judge.”
This [litigant] can invalidate this one’s judge, and this [litigant] can invalidate this one’s judge, according to Rabbi Meir.
But the Sages say:  “When is this so?  When they bring proof against them that they are relatives or otherwise invalid; but if they are valid and experts, he cannot invalidate them.

Explanation—Mishnah One
This mishnah contains two disputes between Rabbi Meir and the Sages with regards to the selection of judges in cases concerning property disputes.  All agree that the first two judges are selected by the litigants themselves, each litigant choosing one judge.  However, Rabbi Meir and the Sages dispute with regards to the selection of the third judge.  Rabbi Meir holds that the litigants together select a third judge and the Sages hold that the first two judges, those already selected by the litigants, are the ones to select the third judge.
With regards to the invalidation of the judges, Rabbi Meir holds that each litigant can indiscriminately invalidate the judge who was chosen by the opposing litigant.  The Sages hold that the judges may only be invalidated on objective grounds, for either being relatives of the litigant or otherwise invalid.  (We will learn more about the what cause a person to be invalid to be a a judge in mishnah three).  If the judges are otherwise valid the opposing litigant may not disqualify them.

Mishnah Two
If one litigant said to the other, “I accept my father as trustworthy”, or “I accept your father as trustworthy”, or “I accept three herdsman as trustworthy”, Rabbi Meir says, “He may retract.”
But the Sages say, “He cannot retract.”
If one must take an oath before his fellow, and his fellow said to him, “Vow to me by the life of your head”, Rabbi Meir says, “He may retract.”
But the Sages say, “He cannot retract.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah contains another two disputes between Rabbi Meir and the Sages.  The subject in this mishnah is a litigant’s ability to retract when he has allowed the opposing litigant to suspend the usual court rules.
Section one:  Usually relatives of either litigant are invalid as either judges or witnesses.  Furthermore, criminals are not accepted as judges or witnesses.  Herdsman were assumed to be thieves, since it was assumed that they would allow their herds to graze in others’ fields.  However, Rabbi Meir and the Sages agree that if one was to accept a relative or a criminal as a judge or witness they could act as such.  On the other hand, Rabbi Meir says that if, during the trial or even after the trial the litigant who accepted the relative or criminal were to change his mind, he could do so and ask for a retrial.  The Sages say he may not retract.  Once he has accepted the relative or the criminal he must accept the decision they make.  
Section two:  In certain circumstances the defendant will have to take an oath that he doesn’t owe the plaintiff money or property (on rarer occasions the plaintiff is allowed to take an oath and collect from the defendant).  The usual oath is one taken in front of a court, and it was considered an extremely grave matter.  However, all agree that the other litigant could allow the litigant who must take the oath to take a more personal oath, one by his own head, and not have to take an oath in front of the court.  Again, according to Rabbi Meir, if at a later point he wanted his opposing litigant to take an oath in front of the court, an oath that was considered to be graver, he may do so.  As in the previous case, Rabbi Meir allows him to retract, whereas the Sages do not.    

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  Is there a consistency between the two opinions of Rabbi Meir, or the two opinions of the Sages? Why might each hold the way they do?  
Mishnah two:  Why does Rabbi Meir allow the person to retract?  What effect will Rabbi Meir’s permission to retract have on the opposing litigant?
