Sanhedrin, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three lists those people disqualified from testifying and judging and mishnah four lists relatives of a person who may not testify or judge cases in which he is involved.

Mishnah Three
And these are they which are not qualified [to be witnesses or judges]:
A dice player, a usurer, pigeon racers, or traffickers in Seventh Year produce.
Rabbi Shimon said:  “In the beginning they called them ‘gatherers’ of Seventh Year produce, but after the oppressors grew many they changed this and called them ‘traffickers’ of Seventh Year produce.”
Rabbi Judah said:  “This applies only if they have no other trade, but if they have some other trade other than that, they are not disqualified.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
There are four types of people who are disqualified from acting as witnesses or judges:  1)  The first is a dice player, in other words a gambler.  Such a person cannot testify since he is known to be a liar, especially with regards to monetary matters.  Another reason is that he doesn’t participate constructively in building society. 2)  A usurer.  He is also probably considered to not be trustworthy in monetary matters.  3)  A pigeon racer.  Racing pigeons was a form of gambling.  4)  Those who sell produce grown during the Seventh Year. According to Lev. 25:5-7 produce grown in the fields during the Seventh Year may be eaten by its owners, but it may not be sold.  One who therefore sells Seventh Year produce is engaging in forbidden business practices which according to our mishnah make him not trustworthy to testify or act as a judge.
Rabbi Shimon points out that this law actually was different in an earlier period. According to Rabbi Shimon at first the law was stricter and forbade even those who gathered Seventh Year produce from testifying or judging.  Although eating from the fields was permitted, a person who gathered the produce was suspected of later selling it, which was prohibited.  Therefore, they originally forbade even those who gathered Seventh Year produce from testifying. However, once the oppressors grew too many they relaxed the prohibition.  In the Talmud it is explained that the “oppressors” refers to the Roman government which demanded taxes from the produce grown on the land, even during the Seventh Year.  The Rabbis therefore permitted a person to gather his produce and give it for taxes.  When this happened they decided to allow people who gathered Seventh Year produce to testify.
Rabbi Judah adds an important qualification on those who are prohibited from testifying.  These people are disallowed to testify only if they have no other profession.  If gambling or racing pigeons was only a hobby or an irregular activity they could still act as witnesses or as judges.  

Mishnah Four
These are the relatives [that are not qualified to be witnesses or judges]:
A suitor’s father, brother, father’s brother, mother’s brother, sister’s husband, father’s sister’s husband, mother’s sister’s husband, mother’s husband, father-in-law, or wife’s sister’s husband—them and their sons and their sons-in-law; also the suitor’s step-son only [but not the stepsons’ sons].
Rabbi Yose said, “Such was the mishnah of Rabbi Akiva, but the first mishnah taught: ‘a suitor’s uncle, or his uncle’s son, and all that are qualified to be his heir. 
Moreover all that were kinsmen at the time [are disqualified]; but kinsmen that have ceased to be kinsmen become qualified.”
Rabbi Judah says:  “If a man’s daughter died and left children, her husband still counts as a kinsman.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  The first section lists relatives who are disqualified from testifying.  The list is self explanatory, and only a few require explanation.  A mother’s husband refers to someone who is not the suitor’s father.  Any son or son-in-law of any of these listed relatives is likewise forbidden to testify.  For instance one’s father’s brother’s son (a cousin) is forbidden to testify.  The only exception is that the suitor’s stepson, i.e. his wife’s son from another marriage, is forbidden to testify but stepson’s son is allowed.
Rabbi Yose gives us a glimpse into the development of the Mishnah.  The previous clause was the mishnah of Rabbi Akiva, who lived from about 50-135 C.E.  Rabbi Yose then relates the way it was taught before this time.  While there are some legal differences between the two formulations, the most basic difference is that “first mishnah” used language that approximated Biblical style (see Lev. 25:49).  This change from the earlier language to the later style which was more distinct from the Biblical language, may signify the growing independence of the Oral Torah from the Written Torah.  It seems likely that in an earlier stage the Oral Torah was usually preserved as an exegesis or midrash on the verses of the Torah.  The advantage to this system was that the Torah was a text known to most.  The second advantage was that it was clear that Rabbinic law attained its authority by its being an interpretation of Biblical law.  However, the biggest detriment was its lack of organization.  Many laws appear in parallel forms in several books of the Torah.  For instance laws concerning slavery appear in Exodus, Leviticus and Deuteronomy.  Laws concerning the redemption of the first born appear in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy.  One who wished to know the law would not know where to find it.  One of the innovations of Rabbi Akiva was to sort Jewish law into topical tractates.  In our mishnah we see that as this processed developed the language of the laws changed from Biblical to Rabbinic Hebrew.
As far as substantive differences between the first mishnah and Rabbi Akiva’s mishnah.  There are three potential differences:  his mother’s sister’s husband, his mother’s husband and his wife’s sister’s husband.  These three men are not potential inheritors and therefore could testify according to the first mishnah, but they may not according to Rabbi Akiva’s mishnah.  
Section two:  Only if the relative is a current relative may he not testify.  If the relationship is by marriage and it is severed through divorce before the trial, the formal relative may testify.  Rabbi Judah states that there is one exception to this rule.  If a daughter married a man and had children the husband cannot testify, even after the daughter dies.  Since the children bind the husband to the grandfather, he is still considered to be a relative.   

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Three:  What is the reasoning behind Rabbi Judah’s opinion?  
