Sanhedrin, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction 
Chapter eight deals almost exclusively with the wayward and rebellious son mentioned in Deut. 21:18-21.  According to this famous passage in the Torah, if parents have a son who does not obey their words they may take him to the elders of the city, pronounce him to be wayward and rebellious and the child will be punished through stoning.  Much can be said about this passage and indeed it sounds quite harsh to our modern ears.  The Rabbis too seemed to be troubled by the passage and dealt with it in three different ways:  1)  there is one strain of thought in Rabbinic sources which says that this law was never fulfilled.  In other words, there never was a rebellious and wayward son who was stoned.  2)  Although we may not understand the passage it is God’s word and we have no right to question it.  3)  The rebellious son is not punished because of his prior actions but rather to prevent him from becoming a worse menace to society. 

Mishnah One
A wayward and rebellious son:  at what age does he become liable [to be stoned]? 
From the time that he produces two hairs until the beard is full—by which is meant the hair of the genitals, not that of the face, but the Sages used euphemisms—, for it says, “If a man has a son” (Deut. 21:18) a son, but not a daughter; ‘a son’, but not an adult man. 
The minor is exempt, since he does not come within the scope of the commandments. 

Explanation—Mishnah One
This mishnah deals with the age that a boy must be in order for him to be stoned as a wayward and rebellious son.  Section a states that he must have already have reached the beginning stages of puberty but not have reached adulthood.  Through a midrash on the opening verse, “If a man has a son” the Rabbis conclude that the passage in Deuteronomy relates to a son and not a daughter, to someone who still acts as the son of his father but not to an adult who is already beyond the strict authority of his parents.   
Section b states that the minor is exempt, since he is not obligated for commandments.  Taken in its totality the mishnah severely limits the age at which a child can be punished as a wayward and rebellious son.  We are probably talking about a time period of about six months.   

Mishnah Eight
When does he become liable [to be stoned]?
Once he has eaten a tartemar of meat and drunk half a log of wine.  
Rabbi Yose said: “A maneh of meat and a log of wine. 
If he ate it in a company [celebrating] a religious act; 
or at a gathering for the purpose of intercalating the month; 
if he ate the second tithe in Jerusalem; 
if he ate the carrion or terefoth (meat that was not slaughtered in a kosher fashion), 
abominable and creeping things, or untithed produce, or the first tithe from which terumah had not been separated,  or unredeemed second tithe,  or unredeemed sacred food;  
if his eating involved a religious act or a transgression;   
if he ate any food but did not eat meat or drank any drink but did not drink wine, 
he does not become a ‘stubborn and rebellious son, unless he eats meat and drinks wine, for it is written, “This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice;] he is a glutton and a drunkard” (Deut. 21:20). 
Although there is no clear proof for this, there is at least a hint, as it is says, “Do not be among wine drinkers, among gluttonous meat eaters of flesh (Proverbs 23:20).  

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah deals with what actions are required to make a child punishable as a wayward and rebellious son.  
Section one:  The child must eat a minimum amount of meat and drink a minimum amount of wine.  This is proven at the end of the mishnah in sections 2g and 2gi.  The verse from Deuteronomy states that the parents must accuse their child of being a glutton or a drunkard.  The verses from Deuteronomy do not explain what these two terms mean.  In the book of Proverbs it is stated that a glutton refers to one who eats too much meat and a drunkard is one who drinks too much wine.  From here the mishnah concludes that the child must have drunk wine and eaten meat in order for him to be wayward and rebellious.  The Rabbis disagree with regards to how much wine and meat he drank.
Section two:  This section lists all sorts of circumstances of eating and drinking that would not cause him to be a wayward and rebellious son.  These circumstances can be divided into two types:  1)  religious celebrations; 2)  consumption of forbidden food.  If he ate at a religious celebration he cannot be punished since it is praiseworthy to eat much wine and meat at such affairs.  These types of affairs are listed in the first three clauses of the section.  Second tithe, mentioned in section b, is consumed only in Jerusalem, and therefore by eating it there he is fulfilling a religious duty.  Clauses c and d list several foods that are forbidden to be consumed, whether they are agricultural products who have not had the agricultural offerings separated from them (untithed produce, etc.), meat that was not slaughtered properly (carrion or terefoth) or animals that are forbidden to eat (abominable and creeping things).  The Talmud explains that eating or drinking these things do not make one a wayward and rebellious son because the parents state, “He does not listen to our voice”, whereas one who eats these things doesn’t listen even to God’s voice.  A wayward and rebellious son is only defiant to his parents but not to his entire religious obligation.  
Finally the mishnah reminds us that he must have eaten meat and drunk wine in order to become a wayward and rebellious son.  Eating other food gluttonously and getting drunk off other beverages will not make a child liable to be punished as a wayward and rebellious son.

Questions for Further Thought:
Can you detect a common denominator in the Rabbis understanding of the passage of the wayward and rebellious son?  Of the strategies listed in the introduction that the Rabbis used to deal with this difficult portion of the Torah, which one is employed in these mishnayoth? 
