Sanhedrin, Chapter Five, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with invalidating the testimony due to discrepancies between the testimony of the two witnesses.
Mishnah four deals with the court procedure after the testimony has been presented. 

Mishnah Three
If one said, “On the second of the month”, and the other said, “On the third”, their evidence remains valid, since one may have known that the month was intercalated and the other may not have known that the month was intercalated.
If one said, “On the third” and the other said, “On the fifth”, their evidence is invalid.
If one said, “At the second hour”, and the other said, “At the third”, their evidence remains valid.
If one said, “At the third hour”, and the other said, “At the fifth”, their evidence becomes invalid.
Rabbi Judah says:  “It remains valid.  [But] if one said, ‘At the fifth hour’ and one said ‘At the seventh’, their evidence becomes invalid, since at the fifth hour the sun is in the east and at the seventh it is in the west.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah deals with discrepancies between the testimony of the witnesses with regards to the time at which the crime was committed.
Section one:  If there is a discrepancy of one day between the witness’s testimony it is not invalidated.  This is due to the intercalation of the Jewish month.  Jewish months go according to the cycles of the moon.  There are between 29 and 30 days in a lunar month.   Therefore some months are of 29 days and some are of 30.  In the time of the Mishnah the Jewish calendar was not yet fixed.  This meant that at the end of every month, on what was potentially the 30th day of the month, the court would need to decide if the current day was the first of the next month or the last of the previous month.  According to our mishnah, witnesses may not know that the previous month was actually a 30 day month and therefore they may not know the exact current date.  Hence, a one day discrepancy does not invalidate their testimony.  A two day discrepancy does, however, invalidate their entire testimony.
Section two:  At the time of the Mishnah daytime was divided into 12 hours, no matter how long the actual day.  During the summer the hours would be longer and during the winter they would be shorter. A one hour discrepancy between the two witnesses is not significant and therefore does not invalidate their testimony.  This makes strong sense if we remember that they certainly did not have clocks in the time of the Mishnah.  A two hour discrepancy does invalidate the testimony.  It is assumed that although they did not have clocks, people were able to chart the sun and thereby keep rough track of time.  Rabbi Judah disagrees.  According to him sometimes even a two hour discrepancy between the witnesses does not invalidate the testimony.  If the discrepancy was all within one period of the day, it does not invalidate the testimony.  If, however, it was between the fifth and seventh hour, in other words between the first half and the second half of the day, at the time when the sun would pass from the east to the west, the testimony would be invalidated, since this is a point of time that most people would recognize.

Mishnah Four
They afterward bring in the second witness and examine him.  
If their words were found to agree together they begin [to examine the evidence] in favor of acquittal.
If one of the witnesses said, “I have something to argue in favor of his acquittal”, or if one of the disciples said, “I have something to argue in favor of his conviction”, they silence him.
If one of the disciples said, “I have something to argue in favor of his acquittal”, they bring him up and set him among them and he does not come down from there all day.
If there is anything of substance in his words they listen to him.
Even if the accused said, “I have something to argue in favor of my acquittal”, they listen to him, provided that there is substance to his words.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
After the second witness is examined, the judges begin to examine the evidence.  They first examine evidence that might lead to the accused person’s acquittal.  The witnesses are not allowed to testify again, even if they know testimony that might lead to acquittal.  The disciples, those students of the Sages who sat in rows in front of the judges, were not allowed to speak in favor of conviction.  If, however, one of the students was able to raise a point in favor of acquittal, he would be promoted to one of the judge’s seats and from there he could say what he has to say.  Finally, the accused himself may testify on his own behalf, provided his claim has some substantial basis.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four:  Why must the mishnah instruct the judges that they have listen to what was said by one of the disciples?  Why was the disciple elevated to the seat of a judge instead of being allowed to speak from his place?  

