Shabbat, Chapter Twenty, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
The first section of this mishnah discusses clearing things off one’s bed in order to sleep on it.  The second section deals with removing clothes from a “clothes press.” A “clothes press” was made by placing a piece of clothing between two boards and then fastening them together.

Mishnah Five
The straw [lying] upon a bed—one may not move it with his hand, but he may move it with his body. 
But if it is animal feed, or a pillow or a sheet was upon it [on the eve of Shabbat], he may move it with his hand.  
A householder’s clothes press—one may undo it, but not force it down.  
But a launderer’s [press] one may not touch it.  
Rabbi Judah says: if it was undone before Shabbat, one may unfasten the whole and remove it.

Explanation
Section one:  Straw is usually used for lighting a stove and hence it is muktzeh.  If this straw is on her bed she can’t just remove it with her hand.  However, she may move the bed with her body and thereby cause the straw to fall off.  “Carrying” with the side of one’s body is not considered carrying and therefore this is permitted.
Section two:  If the straw had been designated to serve as animal feed, then it is not muktzeh and she may remove it by hand.  We see here that something is defined to be that which it is intended to be used for—if it is intended to be used for something permitted on Shabbat, then it is not muktzeh.  
Furthermore, if she set the bed aside for sleeping (as opposed to using it to store things) by placing on it a pillow or sheet, then she may move the straw even though it was set aside to light a fire.  It was only forbidden if it was unclear whether the bed was going to be used for storage or for sleeping.
Section three:  A “householder’s clothes press” is not an item used by a professional.  Therefore, one may undo it, meaning take the clothes out, but not put the clothes in.  Putting clothes in the clothes press is considering “fixing” them, and “fixing” is forbidden on Shabbat.
A launderer’s press is a professional piece of equipment. Hence one may not touch it at all on Shabbat.  This is forbidden because of “tearing down”—by taking it apart it is as if she is “tearing down.”  
Rabbi Judah, however, is more lenient.  If the launderer’s press was already somewhat unfastened before Shabbat, she may take the rest of the press apart and take the clothes out.  Since it was already not fully closed up, this is not considered “tearing down.”  
