Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah discusses a person who was traveling on Friday and did not arrive at her destination before Shabbat. 

Mishnah One
One for whom it becomes dark while on the road, he may give his purse to a non-Jew;   
And if there is no non-Jew with him, he places it on a donkey. 
When he reaches the outermost courtyard, he removes the objects which may be handled on Shabbat.
As for those which may not be handled on Shabbat, he unties the cords and the sacks fall off automatically.

Explanation
Section one:  Once it becomes dark the Jew must not carry her purse, since it is prohibited to carry in the public domain.  However, she may give the purse to a non-Jew.  The rabbis permitted this because if they had been strict a person may be so attached to her possessions that she would herself carry on Shabbat.  Since it is less problematic to give the purse to the non-Jew than for the Jew herself to carry, giving it away is preferable.  However, we should remember that generally it is forbidden to ask a non-Jew to do work on Shabbat on behalf of a Jew.  
If there is no non-Jew with her, then she may place the purse on a donkey and allow the donkey to carry it back to the city.  However it is preferable to give the purse to the non-Jew because Jews are supposed to let their animals rest on Shabbat as well, but a Jew is not commanded to ensure that the non-Jew rest on Shabbat.  
Section two:   When the traveler who has put her purse (or other goods) on a donkey reaches the outermost courtyard of the city, she may no longer allow them to remain on the donkey, since they have now reached a safe point.  Therefore, those objects that she may handle on Shabbat, she must remove and stow them somewhere safe.   Those objects that may not be handled, she must undo the straps which attach them to the donkey and they will fall to the ground on their own.  
We should note that the “city” to which the mishnah refers is one in which everybody knows each other, and therefore people can leave their private belongings in a public area without much fear of their being stolen.  This reminds me of the situation in a kibbutz, or perhaps a summer camp, but it is certainly different from the situation in our cities.  

