Shabbat, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
Our mishnah introduces an abstract concept called “work which is not needed for its own sake.” This refers to someone who performs a prohibited labor on Shabbat but does not need the results of the labor itself but a side result.  The tannaim debate whether someone who does this activity is liable for having transgressed the Shabbat. We shall see an illustration of this in the mishnah.
The immediate topic is laws concerning extinguish lamps.

Mishnah Five
One who extinguishes the lamp because he is afraid of non-Jews, robbers, or an evil spirit, or so that a sick person may sleep, he is exempt.   
If [he does so because] he wants to spare the lamp, the oil, or the wick, he is liable. 
Rabbi Yose exempts in all cases, except for the wick, because he makes charcoal. 

Explanation
Section one:  Extinguishing a fire is forbidden on Shabbat. However, saving a life always takes precedence over the laws of Shabbat.  Hence, any of the activities listed in this mishnah are permitted.  We should note that the mishnah states “exempt.”  Exempt usually means that one who does such a thing is not liable for a penalty, but the activity is still not permitted.  This mishnah is an exception—exempt means that it is totally permitted.
The sick person referred to in this mishnah is someone with a potentially life-threatening disease.  It is forbidden to extinguish a lamp for someone who only has a slight headache, or similar non life-threatening illness.
Section two:   According to the first opinion, if a person puts out a lamp not because she wants it to be dark, but because she wants to save the material used in the lamp she is still liable.  This is “a work not needed for its own sake.” According to this opinion a person who does this type of work is liable.
Rabbi Yose holds that one who performs “a work not needed for its own sake” is generally exempt.  The exemption is one who puts out a lamp because she wants to singe the wick.  Singing the wick makes it into a type of charcoal and therefore this is no longer “work not needed for its own sake” but rather work for its own sake and hence she would be liable.      

