Shabbat, Chapter Nineteen, Mishnah Five

Introduction
As we have already mentioned, circumcision is done on Shabbat only if it is done on the eighth day.  If it is done on any other day besides the eighth, then the circumcision must wait until after Shabbat. Our mishnah shows that sometimes this will delay the circumcision by several days.

Mishnah Five 
An infant is circumcised on the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth [days], neither before nor later. 
How so? 
In the normal situation, on the eighth.
If he is born at twilight, on the ninth;   
At twilight on the eve of Shabbat, on the tenth.   
If a festival follows Shabbat, on the eleventh.   
If the two days of Rosh Hashanah [follow Shabbat], on the twelfth.   
An infant who is sick is not circumcised until he recovers.

Explanation
Section one:  Normally, a child is circumcised on the eighth day.
Section two:  Twilight is a halakhically doubtful time—we don’t know whether to consider it still the previous day or the day after.  Therefore, if a boy is born at twilight, he is circumcised on what might be the ninth day.  In other words we act as if he was born on the next day.
Section three:  If he is born on twilight on the eve of Shabbat, he can’t be circumcised on Shabbat because only circumcision on the eighth day overrides Shabbat, and Shabbat may be the ninth day.  Therefore he is circumcised on Sunday, the tenth day.
Section four: If Sunday is a festival, we must delay his circumcision until the eleventh day.  Just as circumcision does not override Shabbat unless it is the eighth day, so too it does not override a festival unless it is on the eighth day.
Section five:  Finally, if the two days of Rosh Hashanah follow Shabbat, then he will be circumcised on the twelfth day.  We should note that even in the land of Israel Rosh Hashanah was observed for two days.  In the Diaspora the same would hold true for the second day of festivals.
Section six:  Healthy infants can be circumcised on the eighth through twelfth days, but sick infants must wait until they recover from their illness to be circumcised.  Their health overrides their need to be circumcised.   


