Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with acts that are similar to healing in that they manipulate the body in some way. As we have learned above in 14:3, healing is prohibited on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Six
One may oil and [lightly] massage [the body] but not step on [the body] or scrape [the skin].   
One may not go down to a piloma, 
And one may not drink an epiktvizin [to induce vomiting];
And one may not straighten an infant[‘s limbs].   
And one may not set a broken bone. 
If one's hand or foot is dislocated, he must not agitate it violently in cold water but he may bathe it in the usual way, and if it heals, it heals.

Explanation
Section one: One may lightly rub oil or massage one’s body (or another person’s body) on Shabbat, but not do so vigorously by stepping on a person or roughly scraping off skin.  Most commentators say that this is too much like an act of healing and it is forbidden to heal a person on Shabbat.  Furthermore, all of these things were done in the bathhouse and the rabbis may have wanted to keep people from fully engaging in bathhouse activities on Shabbat.
Section two:  I have adopted a reading of this section in accordance with manuscripts and Albeck’s suggestion.  A piloma is a place where a person takes a mud bath.  There are a host of different explanations for this section.  Albeck’s seems most convincing.  At a piloma one would engage in the activities prohibited in section one.  Hence one shouldn’t even go into a piloma.
Section three: An epiktvizin was a potion used to induce vomiting.  This was forbidden because it was like healing.
Section four:  If an infant’s limbs were crooked, they would manipulate them in order to straighten them out.  This may not be done on Shabbat because it is similar to the prohibited labor of “building.”
Section five:  Similarly, one may not set the broken bone of an adult.
Section six:   If one separated a limb, such as a hand or foot and it needs to be put back into its place, one shouldn’t vigorously shake it in cold water because everyone will see that this is an act of healing.  However, if one wishes to wash in a more normal manner, one may do so and if by doing so the separated limb is healed, then nothing wrong has been done.  

