Shabbat, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Most of this mishnah is the opposite of the first mishnah of this chapter.  There we learned what things a woman may not wear into the public domain.  Here we learn things that she may wear.

Mishnah Five
A woman may go out with ribbons made of hair, whether they are of her own hair or her friend’s, or an animal’s; 
And with frontlets or head-bangles if they are sewn,
And with a hair-net and with a wig into a courtyard; 
And with wool in her ear, with wool in her sandals, and with wool which she prepared for her menstruation; 
With a peppercorn, with a lump of salt and anything that is placed in her mouth,   providing that she does not put it in her mouth in the first place on Shabbat, 
And if it falls out, she may not put it back. 
A false tooth or a gold tooth:
Rabbi permits but the sages forbid it.

Explanation
Section one:  In the first mishnah we learned that a woman may not go out with ribbons of wool or flax since she might take them off and carry them in the public domain. Also, since she had to remove them before immersing in a mikveh we feared that she may remove them on Shabbat in order to immerse.  Here we learn that she may wear ribbons of hair, since she need not remove them when immersing.  
Section two:  Since these are sewn to her hair-net, she may wear them out on Shabbat and we are not concerned lest she remove them.
Section three:  She may wear her wig and hair-net into a courtyard but not into the public domain. 
Section four:   She may go out with pieces of wool cloth in her ear (to keep in the puss from an infection), in her sandal (if her feet are sore) and as a tampon.  Since these are necessary and we are not concerned that she will remove them in the public domain, she may go out with them.
Section five:  People put peppercorns in their mouths to improve their breath and salt to heal a wound.  The mishnah teaches that a woman may go out with these things in her mouth on Shabbat and it is not considered “carrying.”  However, she may not put them in her mouth on Shabbat itself because they are like medicines.  As we shall learn, taking medicine was prohibited on Shabbat lest someone come to grind their own drugs.  Grinding is a labor prohibited by the Torah.  Furthermore, even if it was in her mouth before Shabbat and then fell out, she may not put it back in.
Section six:  According to the sages, she may not wear false teeth lest her friends laugh at her or admire them and she removes them to show her friends.  Rabbi is not concerned with this possibility and hence permits wearing false teeth.
Sections five and six are addressed to women (as is the entire mishnah) but it is likely that the same rules would also apply to men.  The reason that these sections are addressed to women is probably that these things were more customarily done by women.        

