Shabbat, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with hunting (trapping) the topic covered in the last chapter.  It also begins to discuss wounding animals.
 
Mishnah One 
The eight creeping things which are mentioned in the Torah:  he who hunts them or wounds them [on Shabbat] is liable;   
But [as for] other abominations and creeping things, he who wounds them is exempt.
He who hunts them for need is liable; 
Not for need, he is exempt. 
A beast or a chicken in one’s own domain, he who hunts them is exempt. 
He who wounds them is liable.

Explanation
Section one:  The Torah lists eight creeping things which are impure.  According to our mishnah, one who hunts one of these things is liable, for it is was normal to hunt them in order to use their hide.  Furthermore, one who wounds them is also liable, a forbidden labor derived from the prohibition against slaughtering.  Other commentators explain that “wounding” is derived not from slaughtering but from dyeing, since when the blood comes out it colors the hide.  Maimonides explains that “wounding” is derived from “threshing”—both are activities which separate one thing from another.  In wounding, blood is separated from the body.
Section two:  Other “creeping things” do not have hides and hence one who wounds them is not liable.  In order to be liable for something like slaughtering the animal must have a hide for on the hide a permanent scar would be life.  
Section three:  With regard to hunting, if she hunts them to use them for a specific purpose, such as medicine, she is liable.  However, it is not normal to hunt these things and therefore if she hunts them for no specific purpose, she is not liable.  
Section four:  If a beast (a domesticated) or chicken is already on one’s domain, then they need not be further trapped, and therefore one who does trap them is exempt.  Cows, sheep, goats and chickens, the domesticated animals, are already trapped by their very domesticated nature.  Therefore, further hunting (trapping) of them does not apply.  
However, since they (according to the rabbis) have hides one who wounds them is liable.  
