Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with feeding animals on Shabbat. 

Mishnah Three
One may not stuff a camel [with food] nor cram [food into its mouth], but one may put food into its mouth. 
And one may not force feed calves, but one may put food into their mouth. 
And one may put food into one’s hands for chickens and one may put water into bran, but not mix it [into a mass]. 
And one may not put water in front of bees or in front of doves in a dove-cote, but one may put [water] in front of geese, chickens and Rhodesian doves. 

Explanation
Section one:  It was customary to stuff a camel with enough food to last several days before setting out on a journey.  In this way it wouldn’t be necessary to feed the camel while on the road.  [Note: this unfortunately does not work for humans.]  Since this is a lot of work, and is also preparing on Shabbat for after Shabbat, it is not permitted.  However, if the camel does not want to eat at all, it is permitted to put food into its mouth.
Section two:  The same rule holds true for calves—one may put food into their mouths but not force feed them.
Section three:  Mixing water into a mass of bran is considered too much work to do on Shabbat, and it is not strictly necessary.  The chicken will be fine without the bran/water combination having been mixed.  Therefore, mixing is prohibited.  However, merely feeding the chickens by hand or putting water into a bowl of bran for them to eat is permitted.
Section four:  Bees and doves fly long distances and should be able to find their own water.  Therefore, since is no need to put water out for them on Shabbat it is prohibited to do so.  However, geese, chickens and certain types of doves do not fly far from their owner’s homes and hence one may put water out for them on Shabbat.  The general principle which we again see illustrated is that something that is necessary to feed animals on Shabbat is permitted, while unnecessary actions are prohibited.  
 
