Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-One, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with picking up something that is muktzeh (forbidden to be touched on Shabbat) with something which a person is allowed to carry on Shabbat.

Mishnah One
A man may pick up his son while he has a stone in his hand or a basket with a stone in it. 
And one may carry impure terumah together with pure [terumah] or with non-sacred produce.   
Rabbi Judah said: one may also remove the mixture [of terumah in non-sacred produce] when one [part is neutralized] in a hundred [parts].  

Explanation
Section one:  One can carry a child on Shabbat; a child is not “muktzeh.”  However, the stone which the child is holding is muktzeh (because there is no purpose to it on Shabbat).   The mishnah teaches that the parent can pick up the child even though she has a stone in her hand.  Similarly, one can pick up a basket (not muktzeh) with a stone in it, even though the stone is muktzeh.   
Section two:  Impure terumah cannot be eaten and therefore it can’t be used on Shabbat.  This makes it muktzeh.  Nevertheless, if the impure terumah is in the same container as either pure terumah or non-sacred produce (hullin), both of which can be used on Shabbat, then it may be carried.  The Talmud explains that this is so only if the pure terumah cannot be taken off the top.  If however, the pure terumah can be removed without touching the impure terumah then the impure terumah should not be touched.
Section three:  If terumah becomes mixed with non-terumah (hullin) then the whole mixture takes on the status of terumah and it may only be eaten by priests.  However, if there are more than one hundred parts hullin to one part terumah than one may take up one part out of the one hundred and one parts, give that part to terumah and the remainder reverts to being hullin, edible by non-priests.  Rabbi Judah teaches that on Shabbat one can carry a mixture of one part terumah and one hundred parts hullin and even take out the one part on Shabbat in order to make it edible by non-priests.  
