Shabbat, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction 
As we learned in the first mishnah to the tractate, it is forbidden for a person to carry something from the private domain to the public domain or vice versa.  However, people are obviously allowed to wear clothing and thereby “carry” their clothing through the public domain.  Wearing jewelry on Shabbat would not be considered carrying and therefore it should be permitted.  However, the sages were concerned lest the jewelry fall or lest someone remove the jewelry to show others so they prohibited it.  Our mishnah deals with jewelry which a woman may not wear out of her home on Shabbat.

Mishnah One 
With what may a woman go out and with what may she not go out?   
A woman may not go out with wool ribbons, linen ribbons, or straps around her head;   
Nor may she immerse while wearing them, until she loosens them. 
[She may not go out] with frontlets or head-bangles if they are not sewn, 
Or with a hair-net into the public domain, 
Or with a golden city, or with a necklace or with ear-rings, or with a finger-ring [even if it has] no signet, or with a needle [even if it] is unpierced. 
But if she goes out with these, she is not liable to a sin-offering.

Explanation
Section one:  The words “around her head” refer to all of the ribbons or straps in this section.  With all of them we are afraid that they may fall off her head and that she may thereby come to carry them on the Shabbat.  
Section two:  This halakhah is an aside which does not deal directly with Shabbat.  It teaches that when a woman immerses in a mikveh if she has a ribbon on her head she must loosen it.  Otherwise the ribbon will prevent the water from having direct contact with her head.  The Talmud connects this small discursion to the previous section’s prohibition.  Since a woman who goes to the mikveh on Shabbat will have to loosen her ribbons, she might forget to tie them back tightly and therefore they might drop off her head on Shabbat.
Section three:  Frontlets or head-bangles are types of tiaras which go on her forehead.  She can’t go out with them if they are not tied to her head covering because they might fall off.  
Section four:  A hair-net would be placed under the frontlets or head-bangles.  According to Maimonides the words “into the public domain” refer to all of the prohibitions above.  While she may not go out into the public domain, she may go out to her courtyard.
Section five: The things in this section are all jewelry.  She may not go out with them lest she take them off to show them to someone else or lest they fall off and she carry them in the public domain. By the way, “city of gold” is where the phrase “Jerusalem of gold” or “Yerushalayim shel zahav” originally comes from.  
Section six:  The prohibition of going out with any of the things listed in this mishnah is only a rabbinic (derabbanan) prohibition.  Therefore, even if she does go out with one of them she is not liable to bring a sin-offering, as she would be if she carried something in the public domain that was biblically prohibited (deoraita).  In other words, going out wearing any of these things is not considered to be “carrying”, and therefore she is not liable if she does so. 

  

