Shabbat, Chapter Eleven, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with throwing from either the sea to dry land (or the opposite) or from ships to the sea or other ships.

Mishnah Five
If one throws [somethign] from the sea to dry land, or from dry land to the sea, from the sea to a ship or from a ship to the sea or from one ship to another, he is exempt. 
If ships are tied together, one may carry from one to another. 
If they are not tied together, even though they lie close [to each other], one may not carry from one to another.

Explanation
Section one:  As we mentioned earlier, the sea is considered a “karmelit”—a place that is neither the public domain nor the private domain.  Hence, one who throws from dry land (the public domain) to the sea or vice versa is exempt.  One is liable only for moving something from the public domain to the private domain or vice versa. 
A ship is considered a private domain.  Hence, if one throws from the sea to a ship or from a ship to the sea, she is also exempt, for this is throwing from a “karmelit” to a private domain.  Finally, one who throws from one ship to another is exempt, just as one who throws from one private domain to another private domain with the public domain lying in-between is exempt (see mishnah 11:1).  In this case, it would seem that even Rabbi Akiva would exempt the thrower because what lies in-between is not a public domain but the sea (a karmelit).   
Section two:  In this case the two ships are tied together and lying adjacent to one another.  According to Albeck, who explains the mishnah according to the Yerushalmi (the Palestinian Talmud) since there is no karmelit lying between the ships, one can carry from one to the other.  In the Babylonian Talmud, this section is explained as referring to boats owned by two different people.  They may carry from one to the other if they set up an eruv, a concept about which we learn in the next tractate. 
Section three:  If the ships are not tied together, one may not carry from one to the other, even if they lie adjacent to each other.  Since the two boats may become separate, thereby forming a karmelit between them, the halakhah is more stringent in this case.  

