Shabbat, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This mishnah teaches two main things.  First of all, if two people jointly perform a forbidden labor that could be performed by one person, they are both exempt.
Secondly, when we consider what a person is liable for carrying, we only consider the main thing and not those things that are ancillary to it.

Mishnah Five
If one carries out a loaf into the public domain, he is liable. 
If two carry it out, both are exempt. 
If one could not carry it out and two carry it out, they are liable; 
But Rabbi Shimon exempts [them].  
If one carries out less than the standard quantity of food in a utensil, he is not liable for the utensil, because the utensil is secondary to the [food]. 
[If one carries out] a living person on a bed, he is not liable even in respect of the bed, because the bed is secondary to him.
A corpse in a bed, he is liable. 
And similarly [if one carries out] the size of an olive of a corpse, the size of an olive of a nevelah, or the size of a lentil of a [dead] creeping thing, he is liable.   
But Rabbi Shimon exempts him. 

Explanation
Section one:  Here we learn that if two people jointly perform a forbidden labor that could have been performed by one person, both are exempt.  In the Talmud this is derived from Leviticus 4:27, “If one person should unintentionally sin,”—if one person does the entire labor for which one must bring a sin offering, she is liable, but if two people perform the labor together, they are both exempt.  Again, we should emphasize that “exempt” does not mean that it is permitted. This is forbidden but nevertheless both are exempt from bringing a sin-offering.  
However, if the labor was something that one person couldn’t perform alone, for instance carrying a large table, then both are liable because both are performing as much of a forbidden labor that one person can perform.  Rabbi Shimon disagrees and holds that two people can never be liable for one jointly performed labor.  
Section two:  This section discusses situations where a person takes out two things, one of them being the main thing and the other being secondary.  For instance, a person takes out food in a vessel.  The intention is to bring the food out and the vessel is merely a means to transport the food.  If the food is less than the minimum measurement for which one incurs liability (usually the size of a dried fig) then she is exempt even for carrying out the vessel. This is because her intention was to carry out the food, and the vessel was secondary.  Had she carried just the vessel, she would be liable, but since she carries the food as well, it becomes obvious that her intention was to carry the food.
Section three:  We learn two things in this section.  First of all, the rabbis believed that a living thing “carries itself.” This means that one does not incur liability for carrying a living thing, at least one that can walk on its own.   So if a person carries out a living person on a bed, she is not liable for carrying the person.  She is also exempt for carrying the bed since the reason that she carried the bed was to carry the person.
However, if she carries a dead body on a bed (the word for bed is the same word as that for bier) she is liable for carrying the dead body.
Section four:  In the above section we learned that a person is liable for carrying a dead body.  Similarly, according to the first opinion in this section, a person is liable for carrying parts of a dead body, as long as they have a minimum measure.  The minimum measures here are the minimum amounts that transmit impurity.  
Rabbi Shimon exempts one who carries parts of a dead body because this is “work not needed for its own sake.”  That is to say, when she carries out these parts she is not doing so because she wants to do something with them outside in the public domain; rather she wants to clear them from the house.  Therefore, she is exempt.   
 


