Shabbat, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with hunting.  We should note that hunting is not exactly what we think of it today—going out and killing an animal.  Hunting refers to trapping an animal such that it remains alive.  Killing an animal is a different, yet still prohibited labor.

Mishnah Five
Rabbi Judah says: he who hunts a bird into a tower trap, or a deer into a house, is liable; 
But the sages say: [he who hunts] a bird into a tower trap, and a deer into a house, courtyard or corral. 
Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says: not all corrals are the same. 
This is the general principle: if it lacks further work of hunting, he is exempt.  If it does not lack further work of hunting, he is liable.  

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Judah, once one traps a bird in a tower trap, which was a box in the shape of a tower, she has sufficiently trapped the animal such that she is liable for hunting.  Similarly, if she traps a deer in a house she is liable.  However, if she traps a bird in a house she is exempt because it will still require further trapping in order to get the bird. Furthermore, the bird can escape the house and therefore, the bird is not really trapped. Also, if the deer is trapped into a larger space, then she is not liable.  
Section two: The sages agree with Rabbi Judah with regard to the bird but disagree with him with regard to the trapping of the deer.  Even if she traps the deer into a courtyard or corral she is still liable.  
Section three:  Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel notes that liability depends on the size of the corral into which the deer has been trapped.  We can’t just state unequivocally that trapping into all corrals makes one liable.  If catching the deer requires no further worth of hunting (meaning it can be caught easily) than it has already been hunted and she is liable.  However, if catching the deer will require further work, then the one who catches it in the corral is not liable.  
It is interesting to note that Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that not all corrals are the same.  It may be that in contrast, most houses and courtyards were the same, meaning they were similarly built and of similar size.  

