Shabbat, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that it is forbidden to set up a lamp such that someone might take away some of its oil.  Taking away oil is like extinguishing it because it will cause it to go out earlier. Extinguishing, like kindling, is a labor prohibited by the Torah.

Mishnah Four
One may not pierce an egg shell, fill it with oil, and place it over the mouth of a lamp, in order that it should drip, and even if it is of clay. 
And Rabbi Judah permits it. 
But if the potter connects it beforehand it is permitted, because it is one utensil. 
One may not fill a dish of oil, place it at the side of a lamp, and put the wick end in it in order that it should draw. 
And Rabbi Judah permits it.

Explanation
Section one:  This section describes a person who fills an egg shell or piece of clay with oil and pierces a tiny hole in the bottom so that it should drip into the lamp.  We should note that he does this before Shabbat; during Shabbat it would clearly be strictly forbidden since this is considered to be the forbidden work of “kindling”.  The problem is that since this is a vessel separate from the lamp itself, a person may think that it is permitted to take from it and use the oil.  However, the oil is “muktzeh”—set aside—for the use in the lamp and may not be used for other purposes.  It is also considered to be extinguishing the lamp, because by taking oil away he is causing the light to go out early.  “Muktzeh” is a broad category which usually means that something may not be used or even touched on Shabbat.  We will learn more about muktzeh throughout the tractate.  
Rabbi Judah is not concerned lest someone take the oil from the external vessel and hence permits this. 
If the egg shell or external clay vessel was attached to the lamp (before Shabbat) then it is permitted.  We are only concerned lest someone take the oil from an external vessel, reasoning that she is not really taking it from the lamp itself.  People know that it is forbidden to take oil out of a lamp and hence will not do this.
Section two:  In this case a person has a wick which has several ends.  She puts the lit end into one lamp and then the other end extends out of the lamp into another vessel so that it can draw more oil.  This is prohibited for the same reason as above.  Since the other vessel is external, a person might think that it is okay to take oil from it.  Again, the problem is that the other oil is muktzeh and by taking it away she is causing the lamp to go out early.  As above, Rabbi Judah is not concerned lest she take away from the oil.    

