Shabbat, Chapter Four, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The second (and last) mishnah of this brief chapter teaches that sometimes one may use certain material to cover up food to preserve its heat and yet the material is “muktzeh” and hence cannot be handled on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Two
They may cover up [food] with hides, and they may be handled; 
[They may cover up food] with wool shearings, but they may not be handled.     
What then is done? 
The lid [of the pot] is lifted, and they [the shearings] fall off of their own accord. 
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah says: the basket [holding the pot] he turns on its side and [the food] is removed, lest one lift [the lid of the pot] and is unable to replace it.     
But the Sages say: one may take [out the pot] and replace [it].    
If he did not cover it [a pot] while it was yet day, it may not be covered after nightfall.   
If it was covered but became uncovered, it may be recovered. 
One may fill a jug with [cold water] and place it under a pillow or blanket [to keep it cool]. 

Explanation
Section one:  Hides only preserve heat and do not add heat and therefore they may be used to cover up food on Shabbat.  The hides also can be used as mats for sitting or lying down. Since they can be used on Shabbat they are not muktzeh and they may be handled.
Section two:  Wool shearings may be used for covering up food but they may not be handled.  Normally wool shearings are used for spinning wool and making cloth, an activity prohibited on Shabbat.  Hence, they are muktzeh.
Section three:  The mishnah now addresses the problem of a pot that was covered with wool shearings before Shabbat:  how does she get to the pot when it is covered by material which is muktzeh?  The answer is that she may simply pick up the lid and allow the wool shearings to fall by the side. 
Section four: This section refers to a situation where a person put a pot into a basket.  The basket was filled with material (wool shearing in this case) to preserve the heat of the pot.  She made space in the shearings so that the pot could fit in.  The problem is that if she removes the pot she won’t be able to make space in the basket so that it can be returned.  Rabbi Elazar says that she tilts the basket to the side and takes directly from the pot while it is in the basket.  She is not allowed to remove the pot lest she move the muktzeh wool shearings in order to return it. The Sages hold that we are not concerned lest there not be space to return the pot and therefore she may take it out.  However, if she takes it out and there is no space to return it, she may not move aside the wool shearings in order to return it.
Section five:  It was permitted to cover up food only before Shabbat began. Once Shabbat has begun covering up is prohibited lest someone find that her food has grown cold and come to actually cook it on Shabbat.  However, it is permitted to return food to where it had been covered and therefore if the covering comes off, it is also permitted to return the covering.
Section six:  There is no prohibition to cover cold things in order to preserve their coolness on Shabbat.  The entire prohibition of “covering up” only referred to hot foods because of the concern that someone might come to cook on Shabbat.  

