Shabbat, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The mishnah begins by discussing things which were prepared to be given as fodder to animals.  The remainder of the mishnah deals with other laws concerning animals on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Two
Bundles of straw, bundles of twigs, or bundles of young shoots, if they were prepared as animal food, they may be carried; if not, they may not be carried.  
One may overturn a basket before young birds, so that they will get up and then get down.
A chicken which has run away, they may push her until she re-enters. 
One may make calves and foals walk in the public domain. 
And a woman may make her son walk.  
Rabbi Judah says: when is this so?  If he lifts one [foot] and places [another] down; but if he drags them it is forbidden. 

Explanation
Section one:  It is permissible to carry animal food on Shabbat, so if these bundles of various things were prepared for this purpose they may be carried.  However, if they weren’t specifically prepared to be animal food then we can assume that they were prepared to be used in lighting a stove or oven, an act prohibited on Shabbat.  Therefore, they may not be carried for they are muktzeh.  
Section two:   The young birds themselves are muktzeh since there is nothing that one can do with them on Shabbat.  However, the mishnah holds that one may nevertheless move a basket in front of them so that they will get up onto the basket and then get off of it.  
Section three:  Again, it is forbidden to hold the chicken itself because it is muktzeh. However, if it runs away one may push it back to its place.  This is assumedly allowed to prevent the loss of the chicken, just as activities normally prohibited on Shabbat were allowed to prevent loss of property from fire.
Section four:  One can help small animals or toddlers walk around on Shabbat and we need not be concerned that the mother or the one helping the animal will pick the animal up, which is forbidden. 
Rabbi Judah limits this permission to a child who can at least walk a little bit on his own.  But if the child is only “dragging its feet”, then one can’t help it walk on Shabbat, lest one come to pick it up and thereby carry it.   
