Shabbat, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The final mishnah of this chapter continues to provide examples of things that an animal may not carry on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Four
A donkey may not go out with a saddle-cloth, when it is not tied to it, 
or with a bell, even if it is plugged, 
or with a ladder[-shaped yoke] around its neck, 
or with a strap around its foot. 
Fowls may not go out with ribbons,
or with straps on their legs. 
Rams may not go out with a wagon under their tails.   
Ewes may not go out with a hanun.   
A calf may not go out with a small yoke.
Or a cow with the skin of a hedgehog, 
or with the strap between its horns.
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah’s cow used to go out with a strap between its horns, not with the approval of the rabbis.

Explanation
Section one:  If the saddle-cloth is not tied to the donkey, we are concerned lest it fall off and the owner picks it up on Shabbat.  Above in mishnah two we learned that if it is tied to the donkey, it is permitted.  
Section two:  Putting the bell on the donkey makes it look as if its owner is bringing it to the market to sell it.  Hence, even if the bell is plugged up and doesn’t make a sound it is prohibited.  
Section three:  This yoke was placed on the donkey when it had sores on its back.  The yoke prevents the donkey from biting its sores.  
Section four:  If the donkey’s legs rub each other when it walks they would place a thong around its feet to keep the legs apart. 
Section five:  The ribbons were placed on its legs so that people could tell their fowl apart from those of others.
Section six:  Straps were placed on their legs to prevent them from hopping too far and damaging other people’s things.
Section seven: These little wagons were placed under their tails to keep them from dragging on the ground.
Section eight:  According to the Talmud a “hanun” was a certain herb that they would place in the nose of female sheep so that the worms would come out (sounds like Vick’s vapor rub for sheep!).  Since males butt each other and the worms will come out when they do so, they don’t need this herb.  Hence it is forbidden to place this herb on a ram.  
Section nine:  They would place a small yoke on the calf to accustom it to being yoked.
Section ten:   They would attach the skin of a hedgehog to the udders of a cow to prevent other animals from suckling from the cow when she is asleep.  
Section eleven:  The strap was purely decorative.  Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah let his cow go out with this strap, meaning that this is permitted.  
All of these are prohibited because putting them on an animal is considered carrying or because we are concerned that the thing will fall and someone will pick it up on Shabbat.  


