Shabbat, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
The next four mishnayot contain disputes between Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel over things that can be done before the Sabbath.  
Most of the disputes revolve around one central issue:  can a person’s vessels perform work for them on the Sabbath?  It is clear that a person herself cannot perform a forbidden act of work on the Sabbath; the debate is whether a person can set in motion a process which will cause work to be done on the Sabbath.  Today it is clear to us that this is permitted.  For instance, I can set a timer on my clock and it can go on on Shabbat and light my house.  Bet Shammai, however, would say that such an act is forbidden.
We should note, the it seems that the sect of Jews who lived in Qumran and produced the Dead Sea Scrolls probably held like Bet Shammai.  According to this understanding, work may not be done for a Jew on the Sabbath.  The verse from the Ten Commandments which reads, “Six days you shall labor and do all your work” (Exodus 20:9) is interpreted to mean that all of a person’s work must be done within six day. In contrast, the Hillelites would hold that a Jew may not perform work on the Sabbath.  They interpret the verse to mean that a person can do work for only six days, not that all of a person’s work must be done in six days.  Although these positions might seem similar, they are based on different understandings of the Sabbath and indeed of halakhah in general.    
 
Mishnah Five
Beth Shammai says:  ink, dyes and vetch may not be soaked [on Friday afternoon] unless they can be fully soaked while it is yet day;   
And Bet Hillel permits it.

Explanation
Inks, dyes and vetch (a legume soaked and then used as animal food) are all processed by soaking a plant in water to soften it.  According to Bet Shammai it is forbidden to start such a process on Friday unless the person can sure that she can complete the process before Shabbat.  As we learned above in the introduction, Bet Shammai forbids a person from having her “things” work for her on Shabbat.  Bet Hillel permits this.  

