Shabbat, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
This chapter deals with candle lighting on Friday eve before Shabbat.  Candle lighting is part of the joy that we are commanded to experience on Shabbat. Today, with electric lights in abundance we no longer appreciate the function of a simple candle on Friday eve.  In the time of the Mishnah, on most nights people would have gone to sleep at nightfall.  It was just too expensive to use up oil for light on normal occasions.  On Friday night they lit candles, stayed up late, ate a festive meal and studied Torah.
Most of the chapter deals with the technical details of lighting—wicks, oils, lamps, etc.

Mishnah One
With what may they kindle [the Shabbat light] and with what may they not kindle them?  
They may not kindle with cedar fiber, uncarded flax, a raw silk, a desert wick, or seaweed, 
And not with pitch, wax, castor oil, [terumah] oil [which must be] burnt, tail fat, or tallow. 
Nahum the Mede says: they may kindle with melted tallow.
And the sages say: whether melted or not, they may not kindle with it.  

Explanation
Section one:  The list in this section is of material which may not be used for wicks in lighting the Sabbath candles.  The reason that we do not light with these types of wicks is that they don’t absorb the oil well, and someone might tilt the lamp on Shabbat to try to get more oil on the wick.  Such tilting is prohibited because it is like lighting a fire.  Also, since they are not good wicks they might go out, forcing the family to sit in the dark.
Section two:  The same reason that the above-mentioned wicks were prohibited is why most of these types of oil are also prohibited.  The exception is terumah oil which must be burned. This refers to terumah oil which has been made impure and therefore has to be burned.  It is prohibited to burn unclean sacrifices or terumah on Shabbat and on holidays.
The final debate is on whether all types of tallow are prohibited or just tallow that has not been melted.  
  

