Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Four, Mishnah Five
 
Introduction
The final mishnah of Shabbat begins by discussing annulling and releasing vows and continues with a story about measuring things on Shabbat to see if they are pure or impure, fit or not fit.

Mishnah Five
They may annul vows on Shabbat, and they may be asked [to release vows] when these are necessary for Shabbat. 
One may close up a skylight, and measure a rag and a ritual bath.   
And it once happened in the days of Rabbi Zadok’s father and the days of Abba Shaul ben Botnit that they closed up the window with a small clay vessel and tied a [clay] pot to a string to ascertain whether there was the opening of a handbreadth or not in the barrel.   
And from their words we learn that we may close [a skylight] and measure and tie on Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:  It is permitted for a husband to annul his wife’s vows and for a father to annul his daughter’s vow on Shabbat, since these vows may only be annulled on the day upon which they are heard (Numbers 30: 6, 9).  If they had to wait until after Shabbat was over to annul them, the vows could no longer be annulled.  
Similarly, sages may be asked to release a vow on Shabbat, but only if there is some reason to release the vow on Shabbat itself and not wait until Shabbat is over.  Such would be the case if for instance the vow was not to eat on Shabbat.  If the vow was not going to impact Shabbat, then they must wait until Shabbat is over.
For more on how Sages release vows and how husbands and fathers annul vows see Nedarim 9-11.  
Section two:  The issue of closing up a skylight/window was discussed above in 17:7.  There we saw that the sages allowed one to put a board back into a window frame to close out the light.
One is allowed to measure a rag on Shabbat to see if it is three handbreadths by three handbreadths, the minimum measurement required for it to be susceptible to impurity.  It is also permissible to measure a ritual bath to see if it contains the required 40 seah of water.  These two measurements are allowed because they are connected to mitzvot.  Other measurements would be forbidden.
Section three: The Talmud explains what exactly happened in this story.  There were two houses which shared a wall and there was a window in the wall.  In the window was a cracked barrel with a large hole in it.  On a certain Shabbat a person died in one of the houses and they wanted to know if there was a handbreadth’s gap in the pitcher, such that the impurity from one house would be transmitted to the other house.  First they closed up the skylight with a small clay vessel so that the priests could go up to the roof without becoming impure.  They then wanted to measure the crack in the barrel but couldn’t reach it from the roof. So they tied an earthenware pot the size of one handbreadth by one handbreadth to a string and lowered it to the hole of the barrel.  From these actions (which were certainly creative) we learn that it is permitted to close up a gap, to measure things to know whether they are impure and to make certain types of knots on Shabbat.  

Congratulations!  We have finished Shabbat.  
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us to finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.  
Shabbat was the longest tractate we have covered so far, so an extra “yasher koah” to all who stuck it through.  Admittedly, many of the details were quite difficult and the halakhot truly dictated exactly what is and is not permitted on Shabbat.  I hope that learning this tractate will enrich your own Shabbat experience, and that you will find in the details of halakhah a system which forces a person to examine each and everyone one of her actions and to withdraw somewhat from the hustle bustle of the world for one day a week.  Shabbat is a day dedicated to holy activities, worship of God, study, reflection, eating and drinking and non-creativity.  The halakhot of Shabbat are meant to ensure that these lofty ideals can be achieved.  
May you have the strength and time to keep on learning more Mishnah!  Tomorrow we begin Eruvin, a tractate which is actually quite connected to Shabbat.  
 

