Shabbat, Chapter Twenty-Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
The first section of the mishnah deals with hiring laborers on Shabbat.
The remaining portions of the mishnah deal with going out to the Shabbat border in order to perform an activity after Shabbat that may not be performed on Shabbat itself.  The “Shabbat border” is the limit which a person is allowed to walk out of town on Shabbat.  This border is two thousand cubits outside of the city.
The commonality between these two subjects (hiring workers and going out to the border) is that both are connected to Isaiah 58:13, “If you honor [the Sabbath] and do not do your business, nor look to your affairs, nor make statements [then you can seek the favor of the Lord]”.  This translation tries to capture the spirit of how the rabbis understand the verse.  Isaiah speaks of activities that are not necessarily forbidden by the Torah but nevertheless are activities which turn Shabbat into an ordinary day.  As an aside, I should mention my belief that preserving the spirit of Shabbat is as important as observing the halakhic details.  Shabbat must be a day set aside from work and from many normal daily activities, even if the performance of such work is not a technical violation of Shabbat.  

Mishnah Three
One may not hire laborers on Shabbat, nor say to his fellow to hire laborers for him. 
One may not go to the Shabbat border to await nightfall in order to hire laborers or bring in produce; but one may do so in order to watch [his field] and [then] he can bring produce [back] with him.  
Abba Shaul stated a general principle: whatever I have a right to say [that it be done], I am permitted to go to await nightfall, for it [at the border].

Explanation
Section one: Hiring laborers on Shabbat to do work after Shabbat is not technically a violation of one of the 39 prohibited labors.  However, it is clearly against the “spirit of Shabbat” as is described in the verse from Isaiah above.  One shouldn’t even say to one’s friend to hire laborers.
Section two:  One is allowed to go on Shabbat up until the Shabbat border, 2000 cubits outside the city.  However, one should not do so in order to get a jump start on performing an activity prohibited on Shabbat.  This is again a violation of the spirit of Shabbat and it is using time on Shabbat to prepare for the performance of work after Shabbat.  
However, one may go out to the Shabbat border before Shabbat is over to perform an activity, such as guarding produce, which is permitted on Shabbat.  In such a case, the only thing preventing her from guarding her fields is that they lie outside of the Shabbat border (as fields usually do).  If she goes out to guard her fields (a permitted activity), she may also bring back produce with her when she returns (an activity permitted on Shabbat).  What is prohibited is going to wait at the border specifically to perform a prohibited activity.  
Section three:  Abba Shaul does not disagree with the previous opinion, but rather summarizes that opinion using a general principle.  Anything that a person may ask another person to do on Shabbat, such as guard fruit, one may also go out to the Shabbat border in order to perform the activity at nightfall.  This would include watching fruit and also those activities which will be listed in the following mishnah.  Put in other words, if the activity is not prohibited on Shabbat, nor in violation of the spirit of Shabbat, one may go out to the border in order to perform the activity right after Shabbat.  

