Shabbat, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
And even more minimum measurements for which a person is liable for carrying!
One interesting thing to note is that as we reach the end of the chapter, there are more and more debates between the sages. According to Abraham Goldberg, the editor of the Mishnah intentionally saves debates for latter portions of the discussion in order not to confuse the reader at an earlier point.  In other words, the redaction of the mishnah serves the pedagogic purpose of making the material clearer.  This is probably one of the unique attributes of the Mishnah that make it the best-edited work in the entire corpus of rabbinic literature.

Mishnah Five
Red earth, as much as is required for a seal on merchandise bags, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
But the sages say: as much as is required for the seal on letters.     
Manure, or thin sand, as much as is required for fertilizing a cabbage stalk, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
But the sages say: for fertilizing one leek plant. 
Thick sand, as much as is required for putting on a full plaster trowel. 
Reed, as much as is required for making a pen. 
But if it is thick or crushed, as much as is required for boiling the lightest of eggs beaten up and placed in a stew pot.

Explanation
Section one:  Red earth was used for making seals.  According to Rabbi Akiva, the minimum amount of red earth which causes a person to be liable for carrying is enough to make a seal on a merchandise bag. The sages disagree and set an even smaller amount—the amount used to make a seal on a letter.
Section two:  Manure and thin sand were used to fertilize vegetables.  Rabbi Akiva sets the minimum amount at enough to fertilize a cabbage stalk, whereas the sages set the minimum amount at enough to fertilize a leek plant.  In both this section and the above Rabbi Akiva is more lenient than the sages.
Section three:  Lime plasterers would mix thick sand with their lime.  The measure of thick sand for which one is obligated for carrying on Shabbat is enough to fill one plasterer’s trowel so that the sand can be mixed with lime.  This is the minimum amount of thick sand that has practical use.
Section four:  Reeds were often used to make pens.  If the reed was usable for making pens, then the minimum amount is enough to make one pen.  This would be a very small amount.
 If it was not possible to use the reed to make a pen, for instance the reed was too thick or it was crushed, then they would burn it in the fire.  With regard to carrying such types of reed, the minimum amount is enough to make a fire which would fry a small egg.  This would obviously be a much larger amount than above.

