Shabbat, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
Tractate Shabbat begins with a formulaic teaching about the prohibition of carrying.  The remainder of the chapter discusses preparations before Shabbat, but it seems that the Mishnah’s editors wanted to begin with a mishnah that contains the formula “two which are four”.  This is the same way that tractate Shevuoth began, and it seems that this type of opening was often preferred by the Mishnah.  Indeed, Abraham Goldberg (whose Hebrew critical commentary on Shabbat I will use from time to time—published by the Jewish Theological Seminary of America) notes that about half of the tractates of the Mishnah begin with numbers or an issue related to numbers. Goldberg also believes that opening the tractate with a mishnah concerning carrying something from one domain to another was intended as a polemic against the Sadducees who did not agree with the Pharisees in all of the details of these laws.    
The prohibition of carrying will be further discussed later on in chapter five and will continue to be discussed through chapter eleven.  

Mishnah Five
The carryings out of Shabbat are two which are four from the inside, and two which are four from the outside.  
How is this so? 
The poor man stands outside and the householder stands inside: 
If the poor man reaches his hand inside and places [something] into the hand of the householder, 
or if he takes [something] from it and carries it out, the poor man is liable, and the householder is exempt.  
If the householder reaches his hand outside and places [an object] in the poor man's hand, 
or takes [something] and carries it in, the master is liable, while the poor man is exempt.  
If the poor man reaches his hand inside and the master takes [an object] from it, 
or places [an object] in it and he carries it out, both are exempt; 
If the householder stretches his hand outside and the poor man takes [an object] from it, 
or places [an article] in it and he carries it inside, both are exempt. 

Explanation
The mishnah lists eight slightly different scenarios in which an object is brought from outside in the public domain to inside the house, the private domain.  These scenarios can be divided twice.  In the first four examples a person has performed a complete action, taking something from one domain and bringing into another and is therefore liable.  In two of these cases the object is brought in and in two it is taken out.  In the second four cases, the two people share in bringing the object in or taking it out and hence they are both exempt (remember that this does not mean that this is permitted.)  These cases can also be divided into two subcategories.  
The mishnah probably uses the example of a poor person standing outside and a householder inside because this is a realistic situation and it will be easier to remember.  
Section one:  The poor man is liable because he took something from the public domain and brought it in.
Section two:  The poor man is liable because he took something out.  In both cases the householder has not done anything and hence he is exempt.  
Section three:  The householder has brought something out and is liable.
Section four:  The householder brought something in.
Section five:  The poor man brought something in, but is not liable because he didn’t put it down in the private domain.  Rather the householder took it out of his hands.  Both are exempt even though together they have performed a forbidden act of work.    We now learn that in order to be liable the person must uproot something from one domain and put it down in another domain.  One is not liable for half of an activity. 
Section six:  The poor man didn’t pick the object up so he’s not liable and the householder didn’t bring it out so he’s not liable.  Both are exempt.
Section seven:  The householder picks up an object and brings his hand out of the house but the poor man takes the object out of his hand.  Both have performed half of a forbidden labor and both are exempt.  
Section eight:  Finally, the poor man puts the object in the householder’s hand and the householder brings it inside, so again both have performed half of a forbidden labor and again both are exempt.

