Shabbat, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with acts of healing on Shabbat.

Mishnah Four
He who feels pain in his teeth may not sip vinegar through them, but he may dip [his bread in vinegar] in the usual manner, and if he is cured, he is cured. 
He who feels pain in his hips may not rub them with wine or vinegar, but he may anoint them with oil but not rose oil.   
The children of royalty may anoint their wounds with rose oil, since it is their practice to anoint themselves thus on weekdays. 
Rabbi Shimon said: all Israel are royal children.

Explanation
Section one:  Vinegar was used as an ailment for toothaches.  Therefore, one who has a toothache is not allowed to sip vinegar through his teeth, since this is obviously for healing purposes.  However, he may dip his bread in vinegar in a manner which is done typically during the week.  Since this is a normal activity performed not only for healing, it is permitted.  If by doing so he is cured, so be it.
Section two:  Vinegar or wine was evidently rubbed on a person’s hips to cure pains (backache? arthritis?).  Since this is the only reason that they would be rubbed on one’s body, it is forbidden to do so on Shabbat.  However, oil may be rubbed on a person’s body for a variety of other reasons and therefore it is permitted to rub oil for medicinal purposes as well.  When one does so it will not be recognized by others that she is healing herself.  Nevertheless, rose oil is forbidden since normal people don’t rub expensive rose oil on themselves except for medicinal purposes.  Again, this rule suffers one exception.  Children of royalty may anoint themselves with rose oil since they do so on the weekdays.  The rule is consistent:  a person may perform an act of healing on Shabbat if she regularly performs that same act for purposes other than healing.  
Finally, on a more poetic note, Rabbi Shimon states that all Jews are to be considered as the children of royalty, and therefore they all may anoint themselves with oil, regardless of their actual wealth.    
We might delay for a moment on the philosophy that lies behind Rabbi Shimon’s words.  Differences in wealth do not create essential distinctions between Jews and therefore the halakhah must (at least in this case) treat them equally. Their value stems from their having accepted the Torah and is irregardless of their actual monetary wealth.      
