Shabbat, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
The first section of our mishnah contains a fascinating debate concerning carrying weapons of war on Shabbat.  The second section discusses garters used to hold up hose worn on legs.
 
Mishnah Four
A man may not go out with a sword, bow, shield, club, or spear, and if he does go out, he incurs a sin-offering. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: they are ornaments for him. 
But the sages say, they are nothing but a disgrace, as it is said, “And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more” (Isaiah 2:4).   
A garter is clean, and they go out [wearing] it on Shabbat.
Knee-bands are unclean, and they may not go out with them on Shabbat.

Explanation
Section one:   According to the sages weapons are disgraceful to a human being.  While the sages would not deny that weapons are necessary in times of war, they should not be worn as mere decorations, meant to make a person look tougher.  The sages derive this opinion from the famous messianic vision in Isaiah.  As an aside, it seems to me that this is an approach deeply emblematic of Judaism—war and it accoutrements are necessary evils not to be celebrated during times of peace.
On the other hand, Rabbi Eliezer holds that weapons are ornaments for men. The word “ornaments” is the same word in Hebrew as “jewelry” for women.  Just as women may wear jewelry for its intent is to improve their image, so too men may wear their weapons.  
Section two:  A garter is worn on the thighs to hold up the hose (socks).  “It is clean” means that it is not receptive to impurities.  The reason is that it is not considered an article of clothing in and of itself; rather it is part of another piece of clothing.  Since it is not itself an article of clothing it cannot receive impurity.  It may be worn on Shabbat since it is necessary to hold up a person’s hose.  
“Knee-bands” refers to chains attached to the garter to keep the legs from spreading to far apart.  According to the Talmud these were typically worn by women.  Since they have chains, they are considered to be in and of themselves an article of clothing and hence susceptible to impurity.  They may not be worn on Shabbat lest the woman wearing them takes the chain off and carries them in the public domain.     

