Shabbat, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
The mishnah continues to deal with laws that are concerned with the day before the Sabbath.  However, through associative thought, this mishnah also includes one law that is not concerned with the Sabbath eve and one law that is concerned with another topic altogether.

Mishnah Three
A tailor must not go out with his needle near nightfall, lest he forget and go out.
Nor a scribe with his quill. 
And one may not search his garments [for lice or fleas], nor read by the light of a lamp.   
In truth it was said, the hazzan may see where the children are reading from, but he himself must not read. 
Similarly, a zav must not eat together with a zavah, because it may lead to sin.  

Explanation
Section one:  On the Sabbath itself, it will be prohibited for the tailor to carry his needle around (or anything else).  Therefore, even as nightfall draws near, he should take his needle out of his coat where he typically stores it, lest he forget and accidentally carry it on the Sabbath.
Similarly, a scribe should not go out on the Sabbath eve with his quill. 
Both of these things, the scribe’s quill and the tailor’s needle are small items that can easily be carried without a person knowing.  Therefore, he should make sure he puts them away before the Sabbath.  In essence, this is part of his Shabbat preparation.  
Section two:  This halakhah is concerned not with the eve of Shabbat but with Shabbat itself.  It is brought here because the nature of the halakhah is similar to the nature of the other halakhot.  They are all “gezerot”—that is prohibitions created to prevent a situation which might cause a person to transgress.  A person should not check his clothes for lice or fleas or read by candlelight on Shabbat lest he tilt the candle to bring more oil to the wick—an activity considered to be prohibited due to the prohibition of lighting a fire. 
Section three:  Although a person shouldn’t read by candlelight, children may do so because their teacher will stop them from tilting the candle.  The Palestinian Talmud explains that children want the candle to go out so that they won’t have to read anymore, hence they won’t tilt it.  Their teacher, the hazzan (today the word is used to refer to the cantor, but in the Mishnah it has a different meaning), may also help them read with the candlelight.  However, he must not use the candle for his own reading.
A note on the phrase “in truth”—be’emet:  According to Goldberg, this phrase is used to introduce an exception to the previous rule which was taught above.  The Talmud claims that this phrase means that the law was given directly to Moses on Sinai.  
Section four: This section contains another “gezerah”—a prohibition meant to keep a person from transgressing.  A zav and a zavah are a man and woman who have abnormal genital flows.  They are both impure.  A pure person should not eat together with a zav or a zavah because the zav or zavah will cause the food they share to become impure.  Seemingly, there should be no problem with a zav eating with a zavah, because they are both impure.  However, in order to prevent people from becoming accustomed to eating with zavim, even this is prohibited.    
