Shabbat, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses taking medicine or performing acts of healing on Shabbat.  If there is any danger to a person’s life, even a potential danger, all medicines and acts of healing are permitted.  Indeed they are mandated.  However, the sages forbade the use of medicines which are for aches, pains, etc. that are not life-threatening.  According to most commentators, the reason for this prohibition is that most drugs were made by grinding roots or other parts of plants.  Grinding roots is prohibited as a derivative of grinding wheat.  However, in the Palestinian Talmud the reason that healing is prohibited on Shabbat is so that a person should distinguish between Shabbat and the week.  

Mishnah Three
They do not eat Greek hyssop on Shabbat, because it is not the food of healthy people. 
But he may eat yo’ezer and drink abuv ro’eh.  
A man may eat any kind of food as medicine, and drink any liquid, except water of palm trees and a potion of roots, because they are for jaundice. 
But he may drink water of palm trees for his thirst and rub himself with oil of roots for a non-medical purpose.

Explanation
Section one:  Greek hyssop is eaten only by sick people.  When one eats this type of hyssop everyone knows that the person is eating it for medicinal purposes.  Hence, it is prohibited, as we explained above.
Section two:  Yo’ezer and abuv ro’eh are types of plants that are often used for medicinal purposes, but they are also eaten or drunk in potions by healthy people.  Since, when a person eats or drinks these things, it won’t be recognized that she is taking medicine, it is permitted.  It is only prohibited to eat or drink something for medicinal purposes if everyone observing will see that she is doing so for healing.  
Section three:  Foods may always be eaten and liquids may always be imbibed even if the person intends to use them for medicinal purposes.  Since healthy people also eat these foods or drink these drinks, it will not be recognizable that she is doing anything for medicinal purposes.  The only exception to this rule is water of palm trees and a potion of roots which were used for jaundice.  Since the face of the person drinking these things is yellow, it will be recognized that she is drinking them for medicinal purposes.  Hence, a person who has jaundice is not allowed to drink these things.
Section four:  However, a person who does not have jaundice and is merely thirsty may drink these things.  Since she looks healthy, no one will think she is taking medicine on Shabbat.  She may also rub herself with oil of roots, as long as she does so for comfort and not for medicinal purposes.           
