Shabbat, Chapter Three, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the concept of “muktzeh”—things set aside that cannot be used on Shabbat.  It is forbidden to move anything that is muktzeh on Shabbat.  The opposite of muktzeh is “mukhan”, things which are prepared to be used on Shabbat.  As an aside, we should note that the laws of Shabbat are intimately connected with the intentions of the person performing the act.  The same activity has different consequences depending on what intention the activity was performed with.  This also shows us that these mishnayot are addressed to audiences who already “buy into the system”—that is to say they are not looking to get away with things that are actually forbidden on Shabbat.  Otherwise, a person could always lie about her intention or about what actually happened.  This is an important point that in my opinion applies to a large percentage of halakhah.  

Mishnah Six 
They may not place a vessel under a lamp to catch the oil.   
But if it was placed there before sunset it is permitted. 
Yet one may not benefit from it because it is not prepared (mukhan).    
They may handle a new lamp but not an old one.   
Rabbi Shimon says: all lamps may be handled, except a lamp [actually] burning on Shabbat.
A vessel may be placed under a lamp to catch the sparks, but one must not pour water into it, because he extinguishes [them].

Explanation
Section one:  The oil that was in the lamp is “muktzeh” since it had been set aside for lighting the lamp.  While the oil is in the lamp she could not take any.  Once the muktzeh oil falls into the vessel the vessel itself also becomes muktzeh.  Anything that holds something that is muktzeh is itself muktzeh.  Hence putting the vessel there to catch the oil is forbidden for she will be holding something which is muktzeh.
However, she may put the vessel there before Shabbat and we are not concerned lest she take oil from the vessel or move the vessel itself on Shabbat.  
Even in a case where it was permitted to put the vessel under the lamp it is still forbidden to use the oil on Shabbat because the oil itself is always muktzeh.    
Section two:  It is permitted to handle a new, unused lamp on Shabbat.  Such a lamp is not muktzeh.  However, an old lamp may not be handled on Shabbat even if it is not lit because it is muktzeh.  The reason that it is muktzeh is that it is repulsive.  An old lamp may be caked with oil and shmutz and hence people will not like handling it.  Repulsive things are muktzeh on Shabbat because people don’t intend to handle them.  
Rabbi Shimon does not hold that things which are “muktzeh” may not be handled on Shabbat.  Therefore in his opinion an old lamp may be handled.  The only type of lamp that may not be handled is one that it is already lit lest by carrying it he causes it to go out.  
Section three:  Above we learned that it is forbidden to put a vessel under a lamp to catch the oil.  Here we learn that it is permitted to put a vessel under a lamp to catch the sparks that might fly out of the lamp.  The rabbis considered the sparks to not be “material” and therefore they are not muktzeh and they do not make the vessel muktzeh.  However, it is forbidden to put water into the vessel since this extinguishes the sparks and extinguishing is prohibited on Shabbat.  



