Bava Batra Chapter Nine Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The ninth chapter of Bava Batra continues to deal with the laws of inheritance, the subject discussed in chapter eight.  The first mishnah of the chapter deals with the division of the inheritance between sons and daughters.  The second mishnah deals with the division of the inheritance when one of the children is not discernibly male or female and other laws concerning such a child.

Mishnah One
If a man died and left sons and daughters, and the property was great, the sons inherit and the daughters receive maintenance.
But if the property was small the daughters receive maintenance and the sons go begging at people’s doors.
Admon says:  “The son may say, ‘Must I suffer a loss because I am a male’”.
Rabban Gamaliel says:  “I approve of Admon’s opinion.”

Explanation—Mishnah One
As we have learned in several mishnayoth in the previous chapter, when a man dies and he has sons who survive him, the sons are the sole inheritors of his property.  However, the surviving daughters have a right to continue to receive maintenance (food, clothing, shelter and a dowry) from his estate until they reach majority age and are married.  Our mishnah teaches that if the property was sufficient for both an inheritance and for the maintenance of the daughters, then the sons inherit and the daughters receive maintenance.  If, however, there was not enough property, the daughters maintenance takes precedence over the sons inheritance.  In such a case the sons will have to beg at people’s doors. Admon disagrees and says that the son may claim that he should not lose out just because he is male.  Rabban Gamaliel agrees with Admon.

Mishnah Two
If a man left sons and daughters and one that was of doubtful gender, if the property was great the males may push him (the one of doubtful gender) onto the females; if the property was small the females may thrust him onto the males.
If a man said, “If my wife shall bear a male he shall be given 100 zuz”, and she had a male, he receives 100 zuz.  
[If he said, “If my wife shall bear a] female she shall be given 200 zuz”, and she had a female, she receives 200 zuz.  
[If he said, “If may wife shall bear a] male he shall be given 100 zuz and if a female 200 zuz” and she had a male and a female, the male receives 100 zuz and the female 200 zuz.
If she had one of doubtful gender, he does not take.
But if he said, “Whatsoever my wife shall bear shall be given [such an amount], he receives.
If he [the one of doubtful gender] was the only heir, he inherits everything.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah discusses the rights of a “tumtum” which is the Hebrew term for a child who does not have sexual signs of being a male or female. If there is a large inheritance, and therefore the sons will take their part, the sons can tell the “tumtum” that he is not a son and therefore he can only receive maintenance with the other daughters.  If, however, there is small estate, and it is not sufficient to support all of the children, the daughters can tell him that he must go begging with the other sons.  These two laws are based on the principle, common to many Rabbinic laws, that the burden of proof is on the plaintiff.  In order for the “tumtum” to take part of the inheritance he must prove that he is male, which he cannot.  In order for him to receive maintenance when the estate is small, he must prove that he is female, which he cannot.
Section two deals with a father who makes a promise to give his child a present when the child is born and bases the size of the present on the gender of the child.  Sections 2, 2a and 2b are straightforward and need no explanation.  According to section 2c if, in any of the aforementioned cases, the woman were to bear a “tumtum” the child would not be able to claim the present. Since the present was based on the child’s gender and the child cannot prove a gender, the child cannot make a claim on the gift.
If, however, the father had said that he wished to give a gift to anything that the wife had, then he has not based the gift on the child’s gender.  In such a case even a tumtum would receive the gift.  Finally the mishnah states that if the “tumtum” were the only inheritor, s/he would inherit.  
 
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  Why does the anonymous opinion hold that the daughters receive support from their dead father’s estate while the sons must beg, at least in a case where there is insufficient funds for all?  Why not vice versa? 
Mishnah two:  Why does the mishnah need to state that if the “tumtum”, one of doubtful gender, was the only inheritor, s/he would inherit?  Why might this not be obvious?  
 
