Bava Batra Chapter Five Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with what is included in the sale of various items such as donkeys, cows, and beehives.  Mishnah four deals with the a person who buys trees in another person’s field and whether or not the buyer has acquired the land on which the trees grow.  

Mishnah Three
If a man sold a donkey he has sold its foal.
If a man sold a cow he has not sold its calf.
If he sold a dungheap, he has sold the dung on it.
If he sold a cistern, he has sold the water in it.
If he sold a bee-hive he has sold the bees.
If he sold a dovecote he has sold the pigeons.
If a man bought “the fruit of a dovecote” from his fellow he must let go the first pair that are hatched.
[If he bought], the “fruit of a beehive” he may take three swarms and then [the seller] may make the rest sterile.
[If he bought] honeycombs he must leave two honeycombs.  
[If he bought] olive trees to cut down the branches, he must leave two shoots.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one—The question in this section is whether or not a person has sold the young child of a mother animal, when he has sold the mother.  According to the mishnah when he sells a donkey he has sold the foal but when he sells a cow he has not sold the calf.  The Talmud explains that the mishnah is dealing with a case where the seller says that he is selling a “nursing” donkey or cow.  Since people do not use donkeys for milk, it can be assumed that when he said “nursing donkey” he intended to sell the donkey and its young, who may be nursing from its mother.  However, since people do use cows for milk, it may be that he was selling the cow on its own, without the young, and the reason why he called it a “nursing cow” was to let the buyer know that this cow produces milk.
Section two—In this section four things are listed, which if the outer container is sold, the contents are sold with it.  Since the sole purpose of the container is to hold the contents, we can assume that when the sale was made, the intent of both the buyer and the seller was to include the contents.
Section three—If a person buys the young pigeons that will be born in a dovecote (where pigeons are raised), then he return to the seller the first pair that are born. This is in order for the parents, who are still owned by the seller, to have a pair of young to take care of, so that the parents won’t fly away.  If one buys the bees that will be born in a beehive, he may take three swarms.  After taking the three swarms, the seller may cause the bees to be sterile so that their energy will be devoted to making honey and not to making young.  Alternatively, the last phrase of this section of the mishnah may state that after taking the first three swarms, the buyer takes alternative swarms.  The lack of clarity in the mishnah is due to the dual meaning of the Hebrew word. 
Section four:   When a person buys honeycombs from another person’s beehive, he must leave at least two honeycombs behind, in order to feed the bees that are left.  Similarly, when a person buys an olive tree with the intent to cut down the branches he must leave two branches so the tree can regenerate.  

Mishnah Four
If a man bought two trees in his fellow’s field, he has not bought the ground [in which they grow].
Rabbi Meir says:  “He has bought the ground”.
When they grow (branches), he (the seller) may not trim them.
What comes up from the stem belongs to him (the buyer) but what comes up from the roots belongs to the seller.
And if they die, the ground is not his [to replant new trees].
If he bought three trees, he has bought the ground [between them].
When they grow he may trim them,
And what comes up whether from the stem or from the roots belongs to him (the buyer).
And if they die the ground is his. 

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Our mishnah begins with a dispute between Rabbi Meir and the Sages.  According to the Sages when a person buys two trees he has not bought the ground they are on, and according to Rabbi Meir he has bought the ground.  The remainder of section one goes according to the Sages.  Section 1b states that if the trees grow branches the seller, who still owns the land, may not trim them.  Although these branches now cover land that he did not sell, and when he sold the tree these branches were not there, by selling the tree he tacitly gives permission to the buyer to let the branches grow.  Section 1c states that anything that grows from the tree above ground belongs to the buyer and anything below ground still belongs to the seller/landowner.  Finally, if the trees die, the buyer may not plant there new trees.  Since he didn’t buy the land, when the trees die he has totally lost his acquisition.
In section two we learn that the laws are different when one acquires three trees.  In that case the person has acquired the land.  If the trees should grown branches that overhang into the seller’s property he may trim them. Anything that grows from the tree, even below the ground, belongs to the buyer.  Furthermore, if the trees die he may plant there new trees.   

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  How is a person who buys a dovecote different from a person who buys the “fruit of a dovecote”?
Mishnah four:  Why may the seller trim the trees if he sold three to the buyer but not if he sold two?  
