Bava Batra, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Mishnah seven defines the precise moment when a sale occurs and is therefore not retractable.

Mishnah Seven
If a man sold produce to his fellow and the buyer drew it towards him but did not measure it, [the buyer] has acquired [the produce].
If [the seller] had measured it but [the buyer] did not draw it towards him, he has not acquired [the produce].  
If [the buyer] is clever he will rent the place [in which the produce is located].
If a man bought flax from his fellow he has not acquired it until he has moved it from one place to another.
If it was still attached to the ground, and he plucked any small quantity of it, he has acquired possession.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven   
Section One—According to Jewish law, movable items (as opposed to real estate) are acquired by taking hold of them (either by lifting them or by drawing them near) and not through the transfer of money.  In other words, if Reuven gives Shimon money for his television set, the deal is not final until Reuven takes possession of the television set.  If the set should break after Reuven has given the money, but still in Shimon’s possession, Shimon will have to return the money.  If, on the other hand, Reuven took the television and did not pay the money, and then the set broke, Reuven will still owe Shimon the money.  Our mishnah teaches that when a person buys produce, the moment he takes the produce is when the sale is final and not retractable.  If the buyer wishes to ensure that the seller does not change his mind, he can rent the place where the produce is located.  Thus when the buyer gives the money it is as if the produce is already in his possession and the seller may not retract the sale.  
Section Two—With regards to flax, according to the mishnah it is not enough that he draw the flax towards him, he must carry it from place to place.  Alternatively, if he purchased flax still attached to the ground, he can acquire the flax by plucking it.

Mishnah Eight
If a man sold wine or oil to his fellow, and its value rose or fell, if [the price rose or fell] before the measure was filled up, it belongs to the seller, [and he may refuse to sell except at the higher price].
But if [the price rose or fell] after the measure was filled up, it belongs to the buyer [and he may refuse to buy except at the lower price].
If there was a middleman between them, and the jar broke, it is broken to [the loss of] the middleman.
[After emptying the measure] the seller must let three more drops drip [for the buyer].
If he then turned the measure over and drained it off, what flows out belongs to the seller.
The shopkeeper is not obligated to let three more drops drip.
Rabbi Judah says:  “[Only] on the eve of Shabbath as it becomes dark is he exempt.”

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  With regards to the selling of wine and oil, the point in which the sale is final is the point at which the measuring container fills up.  If the price of the wine or oil should rise before it fills up, the seller can demand the higher rate.  If the price fluctuated after it was full, the buyer need only pay the lower rate. 
Section two:  If a middleman acted as an agent for the buyer and seller and the measuring cup should break thereby causing the loss of the wine or oil, the middleman is responsible to recompense for the loss.
Section three:  When the seller pours the oil from the measuring cup into the vessel of the buyer, he must wait until three drops have spilled out.  After this point, any oil that is stuck to the sides of the vessel belong to the seller.  Since a shopkeeper is busy with many customers, he need not wait after pouring to ensure that three drops come out of the container.  According to Rabbi Judah, this law is true only before the Shabbath, which is a time when the shopkeeper would be especially busy.  At other times during the week, he too must wait for three drops to drip out of the measuring container.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Eight: Must the seller sell at the lower rate if the price went down before the measuring cup was full??
Mishnah Eight, section three:  Why might one have thought that the middleman would not be responsible if the measuring cup broke?  If he was not responsible who would be?
