Bava Batra Chapter One Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The first two mishnayoth of Bava Batra deal with neighbors who share either a courtyard, a garden or a valley.  The mishnah is concerned with the building of a wall to separate the neighbors and with the ability of one neighbor to force the other neighbor to share the costs of building the wall.

Mishnah One
If two partners wish to make a partition in a courtyard they build the wall in the middle.
In a place where the custom is to build of unshaped stones, or of hewn stones, or of half-bricks, or of whole bricks, so they should build it—everything is according to local custom.
[If the wall is made of] unshaped stones this one supplies [from his property] three handbreadths, and this one supplies [from his property] three handbreadths.
[If the wall is made of] hewn stones this one supplies [from his property] one and a half handbreadths, and this one supplies [from his property] one and a half handbreadths.
[If the wall is made of] half-bricks this one supplies [from his property] two handbreadths, and this one supplies [from his property] two handbreadths.
[If the wall is made of] whole bricks this one supplies [from his property] one and a half handbreadths, and this one supplies [from his property] one and a half handbreadths.

Explanation—Mishnah One 
In the time of the mishnah most homes did not have openings to the street but rather would open onto a common courtyard.  The courtyard was used for all sorts of purposes and was the common property of the owners of the houses surrounding it.  Our mishnah states that if the two partners wish to build a wall separating the courtyard they should build the wall in the middle and when they do, they should build the wall with the materials customary used in their place.  There are four kinds of building materials mentioned in the mishnah, and the mishnah lists each one.
Clauses 2a through 2d all state how much of a person’s property he should allocate for the thickness of the wall.  This space will depend on the thickness of the building materials.  Unshaped stones are (on average) 6 handbreadths wide and therefore each partner must allocate three handbreadths of his property for the building of the wall.  Hewn stones are only 3 handbreadths wide and therefore each partner allocates one and a half handbreadths.  A whole brick is 3 handbreadths wide, and therefore each partner allocates one and a half handbreadths.  Half bricks are one and half handbreadths wide.  In order to make a wall with them they would use two half-bricks, placing mortar in between the two.  The total width of the wall would be four handbreadths, and therefore each partner would allocate two handbreadths.

Mishnah Two
The same is true with a garden:  in a place where the custom is to build a fence, they can obligate him to do so.
However, in a valley, where it is not customary to build a fence, they cannot obligate him to do so.
But if he wants to [build a fence] he must gather into his own portion and build, and he puts a finishing on the outside of the wall.
Therefore if the wall falls, the place and the stones belong to him.
If they acted with each other’s consent, they should build the wall in the middle and put a finishing on both sides.
Therefore if the wall falls, the place and the stones belong to them both.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Mishnah two begins by comparing a garden to a courtyard.  The mishnah states that a garden is similar to a courtyard in that if it is customary to build there a fence, one partner can force the other to share in the costs and allocated space.  However, in section 1a we learn that a valley is different.  Since it is not customary to build there a fence, neither can force the other to do so.  If one partner wishes in any case to make a fence he must do it in his own area and put a finishing on the wall so that it will it will not look unfinished nor ugly in the eyes of the one who did not want a fence, nor will it be rough and potentially damage the other person’s animals.  Since he has built the wall on his own property and he alone paid for it, if the wall should fall, both the place and the materials belong to him.  If however, the two partners built the wall together and shared in its costs and space, they should finish both sides of the wall.  If the wall should fall they will share the space and the materials.
[Please note that I explained the idea of “finishing the wall” according to Albeck’s explanation and not the explanation given in the Talmud.] 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  If one partner wished to build with half-bricks and one partner with whole bricks, and the custom of the land was to use hewn stone, what type of wall should they build?
What laws in modern society are similar to these types of laws?  How are they different?

