Bava Batra Chapter Two Mishnayoth 
Thirteen and Fourteen

Introduction
We learned yesterday in mishnah twelve that if another person’s trees encroach on one’s property one may cut out the roots, up to a certain depth.  In mishnah thirteen we learn that if another person’s branches encroach on one’s property they may also be removed.
In mishnah fourteen we learn that if the branches of a tree encroach on the public domain, they too may be cut down.

Mishnah Thirteen
If a tree stretches into another’s field, he may cut it away as far as is reached by an ox-goad held over the plough, or, if it is a carob or sycamore, [he may cut it away] according to the plumb line’s measure.
All trees that stretch over irrigated fields may be cut away according to the plumb line’s measure. 
Abba Shaul says:  “All trees that bear no fruit may be cut away according to the plumb line’s measure.”

Explanation—Mishnah Thirteen
In this mishnah we encounter two different ways in which a person may cut off the branches of a tree that encroaches on his property.  In section one we learn that in general a person can cut them as high as is reached by the “ox-goad held over the plough”.  An ox-goad is the whip which a person riding a plough pulled by oxen would use to goad the oxen.  If the branches were to interfere with the ox-goad one would have trouble plowing his field.  Therefore, up until this height one can always remove the branches.  The other measure for cutting down trees is the plumb line, which would go straight up from the end of his property.  In other words, any branches hanging over his property may be cut down.  One can cut away according to the measure of the plumb line in the following situations:  1)  a carob or sycamore’s tree, whose branches are thick and will provide too much shade for the field over which they hang.  2)  Any tree that stretches over an irrigated field, which needs a lot of irrigation.  A tree from another field blocking its access to rain will cause much damage to this type of field.  According to Abba Shaul one may always cut away up until the plumb line.

Mishnah Fourteen
If a tree stretches into the public domain enough must be cut away to allow a camel and its rider pass by.
Rabbi Judah says:  “A camel laden with flax or bundles of branches.”
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Every tree [must be cut away] according to the plumb line’s measure, because of impurity.

Explanation—Mishnah Fourteen
There are three opinions in our mishnah with regards to removing branches that overhang onto the public domain from a tree originating in private property.  The first opinion is that they must be removed up until a height that will allow a camel and its rider to pass by.  Rabbi Judah says that the branches do not need to be removed all the way to the height of the rider for he can duck. They only need to be removed to the height of the camel’s load which obviously cannot duck to avoid the branches.  Rabbi Shimon says that all of the branches which overhang into the public domain must be removed because of the laws of impurity.  According to the Jewish system of purity and impurity if a pure thing is overshadowed by the same object overshadowing an impure thing, the impure thing will convey impurity to the pure thing.  In other words, if a bone which imparts impurity were to be underneath branches and a person were to be there as well, the person would be impure.  In order to prevent such a situation, Rabbi Shimon does not allow branches to grow into the public domain.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah thirteen:  What is the basis for the dispute between Abba Shaul and the anonymous opinion?

