Bava Batra Chapter Two Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
Most of the second chapter of Bava Batra deals with the obligations to distance damaging things from another person’s property.  Mishnah one deals with distancing things from a person’s wall lest they damage the wall.  Mishnah two deals with placing an oven or other cooking device in a house in a fashion that will not cause damage to the house.

Mishnah One
One may not dig a cistern near his fellow’s cistern;
Nor may he dig a ditch, cave, water-channel, or laundry pool unless it is three handbreadths away from his fellow’s wall, and he must plaster it with lime.
They distance piles of olive refuse, manure, salt, lime or stones three handbreadths from his fellow’s wall, and he plasters it with lime.  
They distance seeds, and a plow and urine three handbreadths from the wall.
And they distance the mill [from the wall]: three [handbreadths] from the lower millstone and four [handbreadths] from the upper millstone.
And [they distance] the oven [from the wall]:  three from the belly of the oven and four from the rim of the oven.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one states that a person should not dig a cistern close to another person’s cistern since one cistern may cause the other to break.  A cistern is where they would store collected rain water, as opposed to a well which collects water from underground.
The remainder of the mishnah deals with distancing things from another person’s wall, lest they cause damage to the wall. The items mentioned in section two may cause the wall to fall, therefore he must distance them three handbreadths and plaster them to prevent water from seeping out.
The items mentioned in section three also may cause damage to another person’s wall and therefore he must distance them and plaster the place in which he places them.
Section four deals with three more items which also must be kept three handbreadths away from another person’s wall:  seeds, a plow and urine.  The difference between these items and those mentioned previously is that plastering is not applicable in these cases.
Sections five and six mention large items, a mill and an oven which also must be distanced from another’s wall.  In both of these cases there are different measurements given for different parts of the item.

Mishnah Two
One may not set up an oven inside a house unless there is a space of four cubits above it.  
If he sets it up in the upper room, the flooring beneath it must be three handbreadths deep, or for a stove one handbreadth.
And if it causes damage [to the floor] he must pay for the damage caused.
Rabbi Shimon says:  “They only mentioned these measurements so that if the object caused damage he would be exempt.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Sections one sets up specifications for placing an oven or a stove inside a house, either on the first floor or on the second floor (the upper room).  Note that a stove causes less heat than an oven.
Section two contains a dispute between the anonymous opinion and Rabbi Shimon with regards to the ramifications of the distances mentioned in this and the previous mishnah.  According to the first opinion, while a person must observe these restrictions, even if he does so he will still be obligated to make restitution if his property damages someone else’s property.  According to Rabbi Shimon, if one follows the restrictions, and properly distances his potentially damaging property from another person’s property, he will be exempt if it causes damage.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah One:  What is the difference between the objects mentioned in sections four and those in sections two and three?  Why is the law slightly different in the different sections?
Mishnah Two:  According to the anonymous opinion is section 2, even if a person properly distances his damaging things from another’s property he will still be obligated for subsequent damages.  Why then does the mishnah mention how far these mentioned things must be distanced? 


