Bava Batra, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Mishnah four, which we learned yesterday, discussed some laws concerning gifts given by groomsmen to the bride and groom.  Mishnah five discusses a related subject, gifts given by a man to his fiancee, after betrothal but before the marriage.  

Mishnah Five
If a man sent betrothal gifts to his father-in-law’s house, and he sent there 100 maneh (10,000 dinar) and he ate a betrothal meal of but one dinar, [and he afterward divorced his wife] they (the betrothal gifts) are not recoverable.
But if he did not eat the betrothal meal, they are recoverable.  
If he sent many betrothal gifts in order for them to return with her to her his house [when he marries her], they are recoverable.
If he sent few betrothal gifts which were to be used in her father’s house, they are not recoverable.

Explanation
In Jewish law there are two stages to the marriage process, betrothal and marriage.  After betrothal the woman continues to live in her father’s house and only moves to her husband’s house at the time of marriage.  In our mishnah the husband sends betrothal gifts to the father’s house, a common custom in the time of the mishnah.  The mishnah discusses the husband’s ability to recover these gifts should he divorce his fiancee before marrying her (in Jewish law betrothal is binding and therefore requires divorce to sever the tie).  According to our mishnah if he ate a celebratory betrothal meal at his father-in-law’s house, he cannot recover the betrothal gifts.  The meal is provided by the father-in-law in return for the gifts.  Even if the trade is unequal, the deal is sealed and the gifts are unrecoverable.  
If he sent many gifts and it was obvious that the husband expected his fiancee to eventually bring the gifts back with her when she came his house at the time of marriage, then the gifts are recoverable if he should divorce her before marriage.  Since the husband did not intend to give these gifts as permanent gifts, but rather for them to be “on loan” until they returned to him with her at the time of marriage, he can recover them.  If, however, he gave few gifts, then the gifts were intended to be used up in her father’s house.  In such a case since he never had an expectation to receive them in return, he cannot recover them should he divorce her before marriage.

Questions for Further Thought:
If the man sent many betrothal gifts with the intention that they should return with the wife when she enters his home, and he ate the betrothal meal at his father-in-law’s house, are the gifts recoverable should he divorce her before marriage?
The problem of couples breaking up after having received engagement gifts is a problem still in our society.  How do we deal with it? 

