Bava Batra Chapter Five Mishnayot One and Two

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today continue to deal with the topic of what things are included in a sale.  Mishnah one deals with the sale of a boat, a wagon pulled by mules or the sale of oxen.    Mishnah two deals with the sale of a donkey. 

Mishnah One
If a man sold a ship, he has also sold the mast, the sail, the anchor, and all the means of steering it.
But he has not sold the slaves, the packing-bags, or the lading.
But if he had said, “It and all that is in it”, all these are sold also.
If a man sold a wagon, he has not sold the mules, and if he sold the mules, he has not sold the wagon.
If he sold the yoke, he has not sold the oxen, and if he sold the oxen, he has not sold the yoke.
Rabbi Judah says:  “The price tells all.  How is this so?  If one said to him, “Sell me your yoke for 200 zuz, it is known that no yoke costs 200 zuz.”
But the sages say:  “The price is not proof.”  

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  If a man sells a ship without specifying what is included in the sale, all of the fixed parts of the ship are included in the sale.  However, the slaves and the bags used for packaging the merchandise on the ship are not included in the sale, unless he were to specify that they were.  This law is similar to many of the laws we learned in the previous chapter.
Section two:  Even though a wagon is pulled by mules, if a man sold a wagon the mules are not automatically included in the sale.  Likewise, if he sold the mules, he has not automatically sold the wagon.  The same is true with regards to oxen and the yoke used to steer them.  If a person sold one, he has not necessarily sold the other.  Rabbi Judah disagrees and he thinks that the price should be able to determine what was included in the sale.  If a person sold a yoke for an exorbitantly high price, it is patently obvious that the oxen were part of the sale.  However, the sages do not believe that the price is proof.  If a buyer pays a high amount for a yoke and then wishes to claim that he bought the oxen as well as the yoke he must bring proof.

Mishnah Two
If a man sold a donkey he has not sold its trappings.
Nahuma of Madi says:  “He has sold its trappings.”
Rabbi Judah says:  “Sometimes they are sold and sometimes they are not sold.  How is this so?  If the donkey was before him with its trappings on it and he said, ‘Sell me this donkey of yours’, the trappings are sold (with the donkey).  If he said, ‘Sell me that donkey of yours’, the trappings are not sold.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
A donkey is usually packed with several bags used to carry the donkeys load.  These are the “trappings” referred to in the mishnah.  According to the first opinion, if a man sold a donkey, the trappings are not sold.  Nahum of Madi dissents and declares that they are sold.  Rabbi Judah states that one can determine if the trappings were sold by the circumstances and by the language used in the sale.  If the donkey was standing in front of the seller with its trappings on it and the seller specified that he wants to buy this donkey, then he has bought the trappings as well.  Since he saw the trappings we can assume that his intention was to buy them with the donkey.  However, if he just tells him to sell “that donkey of yours” we cannot be sure that his intention was to buy the donkey standing in front of him.  Since we cannot determine what he intended to buy or what the seller intended to sell, the trappings are not included in the sale.  

Questions for Further Thought:
What is the similarity between Rabbi Judah’s opinion in the two mishnayoth?  


