Bava Batra Chapter Six Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today deal with a person who owns either a cistern (mishnah five) or a garden (mishnah six) behind another person’s property and hence requires a passage through the other’s property to get to his cistern or garden.  The mishnah provides rules to both the property owner and the cistern or garden owner to ensure that the latter receives access without trespassing on the former.

Mishnah Five
If he had a cistern behind his fellow’s house, he may go in and out only at the time when others are accustomed to go in and out. 
And he may not bring in his cattle and let them drink from his cistern, rather he must draw water and let them drink outside.
He and the owner of the house should each make themselves a lock.  

Explanation—Mishnah Five 
This mishnah discusses the case where a person owns a cistern that exists behind another person’s property.  In such a case the person is allowed to enter the other’s property in order to reach his cistern, but he must do so at the time when people customarily draw water from their cisterns.  He is further restricted from bringing his cattle or other animals onto the other’s property.  Rather he must draw the water and carry it outside.  Finally, the mishnah demands that each of them make a lock.  The cistern owner should make a lock for the cover of the cistern so that the house owner doesn’t steal any water.  The house owner should make a lock on his door so that the cistern owner doesn’t enter when he is not allowed to.

Mishnah Six
If he had a garden behind his fellow’s garden, he may go in and out only at the time when others are accustomed to go in and out.  
And he may not bring in merchants, or enter through it into another field.
[The owner of] the outer garden may plant seeds on the path.
But, if with the other’s consent, he has been given a path at the side [of the other’s garden] he may go in and out when he wishes.
And he may bring in merchants, but he may not enter through it into another field.
And neither of them has the right to plant seeds on the path. 

Explanation—Mishnah Six
This mishnah deals with a person who owns a garden behind another person’s garden.  In other words in order to get to his garden he must go through the other person’s garden.  The mishnah says that he is allowed to do so, but with certain limitations, similar to those we saw in the previous mishnah.  First of all, he must go in and out at the time when people are accustomed to going to their gardens.  Second, he may not bring merchants through his fellow’s property in order to buy his produce.  Rather he must carry the produce out and the merchants can buy outside.  Third, he may not use the path as a shortcut to other fields. Since the path was designated only to reach a certain field he is not allowed to use it to reach others.  Finally, the owner of the outer garden is allowed to plant seeds on the path, even though this will make it more difficult for the owner of the inner garden to use the path.  Since the path belongs to owner of the outer garden, he can do with it as he pleases.
If, however, the owner of the inner garden was given (possibly by the court) a path on the side of the outer garden, and the owner of the outer garden consented, then he may go there whenever he please.  He may also bring in merchants to buy the produce, but he still may not use the path as a shortcut to other fields.  Again, since the path was designated for reaching a certain field, he may not use it to reach others.  Finally, since the path is intended only for walking, neither of them may plant on the it. 

Questions for Further Thought:
What are the similarities between the two mishnayoth and the situations described in them, and what are the differences?


