Bava Batra Mishnayoth Nine, Ten and Eleven

Introduction
Mishnah nine deals with a father who sends his small child to buy oil from a shopkeeper and on the way home the son drops the flask of oil.
Mishnah ten deals with the proper maintenance of weights and measures to ensure that the purchaser does not receive less than he bought.
Mishnah eleven continues to deal with the weighing of produce.

Mishnah Nine
If a man sent his child to a shopkeeper with a pondion (a coin) in his hand and he measured him out an issar’s (a coin worth half a pondion) worth of oil and gave him an issar in change and the child broke the flask and lost the issar, the shopkeeper is liable.
Rabbi Judah declares him exempt, since the father sent the child for this purpose.
And the Sages agree with Rabbi Judah that if the flask was in the child’s hand, and the shopkeeper measured the oil into it, the shopkeeper is exempt.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
In the scenario in our mishnah a father sends his child to a store to buy him some oil.  The shopkeeper hands him a flask containing the requested oil and the change from the sale.  According to the Sages, if the child should lose the oil or the coin on his return home, the shopkeeper is liable to pay back the father.  Since a child is not responsible for his actions, the shopkeeper should have found a safer way of returning the oil and coin to the father.  Rabbi Judah disagrees.  According to him, since the father sent the child on such a mission, the father agreed to allow his child to deliver the oil and the change.  The Sages agree with Rabbi Judah that the shopkeeper is not liable only in the case where the child came to the store with a flask in his hand.  In such a case it is clear that the father intended that the child should deliver the oil, and therefore the shopkeeper will be exempt.

Mishnah Ten  
The wholesaler must clean out his measures once every thirty days and the householder once every twelve months.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “The rule is just the opposite.”
The shopkeeper must clean out his measures twice in the week and polish his weights once a week and clean out his scales after every weighing.

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
The Torah (Leviticus 19:35-36) forbids falsifying weights and commands a person to keep properly weighed and maintained weights and measures.  Our mishnah is concerned with the proper maintenance of weights and measures.  According to the anonymous opinion in section one, a wholesaler who uses his measures frequently must clean them out once every thirty days.  This is to prevent the buildup on the sides of the containers which will reduce the amount purchased.  A householder, who uses his measure less frequently, need clean them out only once a year.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel holds that the opposite is true.   According to him the more frequently one uses the measures, the less buildup will accumulate.  Therefore, a householder must clean them out once every thirty days and a wholesaler only once a year.  A shopkeeper, who uses his weights frequently, must clean them out twice a week.  In addition he must once a week polish his weights so that they don’t grow heavier and clean out his scales after every use so that they don’t accumulate buildup.

Mishnah Eleven
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said:  “When is this so (that one needs to clean out measures)?  With regards to liquid measures, but with regards to dry measures it is not necessary.
[And a shopkeeper] must let the scales sink down a handbreadth [to the buyer’s advantage].
If he gave him an exact measure, he must give him his overweight, a tenth for liquid measures and a twentieth for dry measures.  
Where the custom is to measure with small measures they should not measure with large measures and where the custom is to measure with large measures they should not measure with small measures.  
Where the custom is to smooth down [what is in the measure] they should not heap it up, and [where the custom is] to heap it up, they should not smooth it down.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
Section one:  Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel qualifies the statements in the previous mishnah regarding cleaning out measures.  These statements applied to measuring liquids, but measures used for dry goods need not be cleaned out with regular frequency, since the dry goods do not stick to the sides.
Section two:  The custom was to let the buyer’s side of the scale, which contained the goods, sink one handbreadth lower than the seller’s side.  If, however, one did not follow this custom, then the shopkeeper would be obligated to give the buyer either a tenth or a twentieth more than he purchased, depending on the nature of the produce.
Sections three and four:  The last two sections teach that one must follow the customs that are typical in one’s place.  This is true with regards to the size of the weights as well as the smoothing out or heaping up of the dry goods in the measuring cup.  As long as people are consistent in their customs, buyers and sellers will know what they are doing and one will not cheat each other. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Ten, section three:  Is this clause according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel or according to the anonymous taught opinion in section one?
