Bava Batra Chapter Four Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three continues to discuss what parts of the house are sold with a house when the house is sold without specification as to what is being sold.  Mishnah four discusses what parts of a courtyard are sold, also when specification is lacking.

Mishnah Three
If a man sold a house he has sold also the door, but not the key.
He has sold a permanent mortar but not a movable one.
He has sold the convex millstone (the lower, usually fixed stone) but not the convave one.
Nor [has he sold] the oven or the stove.
But if he had said:  “[I am selling to you] the house and all that is in it, these are also sold.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
The mishnah lists the things that are permanent parts of the house and therefore are sold as part of the house even though not specified in the sale.  The door is a permanent part of the house and therefore it is sold with the house.  The key is not a part of the house and hence, is not part of the house.  A permanent mortar, used for crushing, is part of the house but a movable one is not.  The millstone fixed to the ground is part of the house but the movable, top millstone is not.  Nor are ovens and stoves part of the house.  Finally the mishnah clarifies that if the seller had specified that he is selling all that is in the house, all of these things are also including.

Mishnah Four
If a man sold a courtyard, he has also sold its houses, cisterns, trenches and caves, but not the movable property.
But if he had said:  “It and all that is in it” all of these are also sold.  
But in neither case has he sold the bath-house, or the olive press that are in it.
Rabbi Eliezer says:  “If a man sold a courtyard, he has sold only the air (the open spaces) of the courtyard.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
This mishnah explains what parts of a courtyard complex are sold with it even though not specified as part of the sale.  The sale of the courtyard includes all of the houses, and underground structures that are attached or part of the courtyard.  As in the previous mishnah, only the fixed, permanent pieces of the property are included in the sale.  If, on the other hand, the seller specified that he was selling everything in the courtyard, he has sold the movable property as well.  However, as we learn in section 1c, the bath-house and olive press are in any case not considered part of the courtyard, and are consequently not sold with it, even if he stipulated that he was selling everything in the courtyard.  Rabbi Eliezer disagrees.  According to him, when a man sells a courtyard he is only selling the empty yard part, but not the structures that are attached to it.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Four:  Why are a bath-house and olive press not considered part of the courtyard to be sold with it? 
Mishnah Four:  With which parts of the mishnah does Rabbi Eliezer disagree?
