Bava Batra Chapter Eight Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with a father’s ability to decide which of his inheritors will inherit.  Mishnah six deals with a father’s ability to declare that a certain person is either his son or his brother in order that he should be his legal inheritor.

Mishnah Five
If a man says, “So and so, my firstborn son, shall not receive a double portion”, or “So and so, my son, shall not inherit with his brothers”, he has said nothing, for he has made a condition contrary to what is written in the Torah.
If a man apportioned his property to his sons by word of mouth, and gave much to one and little to another, or made them equal to the firstborn, his words are valid.
But if he had said [that it should be so] “by inheritance”, he has said nothing.
If he had written down, whether at the beginning or in the middle or at the end [of his will] that it should be as a gift, his words are valid.
If a man said, “So and so a man shall inherit from me” and he has a daughter; or “My daughter shall inherit from me”, and he has a son, he has said nothing, for he has made a condition contrary to what is written in the Torah.
Rabbi Johanan ben Baroka says:  “If he said [that so and so shall inherit from me] of one that was qualified to inherit from him, his words are valid, but if of one that was not qualified to inherit from him his words do not remain valid.”
If a man wrote away his property to others and passed over his sons, what he has done is done, but the Sages are not comfortable with it.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “If has sons did not behave properly, it should be counted to his credit.”

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Our mishnah deals with a father who does not want to simply let the inheritance fall in its proper order (as learned in the first two mishnayoth of the chapter) but rather wants to divide his property in another fashion.
Section one:  The Torah demands that the eldest son receive a double portion and each of the other sons divide the money equally.  A father’s attempt to lessen the portion of the eldest son or increase the portion of the other sons would be, therefore, a condition that goes against Torah law, and such a condition is invalid.
Section two:  However, the fact that a man cannot make a change in the inheritance law does not mean that he cannot apportion his money as a present to his children while he is still alive.  As long as the document or his verbal contract states that the money is being passed to his children as a present while he is still alive and not as an inheritance after his death, the transaction is valid.  The Torah’s laws govern inheritance, the transfer of money after death and not presents given during life.  
Section three:  Similar to the law in section one, here too a person attempts to change the laws of inheritance from the Torah, by saying that a stranger will inherit when he has a daughter or that his daughter will inherit when he has a son.  Again, we learn that such a stipulation, contrary to the laws of the Torah, is invalid.  Rabbi Johanan ben Baroka disagrees.  He says that as long as the intended inheritor is a legal inheritor, meaning one of those on the list in mishnah one and two, then a person can bypass the primary inheritor and give to the secondary one.  In other words Jacob could state that instead of his sons inheriting his property his daughter Dina could inherit, since she is on the lines of inheritance.  He could not however, state that a stranger to the family would inherit in place of his sons.
Section four:  Finally, the mishnah states that although a person can give away his property to strangers before he dies, thereby leaving no inheritance for his sons, the Rabbis were not happy with such an action.  The laws of inheritance in the Torah are not just guidelines for inheriting should the situation arise, they are the proper way in which property would be transferred from generation to generation.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel lastly notes, that if the sons were engaged in improper behavior, it is meritorious for the father to ensure that they receive no inheritance. 

Mishnah Six
If a man said, “This is my son”, he is believed.
If [he said], “This is my brother”, he is not believed, yet the other may join him in his portion.
If he died the property returns to its place.
If he inherited property from elsewhere the other’s brothers inherit it together with him.
If a man died and a testament was found bound to his thigh, this counts as nothing.
But if [he had delivered it and] through it granted title to another, whether of his heirs or of those who are not his heirs, his words are valid.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  If a man states that a certain person is his son, and therefore should inherit his property along with his other sons, he is believed.  Since he could give his property to this person in any case, we allow him to claim that the person is his son so that he may receive a portion of the inheritance.  However, he is not to believed to say that a person is his brother and therefore should share in the inheritance from his father.  Since, by saying that a person is his brother and deserves part of the inheritance he would be taking away from the shares of the other brothers, he is not believed.  Suppose a case in which Reuven and Shimon come to split an inheritance and Shimon claims that Levi is his brother.  If they were to split equally, Reuven would receive a third of the inheritance and not the half, which would be his had Shimon been his only brother.  Therefore Reuven takes half and Shimon and Levi split the other half.  If Levi were to die, the money would revert to Shimon. Since the money was taken out of Shimon’s share in the first place, the money would eventually revert to him and not to Reuven.  If Levi were to receive money from somewhere else (i.e. not from his father’s inheritance) and then die, Reuven and Shimon would both inherit.  Since Shimon claimed that Levi was his and Reuven’s brother he must share the inheritance from Levi with Reuven.    
Section two:  If a man died and a testament (will) was found on him, the will is invalid.  Although we may assume that the man wrote the document we do not know if he intended to give it to the intended person.  Since he may have written it and changed his mind, the document is not valid.  If, however, he gave the document to someone else before he died the document is valid.  Since it was given while the person was alive, it is a proper will and it will be carried out. 
 
