Bava Batra Chapter Two Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three discusses types of professions or businesses that a person can or cannot have in his home or near his home lest they disturb his neighbor.
Mishnah four discusses how far a person must distance his wall from his neighbor’s walls.

Mishnah Three
One may not open a bakery or a dyer’s shop under his fellow’s storehouse, nor a cattle stall.
In truth, they have permitted these things under a winestore but not a cattle stall.
A man may protest against [another that opens] a shop within the courtyard and say to him, “I cannot sleep because of the noise of them that go in and out.”
One who makes utensils, should go outside and sell them in the market.
But none may protest and say to him, “I cannot sleep because of the noise of the hammer” or “because of the noise of the mill-stones” or “because of the noise of children.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  A bakery, a dyer’s shop, and cattle stall, if placed underneath a storehouse of produce will damage the produce.  The bakery and dyer’s shop will produce heat, which can be damaging to the fruit, and the stench of the cattle stall will, for obvious reasons, also damage the fruit.  However, as we learn in section 1a, if the storehouse was for wine, one can place a bakery or dyer’s shop underneath, since the wine will improve due to the heat.  However, the stench of the cattle stall will not improve the taste of the wine!  (Yuk)
Section two: As we have learned on several occasions, in the time of the mishnah a courtyard was usually shared between several neighbors.  If one’s neighbor began to sell his wares in the courtyard the other neighbors could protest against the noise pollution caused by the customers.  
Section three is a continuation of the subject began in section two.  A utensil maker is allowed to make his utensils in the courtyard, even though the hammer will cause noise pollution.  He must, however, sell them in the market, as we also learned in the previous section.  Similarly, a person can grind flour in the courtyard but he must sell it in the market.  Finally, a teacher may bring students into the courtyard to learn, even though they will make much noise.

Mishnah Four
If one’s wall was adjacent to his friend’s wall he may not build another wall adjoining it unless it is at a distance of four cubits.
And [if he builds a wall opposite his friend’s] windows, whether it is higher or lower than them or level with them, it may not be within four cubits.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  If a person already owns a wall adjacent to his friend’s wall, he may wish to add another wall, thereby creating a three walled structure.  If he wishes to do that he must leave four cubits between the new wall and his friend’s wall in order that people will walk near his friend’s wall.  It was believed that people walking near a wall would strengthen the foundations of the wall.  If he didn’t leave enough room next to his friend’s wall people would not walk there, thereby depriving his friend of that benefit.
Section two:  If a person wishes to build a wall opposite another person’s windows he must fulfill three conditions:
If the wall is higher than the window it must be more than four cubits higher so that he will not be able to use his wall to look into his friend’s window.
If the wall is lower than the window it must be more than four cubits lower so that he will not be able to stand on the wall and look into the window.
If it is across, it must be four cubits away so that it will not block the light going into the other window.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Three:  Why does the mishnah allow one to bring students into a courtyard even though it will cause noise pollution?
Mishnah Four:  Why is the mishnah so concerned with people looking into other people’s windows?  What does this teach us about privacy?


