Bava Batra Chapter Five Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five deals with what is included in the sale of large and small animals.  Mishnah six begins to discuss certain ethical principles in the laws of selling and buying and their consequences on the validity of the sale.  This is a topic which will be discussed through the middle of chapter six.

Mishnah Five
He who has sold the head of a large animal, has not sold the feet.
If he sold the feet, he has not sold the head.
If he sold the lungs he has not sold the liver.
If he sold the liver he has not sold the lungs.
But in the case of a small animal:
If he sold the head he has sold the feet.
If he sold the feet he has not sold the head.
If he sold the lungs he has sold the liver.
If he sold the liver he has not sold the lungs.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
This mishnah draws a distinction between large animals, such as cows, and small animals such as sheep or goats.  In section one we learn that each part of a large animal is significant enough to be sold separately.  In other words, if one sells one part of a large animal, he has not necessarily sold another part of the animal with it.  However, with small animals some parts are sold with others and some parts are sold alone. For instance, if one bought the head, the feet are automatically included.  Likewise if one bought the lungs, the liver is automatically included.  However, the opposites are not true.  If one bought the feet he has not automatically bought the head.  If one bought the liver he has not automatically bought the lungs.

Mishnah Six
There are four rules with regards to those who sell:
If one has sold good wheat and it turns out to be bad, the buyer can retract.
If he sold bad wheat and it is found to be good, the seller can retract.
[But if one sold] bad wheat and it is found to be bad, or good wheat and it is found to be good, neither may retract.
[If one has sold] dark wheat and it turned out to be white;
Or white and it turned out to be dark;
Or [if he sold] olive wood and it turned out to be sycamore wood;
Or sycamore wood and it turned out to be olive wood;
Or [if he sold] wine and it turned out to be vinegar;
Or vinegar and it turned out to be wine;
Either of them may retract.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
As stated at the beginning of the mishnah, there are four rules with regards to retracting a sale.  These rules are contained in sections 1-4.  (1)  If a person sold something that was supposed to be good and it turned out to be bad, the buyer can retract.  (2)  If a person sold something that was supposed to be bad and it turned out to be good, the seller can retract.  (3)  If a person sold something and it turned out to be what he sold, the sale is final and no one may retract.  (4)  Finally, if a person sold something and it turned out to be different from what he sold, not necessarily better or necessarily worse, either of them may retract.

Questions for Further Thought:
How do the laws in mishnah six differ from modern laws of sale?  How might these differences reflect on the economic ideas of their society?

