Bava Batra Chapter Three Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction 
In the previous two mishnayoth we began to learn the laws of establishing ownership through possession.  In mishnah three we learn what a “possessor” must say to the other person who claims ownership, in order for the “possessor” to establish ownership through possession.  We also learn in mishnah three that certain people who possess land cannot claim ownership, even though they possessed for three years. 
In mishnah four we learn the consequences of falsely testifying with regards to possession for three years.  

Mishnah Three
An act of possession without which there is no claim [on the ownership of the property] is not valid possession [to establish ownership].
How is this so?
If he said to him:  “What are you doing on my property? And the other answered:  “No one ever said anything to me”, this is not valid possession [to establish ownership].
[If he said to him]:  “You sold it to me”, “You gave it to me as a gift”, “Your father sold it to me”, “Your father gave it to me as a gift”, this is valid possession [to establish ownership].
He who holds possession [for three years] due to inheritance [from the previous owner], does not need to make a claim.
Craftsmen, partners, sharecroppers and guardians cannot establish ownership through possession.
A man cannot establish ownership through possession of his wife’s property, nor may a wife establish ownership through possession of her husband’s property, nor a father of his son’s property, nor a son of his father’s property.
When is this so [that one needs three years to establish ownership]?
When the person attempts to acquire the land through possession.
But, when the property was given as a gift, or when brothers shared a piece of their inheritance, or when one claimed title by possession to the property of a convert [who died without inheritors], then if the claimant has shut in, walled up or broken down anything, this counts as securing ownership through possession.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one—In order for a person to claim ownership through possession he must claim that the counter claimant sold it to him.  For instance Reuven comes to Shimon and claims that the land that Shimon possesses is Reuven’s.  Reuven brings a deed or witnesses to prove that the land is his.  We can now be sure that Reuven once owned the land and the question is does he still own the land.  If Shimon says that from the time he possessed the land no one said anything to him, the land will go back to Reuven.  Since Shimon does not have a logical explanation for how he received the land, he cannot keep it.  If, however, Shimon were to claim that Reuven sold him the land or gave it to him as a gift, or that Reuven’s father had done so, than we can assume that the land now belongs to Shimon.  Since he occupied the land for three years without Reuven protesting, we assume that Shimon received the land from Reuven or his father and lost his documentation.  The one exception to this rule is the one who received his land as part of an inheritance from his father.  If he can prove the land was his as inheritance he need not prove how his father received the land.
Section two—The people listed in section two by definition will use other people’s property.  For instance craftsmen may come and do work on another person’s property.  This is not a sign that they own the property and therefore they cannot establish ownership through possession.  So too a spouse cannot claim title to his/her spouses property through possession, since husbands and wives regularly make use of each other’s property without protesting.  Finally, the same is true of parents and children:  they too cannot claim title to the other’s land due through possession.
Section three—We learn here that it takes three years to establish ownership, only when the property is in dispute.  However, if someone gives property to another person, or brothers split the property left to them in inheritance, or a person comes to take property that has no owners, all he must do is show minimal use on the property and it belongs to him.  The example of minimal uses is that he changes a part of the outside wall, by making a lock, by adding onto the fence or even by breaking the fence.  In these three ways a person can establish immediate ownership and the three years are not necessary.

Mishnah Four
If two testify that he has had the use [of property] during three years and they are found to be false witnesses, they must make full restitution to the owner.
If two [false witnesses] testify of the first year, two of the second, and two of the third, they divide up the costs of restitution between them.
If three brothers testify and another is included with them, they offer three different acts of testimony, but their words count as a single act of testimony when the evidence is proved false.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
According to Deuteronomy 19:19 the punishment for testifying falsely is that punishment which would have been meted out on the defendant.  In our mishnah, witnesses falsely testify that a man had three years possession of a field.  Had they been telling the truth the field would have changed from belonging to the original owner to belonging to the possessor.  In other words, through their testimony they caused a field to transfer from one person to another.  In such a case, if they testified falsely, they would have to pay the cost of the field to the original owner.  They tried to make him lose a field now they have to pay him the cost of a field.
Section two deals with a scenario where three sets of witnesses testify to possession, each testifying to one year.  Together they can establish that he had three years possession and now owns the land.  If they were found to be false witnesses they will collectively pay the punishment of paying the original owner the value of the field.
In order to understand section three we must mention that relatives are not allowed to testify together in order to make up the required two or more witnesses.  In the case discussed in this section three brothers testified to the possession of the field, each brother to a different year.  In addition, one person testified to all three years. In total, two people testified with regards to each year, and no single year was testified to by two brothers. In this case their testimony is accepted as three different testimonies, and therefore we do not have a problem of brothers testifying together.  However, if they are lying, it is considered to be one testimony, with regards to making compensation to the original owner.  The person who testified to all three years will pay half of the value of the field and the three brothers will together pay half, each brother paying one-sixth. 
