Bava Batra Chapter Four Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnah seven discusses what is sold as part of a town, if one should sell the town without specifying what is included in the sale.  Mishnah eight discusses what is sold as part of a field.

Mishnah Seven
If a man sold a town, he has also sold the houses, cisterns, trenches, caves, bath houses, dovecotes, olive presses, and irrigated fields, but not the movable property.
But if he had said:  “It and all that is in it”, even if cattle and slaves were in it, all of these are sold.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: “If a man sold a town he has also sold the town watchman.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
As we have learned on several occasions in our chapter, we learn in mishnah seven that when a person sells a piece of property, he sells only the parts of that property that are fixed in their place.  In this case, when a person sells a town, included in the sale are all of the fixed institutions of that town, such as the houses and the commercial institutions.  If he wishes to sell the movable property as well, such as the animals and the slaves, he must specify that he is selling “it and all that is in it”.  In that case, he has sold even the cattle and the slaves.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel disagrees slightly with the previous opinion.  According to him when a person sells a town he sells the town watchman, presumably a slave, as well.

Mishnah Eight
If a man sold a field he has also sold the stones that are necessary to it, and the canes in a vineyard that are necessary to it, and its unreaped crop, and a partition of reed which covers less than a quarter-kav’s space of ground, and the watchman’s hut if it was fastened down with mortar, and ungrafted carob trees and young sycamores.  

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
This mishnah lists the things that are sold with a field.  Tomorrow, in mishnah nine we will learn a long list of things that are not sold with a field.  The list of things that are sold with a field includes things that are a necessary part of the maintenance of the field such as the stones used for fences and the canes used in a vineyard to grow the vines.  It also includes the produce still attached to the ground and similarly the watchman’s hut if it was attached to the ground.  [Note: there are other versions of this line concerning the watchman’s hut].  It also includes some small, as of yet insignificant trees as well as an insignificant portion of a reed partition.  Since these things are not significant in and of themselves they become included as part of the field.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven:  Why might Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel hold that when a person sells a town he sells the town watchman but not other slaves?

