Bava Batra Chapter Seven Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today continue to deal with the measurement of fields for purposes of selling.

Mishnah Three
[If he said], “I will sell you [a piece of land] as measured by the rope, whether it is less or more” the condition “whether it is less or more” makes void the condition “as measured by the rope”.
[And if he said], “Be it less or more, as measured by the rope”, the condition “as measured by the rope” makes void the condition “be it less or more”, according to Ben Nanas.
[If he said, I will sell you a piece of land] by its marks and its boundaries”, and the difference was less than a sixth, the sale stands.  
If it was as much a sixth the buyer may reduce the price.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  In the scenario mentioned in both clauses of section one, the seller uses contradictory language when selling the field.  As we learned in mishnah two, when the seller says that he is selling “as measured by the rope”, the intention is that the measurement be precise.  On the other hand, if he says, “whether it is less or more” the intention is that the measurement will not necessarily be precise.  According to our mishnah if he said both languages within one sentence the last language voids the first language.  In other words, we assume that when he said the last language he intended to change his mind from the first language.  Therefore the case will be adjudicated only based on the last language.
Section two:  If a person sold a piece of land using its marks and boundaries as indicators to the place of the land, there is an allowance of up to one-sixth error.  Beyond that, meaning more than one sixth error, the buyer may reduce the price if the error was to the seller’s favor (i.e. the land was smaller than stated).  Alternatively, the buyer will return money or the property to the seller, if the error was to the buyer’s favor (i.e. the land was larger than stated).

Mishnah Four
If a man said to his fellow, “I will sell you half of the field”, it must be divided between them into portions of equal value, and the buyer takes half of the field [which the other allots to him].
[If he said, “I will sell you] the southern half”, the field must be divided between them into portions of equal value, and the buyer takes the southern half.
He accepts responsibility for [providing the ground] for the dividing wall and the large and small ditches.
How large is the large ditch?  Six handbreadths.
And the small ditch?  Three handbreadths.

Explanation—Mishnah Four 
Section one:  When a man sells half a field to another, they must divide the field into equal portions of monetary value.  In a one hundred square meters field worth one hundred dollar, there may be a thirty square meter portion which is worth 50 dollars and a seventy square meter portion that is worth 50 dollars.  In such a case the seller has a choice which piece of the field to keep.  If he wishes he may keep the smaller, better field, or he may keep the larger, but of lesser quality field.
Section two:  If, however, the seller stated which portion of the field he was selling, then they again divide the field into two, but this time the seller must give the specified portion.  Since he specified which portion he was selling, he loses the right to decide which portion to give to the buyer.
Section three:  The buyer is responsible for providing part of his land to make a dividing fence (as we learned in the first mishnah in Bava Batra) as well as part of his land to build ditches.  These ditches would have surrounded the fence and would have prevented animals from jumping over the fence.  The buyer’s part of land given for fences and ditches should be equal to the part given by the seller.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four, section three:  If the mishnah had not stated that the buyer must provide a share of his land on which to build the fence and dishes what might you have thought?  In other words, is there grounds to think that the seller must solely provide the ground?
