Bava Batra Chapter Nine Mishnayoth Nine and Ten

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of chapter nine continue to deal with the topic of doubtful inheritances in which it is unclear who died first, the inheritor or the one from whom he inherits.

Mishnah Nine
If the house fell down on a man and his wife, the husband’s heirs say, “The wife died first and the husband died afterward” and the wife’s heirs say, “The husband died first and the wife died afterward”.
The School of Shammai says:  “Let them split [the property].”
The School of Hillel says:  “The property remains in its former status—the Ketubah to the husband’s heirs and the property that comes in and goes out with her to her father’s heirs.”

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
In our mishnah Jacob and Rachel both died in the same accident and it is unclear who died first.  If Rachel died first then Jacob would inherit all of her property, since a husband inherits from his wife.  If Jacob inherited Rachel’s property then when he died his inheritors would inherit her (as well as his) property.  Therefore, Jacob’s inheritors claim that Rachel died first.  If, on the other hand, Jacob died first, Rachel’s inheritors would inherit her property.  (They would not inherit Jacob’s property since a wife does not inherit from her husband).  Therefore, Rachel’s inheritors claim that Jacob died first.
As in the previous mishnah the School of Shammai says that in such a case the money is to be split.  The School of Hillel again states that the money reverts back to its last verifiable owner.  The ketubah (marriage contract) money last belonged to the husband (it is his until he pays it to her) and therefore his inheritors receive that money.  The woman’s dowry which she brought into the marriage and over which the husband did not take title, belonged to the wife.  Therefore her inheritors receive this money.

Mishnah Ten
If the house fell down on a man and his mother, they (the Schools of Shammai and Hillel) agree that the they split the property.
Rabbi Akiva said: “I agree here, that the property remains in its former status.”
Ben Azzai said to him:  “We already are distressed over those things upon which there is disagreement, and you are coming to bring disagreement on the points in which they agree.”

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
In our mishnah a man and his mother (who was a widow) died in the same accident and it is unknown who died first.  Furthermore, the man had no sons who would inherit him and the woman had no other sons to inherit from her.  If the son died first then the mother’s other inheritors would receive her inheritance.  If the mother died first then the son would inherit her and his inheritors would receive her (as well as his) inheritance.  In such a case the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel agree that all of the inheritors split the property.  Since they are all making claims based on inheritance and none of them had prior possession of the property such that we could say that the property reverts to its previous status (as was the School of Hillel’s opinion in previous mishnayoth), there is nothing left to do but split the property.
Rabbi Akiva believes that even in this case the property reverts to its previous status.  According to Rabbi Akiva when this woman was originally widowed she reverted to being part of her father’s family (as opposed to her husband’s family).  Therefore, when she died, the property is assumed to belong to the inheritors from her father’s side, regardless of whether they can prove that the son died first.
Ben Azzai responds to Rabbi Akiva that it is distressing enough that the Schools of Shammai and Hillel disagreed on so many issues.  In Ben Azzai’s opinion Rabbi Akiva should not create a new dispute where previous scholars were in agreement.
   
Questions for Further Thought:  
Mishnah nine:  How is the School of Hillel’s opinion in mishnah nine consistent with their opinion in mishnah eight? 
Mishnah ten:  Why is Ben Azzai distressed about the fact that the Schools of Shammai and Hillel disagreed over so many issues?  Why is Rabbi Akiva not distressed about this?  

