Bava Batra Chapter Six Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnah seven deals with laws concerning the building and the selling of private and public paths. 
Mishnah eight deals with the building of tombs.

Mishnah Seven
If a public path passed through a man’s field and he took it and gave them [another path] by the side of the field, what he has given he has given and what he has taken for himself does not become his.
A private path is four cubits.
A public path is sixteen cubits.
The king’s path has no prescribed measure.
The path to a grave has no prescribed measure.
The halting places, according to the judges of Tzippori, should be four kab’s space of ground.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
In the scenario presented in section one a person had a path that passed through the middle of his field and decided that he would take that path and use it as part of his field and he would create a different public path on the side of his field.  According to the mishnah the seizure of the public path is invalid and the public may continue to use the path in the middle of the field.  In addition, the path given on the side of the field becomes public property, such that the public may also use that path.
The remainder of the mishnah standardizes the sizes of paths for the purposes of selling and buying.  A private path is four cubits (about 2 meters) wide and a public path is 16 cubits (8 meters) wide.  Therefore if a person were to sell a private path he would be selling a four cubit path, and if he sold a public path he would have sold a 16 cubit path.  The mishnah additionally informs us that a king’s procession passing through another person’s field is permitted to take as wide of a path as needed.  So too, if a funeral procession passes, the procession may cut as wide of a path as needed.  Finally, we learn that halting places, which were places on the path of the funeral procession, where the mourners would stop in the course of a funeral procession in order to eulogize the dead, were generally four kab big (25 meters by 17 meters).  If a person sold a “halting place” to another person this is the size of the land sold.

Mishnah Eight
If a man sold to his fellow a place in which to make a tomb, so, too, if a man was commissioned by his fellow to make a tomb, he must make the inside of the vault four cubits by six, and open within it eight niches, three on this side, three on that side, and two opposite [the doorway].
The niches must be four cubits long, seven handbreadths high, and six handbreadths wide.
Rabbi Shimon says:  “He must make the inside of the vault four cubits by eight, and open within it thirteen niches, four on this side, four on that side, three opposite [the doorway] and one to the right of the doorway and one to the left.
He must make a courtyard at the opening of the vault, six cubits by six, space enough for the bier and its bearers. 
And he may open within it two vaults, one on either side.
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Four, one on each of its sides.”
Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “All depends on the nature of the rock.”

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
In the times of the mishnah people were buried in tombs, which consisted of caves with niches carved out of the wall.  Each tomb could hold a number of bodies, with one body put into each niche.  If someone contracted to build a tomb he must build one 4 by 6 cubits (2 by 4 meters) and make eight niches, each of a specified length, width and height.  According to Rabbi Shimon, the tomb must be 4 by 8 cubits and contain 13 niches.  In addition, he must build a courtyard over the tomb, big enough for the bier, a stretcher which carried the body and the people holding the bier.  According to the anonymous opinion in 3a, the courtyard can serve two tombs and according to Rabbi Shimon it can serve four. 
Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel, section 4, disagrees with Rabbi Shimon and the anonymous opinion in section 1.  According to Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel the size of the tomb is not set in absolute terms, but depends on the nature of the rock.  If it is hard rock he is only obligated to make eight niches in a 4 by 6 tomb, but if it is soft rock, he is obligated to make thirteen niches in a 4 by 8 tomb.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven, section one:  Why is the person in this mishnah doubly fined in that his seizure is invalid and yet his relinquishin the path on the side is valid?  What message is the mishnah conveying?
Mishnah eight:  Why might the anonymous opinion in section 3a limit the builder to two tombs per courtyard?  What is the problem with too many tombs?

