Bava Batra Chapter Eight Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The eighth and ninth chapters of Bava Batra deal with the laws of inheritance.  It states in Numbers 8-11 (JPS translation):  “If a man dies without leaving a son, you shall transfer his property to his daughter.  If he has no daughter, you shall assign his property to his brothers.  If he has no brothers, you shall assign his property to his father’s brothers.  If his father had no brothers, you shall assign his property to his nearest relative in his own clan, and he shall inherit it.”
The first two mishnayoth of our chapter deal with the order of inheritance, who inherits from whom and who bequeaths property to whom.

Mishnah One
There are those who inherit and bequeath, there are those who inherit but do not bequeath, there are those who bequeath but do not inherit and there are those who neither bequeath nor inherit.
These inherit and bequeath:  a father as to his sons and sons as to their father and brothers from the same father, these inherit and bequeath.
A man as to mother, and a man as to his wife, and the sons of sisters, inherit but do not bequeath.
A woman as to her sons, and a wife as to her husband, and brothers of the mother, bequeath but do not inherit.
And brothers from the same mother [but not father] neither inherit nor bequeath.

Explanation—Mishnah One
This mishnah lists in four categories all those who inherit from others and all those who, when they die, bequeath property to others.
Category one:  The relationships listed in this category both inherit and bequeath.  When a father dies, his sons inherit and if they should die without offspring, the father inherits from them.  If a man dies and he has no children and his father is already dead his brother will inherit.  So too if his brother dies in a similar situation , he bequeaths his property to his brother.
Category two:  The relationships listed in this category are ones in which the person inherits but does not bequeath.  A man inherits his mother but if he should die first, the mother does not inherit from him.  So too, a man inherits his wife but if he should die his property is not bequeathed to her.  If a man dies and his sister had children, they may inherit him if he has no closer relative.  However, if they die, he does not inherit their property since it will pass to their father’s side and not their mother’s.
Category three: The relationships listed in this category are ones in which the person bequeaths but does not inherit.  A woman bequeaths her property to her sons but she does not inherit from them if they should die first.  Likewise, a husband inherits his wife’s property, but he does not bequeath his property to her.  Finally, if a man dies and his closest relative is his sister’s children his property is bequeathed to them, but if they should die he cannot inherit from them.
Category four: The relationships listed in this category are ones in which the person neither bequeaths nor inherits.  If a man dies and he leaves a brother who shares a mother but not a father he does not bequeath his property to him, nor does he inherit his property should the brother die.  The inheritance lines go to each man’s father’s family and not to his relatives on his mother’s side. 

Mishnah Two
This is the order of inheritance:  “If a man dies without leaving a son, you shall transfer his property to his daughter” (Numbers 27:8)—the son precedes the daughter, and all the son’s offspring precede the daughter.  
The daughter precedes the brothers and the daughters’ offspring precede the brothers.’
Brothers precede the father’s brothers and the brothers’ offspring precede the father’s brothers.
This is the general rule:  whosoever has precedence in inheritance, his offspring also has precedence.
The father has precedence over all his offspring.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah deals with the order of inheritance as mentioned in the verse, quoted in section one.  A son precedes a daughter in inheritance.  In addition, if the son had children they inherit even if the son is no longer alive.  In other words grandchildren inherit directly from their grandfather if the father is no longer alive. As stated in the general rule in section five, offspring in essence take the place of the supposed inheritor.  So too if the daughter has offspring and she is no longer alive, they will inherit in place of the brothers of the deceased.  If the brothers of the deceased have offspring and the brothers are no longer alive, they will inherit in place of the deceased man’s father’s brothers.  
Finally, the mishnah teaches us one other piece of information that we might have assumed from the Torah but is not explicit.  The Torah lists the father’s brothers as being on the line of inheritance but it does not list the father himself.  Our mishnah states that if a person dies without children, his or her father becomes the primary inheritor.  Likewise, if a grandchild would die with no offspring and the grandchild’s father is also not alive the grandfather would inherit from his granchild.

Questions for Further Thought:
Notice the extreme economy of language in the mishnah (it is even more apparent in the original Hebrew).  Why is the mishnah taught in such abbreviated language?    
Using the verses in the Book of Numbers as a basis, based upon what logic might the mishnah know that a father inherits from his children?  
