Bava Batra Chapter Eight Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
The first half of mishnah seven deals with laws concerning a father who gives money to his son before his death, thereby circumventing the lines of inheritance as prescribed in the Torah.  The second half of the mishnah deals with the division of the inheritance amongst the sons.  Mishnah eight deals with the division of the inheritance when daughters inherit.

Mishnah Seven
If a man writes over his property to his son, he must write, “From today and after my death”, according to Rabbi Judah.
Rabbi Yose says, “He need not do so.”
If a man writes over his property to his son to be his after his death, the father cannot sell it since it is written over to the son, and the son cannot sell it since it is in the possession of the father.
If his father sold the property, it is sold [only] until he dies; if the son sold the property, the buyer has no claim until the father dies.
The father harvests the crops and gives them to whomever he wishes, and what he has left harvested belongs to [all] his heirs.
If he left elder sons and younger sons, the elder sons may not take care of themselves [from the estate] at the expense of the younger sons, nor may the younger sons claim maintenance at the cost of the elder sons, rather they all share alike.
If the elder sons married [at the expense of the estate] so too the younger sons may marry [at the expense of the estate].
If the younger sons said, “We will marry in the way you married”, they do not listen to them, for what their father gave them, he has given.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
The first two sections of the mishnah deal with a father who wrote over his property to one of his sons before his death in order to avoid the property falling equally to all of his sons at the time of his death. The intent of the father’s action is for the money ti stay in the possession of the father until he dies but to already partly belong to the son to whom the property was written over.  In this way the son does not have to split the property with the other sons.
Section one:  In order to accomplish such an action the father must write in the document that it is valid “from today and after my death”.  He writes “from today” so that the property will already be transferred before his death, and thereby not subject to the laws of inheritance which take effect only after death.  He writes, “after my death” so that he can continue to use the property until he dies.  This is Rabbi Judah’s opinion.  According to Rabbi Yose he need not write “from today” in the document.  Since the document contains the date on which it was written, it is clear that the transfer occurs before his death, and is not subject to the laws of inheritance.
Section two:  After the document is written the property is neither fully the son’s nor fully the father’s.  Neither can sell the property; if the father were to do the sale is only valid until he dies at which point the property will belong to the son.  If the son were to sell the sale is valid only after the father dies.  Until then the property is in the father’s possession.  The father may continue to harvest the produce from his fields and he may even give it to others as he so desires.  If he dies and leaves harvested produce, it is subject to the laws of inheritance and not solely to the son to whom the father wrote his property.
Section three:  In this section the father died without writing his property over to one son.  In such a case the inheritance is divided equally.  The elder sons cannot take care of themselves at the expense of the younger sons.  Even though the elder sons need more clothing than the younger sons they may not use more than their share.  So too, the younger sons may not claim more food than their share, even though younger children eat and waste more food.  With regards to providing a marriage feast for the son and his bride and providing the young couple with a place to live, the younger sons can claim to receive the same amount from the inheritance that the elder sons receive.  If, however, the elder sons married while the father was still alive, the younger sons cannot claim that they should receive as much as the elder sons received.  Since the elder sons married while the father was alive the money their father gave them for the wedding was a gift and does not impact on the equal division of the inheritance.

Mishnah Eight
If he left elder daughters and younger daughters, the elder daughters may not care for themselves at the cost of the younger daughters, nor may the younger daughters claim maintenance at the cost of the elder daughters, rather they all share alike.
If the elder daughters married [and took each her dowry from the common inheritance] so too the younger daughters may marry [and take each a dowry from the common inheritance].
If the younger daughters said, “We will marry in the way you married”, they do not listen to them, for what their father gave them, he has given.
A greater stringency applies to daughters than to sons, since daughters can claim maintenance at the cost of the sons, but they cannot claim maintenance at the cost of the [other daughters].

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
The first three sections of this mishnah are identical to the last section of the previous mishnah.  The only difference is that while the father customarily pays for the wedding of his son, to his daughter he gives a dowry.  Therefore in section two and three the daughters are arguing over dowries and not over the costs of the wedding.
Section four:  We will learn in the first mishnah of the next chapter that if a father left sons and daughters and he did not have a large enough inheritance for the daughters to be maintained and the sons to inherit, the daughters’ maintenance (food, clothing and shelter) takes precedence over the sons’ inheritance.  However, if he left only daughters, the younger daughters cannot claim maintenance at the expense of the elder daughters.  In other words, the law with regards to daughters is more strict [vis a vis the other daughters] than the law with regards to sons.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven, section 2a:  Why is produce which is harvested before the father dies subject to the laws of inheritance whereas the rest of the father’s property is transferred to the son to whom the property was written over?
Mishnah eight, section 4:  Why do daughters receive maintenance (food, clothing and shelter) when sons inherit but not when other daughters inherit?  
