Bava Batra Chapter Ten Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnayoth three and four deal with the consent needed from the involved parties in order to write a document. 

Mishnah Three
They may write out a bill of divorce for a man even if his wife is not with him, or a receipt (stating that the husband has paid the ketubah debt) for the wife even if her husband is not with her, provided that he (the scribe) knows them.
And the husband pays the (scribe’s) fee.
They may write out a document for the debtor even though the creditor is not with him, but they may not write out a document for the creditor unless the debtor is with him.
And the debtor pays the (scribe’s) fee.
They may write out a deed of sale for the seller although the buyer is not with him, but they may not write it out for the buyer unless the seller is with him.
And the buyer pays the (scribe’s) fee.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  A scribe may write a get (a divorce document) for a husband or a receipt for the woman saying that she had received her ketubah payment even if the spouse is not there.  The reason that he can write the get without the woman’s presence is that according to Jewish law a woman can be divorced against her will.  Since she need not agree to the writing of the document, she need not be present when it is written.  The reason that the scribe can write the receipt without the husband’s presence is that it is to the husband’s advantage that a receipt be written.  Without the receipt the woman might claim that her husband had not paid her the ketubah money.  In other words, in both of these cases there is no potential that the husband will fraud the wife by writing a get nor the woman fraud the husband by writing a document.  The only requirement is that the scribe know the people for whom he is writing the document.  Since the husband is the one divorcing his wife and in the case of the receipt the husband is the one benefiting, he pays the scribe’s fee.
Section two:  A scribe may write a loan document while not in the presence of the creditor but it must be done in the presence of the debtor.  Since the debtor is the one who through the document becomes liable to pay back the creditor, the scribe must know that the debtor agreed to the writing of the document.  The creation of the document is beneficial to the creditor, for through it he will receive the money in return. Therefore it need not be written in his presence.  The debtor pays the scribe’s fee.
Section three: A scribe may write a sale document while not in the presence of the buyer but it must be done in the presence of the seller.  Since the document will cause the seller to lose his property, the scribe must know that it is being written with his consent.  The buyer, who gains from the sale, need not be present.  The buyer pays the scribe’s fee.

Mishnah Four
They may not write documents of betrothal or marriage except with the consent of both parties.
And the bridegroom pays the (scribe’s) fee.
They may not write documents of tenancy and sharecropping except with the consent of both parties.
And the tenant pays the (scribe’s) fee. 
They may not write documents of arbitration or any document drawn up before a court except with the consent of both parties.
And both parties pay the (scribe’s) fee.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “Two documents are written for the two parties, one copy for each.”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  Since it is necessary for both the bridegroom and the groom to consent to the marriage of the other,  the scribe may not write the document without both of their consent.  Since the bridegroom is gaining a wife, he writes the document.
Section two:  Tenancy is a lease in which the tenant agrees to give the owner of the land a fixed portion of the crop.  Sharecropping is a lease in which the sharecropper agrees to give a fixed amount regardless of what the crop yields.  In both of the these types of agreements between landowners and those who wish to work the land the document must be written in front of them both.  Since the landowner is giving over a piece of his land and the tenant is promising to give the landowner something in return the scribe must ensure that the deal is agreed to by both parties.  The scribe’s fee is split.
Section three:  Arbitration documents are those that state who are the judges from whom the litigants agreed to accept binding judgement.  In the time of the Mishnah litigants jointly chose judges (see Sanhedrin 3:1), who were not necessarily fixed employees of the state.  The other types of court documents referred to in this mishnah would include such documents as those which allowed the creditor to collect the collateral from the debtor in case of default on a loan or a document that states that a creditor collected such collateral (possibly from a third party).  These documents must be written in the presence of both parties, and both parties share the scribe’s fee. 

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three, sections two and three:  Why do you think the debtor and not the creditor pays the scribe’s fee?  Remember that according to Jewish law it is forbidden to lend money to other Jews with interest. Why does the buyer pay the fee?
Can you extract general principles from these two mishnayoth for when the document must be written in a person’s presence?
   
