Bava Batra Chapter Six Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
Mishnah one deals with a person who sells grain to another person and the seeds from that grain do not sprout when planted.  Mishnah two deals with a person who sells something to another person and some of the sold item is found not to be good.  In both of these mishnayoth the question asked is can the buyer demand his money back.

Mishnah One
If a man sold grain to his fellow [and after it was sown] it did not sprout, even if it was flax-seed he is not liable.
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “If it was garden-seeds, which are not used for food, he is liable.”

Explanation—Mishnah One
According to the anonymous opinion in section one, when a person sells grain to another person, if he does not specify that the grain is for planting, he is not liable if the grain doesn’t spout after planted.  Even if he sold flax seed, which is usually sold for sprouting new flax plants, he is still not liable.  Since he didn’t specify that he was selling grain to be planted, he can claim that he intended it to be used as food.  According to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel if he sold him seeds that are always used for planting then he is liable if they do not sprout.  Otherwise, he is not liable.  

Mishnah Two
If a man sold grain to his fellow, the buyer must agree to accept a quarter-kab of refuse with every seah.
[If he bought] figs he must agree to accept ten that are eaten by worms for every one hundred.
[If he bought] a cellar of wine, he must agree to accept ten jars gone sour in every one hundred.
[If he bought] jars in Sharon, he must agree to accept ten which are not fully dry (and therefore are easily broken) in one hundred.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
When a person buys a large amount of a certain item he can expect that most of the  items will be pure and in good working order, but he cannot expect that they will all be pure or in working order.  If he buys grain and he finds that there is a certain amount of refuse in the grain, as long as the refuse is not more than a quarter-kab (about 350 grams) per seah (8.3 liters), he can’t demand his money back.  This is about five per cent refuse.  Similarly if he buys figs he can expect that some will be rotten, if he buys barrels of wine some will be sour and if he buys jars some will not be made properly.  As long as the unacceptable part of the purchase is less than ten per cent, he cannot demand his money back.
[Note:  Sharon is on the coast of Israel, between Jaffa and Haifa.]

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  If a person sold seeds and they did not sprout is he liable to give the buyer back his money?  How can one know the answer to this question from the mishnah?
