Bava Batra Chapter Nine Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three discusses sons who share an inheritance and some of the sons improve the value of the property.  The issue discussed is are the sons who improved the value the only ones to profit or is the profit divided equally between all of the inheriting sons.  A similar situation is discussed in which a widow improves the value of her dead husband’s property.
Mishnah four discusses partnerships between brothers sharing their father’s inheritance and the question of the division of the profits and losses to the partnership.  

Mishnah Three
If a man left elder sons and younger sons, and the elder sons improved the property, they improve it to the common benefit.
If they said, “See, what our father has left us, lo, we will work and from that we will eat”, they improve it to their own benefit.
So, too, if a woman (a widow) improved the property, she improves it to the common benefit.
If she had said, “See, what my husband left to me, lo, I will work and from that I will eat”, she improves it to her own benefit.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
In the scenario mentioned in our mishnah Jacob died and left four sons, two who were older, Reuven and Shimon, and two who were younger, Levi and Judah, and Jacob owned a piece of real estate worth 1000 dollars.  If Reuven and Shimon were to take this land and improve it, thereby doubling its value, each son’s portion would double.  Even though Levi and Judah did not work to improve the value, since it was their inheritance as well, they receive some of the benefit.  If, however, Reuven and Shimon said that they were increasing the value of their portions only, than they alone receive the increase in value.  
Similarly if a widow were to increase the value of her dead husband’s estate, she would share in the increase with the sons of her husband, or the other heirs. However, if she were to state that she is improving her own lot, than she herself would receive the benefit of her work.
Note:  a widow does not inherit from her husband.  She is, however, entitled to receive maintenance from her husband’s estate.  Maintenance payments will be based on the value of the estate:  if there is a large estate she will receive better quality food, clothing and shelter.  Therefore, it is in her interest to increase the value of the estate.

Mishnah Four
If brothers were partners and one of them fell into a public office, it falls to the common benefit.
If one [of them] got sick and needed healing, his healing is at his own expense.
If certain of the brothers in their father’s lifetime had made a present as groomsmen [at their father’s expense] and [after his death] the present was restored to them, it is restored to the common benefit, for the groomsmen’s gift [counts as a loan] and can be recovered in a court of law.
But if [one of the brothers in his father’s lifetime] sent his fellow jars of wine or jars of oil, they cannot be recovered through a court of law, since they count [not as a loan but] as a charitable deed.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  If brothers form a partnership to live off their father’s inheritance and one of the brothers is appointed to a job with the government, his salary is split amongst the brothers.  The mishnah assumes that he received his job on account of his father’s prestige and therefore the job is in essence part of the inheritance.
Section two:  If one of the brother’s got sick, he must pay out of his own share for his healing.  Since the sickness is not connected to the inheritance the cost of the healing is not taken out of the inheritance.
Section three:  In the time of the mishnah it was customary for people to send wedding gifts to the bride and groom in order to help them celebrate the seven days of wedding festivities.  These wedding gifts were not exactly gifts but rather more like loans, for it was the law that one who received the gift would have to himself send a gift when the original sender got married.  If some of the brothers had used their father’s money to send wedding gifts when the father was still alive, when the presents are received in return at the time of the sons marriage, they are split amongst all of the brothers, even those who did not send the gifts and who are not getting married.  Since wedding gifts are like a loan, it is as if they never left the possession of the father, and they are therefore subject to the laws of inheritance.  In the last clause the mishnah distinguishes between wedding presents and regular presents.  If a person gave another person a jar of wine or oil as a present, these cannot be recovered like a loan, for they a form of charity.   

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four, section one:  What would be the law if the brother received a public office not due to his father’s prestige but rather due to his own abilities?  Would he still have to share the salary with his brothers?
Mishnah four, section three:  If wedding gifts were more like loans why did people give them?
