Bava Batra Chapter Two Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three discusses a person who builds a fence partially around another person’s property and wishes that person to share in the costs of the fence.
Mishnah four continues to discuss a wall built in a courtyard owned by two partners, a topic that began in the first mishnah of the chapter.

Mishnah Three
If a man’s land surrounded his fellow’s land on three sides, and he fenced it on the first and the second and the third sides, they do not obligate him [to share in the costs].  
Rabbi Yose says:  “If he rose a built a fence on the fourth side, they obligate him to share in all of the costs.”

Explanation—Mishnah Three
In the scenario discussed in this mishnah Reuven owns three fields which surround Shimon’s fields on three of its four sides.  If Reuven were to fence in all three of his fields he would have built a fence around three sides of Shimon’s fields.  Since this fence does not totally surround Shimon’s field, Reuven cannot claim that Shimon benefited from the field and should therefore share in the costs. Rabbi Yose adds that if Shimon were to fence in four sides, he would thereby show that he wished to have his field fenced in.  In that case he is obligated to share in the costs of all of the fences, since he now benefits from them all.

Mishnah Four
If the wall of a courtyard fell down they obligate each of the partners to help in building it up to a height of four cubits.
He is presumed to have paid [his share] unless the other brings proof that he has not paid.
[If the fence was built] four cubits or higher, they do not obligate him [to help in building it.]
If [the one who did not contribute] built another wall near it, even if he did not put a roof upon it, they obligate him to share in all of the costs.
He is presumed not to have paid [his share] unless he brings proof that he has. 

Explanation—Mishnah Four
In the times of the mishnah, a standard wall, built in a courtyard was about four cubits high (over two meters, a little less than seven feet).  Therefore, if the previous wall fell down, each partner would be obligated to rebuild the wall until it was four cubits high.  If Reuven claims that Shimon did not pay his share, Reuven must bring proof. Since this law is commonly known, we assume that Reuven would not have begun to build the wall until Shimon paid his share.  If he did build the wall without first collecting, he must bring proof that Shimon still owes him money.
In contrast, if Reuven built the wall over four cubits, he cannot ask Shimon to pay for the costs of the added height.  Since walls are not commonly built over four cubits high, Shimon can claim that he did not want such a high wall.  If however, Shimon were to use the wall to support another wall, and show that he intended to lay a roof on the two walls, he must pay for the added height.  Although he was not initially obligated, since he subsequently used the wall, he is obligated to pay for it.  Since this law is not commonly known, we cannot assume that Shimon paid his share.  Until he brings a receipt showing that he has paid for the wall, he will still be obligated towards Reuven.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  If Reuven owns fields surrounding all four sides of Shimon’s field and he puts a fence around all of them, will Shimon have to share in the costs?
What is the connection between mishnah three and mishnah four?  What similar idea is mentioned in both mishnayoth? 
