Bava Batra Chapter Eight Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
In Numbers 27 the story is told of Zelophehad’s daughters.  Zelophehad died with no sons and his daughters came to Moses to request that they inherit Zelophehad’s property.  Moses brings the request to God who affirms that if there are no sons then the daughters are the next in the line of inheritance.  Mishnah three deals with the case of Zelophehad’s daughters and mishnah four deals with the difference between the inheritance of the son and the daughter.

Mishnah Three
The daughters of Zelophehad took three portions of the inheritance (of the Land of Israel):
The portion of their father who was of them that came out of Egypt;
And his portion among his brothers from the property of Hepher (Zelophehad’s father);
And, in that he (Zelophehad) was the first-born, he took a double portion.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah lists how many portions of land the daughters of Zelophehad received.  According to the mishnah the Land of Israel was divided according to the adult males who left Egypt (and not according to those who actually arrived to the Land of Israel).  Since Zelophehad and his father, Hepher, both left Egypt, they both would have received a piece of land in Israel.  In addition, Zelophehad, being the first born, would have taken a double portion in the inheritance he received from Hepher.  These three portions, Zelophehad’s own portion and the two portions he inherited from Hepher, all would have passed down to the daughters of Zelophehad when he died.

Mishnah Four
The son and the daughter are alike concerning inheritance, save that the [firstborn] son takes a double portion of the father’s property but he does not take a double portion of the mother’s property.
And the daughters receive maintenance from the father’s property but not from the mother’s property.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
This mishnah lists the differences between sons and daughters with regards to inheritance.  (Note: daughters only inherit when there are no sons).  The first difference is that the eldest son inherits the double portion, whereas the eldest daughter would inherit equally with younger sisters.  Furthermore, the son inherits a double portion of his father’s inheritance but not of his mother’s inheritance.  The law of the double portion are found in Deuteronomy 21:15.
If a man should die and leave sons and daughters, the sons inherit the estate but the minor daughters are maintained, i.e. fed, clothed, housed and in general provided for, by the estate of the deceased father.  We will learn this principle in chapter nine.  Here the mishnah states that the daughters, when receiving maintenance payments, receive them only from the estate of the father and not from the estate of the mother.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three:  How does this mishnah connect with the subject of the previous mishnah?  In other words why is this mishnah here and not somewhere else in the chapter?
Mishnah four:  Section one is actually worded in a somewhat difficult manner.  What makes it difficult?  
