Bava Batra Chapter Two Mishnayoth Eleven and Twelve

Introduction
Mishnah eleven deals with distancing trees from cisterns lest the roots break the underground walls of the cisterns.
Mishnah twelve deals with distancing trees from the another person’s fields.

Mishnah Eleven
A tree may not be grown within twenty five cubits of a cistern, or within fifty cubits if it is a carob or a sycamore, whether it is higher or on the same level.
If the cistern was there first the tree shall be cut down and compensation given.
If the tree was there first it shall not be cut down.
If it is in doubt which was there first, the tree shall not be cut down.
Rabbi Yose says:  “Even if the cistern was there before the tree it should not be cut down, since this one dug within his own domain and the other planted within his own domain.”

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven
Section one prohibits one from planting a tree either twenty five or fifty cubits, depending on the type of tree, from another’s cistern lest the roots damage the cistern.  This is true whether the tree is on higher or equal ground to the cistern.
Section two deals with the consequences of a tree that was planted closer than twenty five or fifty cubits.  If the cistern was there first, the tree must be cut down, but the owner will receive compensation.  Even though he was not supposed to plant there, it is still his property and therefore he is paid for the loss of the tree.  However, the cistern owner can at least take the initiative and force him to remove his tree.  If, however, the tree was there first, the owner of the cistern cannot even force the tree owner to remove the tree.  If it is unclear which is there first, the tree is not removed.
Rabbi Yose has a different opinion.  According to him, so long as each person’s activities are confined to his property, the other cannot force him to remove the potentially offending object, in this case a tree.  Rabbi Yose is what we might in our time call a right to privacy advocate.


Mishnah Twelve
A person may not plant a tree near another’s field unless it is four cubits away, no matter whether it be a vine or any other kind of tree.
If there was a wall between, each may plant up to the wall on either side.
If its roots entered within the other’s property, the other may cut them away to a depth of three handbreadths so that they shall not hinder the plough.
If he dug a cistern, trench or cave, he may cut them away as far down as he digs, and the wood shall belong to him.

Explanation—Mishnah Twelve
A tree planted close to another person’s property will eventually grow onto that property, both above and below ground.  Therefore a person was required to distance his trees four cubits from another’s property.     
The remainder of the mishnah is basically refining this general law which we learn in section one.  In 1a we learn that the law is not applicable if there is a fence, which would prevent the leaves of the trees from entering into the neighbor’s property.  If there is a fence than one may plant his trees right up to the fence.  In 1b we learn that if the roots of your neighbor’s tree enters your property you are allowed to remove the roots that are less than three handbreadths deep, so that the plow will not get caught on them.  Finally, we learn at the end of the mishnah that if one was digging something on his property and the roots interfered, he can cut them away even further than the aforementioned three cubits.
   
Questions for Further Thought
Mishnah eleven:  In mishnah seven we discussed a similar issue to this mishnah.  What are the differences between the two mishnayoth and why do you think they exist?
Mishnah twelve:  In the last clause of the mishnah it says that the trees (i.e. cut away roots of trees) are his.  Why doesn’t he have to return them to the owner of the tree?
