Bava Batra Chapter Ten Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnayoth five and six deal with laws concerning paying back debts and the proper procedure done with the debt document when the loan is fully or partially paid back.

Mishnah Five
If a man had paid part of his debt and gave the debt document to a third party, and the debtor said to him, “If I have not paid you back by such and such a day, give him (the creditor) back the debt document” and the time came and he had not paid, Rabbi Yose says:  “He should give it to him.”
Rabbi Judah says:  “He should not give it to him.”

Explanation—Mishnah Five
When a person borrows from another person the creditor keeps possession of the debt document, in order to use it later to collect his debt.  If the debtor were to pay back half of the loan, the creditor would not be able to give back the debt document, lest he be unable to collect the second half of the loan.  On the other hand, the debtor would not want the creditor to keep the document, lest he use it to collect the entire loan, even though half was already paid back.  One solution to such a problem was to give the debt document to a third person and for the debtor to promise to pay back the remainder within a certain time or else the third party was to return it to the creditor.  According to Rabbi Yose in such a case if the time elapsed the third party should give the debt document to the creditor.  According to Rabbi Judah he should not.  Since the debtor did not really intend to allow the creditor to collect more than his debt by using the debt document after it had been partially paid, the third party is not allowed to return it to the creditor.  

Mishnah Six 
If a man’s debt document was erased, he must have witnesses testify with regards to the loan, and come before the court to make this attestation: “So and so, the son of so and so, his debt document was erased on such and such a day, and so and so and so and so are his witnesses.”
If a man had paid part of his debt, Rabbi Judah says:  “He should exchange the debt document for a new one.” 
Rabbi Yose says:  “He should write a receipt.”
Rabbi Judah said:  “It turns out that this one (the debtor) will have to guard his receipt from mice.”
Rabbi Yose said to him:  “That’s good for him, as long as the rights of the other (the creditor) have not been damaged.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  If a creditor’s debt document was damaged, for instance through water, he needs to bring to the court witnesses to testify to the original loan.  The court will then draw up a new document which he will subsequently be able to use to recover his loan.
Section two:  We mentioned in the previous mishnah the problem created when a man pays back part of his loan.  In this mishnah two other solutions are offered.  Rabbi Judah says that a new loan document should be written.  Rabbi Yose says that the creditor should write a receipt.  Rabbi Judah tells Rabbi Yose that the problem with writing a receipt is that the debtor will have to guard it from being eaten by mice.  If the debtor loses the receipt the creditor will be able to fully collect the debt.  (Normally when a person pays back a debt the document would be torn up so that it would not be used again.)  Rabbi Yose says that his solution (writing a receipt) is better because writing a new document will damage the rights of the creditor.  The rights referred to here are the lien that exists on the creditors property.  The lien is effective from the day that is written on the document.  In other words any property owned by the debtor on the day mentioned in the debt document has on it a lien and therefore the creditor could collect that property should the debtor default.  If between the day on which the original document was written and the day of the rewriting, the debtor has lost property, a later date on the document will damage the creditor’s ability to collect on his loan.

Questions for Further Thought:
Is there any consistency in the opinions of Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Judah as they appear in the two mishnayoth? 
Mishnah six:  Why is Rabbi Judah concerned that a debtor will lose his receipt but evidently not concerned that a creditor will lose the debt document?

