Bava Batra Chapter Ten Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The tenth chapter of Bava Batra deals with laws concerning the proper writing and execution of documents.  

Mishnah One
A simple document has the signatures within (at the bottom of the page); a sewn document has signatures behind [each fold].  
If in a simple document its witnesses signed behind, or if in a sewn document its witnesses signed within, they are invalid.
Rabbi Hanina ben Gamaliel says:  “If in a sewn document its witnesses signed within, it is valid, since it can be made into a simple document.”
Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says:  “Everything should follow local custom.”

Explanation—Mishnah One
An “simple” document is one in which the text is written at the top of the page and the witnesses sign on the bottom, similar to forms used today.  A “sewn” document is one in which a few lines of text are written, and then the text is folded over and sewn at the fold and then signed on the back of the document.  This process is repeated several times, with each fold being witnessed and sign on the back side of the document.  Evidently this was a more difficult type of document to forge.  The first opinion in the mishnah states that each type of document must be signed in its customary manner:  a simple document on the front and a sewn document on the back.
Rabbi Hanina ben Gamaliel states that a sewn document with signatures on the front is nevertheless valid, and is in essence treated as if it was a simple document.  
Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel states that this law is dependent on the customs of the place. If the custom is to allow sewn documents to be signed on the inside as well as the outside then they are valid; if not they are invalid.

Mishnah Two
A simple document requires two witnesses; a sewn document requires three.
If a simple document has only one witness, or a sewn document has only two, they are both invalid.
If it was written in a debt document:  “100 zuz which are 20 sela (=80 zuz)”, he (the creditor) can claim only 20 sela; if [it was written] “100 zuz which are 30 sela (=120 zuz)” he (the creditor) can claim only 100 zuz.
[If there was written in a debt document] “Silver zuzim which are …”, and the rest was erased, [the creditor can claim] at least two zuzim.
[If there was written in a debt document] “Silver selas which are …”, and the rest was erased, [the creditor can claim] at least two selas.
[If there was written in a debt document] “Darics which are …”, and the rest was erased, [the creditor can claim] at least two darics.
If at the top was written a “maneh (100 zuz)” and at the bottom “200 zuz”, or “200 zuz” at the top and “maneh” at the bottom, everything goes according to the bottom amount.
If so, why is the figure written at the top of the document?
So that, if a letter of the lower figure was erased, they can learn from the upper figure.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
This mishnah deals with documents which were not done properly or had the amount of the debt partially erased.
Section one:   A simple document must have two witnesses and a “sewn document” must have three.  If they have fewer than the required amount  the document is invalid.
Section two:  If in a debt document (an IOU) a number was incorrectly converted into another coin (i.e. dollars into cents), the debtor owes the creditor only the lower amount. 
Section three:  If a document said that the debtor owed a plural of a certain coin, but the number of the coins owed was erased the creditor can collect only two of the coin.  Since the coin was written in plural (i.e. dollars), we know that the number was more than one.  The minimum that it could have been is two, and this is what the creditor will be able to collect from the debtor.
Section four:  If the number at the bottom of a debt document disagrees with the number at the top, the creditor can collect according to the bottom figure, whether it is higher or lower than the bottom figure.  The assumption is that the writer of the document, the debtor (or a scribe on his behalf) changed his mind after writing the first amount, and his true intention was the second amount.   The mishnah then asks, why do we customarily write the amount on the top and not just on the bottom?  The answer is that the top amount will help if the bottom amount is erased.  If, however both amounts are still clearly written, we follow the bottom one.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  Why is a simple document whose witnesses signed on the back invalid?  What is the problem with signing on the back?   
Mishnah two, section twos and three:  What is the principle that explains why in this case the debtor owes the lower amount (section two) or only two of the coin (section three)?  
