Bava Batra Chapter Four Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
Chapter four of Bava Batra deals with the laws of sale, and specifically with the question which things are included in the sale of a particular item.  The two mishnayoth which we will learn today deal with the sale of house and with which items go to the buyer with the house and which remain with the seller.

Mishnah One
If a man sold a house, he has not sold its side chambers, even though they open into the house, nor the room that is behind [the house], nor the roof, if it has a railing more than ten hand-breadths high.  
Rabbi Judah says: “If the roof as entrance shaped like a door, even if the railing is not ten hand-breadths high, it is sold.”

Explanation—Mishnah One
If someone sells a house without specifying what parts of the house he is selling, there are certain things that are not included in the sale.  According to section one, basically the main room is included in the house, but the side room and the room behind the house are not included.  The roof is also not included, on the condition that it has a railing more than ten hand-breadths high.  According to Rabbi Judah, even if the railing is not ten hand-breadths high, if it has an entrance the shape of a door, it is not sold with the house.  In order for the purchaser to acquire these things, he would have to specify so at the time of the sale.

Mishnah Two
Nor [has he sold] the cistern or the cellar, even though he had written in the deed of sale, “the depth and height”.  
And he [the seller] must buy himself a path [from the new owner to reach the cellar or cistern], according to Rabbi Akiva.
But the Sages say:  “He need not buy himself a path.”
And Rabbi Akiva agrees that if he had said to him, “Excepting these [the cistern or cellar]” that he need not buy himself a path.
If he sold them [the cellar or cistern] to another, Rabbi Akiva says:  “He need not buy himself a path.”
But the Sages say:  “He must buy himself a path.”

Explanation—Mishnah Two
All of the sages of our mishnah agree that when a person sells another person a house, he has not sold the underground chambers, namely a cistern for storing water, or a cellar used to store food and wine.  Even if he wrote that he was selling to the depth of the house, his intent may have been the floor of the house, and not the cellar or cistern.  The argument between Rabbi Akiva is over whether or not the seller must buy a path in the house that he sold which will allow him to get to his cellar or cistern.  According to Rabbi Akiva, since he sold the whole house, the new owner will have the right to refuse entrance.  If the old owner wants to get to his cellar he will need to purchase a path.  The Sages disagree. When the person sold the house and did not sell the cellar, we can assume that he intended not to sell a path in the house by which he could reach the cellar.  Hence, he does not need to buy a path.  Rabbi Akiva agrees with the Sages that if the seller specified to the buyer that he was not selling the cellar or cistern, than he intended on retaining the path and he need not, therefore, purchase the path from the buyer of the house.
Section three discusses the opposite situation, where a person sells a cistern or cellar but not the house.  According to Rabbi Akiva, the assumption is that when the seller sold the cistern he intended to sell a path as well, and the buyer need not, therefore, purchase a separate path.  According to the Sages, the seller may have sold the cistern or cellar without intending to sell a path by which the buyer could reach them.  Consequently, if the buyer wishes to get to his new cellar or cistern he must buy a path as well.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one:  Why is important for the roof to have a railing more than ten-handbreadths high, in order for it not to be included in the sale?
Mishnah two:  Do Rabbi Akiva and the Sages express consistent positions throughout the different sections of the mishnah?  If so, how may those positions be explained?
