Ohalot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a case where corpse impurity is found inside a wall. The question is—does the impurity defile the house which is towards the inside of the wall? Also, does it defile a person standing on top of the wall? 

Mishnah Three
A wall serving a house is treated as if it was separate halves. 
How so? A wall serving an open space, that has uncleanness within it: 
If it is in the inward half, the house is unclean, 
But what is above [the wall]   remains clean.   
If it is in the outward half, the house remains clean, 
But what is above [the wall] becomes unclean.   
If it is exactly in the middle, the house becomes unclean, 
And as for what is above, 
Rabbi Meir declares it unclean, 
But the sages declare it clean.   
Rabbi Judah says: the whole of the wall belongs to the house. 

Explanation
Section one: The wall that serves a house is treated as if it was two separate halves. The inner half of the wall is part of the house and the outer half of the wall is not part of the house.
Section two: If the source of uncleanness is in the inside half of the wall, then it defiles the contents of the house. However, someone who is above the wall remains clean as if he were standing on the roof of a house (who is clean if there is uncleanness in the house, because the ceiling is a barrier to the impurity).
Section three: If the source of uncleanness is in the outer half of the wall, then we don't consider it to be in the house and the contents of the house are unclean. What is above the wall is unclean for the impurity in the wall goes up without anything to stop it.
Section four: If the source of uncleanness is right in the middle of the wall, the mishnah rules stringently with regard to the contents of the house, and says that they are unclean. 
With regard to what is above the house, Rabbi Meir again rules stringently. However, the sages are consistent with opinion found in section one. If the contents of the house are unclean, then it means that we look at the uncleanness as if it was in the house. In that case, the person standing above the wall is pure.
Section five: Rabbi Judah disagrees with the opinion in section one. He holds that if the uncleanness is found anywhere in the wall it is considered to be in the house. The contents of the house are unclean but a person standing above the wall is clean because the impurity is in the house. 

