Ohalot, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
A person who walks through a bet peras on stones that cannot [easily] be moved, or [who rides] on a man or beast whose strength is great, remains clean.
[But if he walks] on stones that can [easily] be moved, or [rides] upon a man or beast whose strength is lousy, he becomes unclean.   
A person who travels in the land of the gentiles over mountains or rocks, becomes unclean;   
But if [he travels] by the sea or along the strand, he remains clean. 
What is [meant by] ‘the strand’? Any place to which the sea rises when it is stormy.

Explanation 
Section one: If a person walks through a bet peras but steps only on stones that cannot be moved, or if he gets a ride through a bet peras on the back of another strong person or strong animal, he remains pure. This is because by walking through the bet peras he doesn't move any soil underneath that might contain bones. In the case of the stones, since the stones cannot be moved, he won't move anything that is underneath. And in the case of the person/beast, even though the carrier will move the soil that he treads upon, the person being carried does not move the person carrying him (because he is strong), and therefore he remains pure.
However, if he walks on stones that can be moved or on the back of a weak person or animal, he becomes impure because he is considered as moving the soil underfoot. If the carrier moves a bone underneath, then the person carrying is considered as having moved the bones as well. 
Section two: In 2:3 we learned that the land outside of Israel is considered to be impure. One who walks there is defiled. Our mishnah teaches that this includes even the mountains and rocks. We might have thought that since the dead are not buried there, that these places are pure. Therefore the mishnah teaches that the rabbinic decree that the land of the Gentiles is impure includes even places such as these.
However, it doesn't include the sea or the strand close to the sea. It seems that these places are not considered to be "land" and therefore they were not included in the rabbinic decree.    

