Ohalot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
Vessels beneath the flowerlike top [of a pillar] remain clean.   
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri declares them unclean. 
[In the case of] the uncleanness and the vessels being [together] beneath the flowerlike top [of a pillar]: 
If there is a space of one cubic handbreadth there, [the vessels] become unclean; 
If not, they remain clean.   
[In the case of] two wall-cupboards, one beside the other, or one above the other, if one of them was opened, both it and the house become unclean, but its companion remains clean.   
The wall-cupboard is considered as if it is plugged up, and it is subject to the principle of halves for conveying uncleanness into the house.

Explanation
Section one: The first half of today's mishnah continues to deal with the pillar. On top of a pillar there was typically an ornament that looked like a flower and it would extend to the sides of the pillar. If there are vessels in this space, which is not directly above the source of impurity found below the pillar, they remain pure. In other words, the purity goes directly up and misses the vessels found on the side of the pillar.
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri considers them to be unclean because the ornament is part of the pillar, even if it is not directly over the source of impurity.
Section two: There is a source of uncleanness in this ornament itself and there are vessels on the ground beneath this part of the pillar. If the uncleanness is found in an empty space that is one cubic handbreadth within the ornament, then the impurity will go up and down and defile the vessels below. However, if there is not such a space, the impurity remains trapped inside the ornament. 
Section three: The mishnah now discusses some rules concerning cupboards that are built into the walls of a house. If one cupboard has a source of impurity in it and it is opened, anything in the house or in that cupboard is unclean. However, anything in the closed cupboard is pure because it has a space the size of cubit handbreadth, making it into an ohel, and an ohel prevents impurity from entering.
Section four: The wall-cupboard is seen to be a plugged up part of the wall that serves the house. If the source of impurity is in the half of the wall that is closer to the house, the wall-cupboard is reckoned as part of the wall when considering the width of the wall. For instance, if the thickness of the wall is two handbreadths and it contains a wall-cupboard that is one handbreadth thick, we don't consider the wall to be only one handbreadth thick. That would mean that the impurity would have to be half a handbreadth from the inside of the wall for it to defile the contents of the house. Rather, as long as the impurity is within a handbreadth, it is considered to be to the side of the house.  
