Ohalot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
If corpse-bearers were passing along a portico and one of them shut a door and   locked it with a key, 
If the door can remain in its position on its own,[the contents of the house] remain clean, 
But if not, they become unclean. 
Similarly [in the case of] a barrel of dried figs or a basket of straw placed in a window,   
If the dried figs or the straw can remain in their position on their own, [the contents of the room] remain clean, 
But if not they become unclean. 
[In the case of] a house partitioned off by wine-jars, which had been plastered with clay,   
If the clay can remain in its position on its own, [the space partitioned off] remains clean, 
But if not, it becomes unclean.  

Explanation
Section one: The corpse-bearers were walking along a portico (a structure with pillars and a roof) and one of them locked the door to the house before the dead body was brought into the portico. Subsequently, the corpse was brought into the portico.
If the door can stand in place on its own, without relying on the lock, then the contents of the house are pure. However, if the door cannot stand in place without the lock, then the contents of the house become unclean. This is similar to the rule we found in yesterday's mishnah. Something that serves as a barrier to impurity, in this case the door, must be able to stand on its own without relying on a person or a vessel (the lock) to hold it up. If it cannot stand on its own, it does not serve as a barrier.
Section two: This is the same rule except instead of a door serving as a barrier to impurity we have a barrel or a basket. Inside one room is a dead body. The barrel or basket themselves are susceptible to impurity and therefore they do not serve as a barrier (the barrel would serve as a barrier if its back was towards the room with the dead body). The dried figs or straw are not susceptible to impurity. If they can stand on their own, they serve as a barrier. But if they cannot, the impurity will defile the contents of the other room. 
Section three: In this situation the wine-jars themselves do not provide a barrier because their mouths are open to the impure side. If the clay can remain in place without the wine-jars then it will provide a barrier. But if it does not, there is no barrier and the impurity will spread from one side to the other. 
