Ohalot, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Mishnah One
All objects that defile by overshadowing which were divided and then brought into a house: 
Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas declares clean.
But the sages declare [it] unclean. 
What is the case? 
One who touches two pieces of nevelah,  each the size of half an olive, or carries them, 
Or, in the case of a corpse, if he touches a piece the size of half an olive and overshadows [another piece] the size of half an olive, 
Or if he touches [a piece] the size of half an olive and [another piece] the size of half an olive overshadows him, 
Or if he overshadows two [pieces, each] the size of half an olive, 
Or if he overshadows [a piece] the size of half an olive and [another piece] the size of half an olive overshadows him:
Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas declares him clean, 
And the sages declare him unclean. 
But if he touches [a piece] the size of half an olive and another object  overshadows him and [another piece] the size of half an olive, 
Or if he overshadows [a piece] the size of half an olive and another object overshadows him and [another piece] the size of half an olive, he is clean.  
Rabbi Meir says: Even here Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas declares him clean and the sages declare him unclean. 
Every [case] is unclean  except [a case of] contact [combined] with carriage or of carriage [combined] with overshadowing. 
This is the general principle:  every object [whose defilement] proceeds from one cause is unclean, from two causes is clean.

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas, if two of the defiling agents listed in 2:1 are found in an ohel but there is only half of a measure of each, they do not join together to create the necessary amount to defile. The other sages disagree and say that they do join together to defile.
Section two: This section now explains in what exact case Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas and the sages disagree. We should note that according to the opinion voiced here the debate exists not only in connection with defiling in a tent, but carrying and touching as well. 
He touches or carries two pieces of nevelah (the meat of an animal that was not slaughtered in a kosher fashion). Nevelah does not defile through overshadowing.
One hand has contact with half of a measure of a piece of corpse and the other hand overshadows half of a measure.
One hand has contact, and the other piece of corpse is stuck, for instance, in a wall, and it overshadows him.
He overshadows two pieces of half of an olive's size of corpse.
He overshadows one piece, and another piece overshadows him.
In all of these cases, the sages and Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas disagree.
Section three: According to the first opinion, the sages agree in the following two cases that the person is pure.
In the first case, he touches a half of an olive's size piece of corpse and at the same time something overshadows him and another half of a piece of corpse. In the second case, he overshadows half of a piece of corpse, and something overshadows him and another half of a piece of corpse. The rabbis say that he is pure in these cases. The rabbis hold that when one overshadows a piece of corpse or a piece of corpse overshadows him it is as if he had touched the piece, because the impurity travels up or down within an ohel. This means that in these two cases touching and overshadowing are in the same category or cause of impurity. However, if something overshadows him and a piece of corpse, it is not the same as contact with the corpse, and therefore there are two different causes of impurity—overshadowing and contact. As we learn below, two different causes do not join together to add up to a full measure of impurity. 
Section four: Rabbi Meir says that in these cases too, the rabbis hold that the two types of impurity can be joined. Ohel impurity can always be joined with contact impurity because they are essentially the same cause. The only types of impurity that cannot be joined are contact with carriage and carriage with ohel. Put simply, there are two general types of impurity: 1) contact/ohel; 2) carriage.
Section five: The general rule that governs the sages' opinion is that two different causes of impurity cannot be joined, but two of the same category can be joined. The anonymous mishnah in section three and Rabbi Meir disagree as to how we define different "causes of impurity" but they agree with this general principle. 

