Peah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with how many times a day the field owner must or should let the poor into his field to harvest the peah.

Mishnah Five
There are three times a day [the poor] make a search [in the field for peah]: morning, noon, and sunset.   
Rabban Gamaliel says: these [times] were only set lest they reduce them.   
Rabbi Akiva says: these were set lest they add to them.   
[The men] of Bet Namer used to have the poor harvest [the peah] with the aid of a rope,   and they left peah at the end of each furrow.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the standard position outlined here, the owner of a field must make his field available to the poor three times a day.  This seems to be a way to make sure that if they are working somewhere else, or perhaps trying to find work, their collection of peah won’t be endangered.
Section two:  Rabban Gamaliel says that the rabbis set a number of times at which a field owner must open his field so that field owners won’t reduce the number, thereby making it more difficult for the poor to come and collect.
Section three:  On the contrary, says Rabbi Akiva to Rabban Gamaliel. According to Rabbi Akiva, the reason that the fields have to be open three times a day is so that owners won’t open the field more frequently, thereby making the poor check the fields almost constantly. Having the fields open too much might also lead to owners opening them up at odd times and only letting selective poor people know when they come and collect.  This might corrupt the entire system, especially if poor people end up having to bribe the field owners to tell them when to come and collect.  With set times, this is less of a problem.  However, Rabbi Akiva does hold that if the owner wants to open the field only once or twice a day, he may.
Section four: This section describes a special way that the people of Bet Namer, either the name of a family or the name of a place, gave peah.  They would use a rope to mark off the ends of rows and beyond the rope the poor could collect their peah.  Some commentators explain that the Mishnah praises this because the poor would know exactly where the peah was coming from and they wouldn’t have the mental anguish of waiting in anticipation.  It seems in general that this is one of the problems with peah—it is somewhat subjective, often leaving the poor unsure of there future and also open to potential abuse among field owners.  

