Peah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with cases where we have a doubt as to whether the gleanings belong to the owner of the field or to the poor.  However, the first half of the mishnah seems to deal with the laws of forgotten sheaves and not with the laws of gleanings.  It is probably brought here due to some language which is similar to the second half of the mishnah.

Mishnah Two
The top of a single ear of grain [that remained] after the harvesting and its top touches the standing stalk: 
If it can be cut with the stalk, it belongs to the owner;  
But if not, it belongs to the poor. 
If an ear of grain of gleanings that became mixed up with a stack of grain, [the owner] must tithe one ear of grain and give it to him [the poor].  
Rabbi Eliezer says: how can this poor man give in exchange something that had not yet become his?  Rather, [the owner] must transfer to the poor man the ownership of the whole stack and then tithe one ear of grain and give it to him. 

Explanation
Section one:   After having harvested the stalks, one stalk remains that has a single ear of grain on it.  The question is, is this ear of grain considered to be “forgotten,” in which case it belongs to the poor? The rule is that if it still touches a standing stalk that has not yet been harvested and it can be cut in one swipe with that stalk then it is not forgotten.  If it cannot be cut together with the stalk, then it is not considered to be forgotten and it still belongs to the owner.  
Section two:  In this case an ear of grain of gleanings that should belong to the poor gets mixed up with a stack of grain that belongs to the field owner.  The problem here is that the gleanings are exempt from tithes whereas the stack is liable to be tithed. Therefore, he owner can’t just give the ear to the poor person, because he would be forcing the poor person to tithe it.  So according to the Rambam what he does is he takes two ears of grain from the stack.  He picks up the first one and says, “If this is the gleaning then let it belong to the poor person. But if it is not gleanings, then let the tithes that I give from the other ear be taken for this ear.”  He then makes the same statement on the second ear of grain.  Then he gives one to the poor person.
Section three:  According to Rabbi Eliezer, the problem with this is that the poor person has not yet taken the gleanings such that he can exchange them for another ear.  In other words, according to the sages, the poor person relinquishes ownership over the original gleanings when he accepts the ear of corn in exchange despite the fact that he has not even taken possession of the gleanings.  To avoid this problem what the field owner should do is give the whole stack to the poor person as a retractable gift (which according to halakhah counts as a gift), and then take it back and then perform the tithing procedure as described above.    

