Peah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
The final three mishnayot of Peah deal with the laws of tzedakah. 

Mishnah Seven 
They may not give a poor person wandering from place to place less than a loaf worth a pundion at a time when four seahs [of wheat cost] one sela.   
If he spends the night [at a place], they must give him the cost of what he needs for the night.   
If he stays over Shabbat they must give him enough food for three meals.   
He who has the money for two meals, he may not take anything from the charity dish.  
And if he has enough money for fourteen meals, he may not take any support from the communal fund.   
The communal fund is collected by two and distributed by three people. 

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah begins by dealing with a poor person wandering from place to place.  Although this poor person is not from the local town, and may be totally unknown to everyone, he is still provided for.  He is given a loaf of bread that can be bought for a pundion (a coin) at a time when wheat is going for four seahs per sela.  According to Mishnah Eruvin 8:2, this bread is enough for two meals.  The poor person is given enough bread to sustain him for a day.
Section two:  If he spends the night, he must be given enough money to rent pillows and blankets for the night.
Section three:  If he spends Shabbat in town then he should be given three meals, because on Shabbat it is customary to eat three meals and not the normal two.
Section four:  The first three sections of the mishnah outlined the rights of a poor person and the consequent responsibilities of the community.  In the next two sections the mishnah defines what is a poor person.  This objective definition prevents people who actually have money from taking communal funds.  A person can take from the charity dish only if he doesn’t even have enough money to buy his next two meals.  If he has enough money to buy two meals, then he must use this money to feed himself and not take from the community.
Section five:  The charity fund is a large basket used to collect money.  It is then given out to the poor of a city once a week, on Friday. This fund would not be used for food for those passing through but rather for the needs of the town’s fixed residents.  If a poor person has enough money to buy food for an entire week, that is he has enough money to buy fourteen meals, then he may not take from the charity fund.
Section six: When the charity collectors go around collecting money for this communal fund, there must be at least two people collecting the money, so as to avoid suspicion. When they give out the funds to the poor, there must be three, the same number needed for a court.  This body is like a court because they have to decide when the community really “owes” money because someone is actually poor and when someone is just “faking it” by pretending to be poor.     
