Peah, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with the question of whether it is preferable for the owner to simply leave the peah in the field or for him to harvest it and distribute it to the poor.

Mishnah One
Peah is given from [the crop] while it is still connected with the soil.
But in the case of hanging vine-branches and the date-palm, the owner brings down [the fruit] and distributes it among the poor.  
Rabbi Shimon says: the same applies to smooth nut trees.  
Even if ninety-nine [of the poor] say [to the owner] to distribute it and one says to leave it in the field, this latter is listened to, since he spoke in accordance with the halakhah.

Explanation
Section one:  It is preferable for peah to be left in the field and for the poor to come and harvest it themselves.  This is a more direct fulfillment of the biblical verses that discusses not harvesting the corners of the field.  
Section two:  However, if it would be dangerous for several poor people to come and try to get the peah at the same time, such as in the case of vine-branches that have been hung over a frame of reeds, or a date-palm, then the owner himself should harvest the grapes and dates and distribute them to the poor.
According to Rabbi Shimon, the same is true for a smooth nut tree which would be dangerous for the poor people to climb.  Note that we are worried that in their desperation to get food the poor will injure themselves, and therefore we make the owner do the work for them.
Section three:  What if the poor people want the owner to harvest the crops and distribute them, thereby saving the poor from having to perform the labor themselves?  This may also be in the owner’s interests, for perhaps he is not entirely keen on having a bunch of poor people traipsing around in his field.  It seems that if all of the poor agree, they can ask the owner to do this.  However, if even one poor person says that he would prefer the crops to be left in the field, then the owner must listen to him because that poor person has asked for the law to be followed.    

