Peah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah is a direct continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, which taught that amei haaretz, people who don’t tithe, are trusted to say that their produce is from the agricultural gifts to the poor and exempt from tithes.  However, they are trusted only if the produce is in the state in which it is customary to give such gifts.  

Mishnah Three
They are trusted concerning wheat, but they are not trusted when it is flour or bread.
They are trusted concerning rice in its husk, but they are not trusted when it is either raw or cooked.   
They are trusted concerning beans but they are not trusted when they have been pounded, neither raw nor cooked. 
They are trusted when concerning oil, to declare that it is from the poor person’s tithe, but they are not trusted over [oil] when they claim that it is from the olives [left on the] top [of the tree.]

Explanation
Section one: It is customary for the field owner to give wheat to the poor before it has been processed into bread or flour.  Therefore, the poor are trusted to say that the wheat is from an agricultural gift and hence not liable to tithes.  However, the poor are not trusted when it comes to flour or bread.
Section two:  Rice is given to the poor before it is removed from its husk.
Section three:  Beans are given to the poor before they are pounded into half-beans.  
Section four:  Oil is given as poor person’s tithe, therefore a poor am haaretz is believed to say that his oil is exempt from tithes.  However, if the am haaretz claims that his oil comes from the olives left over on top of the tree, then he is not believed because these olives would have been given to the poor person unprocessed.  The olives on the top of the tree refers to the olives that the field owner gives to the poor because it is just too much trouble to get them down.  In other words, people do give their poor person’s tithe in oil, and hence they are believed if they say that the oil came from this tithe.  However, people do not take down the olives that were hard to get off the tree during the olive harvest and process them into oil and then give them to the poor. Since they are not given when they are oil, the poor person is not trusted to say that they are from the agricultural gifts.   

