Peah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
This is a famous mishnah because it is recited in the early part of the prayer service, after the blessing for learning Torah.  The reason it is here in the beginning of tractate Peah is that it teaches that there is no maximum measure to the amount of peah (corners of one’s field—I will generally use the Hebrew term) that one can leave to the poor.
The following mishnah will teach that there is a minimum amount.

Mishnah One
These are the things that have no definite quantity:  
The corners [of the field].  
First-fruits;
[The offerings brought] on appearing [at the Temple on the three pilgrimage festivals].  
The performance of righteous deeds;  
And the study of the torah.  
The following are the things for which a man enjoys the fruits in this world while the principal remains for him in the world to come: 
Honoring one’s father and mother;  
The performance of righteous deeds; 
And the making of peace between a person and his friend; 
And the study of the torah is equal to them all.

Explanation
Section one: There is no maximum amount for all of the things listed in this section.  A person can give or do as much of them as he wants.  
A.  Peah—this is one of the main topics of our tractate.
B.  First fruits—brought to the Temple and given to the priests (Deuteronomy 26:1).  If a field owner should so desire he may bring his entire crop as first fruits.
C.  These are sacrifices brought to the Temple on the three festivals, Pesah, Shavuot and Sukkot (Deuteronomy 16:16-17).  A person can bring as many of these sacrifices as he wants.  
D and E. The last two things listed in this section (both are also listed below) are two of the most important activities in which a person can engage, according to rabbinic thought.  Righteous deeds are also termed “deeds of loving kindness (gemilut hasadim).” This would include giving money to the needy but go far beyond that to include visiting the sick, burying the dead, finding a spouse for someone and other acts of kindness that help improve the lives of others.  
Section two:  The second section lists mitzvoth for which a person sees an immediate reward, meaning he “enjoys the fruits in this world” and he also receives a reward for performing a mitzvah, a reward delayed until the world to come.  In other words, these are mitzvoth which are beneficial in and of themselves, regardless of any “external reward” such as the reward one might hope to get in the world to come.  The four are self-explanatory.  One can easily see that these four mitzvoth immediately benefit both the one who performs them and the one for whom she is doing the mitzvah.  It is interesting that the sages were so perceptive as to notice that the primary beneficiary of these mitzvoth is not the person for whom the mitzvah is being performed, but the one who performs the mitzvah.  We probably have all experienced the amazing feeling of helping out another person and know that when we do so, we not only help others but we help ourselves as well.    

