Peah, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, which said that something that was left at the end of a row was not considered “forgotten.”

Mishnah Four
These are to be considered ends of the rows:   
If two men begin [to gather] from the middle of the row, one facing north and the other south and they forget [some sheaves] in front of them and behind them, those left in front of them are “forgotten,” but those left behind them are not “forgotten.”   
If an individual begins from the end of the row and he forgets [some sheaves] in front of him and behind him, those in front of him are not “forgotten”, whereas those behind him are “forgotten,” for this comes under the category of “you shall not go back [to retrieve it].”   
This is the general rule: anything that can be said to fall under the law “you shall not go back” is considered “forgotten,” but that to which the principle of “you shall not go back” cannot be applied is not considered “forgotten.” 

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah will now explain two rules concerning when something is considered not to be forgotten because it was left at the end of a row.  The first refers to a situation where two men begin in the middle of a row, one gathering sheaves while walking north and one gathering sheaves while walking south.  In such a case any sheaves they leave in front of them are considered forgotten. Although these sheaves are at ends of rows, they are considered forgotten because when two people gather the sheaves in this way, they should complete their half of the field. There is no reason for the person walking north to leave a sheaf at the end of his row, and hence, if he does, it is considered forgotten.  But if he leaves a sheaf behind him, then it is not forgotten because he may be assuming that the other person will collect it.  For instance, let’s say that one person began at the seventh sheaf in a row and went south, and the other began at the fifth sheaf and went north.  The sixth sheaf is not forgotten because each assumes that the other person will gather it.
Section two:  The opposite rule applies if one person is gathering.  Here the rule is simpler.  That which he leaves in front of him is not forgotten.  It is not covered by the prohibition of “do not go back to retrieve it” (Deuteronomy 24:19) because he hasn’t passed over it yet.  However, that which he leaves behind is forgotten because to get to it, he would have to go back.  It turns out that for an individual the beginning of a row that is not considered to be forgotten is really at the end of the row, whereas for two people it is the middle of the row that is not considered forgotten.
Section three:  The mishnah now provides a general rule:  if one has to go back to retrieve the sheaf then it is considered forgotten, provided we don’t assume that he may have left it there intentionally.  If he doesn’t have to go back to retrieve it because he has not yet passed it, it is not forgotten and he may still collect it.     

