Peah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The final mishnah of the tractate is one long exhortation for proper, ethical behavior.  It seems to me that the rabbis put out a double message when it came to charity.  On the one hand, people must give freely to the poor and support them at a relatively high degree.  Jewish law is full of gifts to the poor that are mandatory—one must give them not out of the goodness of one’s heart, but because one is obligated to do so.  
On the other hand, when addressing the poor person, the rabbis emphasize to him that he must strive to do everything he can to prevent himself from having to take tzedakah.  A person who takes tzedakah when he doesn’t need it, will in the end become truly in need of tzedakah. The rabbis encourage poor people to strive to do all they can to avoid taking tzedakah.  Taking tzedakah, while allowed, is not preferable to trying to earn a living on one’s own.  
The mishnah also contains a few exhortations for judges not to accept bribes and for people not to pretend to be handicapped in order to garner mercy from their fellow human beings.
The content of the mishnah itself is self-explanatory, so I have refrained from commenting below. 
 
Mishnah Nine
One who has fifty zuz and he is using them for his business, he must not take.   
And anyone who does not need to take [charity] and yet takes, will not depart from this world before he actually needs [charity] from others.   
And anyone who needs to take and does not take, will not die of old age until he supports others with his own money. Concerning him the verse says: “Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord and whose hope is the Lord” (Jeremiah 17:7).   
And so too a judge who judges in truth according to its truth.   
And anyone who is not lame or blind but pretends to be as one of these, he will not die of old age before he actually becomes one of these, as it is said, “He who searches for evil, it shall come upon him” (Proverbs 11:27) and it is also said: “Righteousness, righteousness shall you pursue.”   
And any judge who accepts a bribe or who perverts justice will not die in old age before his eyes have become dim, as it is said: “And you shall not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of those who have sight.” 

Congratulations!  We have finished Peah!
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives. 
You have now finished an entire tractate that is about a subject you probably knew almost nothing about before you began.  The tractates of Seder Zeraim are much less learned than those of Moed, Nashim and Nezikin, the seders that we have learned up until now.  Neverthless, I, and I hope you, found the tractate to be a fascinating attempt by the rabbis to work out the meaning of many biblical verses, as well as important issues such as fair ownership over property and how to take care of the poor.  Along the way we have begun to learn a little about how agriculture worked in the Mishnaic period. This is a topic we will continue to address throughout the seder.   
Tomorrow we begin Tractate Demai.


 
