Peah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah is a direct continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, concerning a field that was harvested half by its owners and half by others.

Mishnah Eight
If robbers harvested half and the owner the other half, he gives peah from what he has harvested. 
If he harvested half and sold the other half, then the purchaser must give peah for the whole.   
If he harvested half and dedicated the other half, then he who redeems it from the Temple treasurer must give peah for the whole.   

Explanation
Section one:  Since robbers harvested the first half, he is exempt from giving peah for that section of the field.  He need only give peah from the second half which he himself harvested.
Section two:  In this case he harvested half of the field, thereby becoming obligated to give peah for that half. Then he sold the entire field, including his obligation to give peah for the half of the field that he had already harvested.  In other words had the original owner kept the field, he would have had to have given peah from the second half of the field, from the stalks that he had already harvested. When he sold these stalks to someone else the obligation to give peah still exists.  Therefore, the purchaser must give peah for the whole field, both the half that the previous owner harvested and the half that he himself harvests. 
Section three:  This situation is analogous to that in the previous section.  The owner harvests half the field and then instead of selling the remaining half, he dedicates it to the Temple.  Normally, peah is not given from fields that belong to the Temple. However, in this case because he began to harvest the field himself and he left the peah to be given from the second half of the field, the one who redeems the field from the Temple’s treasurer must still give peah from the second half of the field for the whole field.  
[To recall, redeeming means he gives the value of the field to the Temple and the field becomes non-sacred and belongs to him.  Even the original owner can be the one who can redeem it, and probably would often be the one to do this. Donating the field became a way then of indirectly donating money.]
 

