Peah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
After the poor have collected their agricultural gifts, that which they have not taken becomes ownerless (hefker), and anyone can take it.  Our mishnah delineates how we determine when the poor have finished collecting these various gifts such that they are completely up for grabs.
    
Mishnah One
From when are all people permitted to take gleanings, [forgotten sheaves and peah]? 
After the old ones of the poor have gone. 
And in the case of peret and defective clusters?  
After the poor have gone into the vineyard and come back again.  
And in the case of the olive trees? 
After the descent of the second rainfall.  
Rabbi Judah said: But aren’t there those who do not harvest their olives until after the second rainfall?” Rather, once the poor man has gone out [to gather the agricultural gifts taken from olive trees] and cannot bring back with him [more than the value of] four issars.

Explanation
Section one:  After the old poor people have gone through the field and collected any of the gleanings, forgotten sheaves or peah that was left by the younger poor who were the first to pick through the field, anyone else can come and collect it.
Section two:  This section deals with the agricultural gifts taken from a vineyard, namely peret (dropped grapes) and defective clusters. These belong to anyone once the poor have gone through the vineyard twice. This seems to be a reflection of their greater value. When it comes to grain, the poor will only go through the field once and therefore, after they are done, it belongs to anyone.  In contrast, when it comes to grapes, it is worth it for the poor to go through the field twice and hence their grapes do not belong to everyone until they have done so.
Section three:  Olives, as we have seen throughout the tractate, are the most important agricultural product.  Therefore, the agricultural gifts given from olive trees do not become up for grabs for everyone until after the “second rainfall.” This does not mean the second time that it rains, but rather the first rain that falls during the second part of the rainy season.  There are three opinions as to when this is, the 7th, 17th or 23rd of Heshvan.  
Section four:  Rabbi Judah responds that there are people who don’t harvest their olives until after the second rainfall.  Therefore, he says that we cannot use this mark to determine when the olives become up for grabs for anyone. Rather, the olives belong to the poor until the time comes when a poor person would go to collect the olives that belong to him and he wouldn’t even find four issars’ worth.  An issar is 1/24 of a dinar. According to the rabbis, four issars is enough money to buy four meals, two for the poor person himself and two for his wife.  If he can still collect enough olives to buy four meals then there are still substantial olives in the field and other people cannot take them.        

