Peah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Having finished discussing peah, the mishnah proceeds to discuss “gleanings” or “leket,” one of the other agricultural gifts given to the poor. Gleanings are mentioned in Leviticus 19:9-10, and 23:22.

Mishnah Ten
What are gleanings?  That which falls down at the time of harvesting. 
If while he was harvesting, he harvested a handful, or plucked a fistful, and then a thorn pricked him, and what he had in his hand fell to the ground, it still belongs to the owner.
[That which drops from] inside the hand or the sickle [belongs] to the poor, but [that which falls from] the back of the hand or the sickle [belongs] to the owner.   
[That which falls from] the top of the hand or sickle:  
Rabbi Ishmael says: to the poor;   
But Rabbi Akiva says: to the owner.

Explanation
Section one:  “Gleanings” are produce that falls during the time of harvesting.  The owner is not allowed to go back and claim that which falls, but rather he must give it to the poor.
Section two:  The mishnah now goes on to define what it means to “fall down.”  There are going to be several limiting definitions in this mishnah. First of all, if he harvests the grain and grabs it in his hand and then a thorn causes him to drop that which he had just harvested, then that which is dropped does not belong to the poor.  The reason is that this didn’t fall during the harvest but after the harvest had already been completed. Once it is securely his hand he has harvested it and if he subsequently drops it, it does not belong to the poor.
Section three: If he was harvesting by hand and as he plucked the stalk, it fell from his hand, or if he was harvesting with a sickle and the stalks of grain fell from the sickle before he got them into his hand, the stalks belong to the poor because they fell while being harvested.  If, however, while harvesting, a stalk hits the back of his hand or the back of the sickle and falls to the ground, it still belongs to the owner because this stalk did not fall while he was intending to harvest and neither did it fall during harvesting.
Section four:  Rabbi Ishmael and Rabbi Akiva debate whether a stalk that falls because it struck the top of the hand or the top of the sickle is like one that falls from inside the hand or the front of the sickle, in which case it belongs to the poor, or from the back of the hand or sickle, in which case it still belongs to the owner.  Rabbi Ishmael says it belongs to the poor and Rabbi Akiva says it belongs to the owner.         

