Peah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with a person who harvests part of his field and with the question of whether he can give one peah for the entire field or peah separately for each part that he has harvested.

Mishnah Three
One who clears [his field] of fresh onions for the market and leaves the dry ones [in the ground] for the [time of the] threshing floor, must give peah from these on their own and these on their own.   
The same applies to beans and to a vineyard. 
If he, however, he only thins it out, then he gives [peah] from the remainder according to the quantity of that which he left. 
But if he clears [three from one place] at one time, he gives from the remainder according to the entire quantity.

Explanation
Section one:  This section describes someone who has a field of onions.  He harvests some of them in order to bring them fresh to the market and the rest he leaves in the ground in order to harvest them later when they are dry.  Since some are sold fresh and some are sold dry they are considered to be two different types of onions and he must give peah separately for each type. 
Section two: The same thing is true for beans and for grapes grown in the vineyard.  If he harvests fresh beans to sell in the market and leaves dry beans in the field, he must give peah for each on its own.  So too if he harvests grapes to sell in the market and leaves the rest in the field to be used to make wine or raisins, he gives peah for each on its own.
Section three: If he thins out some clusters of grapes to make room for more to grow, then this is not considered to be harvesting.  He does not have to give peah at all from clusters that he thins out, because he didn’t harvest them for their own sake, only for the sake of those that he left in the vineyard.  He will only give peah from the grapes that he left hanging on the vine.
Section four: In this case he clears out three clusters of grapes at one time from one place.  Since he cut down a significant quantity from one place at one time, these grapes count towards the amount from which he will have to give peah.         
