Peah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with giving peah in fields or parts thereof that are owned by two owners.

Mishnah Five 
[Two] brothers who divided [an inheritance] must give [two] peahs.   
If they afterwards again become partners they give one peah.   
Two who purchase a tree, they give one peah. 
If one buys the northern section [of the tree] and the other the southern section, each must give peah separately. 
One who sells young saplings in his field, [the one who purchases] must give peah from each sapling. 
Rabbi Judah said: When is this so? When the owner of the field left nothing [for himself].  But if he did leave something [for himself], he gives one peah for the whole. 

Explanation
Section one:  Once two brothers have divided an inherited field, each section is considered a separate field and peah must be given separately for each field.
Section two:  If they become partners in the field, then the field is under joint ownership and peah is given for the entire field together.  As we shall see, this is the general rule for all jointly owned fields.
Section three:  Again, joint ownership over something means that only one peah is given.
Section four:  In this scenario, the partners each own a defined section of the tree, one the northern side and the other the southern side.  Since they have divided the tree, they give a separate peah for each part of tree.  According to the Mishnah, dividing a tree is the same, in essence, as dividing a field.
Section five:  In this scenario, a person has sold the young trees in his field but not his field.  The idea is that eventually the purchaser will uproot the trees and plant them in his own field.  Since the purchaser doesn’t own the ground, the ground can’t join the trees into one entity for the laws of peah. He will have to give peah separately for each tree.  
Rabbi Judah mentions one caveat.  If the person bought all of the saplings in the field and the owner left none for himself, then the saplings can be considered as one entity for the sake of peah.  It seems that if the owner left saplings for himself, then they block the purchaser’s saplings from being considered one single entity.  
