Peah, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Usually one leaves the corners of one’s field for peah at the corners of the fields.  However, one can leave parts in the middle or even at the beginning of the field. This is the topic of our mishnah.
 
Mishnah Three 
They may give peah at either at the beginning of the [reaping of the] field or at the middle of it.   
Rabbi Shimon says: as long as he gives at the end according to the set amount.   
Rabbi Judah says: if he leave, one stalk, he can rely on this as [fulfilling the law of] peah; and if he did not, then he only gives as ownerless property.  

Explanation
Section one:  As stated in the introduction, he can give peah anywhere in the field he wants.
Section two: Rabbi Shimon says that he must fulfill the mitzvah of peah by giving the minimum measure at the corners of the field.  He may be as generous as he wants in the beginning and middle of his reaping but he must also leave the corners of the field as peah.  
There might be two ways of understanding this. First of all, the Torah specifies the corner and hence he cannot just leave other parts of the field. Second, this might encourage cheating.  A person might lie and say that he left something in the middle of reaping and that the poor had already come and collected.
Section three:  Rabbi Judah says that as long as he leaves one stalk for himself in the beginning of his harvest, he can give the part of the field near this stalk or even the rest of the field as peah.  The stalk becomes “his field” and the rest of the field becomes peah.  However, if at the beginning of the harvest he didn’t leave even a stalk then the rest of the field cannot be considered peah. If he wants to give the beginning of the field to the poor, he is not giving it as peah rather he is renouncing ownership so that the poor can come and collect.  The result of the field being ownerless is the same as the result of it being peah—both ownerless property and peah are exempt from tithes.  


