Peah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the minimum size that land needs to be for one to be liable to give peah from it.

Mishnah Six
Rabbi Eliezer says: a piece of ground [large enough to plant] one fourth of a kav is liable for peah. 
Rabbi Joshua says: it must [be large enough] to grow two seahs.   
Rabbi Tarfon says:  it must be six by six handbreadths.   
R. Judah ben Batera says: [it must be large enough] for a sickle to cut at least two handfuls and the halakhah is according to his words. 
Rabbi Akiva says: any size of land is liable for peah and for first-fruits, and [is sufficient] for the writing of the prozbul, and also to acquire through it movable property by money, by deed, or by a claim based on undisturbed possession.  

Explanation
Section one: This is estimated to be about 10.5 cubits by 10.5 cubits, or about 35 square meters.
Section two:  Rabbi Joshua sets the minimum amount not based on how much seed can be planted but based on how much produce can be grown.  A seah is 6 kav, and a kav is about 2 liters, so the amount of grain has to be about 12 liters. 
Section three:  This is a very small piece of land, about one square meter.
Section four:  According to Rabbi Judah ben Batera the field need only be large enough for a person harvesting to have to grasp two handfuls of stalks while he chops them down with his sickle. The mishnah notes that this is the accepted halakhic position.  It is rare for the Mishnah to state this.   
Section four:  To Rabbi Akiva, it doesn’t matter how big the plot is, he is always liable for peah.  
Rabbi Akiva goes on to say that the same is true for a few other halakhot.  We shall go through them one at a time.
First fruits, or bikkurim, are referred to in Deuteronomy 26.  
A prozbul is a document written in order to prevent the remittance of debts in the sabbatical year.  In order for the creditor to write this document the borrower must have land.  We shall learn about the prozbul more fully when we study tractate Sheviit, which deals with all of the laws of the Sabbatical year.  
The last law refers to something we learned in Kiddushin 1:5.  According to halakhah movable property, i.e. things, can only be bought by taking physical possession of them.  In contrast, land can be purchased by money, by deed, or by a claim based on undisturbed possession (I shall explain this in a moment).  A person may purchase things without taking physical possession of them if he also acquires land at the same time.  In other words, I can give you money for your land and at the same time I can buy from you cows and sheep without taking possession of them.  
“Undisturbed possession” is a concept which we learned about in Bava Batra 3.  It means that if Reuven lives on a piece of land for three years and then Shimon comes to him with a deed to the land and says get off my land, and Reuven responds that Shimon sold him the land and that he had lost the sale document, Reuven can stay on the land. Had Shimon thought that the land was his he should have protested within three years.  “Undisturbed possession” is one of the three ways through which one can acquire land.   

