
   	
   	five misfortunes befell our fathers on the seventeenth of tammuz and five on the ninth of ab. On the seventeenth of tammuz
The tables [of the law] were shattered, the daily offering was discontinued, a breach was made in the city and apostomos  burned the scroll of the law and placed an idol in the temple. On the ninth of ab it was decreed that our fathers should not enter the [promised] land, the temple was destroyed the first and second time, bethar was captured and the city [jerusalem] was ploughed up.

   	with the beginning of ab rejoicings are curtailed. During the week in which the ninth of ab falls it is forbidden to cut the hair and to wash clothes but on the thursday it is permissible in honour of the sabbath. On the eve of the ninth of ab one may not partake of a meal of two courses nor eat meat nor drink wine. Rabban simeon b. Gamaliel said: one should make a difference in his diet. R. Judah makes it obligatory to turn the bed over;  the sages, however, did not agree with him in this.

   	r. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: there never were in israel greater days of joy than the fifteenth of ab and the day of atonement. On these days the daughters of jerusalem  used to walk out in white garments which they borrowed in order not to put to shame any one who had none. All these garments required ritual dipping.  The daughters of jerusalem came out and danced in the vineyards exclaiming at the same time, young man, lift up thine eyes and see what thou choosest for thyself. Do not set thine eyes on beauty but set thine eyes on [good] family. Grace is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that feareth the lord, she shall be praised.  And it further says,  give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her works praise her in the gates.

   	likewise it says, go forth, o ye daughters of zion, and gaze upon king solomon, even upon the crown wherewith his mother hath crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.  ‘on the day of his espousals:’ this refers to the day of the giving of the law. ‘and in the day of the gladness of his heart:’ this refers to the building of the temple; may it be rebuilt speedily in our days.

