Sheviit, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah defines the territorial boundaries of the land of Israel with regard to the status of the produce grown in the sabbatical year.  As we shall see, the Mishnah divides the land into three parts.

Mishnah One
[The land of Israel is divided into] three territories with regard to the sabbatical law.  
[Any produce grown in land] that was occupied by those who came up from Babylon, namely from Eretz Israel as far as Chezib, may not be eaten, nor [may its soil] be cultivated.
[Any produce grown in land] that was occupied by those who came up from Egypt, namely from Chezib to the river, and until Amonah, may be eaten, but [its soil] may not be cultivated. 
From the river till Amonah and inwards, [produce] may be eaten and [the soil] cultivated. 

Explanation
Section one: The laws of the sabbatical year apply fully to any land occupied by the Israelites when they returned from the exile in Babylon. The southern border is called “Eretz Israel” and would seem to include all of the southern part of Israel. Chezib is north of Acco (my favorite beach in Israel is there—it’s now called Achziv). The produce grown in this area cannot be eaten, which means that it must be eaten with the “sanctity of sabbatical produce.” One cannot store it once it can no longer be found in the fields.
Section two: The laws of sheviit apply less fully to the land conquered by Joshua and those who came up from Egypt. This would include the land from Chezib to “the river.” Unfortunately, the mishnah does not answer what river it is talking about, and there are many different opinions as to the interpretation of this clause. According to Albeck, Amonah is the name of a mountain (see II Kings 5:12) which is opposite of Lebanon. There is a river that comes from the Amonah mountain and descends to Damascus. So “the river” and Amonah are actually the same place. The produce grown in this area may be eaten and it does not have the sanctity of sheviit produce. However, the land may not be cultivated. It is interesting that the Joshua’s conquering of this land did not bequeath permanent holiness to it. Once the Israelites were exiled, this land descended in holiness and since it was not reoccupied, it never recovered.
Section three: This section is also somewhat difficult to explain because the word, “inwards” is not clear. Albeck explains that this refers to the land between Amonah and the sea. This would include Tyre and Sidon, which are today on the coast of Lebanon. This land was never conquered by the Israelites and therefore the laws of sheviit do not apply there at all, even though many Jews may have been living there during the mishnaic period. 
 

