Sheviit, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that the laws of sabbatical produce apply fully to something that is food for humans or beasts or dyeing material and if left in the ground will rot.  Our mishnah discusses what the laws are with regard to plants that are food or dyes but can be left in the ground without rotting. 
Important note: I have explained this mishnah according to the version found in good manuscripts of the Mishnah. The other version begins, “Anything that is not food for man.” In my opinion this version makes less sense is probably a mistake. 

Mishnah Two
And they said yet another general principle: Anything that is food for man or beast, or is used for dyeing, but can be left in the soil, the law of the sabbatical year applies both to it and to its money substitute but the law of removal does not apply to it or to its money substitute. 
Which are these? The root of wild luf, the root of ceterach, scolopendrium, the root of netz hahalav and buchreyah.   
What is the species of dyeing matter?  Puah (madder) and reseda.   
The law of the sabbatical year applies both to them and to their money substitute but the law of removal does not apply to them or to their money substitute.
Rabbi Meir says: their money substitutes must be removed by Rosh Hashanah.   
They said to him: since this law does not apply to the plants themselves, all the more so it does not apply to their money-substitute.

Explanation
Section one: If a plant can be left in the ground, then even though it is food or dye, only some of the laws of sheviit apply to it and some do not. Specifically the plant itself must be treated in the same way that sabbatical year produce is treated. However, the laws of removing it from one’s house do not apply. This is simple to understand. If the plant can be left in the ground, then there would be no reason to remove it from one’s home because one removes produce from one’s home only once that species can no longer be found in the field. 
Section two: As it did before, the mishnah now defines these categories. The plants listed here are edible roots and can be left in the ground without rotting. 
Section three: These dyes are roots and can be left in the ground.
Section four: A summary of the rule in section four.
Section five: Rabbi Meir says that although these plants themselves need not be removed from one’s home during the sabbatical year, their money-substitutes (things bought with the proceeds of their sale) must be removed by the time the sabbatical year is over. According to Rabbi Meir, a person might forget that he bought something with the proceeds from selling sabbatical year produce. If he leaves these money-substitutes in one’s home after the sabbatical year, he will forget that they are supposed to be treated with the sanctity of sabbatical year produce. Therefore, he must remove them from his home by the time the sabbatical year is over.
Section six: The other rabbis respond that if the produce itself need not be removed from one’s house (because it always can exist in the field) then all the more so the money-substitutes, which have less sanctity, need not be removed. 

