Sheviit, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
It is forbidden to fertilize the field with manure during the sabbatical year.  Furthermore, it is forbidden to bring out the dung used as fertilizer and heap it in the fields because that is the typical first step in the fertilization process.  Doing so looks as if they are preparing to fertilize the fields. Therefore they have to wait until the normal time for bringing out the manure has passed before they can bring it out during the sabbatical year.  In our mishnah, three sages debate when this time begins.
Besides noting that it might not have been so pleasant to live with the dung accumulating in the courtyard, we should also note that this mishnah is an excellent example of sages agreeing on the larger picture (fertilizing is prohibited, and one must wait to bring out the manure) and yet disagree on the details, here when one can bring it out.

Mishnah One
From when may they bring out manure to the dung-heaps?  
From when the workers have ceased to work, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But Rabbi Judah says:  until the sweetness [of the manure] has dried up.  
Rabbi Yose says: until [the dung dries] into knots. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, it becomes permitted to bring out the manure once those who do not observe the sabbatical laws are done doing so.  This would have distinguished those who did observe the laws, for they would noticeably take the manure out later than everyone else. As to who the people are who take the manure out on time, they are either non-Jews or perhaps Jews who do not observe these laws.
Section two:  Rabbi Judah says that they have to wait until the manure dries up. This is Rashi’s explanation.  Albeck explains that “the sweetness” refers to sweet herbs. Once their moisture is gone it is clearly too late to fertilize and hence it is permitted to bring the manure out into the field.
Section three:  Rabbi Yose says that they have to wait until the manure itself has dried up.  

