Sheviit, Chapter Ten, Mishnah One

Introduction
The final chapter of Sheviit is concerned with the remission of loans. 
Deuteronomy 15:2-3 states, “Every seventh year you shall practice remission of debts. This shall be the nature of the remission: every creditor shall remit the due that he claims from his fellow; he shall not dun his fellow or kinsman, for the remission proclaimed is of the LORD.  You may dun the foreigner; but you must remit whatever is due you from your kinsmen.”
Our chapter discusses what types of loans are remitted, when they are remitted and other technical aspects of the remission of loans at the end of the seventh year. Most importantly, mishnah three will discuss the prozbul, a document instituted by Hillel the Elder which prevents loans from being cancelled. We will discuss the prozbul when we get to that mishnah.
 
Mishnah One
The sabbatical year cancels a debt written in a document or one not written in a document. 
A debt to a shop is not cancelled, but if it had been converted into the form of a loan, then it is cancelled. 
Rabbi Judah says: the former debt is always cancelled.  
A wage-debt to a worker is not cancelled, but if it had been converted into a loan it is cancelled. 
Rabbi Yose says: the [payment for] any work that must cease with the seventh year, is cancelled, but if it need not cease with the seventh year, then it is not cancelled. 

Explanation
Section one: The seventh year cancels all “loans” whether those loans were secured with a document or not.  This is derived from the words, “every creditor shall remit the due that he claims from his fellow.”
Section two: If a person opens an account with his store, that debt is not remitted because it is not considered a loan. The rabbis look at this as if every day is the time when he should pay back the debt, and hence it is not a loan. However, if the storekeeper turns it into an official loan, for instance if he says something like, “You have until such and such a time to pay me back the money you owe me” then the debt is remitted in the seventh year. 
Rabbi Judah has a more nuanced view of when a debt to a store becomes a “loan.” The first time someone buys something from a shop without paying the debt is not a loan. However, the second time he does so, the prior debt turns automatically into a loan. Since it is a loan, the seventh year will cancel the debt. The same will happen every time he subsequently buys without paying—each time the former debt turns into a loan and is therefore affected by the sabbatical year.
Section three: Similar to a debt to a shop, wages owed to a worker are not considered a loan but a “debt.”  However, once the worker turns this into a loan, the sabbatical year does cancel it out.
Rabbi Yose says that whether or not the sabbatical year cancels the debt to the worker depends on whether the work can continue to be done on the seventh year. If the work cannot be done in the seventh year, then the debt to the worker automatically becomes a loan because the working arrangement has to stop.  However, if the work can continue to be done during the seventh year, for instance the worker was not working in the field, then the debt remains a debt and not a loan because the work could potentially continue.  

