...... 

GENESIS 

 

In the beginning God created the 
heaven and the earth. 2Now the 
earth was unformed and void, and 
darkness was upon the face of the 
deep; and the spirit of God hovered 
over the face of the waters. 3And God 
said: ‘Let there be light.’ And there 
was light. 4And God saw the light, that 
it was good; and God divided the light 
from the darkness. 5And God called 
the light Day, and the darkness He 
called Night. And there was evening 
and there was morning, one day. 

6And God said: ‘Let there be a 
firmament in the midst of the waters, 
and let it divide the waters from the 
waters.’ 7And God made the 
firmament, and divided the waters 
which were under the firmament from 
the waters which were above the 
firmament; and it was so. 8And God 
called the firmament Heaven. And 
there was evening and there was 
morning, a second day. 

9And God said: ‘Let the waters 
under the heaven be gathered together 
unto one place, and let the dry land 
appear.’ And it was so. 10And God 
called the dry land Earth, and the 
gathering together of the waters called 
He Seas; and God saw that it was 
good. 11And God said: ‘Let the earth 
put forth grass, herb yielding seed, and 
fruit-tree bearing fruit after its kind, 
wherein is the seed thereof, upon the 
earth.’ And it was so. 12And the earth 
brought forth grass, herb yielding seed 
after its kind, and tree bearing fruit, 
wherein is the seed thereof, after its 
kind; and God saw that it was good. 
13And there was evening and there was 
morning, a third day. 

14And God said: ‘Let there be lights 
in the firmament of the heaven to 
divide the day from the night; and let 
them be for signs, and for seasons, and 
for days and years; 15and let them be 
for lights in the firmament of the 
heaven to give light upon the earth.’ 
And it was so. 16And God made the 
two great lights: the greater light to 
rule the day, and the lesser light to rule 
the night; and the stars. 17And God set 
them in the firmament of the heaven to 
give light upon the earth, 18and to rule 
over the day and over the night, and to 
divide the light from the darkness; and 
God saw that it was good. 19And there 
was evening and there was morning, a 
fourth day. 

20And God said: ‘Let the waters 
swarm with swarms of living 
creatures, and let fowl fly above the 
earth in the open firmament of 
heaven.’ 21And God created the great 
sea-monsters, and every living creature 
that creepeth, wherewith the waters 
swarmed, after its kind, and every 
winged fowl after its kind; and God 
saw that it was good. 22And God 
1 




blessed them, saying: ‘Be fruitful, and 
multiply, and fill the waters in the 
seas, and let fowl multiply in the 
earth.’ 23And there was evening and 
there was morning, a fifth day. 

24And God said: ‘Let the earth bring 
forth the living creature after its kind, 
cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of 
the earth after its kind.’ And it was so. 
25And God made the beast of the earth 
after its kind, and the cattle after their 
kind, and every thing that creepeth 
upon the ground after its kind; and 
God saw that it was good. 26And God 
said: ‘Let us make man in our image, 
after our likeness; and let them have 
dominion over the fish of the sea, and 
over the fowl of the air, and over the 
cattle, and over all the earth, and over 
every creeping thing that creepeth 
upon the earth.’ 27And God created 
man in His own image, in the image of 
God created He him; male and female 
created He them. 28And God blessed 
them; and God said unto them: ‘Be 
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish 
the earth, and subdue it; and have 
dominion over the fish of the sea, and 
over the fowl of the air, and over every 
living thing that creepeth upon the 
earth.’ 29And God said: ‘Behold, I 
have given you every herb yielding 
seed, which is upon the face of all the 
earth, and every tree, in which is the 
fruit of a tree yielding seed—to you it 
shall be for food; 30and to every beast 
of the earth, and to every fowl of the 
air, and to every thing that creepeth 
upon the earth, wherein there is a 
living soul, [I have given] every green 
herb for food.’ And it was so. 31And 
God saw every thing that He had 
made, and, behold, it was very good. 
And there was evening and there was 
morning, the sixth day. 

And the heaven and the earth 
were finished, and all the host of 
them. 2And on the seventh day God 
finished His work which He had made; 
and He rested on the seventh day from 
all His work which He had made. 3And 
God blessed the seventh day, and 
hallowed it; because that in it He 
rested from all His work which God in 
creating had made. 

4These are the generations of the 
heaven and of the earth when they 
were created, in the day that the LORD 
God made earth and heaven. 

5No shrub of the field was yet in the 
earth, and no herb of the field had yet 
sprung up; for the LORD God had not 
caused it to rain upon the earth, and 
there was not a man to till the ground; 
6but there went up a mist from the 
earth, and watered the whole face of 
the ground. 7Then the LORD God 
formed man of the dust of the ground, 
and breathed into his nostrils the 
breath of life; and man became a living 
soul. 8And the LORD God planted a 
garden eastward, in Eden; and there 
He put the man whom He had formed. 
9And out of the ground made the LORD 
God to grow every tree that is pleasant 
to the sight, and good for food; the tree 
of life also in the midst of the garden, 
and the tree of the knowledge of good 
2 




and evil. 10And a river went out of 
Eden to water the garden; and from 
thence it was parted, and became four 
heads. 11The name of the first is 
Pishon; that is it which compasseth the 
whole land of Havilah, where there is 
gold; 12and the gold of that land is 
good; there is bdellium and the onyx 
stone. 13And the name of the second 
river is Gihon; the same is it that 
compasseth the whole land of Cush. 
14And the name of the third river is 
aTigris; that is it which goeth toward 
the east of Asshur. And the fourth 
river is the Euphrates. 15And the LORD 
God took the man, and put him into 
the garden of Eden to dress it and to 
keep it. 16And the LORD God 
commanded the man, saying: ‘Of 
every tree of the garden thou mayest 
freely eat; 17but of the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt 
not eat of it; for in the day that thou 
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.’ 

a Heb. Hiddekel. 

18And the LORD God said: ‘It is not 
good that the man should be alone; I 
will make him a help meet for him.’ 
19And out of the ground the LORD God 
formed every beast of the field, and 
every fowl of the air; and brought 
them unto the man to see what he 
would call them; and whatsoever the 
man would call every living creature, 
that was to be the name thereof. 20And 
the man gave names to all cattle, and 
to the fowl of the air, and to every 
beast of the field; but for Adam there 

was not found a help meet for him. 
21And the LORD God caused a deep 
sleep to fall upon the man, and he 
slept; and He took one of his ribs, and 
closed up the place with flesh instead 
thereof. 22And the rib, which the LORD 
God had taken from the man, made He 
a woman, and brought her unto the 
man. 23And the man said: ‘This is now 
bone of my bones, and flesh of my 
flesh; she shall be called bWoman, 
because she was taken out of cMan.’ 
24Therefore shall a man leave his 
father and his mother, and shall cleave 
unto his wife, and they shall be one 
flesh. 25And they were both naked, the 
man and his wife, and were not 
ashamed. 

b Heb. Issahah. 

c Heb. Ish. 

3 



Now the serpent was more subtle 
than any beast of the field which 
the LORD God had made. And he said 
unto the woman: ‘Yea, hath God said: 
Ye shall not eat of any tree of the 
garden?’ 2And the woman said unto 
the serpent: ‘Of the fruit of the trees of 
the garden we may eat; 3but of the fruit 
of the tree which is in the midst of the 
garden, God hath said: Ye shall not eat 
of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye 
die.’ 4And the serpent said unto the 
woman: ‘Ye shall not surely die; 5for 
God doth know that in the day ye eat 
thereof, then your eyes shall be 
opened, and ye shall be as God, 
knowing good and evil.’ 6And when 
the woman saw that the tree was good 


for food, and that it was a delight to 
the eyes, and that the tree was to be 
desired to make one wise, she took of 
the fruit thereof, and did eat; and she 
gave also unto her husband with her, 
and he did eat. 7And the eyes of them 
both were opened, and they knew that 
they were naked; and they sewed fig-
leaves together, and made themselves 
girdles. 8And they heard the voice of 
the LORD God walking in the garden 
toward the cool of the day; and the 
man and his wife hid themselves from 
the presence of the LORD God amongst 
the trees of the garden. 9And the LORD 
God called unto the man, and said unto 
him: ‘Where art thou?’ 10And he said: 
‘I heard Thy voice in the garden, and I 
was afraid, because I was naked; and I 
hid myself.’ 11And He said: ‘Who told 
thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou 
eaten of the tree, whereof I 
commanded thee that thou shouldest 
not eat?’ 12And the man said: ‘The 
woman whom Thou gavest to be with 
me, she gave me of the tree, and I did 
eat.’ 13And the LORD God said unto the 
woman: ‘What is this thou hast done?’ 
And the woman said: ‘The serpent 
beguiled me, and I did eat.’ 14And the 
LORD God said unto the serpent: 
‘Because thou hast done this, cursed 
art thou from among all cattle, and 
from among all beasts of the field; 
upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust 
shalt thou eat all the days of thy life. 
15And I will put enmity between thee 
and the woman, and between thy seed 
and her seed; they shall bruise thy 
head, and thou shalt bruise their heel.’ 

16Unto the woman He said: ‘I will 
greatly multiply thy pain and thy 
travail; in pain thou shalt bring forth 
children; and thy desire shall be to thy 
husband, and he shall rule over thee.’ 

17And unto Adam He said: ‘Because 
thou hast hearkened unto the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of 
which I commanded thee, saying: 
Thou shalt not eat of it; cursed is the 
ground for thy sake; in toil shalt thou 
eat of it all the days of thy life. 
18Thorns also and thistles shall it bring 
forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the 
herb of the field. 19In the sweat of thy 
face shalt thou eat bread, till thou 
return unto the ground; for out of it 
wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and 
unto dust shalt thou return.’ 20And the 
man called his wife’s name aEve; 
because she was the mother of all 
living. 21And the LORD God made for 
Adam and for his wife garments of 
skins, and clothed them. 

a Heb. Havvah, that is, Life. 

22And the LORD God said: ‘Behold, 
the man is become as one of us, to 
know good and evil; and now, lest he 
put forth his hand, and take also of the 
tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.’ 
23Therefore the LORD God sent him 
forth from the garden of Eden, to till 
the ground from whence he was taken. 
24So He drove out the man; and He 
placed at the east of the garden of 
Eden the cherubim, and the flaming 


sword which turned every way, to 
keep the way to the tree of life. 

4 



And the man knew Eve his wife; 
and she conceived and bore Cain, 
and said: ‘I have agotten a man with 
the help of the LORD.’ 2And again she 
bore his brother Abel. And Abel was a 
keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller 
of the ground. 3And in process of time 
it came to pass, that Cain brought of 
the fruit of the ground an offering unto 
the LORD. 4And Abel, he also brought 
of the firstlings of his flock and of the 
fat thereof. And the LORD had respect 
unto Abel and to his offering; 5but 
unto Cain and to his offering He had 
not respect. And Cain was very wroth, 
and his countenance fell. 6And the 
LORD said unto Cain: ‘Why art thou 
wroth? and why is thy countenance 
fallen? 7If thou doest well, shall it not 
be lifted up? and if thou doest not well, 
sin coucheth at the door; and unto thee 
is its desire, but thou mayest rule over 
it.’ 8And Cain spoke unto Abel his 
brother. And it came to pass, when 
they were in the field, that Cain rose 
up against Abel his brother, and slew 
him. 

a Heb. Kanah, to get. 

9And the LORD said unto Cain: 
‘Where is Abel thy brother?’ And he 
said: ‘I know not; am I my brother’s 
keeper?’ 10And He said: ‘What hast 
thou done? the voice of thy brother’s 
blood crieth unto Me from the ground. 
11And now cursed art thou from the 
ground, which hath opened her mouth 

to receive thy brother’s blood from thy 
hand. 12When thou tillest the ground, it 
shall not henceforth yield unto thee her 
strength; a fugitive and a wanderer 
shalt thou be in the earth.’ 13And Cain 
said unto the LORD: ‘My punishment is 
greater than I can bear. 14Behold, Thou 
hast driven me out this day from the 
face of the land; and from Thy face 
shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive 
and a wanderer in the earth; and it will 
come to pass, that whosoever findeth 
me will slay me.’ 15And the LORD said 
unto him: ‘Therefore whosoever 
slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken 
on him sevenfold.’ And the LORD set a 
sign for Cain, lest any finding him 
should smite him. 

16And Cain went out from the 
presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the 
land of bNod, on the east of Eden. 
17And Cain knew his wife; and she 
conceived, and bore Enoch; and he 
builded a city, and called the name of 
the city after the name of his son 
Enoch. 18And unto Enoch was born 
Irad; and Irad begot cMehujael; and 
Mehujael begot Methushael; and 
Methushael begot Lamech. 19And 
Lamech took unto him two wives; the 
name of one was Adah, and the name 
of the other Zillah. 20And Adah bore 
Jabal; he was the father of such as 
dwell in tents and have cattle. 21And 
his brother’s name was Jubal; he was 
the father of all such as handle the 

b That is, Wandering. 

c Heb. Mehijael. 


harp and pipe. 22And Zillah, she also 
bore Tubal-cain, the forger of every 
cutting instrument of brass and iron; 
and the sister of Tubal-cain was 
Naamah. 23And Lamech said unto his 
wives: 

Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; 

Ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto 
my speech; 

For I have slain a man for wounding 
me, 

And a young man for bruising me; 

24If Cain shall be avenged 
sevenfold, 

Truly Lamech seventy and 
sevenfold. 

25And Adam knew his wife again; 
and she bore a son, and called his 
name aSeth: ‘for God bhath appointed 
me another seed instead of Abel; for 
Cain slew him.’ 26And to Seth, to him 
also there was born a son; and he 
called his name Enosh; then began 
men to call upon the name of the LORD. 

a Heb. Sheth. 

b Heb. Shath. 

This is the book of the 
generations of Adam. In the day 
that God created man, in the likeness 
of God made He him; 2male and 
female created He them, and blessed 
them, and called their name Adam, in 
the day when they were created. 3And 
Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, 
and begot a son in his own likeness, 
after his image; and called his name 
Seth. 4And the days of Adam after he 
begot Seth were eight hundred years; 

and he begot sons and daughters. 5And 
all the days that Adam lived were nine 
hundred and thirty years; and he died. 

6And Seth lived a hundred and five 
years, and begot Enosh. 7And Seth 
lived after he begot Enosh eight 
hundred and seven years, and begot 
sons and daughters. 8And all the days 
of Seth were nine hundred and twelve 
years; and he died. 

9And Enosh lived ninety years, and 
begot Kenan. 10And Enosh lived after 
he begot Kenan eight hundred and 
fifteen years, and begot sons and 
daughters. 11And all the days of Enosh 
were nine hundred and five years; and 
he died. 

12And Kenan lived seventy years, 
and begot Mahalalel. 13And Kenan 
lived after he begot Mahalalel eight 
hundred and forty years, and begot 
sons and daughters. 14And all the days 
of Kenan were nine hundred and ten 
years; and he died. 

15And Mahalalel lived sixty and five 
years, and begot Jared. 16And 
Mahalalel lived after he begot Jared 
eight hundred and thirty years, and 
begot sons and daughters. 17And all the 
days of Mahalalel were eight hundred 
ninety and five years; and he died. 

18And Jared lived a hundred sixty 
and two years, and begot Enoch. 19And 
Jared lived after he begot Enoch eight 
hundred years, and begot sons and 
daughters. 20And all the days of Jared 
were nine hundred sixty and two 
years; and he died. 
5 




21And Enoch lived sixty and five 
years, and begot Methuselah. 22And 
Enoch walked with God after he begot 
Methuselah three hundred years, and 
begot sons and daughters. 23And all the 
days of Enoch were three hundred 
sixty and five years. 24And Enoch 
walked with God, and he was not; for 
God took him. 

25And Methuselah lived a hundred 
eighty and seven years, and begot 
Lamech. 26And Methuselah lived after 
he begot Lamech seven hundred eighty 
and two years, and begot sons and 
daughters. 27And all the days of 
Methuselah were nine hundred sixty 
and nine years; and he died. 

28And Lamech lived a hundred 
eighty and two years, and begot a son. 
29And he called his name Noah, 
saying: ‘This same shall acomfort us in 
our work and in the toil of our hands, 
which cometh from the ground which 
the LORD hath cursed.’ 30And Lamech 
lived after he begot Noah five hundred 
ninety and five years, and begot sons 
and daughters. 31And all the days of 
Lamech were seven hundred seventy 
and seven years; and he died. 

a Heb. nahem, to comfort. 

32And Noah was five hundred years 
old; and Noah begot Shem, Ham, and 
Japheth. 

And it came to pass, when men 
began to multiply on the face of 
the earth, and daughters were born 
unto them, 2that the sons of God saw 
the daughters of men that they were 

fair; and they took them wives, 
whomsoever they chose. 3And the 
LORD said: ‘My spirit shall not abide in 
man for ever, for that he also is flesh; 
therefore shall his days be a hundred 
and twenty years.’ 4The Nephilim were 
in the earth in those days, and also 
after that, when the sons of God came 
in unto the daughters of men, and they 
bore children to them; the same were 
the mighty men that were of old, the 
men of renown. 

5And the LORD saw that the 
wickedness of man was great in the 
earth, and that every imagination of 
the thoughts of his heart was only evil 
continually. 6And it repented the LORD 
that He had made man on the earth, 
and it grieved Him at His heart. 7And 
the LORD said: ‘I will blot out man 
whom I have created from the face of 
the earth; both man, and beast, and 
creeping thing, and fowl of the air; for 
it repenteth Me that I have made 
them.’ 8But Noah found grace in the 
eyes of the LORD. 

.. 

9These are the generations of Noah. 
Noah was in his generations a man 
righteous and wholehearted; Noah 
walked with God. 10And Noah begot 
three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
11And the earth was corrupt before 
God, and the earth was filled with 
violence. 12And God saw the earth, 
and, behold, it was corrupt; for all 
flesh had corrupted their way upon the 
earth. 
6 




13And God said unto Noah: ‘The 
end of all flesh is come before Me; for 
the earth is filled with violence 
through them; and, behold, I will 
destroy them with the earth. 14Make 
thee an ark of gopher wood; with 
rooms shalt thou make the ark, and 
shalt pitch it within and without with 
pitch. 15And this is how thou shalt 
make it: the length of the ark three 
hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty 
cubits, and the height of it thirty 
cubits. 16A light shalt thou make to the 
ark, and to a cubit shalt thou finish it 
upward; and the door of the ark shalt 
thou set in the side thereof; with lower, 
second, and third stories shalt thou 
make it. 17And I, behold, I do bring the 
flood of waters upon the earth, to 
destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath 
of life, from under heaven; every thing 
that is in the earth shall perish. 18But I 
will establish My covenant with thee; 
and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, 
and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy 
sons’wives with thee. 19And of every 
living thing of all flesh, two of every 
sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to 
keep them alive with thee; they shall 
be male and female. 20Of the fowl after 
their kind, and of the cattle after their 
kind, of every creeping thing of the 
ground after its kind, two of every sort 
shall come unto thee, to keep them 
alive. 21And take thou unto thee of all 
food that is eaten, and gather it to thee; 
and it shall be for food for thee, and 
for them.’ 22Thus did Noah; according 
to all that God commanded him, so did 
he. 

And the LORD said unto Noah: 
‘Come thou and all thy house into 
the ark; for thee have I seen righteous 
before Me in this generation. 2Of every 
clean beast thou shalt take to thee 
seven and seven, each with his mate; 
and of the beasts that are not clean two 
[and two], each with his mate; 3of the 
fowl also of the air, seven and seven, 
male and female; to keep seed alive 
upon the face of all the earth. 4For yet 
seven days, and I will cause it to rain 
upon the earth forty days and forty 
nights; and every living substance that 
I have made will I blot out from off the 
face of the earth.’ 5And Noah did 
according unto all that the LORD 
commanded him. 

6And Noah was six hundred years old 
when the flood of waters was upon the 
earth. 7And Noah went in, and his 
sons, and his wife, and his sons’wives 
with him, into the ark, because of the 
waters of the flood. 8Of clean beasts, 
and of beasts that are not clean, and of 
fowls, and of every thing that creepeth 
upon the ground, 9there went in two 
and two unto Noah into the ark, male 
and female, as God commanded Noah. 
10And it came to pass after the seven 
days, that the waters of the flood were 
upon the earth. 11In the six hundredth 
year of Noah’s life, in the second 
month, on the seventeenth day of the 
month, on the same day were all the 
fountains of the great deep broken up, 
and the windows of heaven were 
7 




opened. 12And the rain was upon the 
earth forty days and forty nights. 

13In the selfsame day entered Noah, 
and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the 
sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife, and 
the three wives of his sons with them, 
into the ark; 14they, and every beast 
after its kind, and all the cattle after 
their kind, and every creeping thing 
that creepeth upon the earth after its 
kind, and every fowl after its kind, 
every bird of every sort. 15And they 
went in unto Noah into the ark, two 
and two of all flesh wherein is the 
breath of life. 16And they that went in, 
went in male and female of all flesh, as 
God commanded him; and the LORD 
shut him in. 17And the flood was forty 
days upon the earth; and the waters 
increased, and bore up the ark, and it 
was lifted up above the earth. 18And 
the waters prevailed, and increased 
greatly upon the earth; and the ark 
went upon the face of the waters. 
19And the waters prevailed 
exceedingly upon the earth; and all the 
high mountains that were under the 
whole heaven were covered. 20Fifteen 
cubits upward did the waters prevail; 
and the mountains were covered. 
21And all flesh perished that moved 
upon the earth, both fowl, and cattle, 
and beast, and every swarming thing 
that swarmeth upon the earth, and 
every man; 22all in whose nostrils was 
the breath of the spirit of life, 
whatsoever was in the dry land, died. 
23And He blotted out every living 
substance which was upon the face of 
the ground, both man, and cattle, and 
creeping thing, and fowl of the heaven; 
and they were blotted out from the 
earth; and Noah only was left, and 
they that were with him in the ark. 
24And the waters prevailed upon the 
earth a hundred and fifty days. 

And God remembered Noah, and 
every living thing, and all the 
cattle that were with him in the ark; 
and God made a wind to pass over the 
earth, and the waters assuaged; 2the 
fountains also of the deep and the 
windows of heaven were stopped, and 
the rain from heaven was restrained. 
3And the waters returned from off the 
earth continually; and after the end of 
a hundred and fifty days the waters 
decreased. 4And the ark rested in the 
seventh month, on the seventeenth day 
of the month, upon the mountains of 
Ararat. 5And the waters decreased 
continually until the tenth month; in 
the tenth month, on the first day of the 
month, were the tops of the mountains 
seen. 

6And it came to pass at the end of 
forty days, that Noah opened the 
window of the ark which he had made. 
7And he sent forth a raven, and it went 
forth to and fro, until the waters were 
dried up from off the earth. 8And he 
sent forth a dove from him, to see if 
the waters were abated from off the 
face of the ground. 9But the dove 
found no rest for the sole of her foot, 
and she returned unto him to the ark, 
for the waters were on the face of the 
whole earth; and he put forth his hand, 
8 




and took her, and brought her in unto 
him into the ark. 10And he stayed yet 
other seven days; and again he sent 
forth the dove out of the ark. 11And the 
dove came in to him at eventide; and 
lo in her mouth an olive-leaf freshly 
plucked; so Noah knew that the waters 
were abated from off the earth. 12And 
he stayed yet other seven days; and 
sent forth the dove; and she returned 
not again unto him any more. 

13And it came to pass in the six 
hundred and first year, in the first 
month, the first day of the month, the 
waters were dried up from off the 
earth; and Noah removed the covering 
of the ark, and looked, and behold, the 
face of the ground was dried. 14And in 
the second month, on the seven and 
twentieth day of the month, was the 
earth dry. 

15And God spoke unto Noah, 
saying: 16’Go forth from the ark, thou, 
and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy 
sons’wives with thee. 17Bring forth 
with thee every living thing that is 
with thee of all flesh, both fowl, and 
cattle, and every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth; that they may 
swarm in the earth, and be fruitful, and 
multiply upon the earth.’ 18And Noah 
went forth, and his sons, and his wife, 
and his sons’wives with him; 19every 
beast, every creeping thing, and every 
fowl, whatsoever moveth upon the 
earth, after their families; went forth 
out of the ark. 

20And Noah builded an altar unto 
the LORD; and took of every clean 
beast, and of every clean fowl, and 
offered burnt-offerings on the altar. 
21And the LORD smelled the sweet 
savour; and the LORD said in His heart: 
‘I will not again curse the ground any 
more for man’s sake; for the 
imagination of man’s heart is evil from 
his youth; neither will I again smite 
any more every thing living, as I have 
done. 22While the earth remaineth, 
seedtime and harvest, and cold and 
heat, and summer and winter, and day 
and night shall not cease.’ 

And God blessed Noah and his 
sons, and said unto them: ‘Be 
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the 
earth. 2And the fear of you and the 
dread of you shall be upon every beast 
of the earth, and upon every fowl of 
the air, and upon all wherewith the 
ground teemeth, and upon all the 
fishes of the sea: into your hand are 
they delivered. 3Every moving thing 
that liveth shall be for food for you; as 
the green herb have I given you all. 
4Only flesh with the life thereof, which 
is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. 
5And surely your blood of your lives 
will I require; at the hand of every 
beast will I require it; and at the hand 
of man, even at the hand of every 
man’s brother, will I require the life of 
man. 6Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, 
by man shall his blood be shed; for in 
the image of God made He man. 7And 
you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; 
swarm in the earth, and multiply 
therein.’ 
9 




8And God spoke unto Noah, and to 
his sons with him, saying: 9’As for Me, 
behold, I establish My covenant with 
you, and with your seed after you; 
10and with every living creature that is 
with you, the fowl, the cattle, and 
every beast of the earth with you; of 
all that go out of the ark, even every 
beast of the earth. 11And I will 
establish My covenant with you; 
neither shall all flesh be cut off any 
more by the waters of the flood; 
neither shall there any more be a flood 
to destroy the earth.’ 12And God said: 
‘This is the token of the covenant 
which I make between Me and you 
and every living creature that is with 
you, for perpetual generations: 13I have 
set My bow in the cloud, and it shall 
be for a token of a covenant between 
Me and the earth. 14And it shall come 
to pass, when I bring clouds over the 
earth, and the bow is seen in the cloud, 
15that I will remember My covenant, 
which is between Me and you and 
every living creature of all flesh; and 
the waters shall no more become a 
flood to destroy all flesh. 16And the 
bow shall be in the cloud; and I will 
look upon it, that I may remember the 
everlasting covenant between God and 
every living creature of all flesh that is 
upon the earth.’ 17And God said unto 
Noah: ‘This is the token of the 
covenant which I have established 
between Me and all flesh that is upon 
the earth.’ 

18And the sons of Noah, that went 
forth from the ark, were Shem, and 
Ham, and Japheth; and Ham is the 
father of Canaan. 19These three were 
the sons of Noah, and of these was the 
whole earth overspread. 

20And Noah the husbandman began, 
and planted a vineyard. 21And he drank 
of the wine, and was drunken; and he 
was uncovered within his tent. 22And 
Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the 
nakedness of his father, and told his 
two brethren without. 23And Shem and 
Japheth took a garment, and laid it 
upon both their shoulders, and went 
backward, and covered the nakedness 
of their father; and their faces were 
backward, and they saw not their 
father’s nakedness. 24And Noah awoke 
from his wine, and knew what his 
youngest son had done unto him. 
25And he said: 

Cursed be Canaan; a servant of 
servants shall he be unto his 
brethren. 

26And he said: 

Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Shem; 

And let Canaan be their servant. 

27God aenlarge Japheth, and he shall 
dwell in the tents of Shem; 

a Heb. Japhth. 

And let Canaan be their servant. 

28And Noah lived after the flood 
three hundred and fifty years. 29And all 
the days of Noah were nine hundred 
and fifty years; and he died. 

 

10 



Now these are the generations 
of the sons of Noah: Shem, 


Ham, and Japheth; and unto them were 
sons born after the flood. 2The sons of 
Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and 
Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and 
Meshech, and Tiras. 3And the sons of 
Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and 
Togarmah. 4And the sons of Javan: 
Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and 
Dodanim. 5Of these were the isles of 
the nations divided in their lands, 
every one after his tongue, after their 
families, in their nations. 

6And the sons of Ham: Cush, and 
Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan. 7And 
the sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, 
and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabteca; 
and the sons of Raamah: Sheba, and 
Dedan. 8And Cush begot Nimrod; he 
began to be a mighty one in the earth. 
9He was a mighty hunter before the 
LORD; wherefore it is said: ‘Like 
Nimrod a mighty hunter before the 
LORD.’ 10And the beginning of his 
kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and 
Accad, and Calneh, in the land of 
Shinar. 11Out of that land went forth 
Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and 
Rehoboth-ir, and Calah, 12and Resen 
between Nineveh and Calah—the 
same is the great city. 13And Mizraim 
begot Ludim, and Anamim, and 
Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 14and 
Pathrusim, and Casluhim—whence 
went forth the Philistines—and 
Caphtorim. 

15And Canaan begot Zidon his 
firstborn, and Heth; 16and the Jebusite, 
and the Amorite, and the Girgashite; 
17and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and 
the Sinite; 18and the Arvadite, and the 
Zemarite, and the Hamathite; and 
afterward were the families of the 
Canaanite spread abroad. 19And the 
border of the Canaanite was from 
Zidon, as thou goest toward Gerar, 
unto Gaza; as thou goest toward 
Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and 
Zeboiim, unto Lasha. 20These are the 
sons of Ham, after their families, after 
their tongues, in their lands, in their 
nations. 

21And unto Shem, the father of all 
the children of Eber, the elder brother 
of Japheth, to him also were children 
born. 22The sons of Shem: Elam, and 
Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and 
Aram. 23And the sons of Aram: Uz, 
and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. 24And 
Arpachshad begot Shelah; and Shelah 
begot Eber. 25And unto Eber were born 
two sons; the name of the one was 
aPeleg; for in his days was the earth 
divided; and his brother’s name was 
Joktan. 26And Joktan begot Almodad, 
and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and 
Jerah; 27and Hadoram, and Uzal, and 
Diklah; 28and Obal, and Abimael, and 
Sheba; 29and Ophir, and Havilah, and 
Jobab; all these were the sons of 
Joktan. 30And their dwelling was from 
Mesha, as thou goest toward Sephar, 
unto the mountain of the east. 31These 
are the sons of Shem, after their 
families, after their tongues, in their 
lands, after their nations. 

a That is, Division. 


32These are the families of the sons 
of Noah, after their generations, in 
their nations; and of these were the 
nations divided in the earth after the 
flood. 

And the whole earth was of 
one language and of one 
speech. 2And it came to pass, as they 
journeyed east, that they found a plain 
in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt 
there. 3And they said one to another: 
‘Come, let us make brick, and burn 
them thoroughly.’ And they had brick 
for stone, and slime had they for 
mortar. 4And they said: ‘Come, let us 
build us a city, and a tower, with its 
top in heaven, and let us make us a 
name; lest we be scattered abroad 
upon the face of the whole earth.’ 
5And the LORD came down to see the 
city and the tower, which the children 
of men builded. 6And the LORD said: 
‘Behold, they are one people, and they 
have all one language; and this is what 
they begin to do; and now nothing will 
be withholden from them, which they 
purpose to do. 7Come, let us go down, 
and there confound their language, that 
they may not understand one another’s 
speech.’ 8So the LORD scattered them 
abroad from thence upon the face of 
all the earth; and they left off to build 
the city. 9Therefore was the name of it 
called Babel; because the LORD did 
there aconfound the language of all the 
earth; and from thence did the LORD 

a Heb. Balal, to confound. 

scatter them abroad upon the face of 
all the earth. 

 

10These are the generations of Shem. 
Shem was a hundred years old, and 
begot Arpachshad two years after the 
flood. 11And Shem lived after he begot 
Arpachshad five hundred years, and 
begot sons and daughters. 

12And Arpachshad lived five and 
thirty years, and begot Shelah. 13And 
Arpachshad lived after he begot 
Shelah four hundred and three years, 
and begot sons and daughters. 

14And Shelah lived thirty years, and 
begot Eber. 15And Shelah lived after 
he begot Eber four hundred and three 
years, and begot sons and daughters. 

16And Eber lived four and thirty 
years, and begot Peleg. 17And Eber 
lived after he begot Peleg four hundred 
and thirty years, and begot sons and 
daughters. 

18And Peleg lived thirty years, and 
begot Reu. 19And Peleg lived after he 
begot Reu two hundred and nine years, 
and begot sons and daughters. 

20And Reu lived two and thirty 
years, and begot Serug. 21And Reu 
lived after he begot Serug two hundred 
and seven years, and begot sons and 
daughters. 

22And Serug lived thirty years, and 
begot Nahor. 23And Serug lived after 
he begot Nahor two hundred years, 
and begot sons and daughters. 

24And Nahor lived nine and twenty 
years, and begot Terah. 25And Nahor 
lived after he begot Terah a hundred 
11 




and nineteen years, and begot sons and 
daughters. 

26And Terah lived seventy years, 
and begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran. 
27Now these are the generations of 
Terah. Terah begot Abram, Nahor, and 
Haran; and Haran begot Lot. 28And 
Haran died in the presence of his 
father Terah in the land of his nativity, 
in Ur of the Chaldees. 29And Abram 
and Nahor took them wives: the name 
of Abram’s wife was Sarai; and the 
name of Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the 
daughter of Haran, the father of 
Milcah, and the father of Iscah. 30And 
Sarai was barren; she had no child. 
31And Terah took Abram his son, and 
Lot the son of Haran, his son’s son, 
and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son 
Abram’s wife; and they went forth 
with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to 
go into the land of Canaan; and they 
came unto Haran, and dwelt there. 
32And the days of Terah were two 
hundred and five years; and Terah died 
in Haran. 

.. .. 

Now the LORD said unto 
Abram: ‘Get thee out of thy 
country, and from thy kindred, and 
from thy father’s house, unto the land 
that I will show thee. 2And I will make 
of thee a great nation, and I will bless 
thee, and make thy name great; and be 
thou a blessing. 3And I will bless them 
that bless thee, and him that curseth 
thee will I curse; and in thee shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed.’ 
4So Abram went, as the LORD had 
spoken unto him; and Lot went with 
him; and Abram was seventy and five 
years old when he departed out of 
Haran. 5And Abram took Sarai his 
wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and all 
their substance that they had gathered, 
and the souls that they had gotten in 
Haran; and they went forth to go into 
the land of Canaan; and into the land 
of Canaan they came. 6And Abram 
passed through the land unto the place 
of Shechem, unto the terebinth of 
Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in 
the land. 7And the LORD appeared unto 
Abram, and said: ‘Unto thy seed will I 
give this land’; and he builded there an 
altar unto the LORD, who appeared unto 
him. 8And he removed from thence 
unto the mountain on the east of Beth-
el, and pitched his tent, having Beth-el 
on the west, and Ai on the east; and he 
builded there an altar unto the LORD, 
and called upon the name of the LORD. 
9And Abram journeyed, going on still 
toward the South. 

10And there was a famine in the 
land; and Abram went down into 
Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine 
was sore in the land. 11And it came to 
pass, when he was come near to enter 
into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his 
wife: ‘Behold now, I know that thou 
art a fair woman to look upon. 12And it 
will come to pass, when the Egyptians 
shall see thee, that they will say: This 
is his wife; and they will kill me, but 
thee they will keep alive. 13Say, I pray 
thee, thou art my sister; that it may be 
well with me for thy sake, and that my 
12 




soul may live because of thee.’ 14And 
it came to pass, that, when Abram was 
come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld 
the woman that she was very fair. 
15And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, 
and praised her to Pharaoh; and the 
woman was taken into Pharaoh’s 
house. 16And he dealt well with Abram 
for her sake; and he had sheep, and 
oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, 
and maid-servants, and she-asses, and 
camels. 17And the LORD plagued 
Pharaoh and his house with great 
plagues because of Sarai Abram’s 
wife. 18And Pharaoh called Abram, 
and said: ‘What is this that thou hast 
done unto me? why didst thou not tell 
me that she was thy wife? 19Why 
saidst thou: She is my sister? so that I 
took her to be my wife; now therefore 
behold thy wife, take her, and go thy 
way.’ 20And Pharaoh gave men charge 
concerning him; and they brought him 
on the way, and his wife, and all that 
he had. 

And Abram went up out of 
Egypt, he, and his wife, and all 
that he had, and Lot with him, into the 
South. 2And Abram was very rich in 
cattle, in silver, and in gold. 3And he 
went on his journeys from the South 
even to Beth-el, unto the place where 
his tent had been at the beginning, 
between Beth-el and Ai; 4unto the 
place of the altar, which he had made 
there at the first; and Abram called 
there on the name of the LORD. 5And 
Lot also, who went with Abram, had 
flocks, and herds, and tents. 6And the 
land was not able to bear them, that 
they might dwell together; for their 
substance was great, so that they could 
not dwell together. 7And there was a 
strife between the herdmen of Abram’s 
cattle and the herdmen of Lot’s cattle. 
And the Canaanite and the Perizzite 
dwelt then in the land. 8And Abram 
said unto Lot: ‘Let there be no strife, I 
pray thee, between me and thee, and 
between my herdmen and thy 
herdmen; for we are brethren. 9Is not 
the whole land before thee? separate 
thyself, I pray thee, from me; if thou 
wilt take the left hand, then I will go to 
the right; or if thou take the right hand, 
then I will go to the left.’ 10And Lot 
lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the 
plain of the Jordan, that it was well 
watered every where, before the LORD 
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, like 
the garden of the LORD, like the land of 
Egypt, as thou goest unto Zoar. 11So 
Lot chose him all the plain of the 
Jordan; and Lot journeyed east; and 
they separated themselves the one 
from the other. 12Abram dwelt in the 
land of Canaan, and Lot dwelt in the 
cities of the Plain, and moved his tent 
as far as Sodom. 13Now the men of 
Sodom were wicked and sinners 
against the LORD exceedingly. 14And 
the LORD said unto Abram, after that 
Lot was separated from him: ‘Lift up 
now thine eyes, and look from the 
place where thou art, northward and 
southward and eastward and 
westward; 15for all the land which thou 
seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy 
13 




seed for ever. 16And I will make thy 
seed as the dust of the earth; so that if 
a man can number the dust of the 
earth, then shall thy seed also be 
numbered. 17Arise, walk through the 
land in the length of it and in the 
breadth of it; for unto thee will I give 
it.’ 18And Abram moved his tent, and 
came and dwelt by the terebinths of 
Mamre, which are in Hebron, and built 
there an altar unto the LORD. 

And it came to pass in the 
days of Amraphel king of 
Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, 
Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal 
king of Goiim, 2that they made war 
with Bera king of Sodom, and with 
Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king 
of Admah, and Shemeber king of 
Zeboiim, and the king of Bela—the 
same is Zoar. 3All these came as allies 
unto the vale of Siddim—the same is 
the Salt Sea. 4Twelve years they 
served Chedorlaomer, and in the 
thirteenth year they rebelled. 5And in 
the fourteenth year came 
Chedorlaomer and the kings that were 
with him, and smote the Rephaim in 
Ashteroth-karnaim, and the Zuzim in 
Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh-
kiriathaim, 6and the Horites in their 
mount Seir, unto El-paran, which is by 
the wilderness. 7And they turned back, 
and came to En-mishpat—the same is 
Kadesh—and smote all the country of 
the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, 
that dwelt in Hazazon-tamar. 8And 
there went out the king of Sodom, and 
the king of Gomorrah, and the king of 
Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and 
the king of Bela—the same is Zoar; 
and they set the battle in array against 
them in the vale of Siddim; 9against 
Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal 
king of Goiim, and Amraphel king of 
Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; 
four kings against the five. 10Now the 
vale of Siddim was full of slime pits; 
and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah 
fled, and they fell there, and they that 
remained fled to the mountain. 11And 
they took all the goods of Sodom and 
Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and 
went their way. 12And they took Lot, 
Abram’s brother’s son, who dwelt in 
Sodom, and his goods, and departed. 
13And there came one that had 
escaped, and told Abram the 
Hebrew—now he dwelt by the 
terebinths of Mamre the Amorite, 
brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner; 
and these were confederate with 
Abram. 14And when Abram heard that 
his brother was taken captive, he led 
forth his trained men, born in his 
house, three hundred and eighteen, and 
pursued as far as Dan. 15And he 
divided himself against them by night, 
he and his servants, and smote them, 
and pursued them unto Hobah, which 
is on the left hand of Damascus. 16And 
he brought back all the goods, and also 
brought back his brother Lot, and his 
goods, and the women also, and the 
people. 17And the king of Sodom went 
out to meet him, after his return from 
the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the 
kings that were with him, at the vale of 
14 




Shaveh—the same is the King’s Vale. 
18And Melchizedek king of Salem 
brought forth bread and wine; and he 
was priest of God the Most High. 
19And he blessed him, and said: 
‘Blessed be Abram of God Most High, 
Maker of heaven and earth; 20and 
blessed be God the Most High, who 
hath delivered thine enemies into thy 
hand.’ And he gave him a tenth of all. 
21And the king of Sodom said unto 
Abram: ‘Give me the persons, and take 
the goods to thyself.’ 22And Abram 
said to the king of Sodom: ‘I have 
lifted up my hand unto the LORD, God 
Most High, Maker of heaven and 
earth, 23that I will not take a thread nor 
a shoe-latchet nor aught that is thine, 
lest thou shouldest say: I have made 
Abram rich; 24save only that which the 
young men have eaten, and the portion 
of the men which went with me, Aner, 
Eshcol, and Mamre, let them take their 
portion.’ 

After these things the word of 
the LORD came unto Abram in 
a vision, saying: ‘Fear not, Abram, I 
am thy shield, thy reward shall be 
exceeding great.’ 2And Abram said: ‘O 
Lord GOD, what wilt Thou give me, 
seeing I go hence childless, and he that 
shall be possessor of my house is 
Eliezer of Damascus?’ 3And Abram 
said: ‘Behold, to me Thou hast given 
no seed, and, lo, one born in my house 
is to be mine heir.’ 4And, behold, the 
word of the LORD came unto him, 
saying: ‘This man shall not be thine 
heir; but he that shall come forth out of 
thine own bowels shall be thine heir.’ 
5And He brought him forth abroad, 
and said: ‘Look now toward heaven, 
and count the stars, if thou be able to 
count them’; and He said unto him: 
‘So shall thy seed be.’ 6And he 
believed in the LORD; and He counted 
it to him for righteousness. 7And He 
said unto him: ‘I am the LORD that 
brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, 
to give thee this land to inherit it.’ 
8And he said: ‘O Lord GOD, whereby 
shall I know that I shall inherit it?’ 
9And He said unto him: ‘Take Me a 
heifer of three years old, and a she-
goat of three years old, and a ram of 
three years old, and a turtle-dove, and 
a young pigeon.’ 10And he took him all 
these, and divided them in the midst, 
and laid each half over against the 
other; but the birds divided he not. 
11And the birds of prey came down 
upon the carcasses, and Abram drove 
them away. 12And it came to pass, that, 
when the sun was going down, a deep 
sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, a 
dread, even a great darkness, fell upon 
him. 13And He said unto Abram: 
‘Know of a surety that thy seed shall 
be a stranger in a land that is not 
theirs, and shall serve them; and they 
shall afflict them four hundred years; 
14and also that nation, whom they shall 
serve, will I judge; and afterward shall 
they come out with great substance. 
15But thou shalt go to thy fathers in 
peace; thou shalt be buried in a good 
old age. 16And in the fourth generation 
they shall come back hither; for the 
15 




iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.’ 
17And it came to pass, that, when the 
sun went down, and there was thick 
darkness, behold a smoking furnace, 
and a flaming torch that passed 
between these pieces. 18In that day the 
LORD made a covenant with Abram, 
saying: ‘Unto thy seed have I given 
this land, from the river of Egypt unto 
the great river, the river Euphrates; 
19the Kenite, and the Kenizzite, and the 
Kadmonite, 20and the Hittite, and the 
Perizzite, and the Rephaim, 21and the 
Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the 
Girgashite, and the Jebusite.’ 

16 



Now Sarai Abram’s wife bore 
him no children; and she had a 
handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name 
was Hagar. 2And Sarai said unto 
Abram: ‘Behold now, the LORD hath 
restrained me from bearing; go in, I 
pray thee, unto my handmaid; it may 
be that I shall be builded up through 
her.’ And Abram hearkened to the 
voice of Sarai. 3And Sarai Abram’s 
wife took Hagar the Egyptian, her 
handmaid, after Abram had dwelt ten 
years in the land of Canaan, and gave 
her to Abram her husband to be his 
wife. 4And he went in unto Hagar, and 
she conceived; and when she saw that 
she had conceived, her mistress was 
despised in her eyes. 5And Sarai said 
unto Abram: ‘My wrong be upon thee: 
I gave my handmaid into thy bosom; 
and when she saw that she had 
conceived, I was despised in her eyes: 
the LORD judge between me and thee.’ 
6But Abram said unto Sarai: ‘Behold, 
thy maid is in thy hand; do to her that 
which is good in thine eyes.’ And 
Sarai dealt harshly with her, and she 
fled from her face. 7And the angel of 
the LORD found her by a fountain of 
water in the wilderness, by the 
fountain in the way to Shur. 8And he 
said: ‘Hagar, Sarai’s handmaid, 
whence camest thou? and whither 
goest thou?’ And she said: ‘I flee from 
the face of my mistress Sarai.’ 9And 
the angel of the LORD said unto her: 
‘Return to thy mistress, and submit 
thyself under her hands.’ 10And the 
angel of the LORD said unto her: ‘I will 
greatly multiply thy seed, that it shall 
not be numbered for multitude. 11And 
the angel of the LORD said unto her: 
‘Behold, thou art with child, and shalt 
bear a son; and thou shalt call his 
name aIshmael, because the LORD hath 
heard thy affliction. 12And he shall be 
a wild ass of a man: his hand shall be 
against every man, and every man’s 
hand against him; and he shall dwell in 
the face of all his brethren.’ 13And she 
called the name of the LORD that spoke 
unto her, Thou art ba God of seeing; 
for she said: ‘Have I even here seen 
Him that seeth Me?’ 14Wherefore the 
well was called cBeer-lahai-roi; 
behold, it is between Kadesh and 
Bered. 15And Hagar bore Abram a son; 
and Abram called the name of his son, 

a That is, God heareth. 

b Heb. El roi. 

c That is, The well of the Living One 
who seeth me. 


whom Hagar bore, Ishmael. 16And 
Abram was fourscore and six years 
old, when Hagar bore Ishmael to 
Abram. 

17 



And when Abram was ninety 
years old and nine, the LORD 
appeared to Abram, and said unto him: 
‘I am God Almighty; walk before Me, 
and be thou wholehearted. 2And I will 
make My covenant between Me and 
thee, and will multiply thee 
exceedingly.’ 3And Abram fell on his 
face; and God talked with him, saying: 
4’As for Me, behold, My covenant is 
with thee, and thou shalt be athe father 
of a multitude of nations. 5Neither 
shall thy name any more be called 
Abram, but thy name shall be 
Abraham; for the father of a multitude 
of nations have I made thee. 6And I 
will make thee exceeding fruitful, and 
I will make nations of thee, and kings 
shall come out of thee. 7And I will 
establish My covenant between Me 
and thee and thy seed after thee 
throughout their generations for an 
everlasting covenant, to be a God unto 
thee and to thy seed after thee. 8And I 
will give unto thee, and to thy seed 
after thee, the land of thy sojournings, 
all the land of Canaan, for an 
everlasting possession; and I will be 
their God.’ 9And God said unto 
Abraham: ‘And as for thee, thou shalt 
keep My covenant, thou, and thy seed 
after thee throughout their generations. 
10This is My covenant, which ye shall 

a Heb. Ab hamon. 

keep, between Me and you and thy 
seed after thee: every male among you 
shall be circumcised. 11And ye shall be 
circumcised in the flesh of your 
foreskin; and it shall be a token of a 
covenant betwixt Me and you. 12And 
he that is eight days old shall be 
circumcised among you, every male 
throughout your generations, he that is 
born in the house, or bought with 
money of any foreigner, that is not of 
thy seed. 13He that is born in thy 
house, and he that is bought with thy 
money, must needs be circumcised; 
and My covenant shall be in your flesh 
for an everlasting covenant. 14And the 
uncircumcised male who is not 
circumcised in the flesh of his 
foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from 
his people; he hath broken My 
covenant.’ 

15And God said unto Abraham: ‘As 
for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call 
her name Sarai, but bSarah shall her 
name be. 16And I will bless her, and 
moreover I will give thee a son of her; 
yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a 
mother of nations; kings of peoples 
shall be of her.’ 17Then Abraham fell 
upon his face, and laughed, and said in 
his heart: ‘Shall a child be born unto 
him that is a hundred years old? and 
shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, 
bear?’ 18And Abraham said unto God: 
‘Oh that Ishmael might live before 
Thee! ’ 19And God said: ‘‘Nay, but 
Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son; 

b That is, Princess. 


and thou shalt call his name aIsaac; and 
I will establish My covenant with him 
for an everlasting covenant for his 
seed after him. 20And as for Ishmael, I 
have heard thee; behold, I have blessed 
him, and will make him fruitful, and 
will multiply him exceedingly; twelve 
princes shall he beget, and I will make 
him a great nation. 21But My covenant 
will I establish with Isaac, whom 
Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set 
time in the next year.’ 22And He left 
off talking with him, and God went up 
from Abraham. 23And Abraham took 
Ishmael his son, and all that were born 
in his house, and all that were bought 
with his money, every male among the 
men of Abraham’s house, and 
circumcised the flesh of their foreskin 
in the selfsame day, as God had said 
unto him. 24And Abraham was ninety 
years old and nine, when he was 
circumcised in the flesh of his 
foreskin. 25And Ishmael his son was 
thirteen years old, when he was 
circumcised in the flesh of his 
foreskin. 26In the selfsame day was 
Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his 
son. 27And all the men of his house, 
those born in the house, and those 
bought with money of a foreigner, 
were circumcised with him. 

a From the Heb. Root meaning to 
laugh. 

 

.... 

And the LORD appeared unto 
him by the terebinths of 

Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the 
heat of the day; 2and he lifted up his 
eyes and looked, and, lo, three men 
stood over against him; and when he 
saw them, he ran to meet them from 
the tent door, and bowed down to the 
earth, 3and said: ‘My lord, if now I 
have found favour in thy sight, pass 
not away, I pray thee, from thy 
servant. 4Let now a little water be 
fetched, and wash your feet, and 
recline yourselves under the tree. 5And 
I will fetch a morsel of bread, and stay 
ye your heart; after that ye shall pass 
on; forasmuch as ye are come to your 
servant.’ And they said: ‘So do, as 
thou hast said.’ 6And Abraham 
hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and 
said: ‘Make ready quickly three 
measures of fine meal, knead it, and 
make cakes.’ 7And Abraham ran unto 
the herd, and fetched a calf tender and 
good, and gave it unto the servant; and 
he hastened to dress it. 8And he took 
curd, and milk, and the calf which he 
had dressed, and set it before them; 
and he stood by them under the tree, 
and they did eat. 9And they said unto 
him: ‘Where is Sarah thy wife?’ And 
he said: ‘Behold, in the tent.’ 10And He 
said: ‘I will certainly return unto thee 
when the season cometh round; and, 
lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son.’ 
And Sarah heard in the tent door, 
which was behind him.—11Now 
Abraham and Sarah were old, and well 
stricken in age; it had ceased to be 
with Sarah after the manner of 
women.—12And Sarah laughed within 
18 




herself, saying: ‘After I am waxed old 
shall I have pleasure, my lord being 
old also?’ 13And the LORD said unto 
Abraham: ‘Wherefore did Sarah laugh, 
saying: Shall I of a surety bear a child, 
who am old? 14Is any thing too hard 
for the LORD. At the set time I will 
return unto thee, when the season 
cometh round, and Sarah shall have a 
son.’ 15Then Sarah denied, saying: ‘I 
laughed not’; for she was afraid. And 
He said: ‘Nay; but thou didst laugh.’ 

16And the men rose up from thence, 
and looked out toward Sodom; and 
Abraham went with them to bring 
them on the way. 17And the LORD said: 
‘Shall I hide from Abraham that which 
I am doing; 18seeing that Abraham 
shall surely become a great and mighty 
nation, and all the nations of the earth 
shall be blessed in him? 19For I have 
known him, to the end that he may 
command his children and his 
household after him, that they may 
keep the way of the LORD, to do 
righteousness and justice; to the end 
that the LORD may bring upon 
Abraham that which He hath spoken 
of him.’ 20And the LORD said: ‘Verily, 
the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is 
great, and, verily, their sin is 
exceeding grievous. 21I will go down 
now, and see whether they have done 
altogether according to the cry of it, 
which is come unto Me; and if not, I 
will know.’ 22And the men turned from 
thence, and went toward Sodom; but 
Abraham stood yet before the LORD. 
23And Abraham drew near, and said: 
‘Wilt Thou indeed sweep away the 
righteous with the wicked? 
24Peradventure there are fifty righteous 
within the city; wilt Thou indeed 
sweep away and not forgive the place 
for the fifty righteous that are therein? 
25That be far from Thee to do after this 
manner, to slay the righteous with the 
wicked, that so the righteous should be 
as the wicked; that be far from Thee; 
shall not the judge of all the earth do 
justly?’ 26And the LORD said: ‘If I find 
in Sodom fifty righteous within the 
city, then I will forgive all the place 
for their sake.’ 27And Abraham 
answered and said: ‘Behold now, I 
have taken upon me to speak unto the 
Lord, who am but dust and ashes. 
28Peradventure there shall lack five of 
the fifty righteous; wilt Thou destroy 
all the city for lack of five?’ And He 
said: ‘I will not destroy it, if I find 
there forty and five.’ 29And he spoke 
unto Him yet again, and said: 
‘Peradventure there shall be forty 
found there.’ And He said: ‘I will not 
do it for the forty’s sake.’ 30And he 
said: ‘Oh, let not the Lord be angry, 
and I will speak. Peradventure there 
shall thirty be found there.’ And He 
said: ‘I will not do it, if I find thirty 
there.’ 31And he said: ‘Behold now, I 
have taken upon me to speak unto the 
Lord. Peradventure there shall be 
twenty found there.’ And He said: ‘I 
will not destroy it for the twenty’s 
sake.’ 32And he said: ‘Oh, let not the 
Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but 
this once. Peradventure ten shall be 


found there.’ And He said: ‘I will not 
destroy it for the ten’s sake.’ 33And the 
LORD went His way, as soon as He had 
left off speaking to Abraham; and 
Abraham returned unto his place. 

And the two angels came to 
Sodom at even; and Lot sat in 
the gate of Sodom; and Lot saw them, 
and rose up to meet them; and he fell 
down on his face to the earth; 2and he 
said: ‘Behold now, my lords, turn 
aside, I pray you, into your servant’s 
house, and tarry all night, and wash 
your feet, and ye shall rise up early, 
and go on your way.’ And they said: 
‘Nay; but we will abide in the broad 
place all night.’ 3And he urged them 
greatly; and they turned in unto him, 
and entered into his house; and he 
made them a feast, and did bake 
unleavened bread, and they did eat. 
4But before they lay down, the men of 
the city, even the men of Sodom, 
compassed the house round, both 
young and old, all the people from 
every quarter. 5And they called unto 
Lot, and said unto him: ‘Where are the 
men that came in to thee this night? 
bring them out unto us, that we may 
know them.’ 6And Lot went out unto 
them to the door, and shut the door 
after him. 7And he said: ‘I pray you, 
my brethren, do not so wickedly. 
8Behold now, I have two daughters 
that have not known man; let me, I 
pray you, bring them out unto you, and 
do ye to them as is good in your eyes; 
only unto these men do nothing; 
forasmuch as they are come under the 
shadow of my roof.’ 9And they said: 
‘Stand back.’ And they said: ‘This one 
fellow came in to sojourn, and he will 
needs play the judge; now will we deal 
worse with thee, than with them.’ And 
they pressed sore upon the man, even 
Lot, and drew near to break the door. 
10But the men put forth their hand, and 
brought Lot into the house to them, 
and the door they shut. 11And they 
smote the men that were at the door of 
the house with blindness, both small 
and great; so that they wearied 
themselves to find the door. 12And the 
men said unto Lot: ‘Hast thou here any 
besides? son-in-law, and thy sons, and 
thy daughters, and whomsoever thou 
hast in the city; bring them out of the 
place; 13for we will destroy this place, 
because the cry of them is waxed great 
before the LORD; and the LORD hath 
sent us to destroy it.’ 14And Lot went 
out, and spoke unto his sons-in-law, 
who married his daughters, and said: 
‘Up, get you out of this place; for the 
LORD will destroy the city.’ But he 
seemed unto his sons-in-law as one 
that jested. 15And when the morning 
arose, then the angels hastened Lot, 
saying: ‘Arise, take thy wife, and thy 
two daughters that are here; lest thou 
be swept away in the iniquity of the 
city.’ 16But he lingered; and the men 
laid hold upon his hand, and upon the 
hand of his wife, and upon the hand of 
his two daughters; the LORD being 
merciful unto him. And they brought 
him forth, and set him without the city. 
17And it came to pass, when they had 
19 




brought them forth abroad, that he 
said: ‘Escape for thy life; look not 
behind thee, neither stay thou in all the 
Plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou 
be swept away.’ 18And Lot said unto 
them: ‘Oh, not so, my lord; 19behold 
now, thy servant hath found grace in 
thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy 
mercy, which thou hast shown unto me 
in saving my life; and I cannot escape 
to the mountain, lest the evil overtake 
me, and I die. 20Behold now, this city 
is near to flee unto, and it is a little 
one; oh, let me escape thither—is it 
not a little one?—and my soul shall 
live.’ 21And he said unto him: ‘See, I 
have accepted thee concerning this 
thing also, that I will not overthrow the 
city of which thou hast spoken. 
22Hasten thou, escape thither; for I 
cannot do any thing till thou be come 
thither.’—Therefore the name of the 
city was called aZoar.— 23The sun was 
risen upon the earth when Lot came 
unto Zoar. 24Then the LORD caused to 
rain upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah 
brimstone and fire from the LORD out 
of heaven; 25and He overthrow those 
cities, and all the Plain, and all the 
inhabitants of the cities, and that which 
grew upon the ground. 26But his wife 
looked back from behind him, and she 
became a pillar of salt. 27And Abraham 
got up early in the morning to the 
place where he had stood before the 
LORD. 28And he looked out toward 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all 

a That is, Little, see verse 20. 

the land of the Plain, and beheld, and, 
lo, the smoke of the land went up as 
the smoke of a furnace. 

29And it came to pass, when God 
destroyed the cities of the Plain, that 
God remembered Abraham, and sent 
Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, 
when He overthrew the cities in which 
Lot dwelt. 

30And Lot went up out of Zoar, and 
dwelt in the mountain, and his two 
daughters with him; for he feared to 
dwell in Zoar; and he dwelt in a cave, 
he and his two daughters. 31And the 
first-born said unto the younger: ‘Our 
father is old, and there is not a man in 
the earth to come in unto us after the 
manner of all the earth. 32Come, let us 
make our father drink wine, and we 
will lie with him, that we may preserve 
seed of our father.’ 33And they made 
their father drink wine that night. And 
the first-born went in, and lay with her 
father; and he knew not when she lay 
down, nor when she arose. 34And it 
came to pass on the morrow, that the 
first-born said unto the younger: 
‘Behold, I lay yesternight with my 
father. Let us make him drink wine 
this night also; and go thou in, and lie 
with him, that we may preserve seed 
of our father.’ 35And they made their 
father drink wine that night also. And 
the younger arose, and lay with him; 
and he knew not when she lay down, 
nor when she arose. 36Thus were both 
the daughters of Lot with child by their 
father. 37And the first-born bore a son, 
and called his name Moab—the same 


is the father of the Moabites unto this 
day. 38And the younger, she also bore 
a son, and called his name Ben-
ammi—the same is the father of the 
children of Ammon unto this day. 

And Abraham journeyed from 
thence toward the land of the 
South, and dwelt between Kadesh and 
Shur; and he sojourned in Gerar. 2And 
Abraham said of Sarah his wife: ‘She 
is my sister.’ And Abimelech king of 
Gerar sent, and took Sarah. 3But God 
came to Abimelech in a dream of the 
night, and said to him: ‘Behold, thou 
shalt die, because of the woman whom 
thou hast taken; for she is a man’s 
wife.’ 4Now Abimelech had not come 
near her; and he said: ‘Lord, wilt Thou 
slay even a righteous nation? 5Said he 
not himself unto me: She is my sister? 
and she, even she herself said: He is 
my brother. In the simplicity of my 
heart and the innocency of my hands 
have I done this.’ 6And God said unto 
him in the dream: ‘Yea, I know that in 
the simplicity of thy heart thou hast 
done this, and I also withheld thee 
from sinning against Me. Therefore 
suffered I thee not to touch her. 7Now 
therefore restore the man’s wife; for he 
is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, 
and thou shalt live; and if thou restore 
her not, know thou that thou shalt 
surely die, thou, and all that are thine.’ 
8And Abimelech rose early in the 
morning, and called all his servants, 
and told all these things in their ears; 
and the men were sore afraid. 9Then 
Abimelech called Abraham, and said 
unto him: ‘What hast thou done unto 
us? and wherein have I sinned against 
thee, that thou hast brought on me and 
on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast 
done deeds unto me that ought not to 
be done.’ 10And Abimelech said unto 
Abraham: ‘What sawest thou, that 
thou hast done this thing?’ 11And 
Abraham said: ‘Because I thought: 
Surely the fear of God is not in this 
place; and they will slay me for my 
wife’s sake. 12And moreover she is 
indeed my sister, the daughter of my 
father, but not the daughter of my 
mother; and so she became my wife. 
13And it came to pass, when God 
caused me to wander from my father’s 
house, that I said unto her: This is thy 
kindness which thou shalt show unto 
me; at every place whither we shall 
come, say of me: He is my brother.’ 
14And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, 
and men-servants and women-
servants, and gave them unto 
Abraham, and restored him Sarah his 
wife. 15And Abimelech said: ‘Behold, 
my land is before thee: dwell where it 
pleaseth thee.’ 16And unto Sarah he 
said: ‘Behold, I have given thy brother 
a thousand pieces of silver; behold, it 
is for thee a covering of the eyes to all 
that are with thee; and before all men 
thou art righted.’ 17And Abraham 
prayed unto God; and God healed 
Abimelech, and his wife, and his 
maid-servants; and they bore children. 
18For the LORD had fast closed up all 
the wombs of the house of Abimelech, 
because of Sarah Abraham’s wife. 
20 




And the LORD remembered 
Sarah as He had said, and the 
LORD did unto Sarah as He had spoken. 
2And Sarah conceived, and bore 
Abraham a son in his old age, at the 
set time of which God had spoken to 
him. 3And Abraham called the name of 
his son that was born unto him, whom 
Sarah bore to him, Isaac. 4And 
Abraham circumcised his son Isaac 
when he was eight days old, as God 
had commanded him. 5And Abraham 
was a hundred years old, when his son 
Isaac was born unto him. 6And Sarah 
said: ‘God hath made laughter for me; 
every one that heareth will laugh on 
account of me.’ 7And she said: ‘Who 
would have said unto Abraham, that 
Sarah should give children suck? for I 
have borne him a son in his old age.’ 

8And the child grew, and was 
weaned. And Abraham made a great 
feast on the day that Isaac was 
weaned. 9And Sarah saw the son of 
Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had 
borne unto Abraham, making sport. 
10Wherefore she said unto Abraham: 
‘Cast out this bondwoman and her son; 
for the son of this bondwoman shall 
not be heir with my son, even with 
Isaac.’ 11And the thing was very 
grievous in Abraham’s sight on 
account of his son. 12And God said 
unto Abraham: ‘Let it not be grievous 
in thy sight because of the lad, and 
because of thy bondwoman; in all that 
Sarah saith unto thee, hearken unto her 
voice; for in Isaac shall seed be called 
to thee. 13And also of the son of the 
bondwoman will I make a nation, 
because he is thy seed.’ 14And 
Abraham arose up early in the 
morning, and took bread and a bottle 
of water, and gave it unto Hagar, 
putting it on her shoulder, and the 
child, and sent her away; and she 
departed, and strayed in the wilderness 
of Beer-sheba. 15And the water in the 
bottle was spent, and she cast the child 
under one of the shrubs. 16And she 
went, and sat her down over against 
him a good way off, as it were a bow-
shot; for she said: ‘Let me not look 
upon the death of the child.’ And she 
sat over against him, and lifted up her 
voice, and wept. 17And God heard the 
voice of the lad; and the angel of God 
called to Hagar out of heaven, and said 
unto her: ‘What aileth thee, Hagar? 
fear not; for God hath heard the voice 
of the lad where he is. 18Arise, lift up 
the lad, and hold him fast by thy hand; 
for I will make him a great nation.’ 
19And God opened her eyes, and she 
saw a well of water; and she went, and 
filled the bottle with water, and gave 
the lad drink. 20And God was with the 
lad, and he grew; and he dwelt in the 
wilderness, and became an archer. 
21And he dwelt in the wilderness of 
Paran; and his mother took him a wife 
out of the land of Egypt. 

22And it came to pass at that time, 
that Abimelech and Phicol the captain 
of his host spoke unto Abraham, 
saying: ‘God is with thee in all that 
thou doest. 23Now therefore swear unto 
me here by God that thou wilt not deal 
21 




falsely with me, nor with my son, nor 
with my son’s son; but according to 
the kindness that I have done unto 
thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the 
land wherein thou hast sojourned.’ 
24And Abraham said: ‘I will swear.’ 
25And Abraham reproved Abimelech 
because of the well of water, which 
Abimelech’s servants had violently 
taken away. 26And Abimelech said: ‘I 
know not who hath done this thing; 
neither didst thou tell me, neither yet 
heard I of it, but to-day.’ 27And 
Abraham took sheep and oxen, and 
gave them unto Abimelech; and they 
two made a covenant. 28And Abraham 
set seven ewe-lambs of the flock by 
themselves. 29And Abimelech said 
unto Abraham: ‘What mean these 
seven ewe-lambs which thou hast set 
by themselves?’ 30And he said: 
‘Verily, these seven ewe-lambs shalt 
thou take of my hand, that it may be a 
witness unto me, that I have digged 
this well.’ 31Wherefore that place was 
called Beer-sheba; because there they 
swore both of them. 32So they made a 
covenant at Beer-sheba; and 
Abimelech rose up, and Phicol the 
captain of his host, and they returned 
into the land of the Philistines. 33And 
Abraham planted a tamarisk-tree in 
Beer-sheba, and called there on the 
name of the LORD, the Everlasting 
God. 34And Abraham sojourned in the 
land of the Philistines many days. 

22 



And it came to pass after these 
things, that God did prove 
Abraham, and said unto him: 
‘Abraham’; and he said: ‘Here am I.’ 
2And He said: ‘Take now thy son, 
thine only son, whom thou lovest, 
even Isaac, and get thee into the land 
of Moriah; and offer him there for a 
burnt-offering upon one of the 
mountains which I will tell thee of.’ 
3And Abraham rose early in the 
morning, and saddled his ass, and took 
two of his young men with him, and 
Isaac his son; and he cleaved the wood 
for the burnt-offering, and rose up, and 
went unto the place of which God had 
told him. 4On the third day Abraham 
lifted up his eyes, and saw the place 
afar off. 5And Abraham said unto his 
young men: ‘Abide ye here with the 
ass, and I and the lad will go yonder; 
and we will worship, and come back to 
you.’ 6And Abraham took the wood of 
the burnt-offering, and laid it upon 
Isaac his son; and he took in his hand 
the fire and the knife; and they went 
both of them together. 7And Isaac 
spoke unto Abraham his father, and 
said: ‘My father.’ And he said: ‘Here 
am I, my son.’ And he said: ‘Behold 
the fire and the wood; but where is the 
lamb for a burnt-offering?’ 8And 
Abraham said: ‘God will aprovide 
Himself the lamb for a burnt-offering, 
my son.’ So they went both of them 
together. 9And they came to the place 
which God had told him of; and 
Abraham built the altar there, and laid 
the wood in order, and bound Isaac his 
son, and laid him on the altar, upon the 

a Heb jireh, that is, see for Himself. 


wood. 10And Abraham stretched forth 
his hand, and took the knife to slay his 
son. 11And the angel of the LORD called 
unto him out of heaven, and said: 
‘Abraham, Abraham.’ And he said: 
‘Here am I.’ 12And he said: ‘Lay not 
thy hand upon the lad, neither do thou 
any thing unto him; for now I know 
that thou art a God-fearing man, seeing 
thou hast not withheld thy son, thine 
only son, from Me.’ 13And Abraham 
lifted up his eyes, and looked, and 
behold behind him a ram caught in the 
thicket by his horns. And Abraham 
went and took the ram, and offered 
him up for a burnt-offering in the stead 
of his son. 14And Abraham called the 
name of that place aAdonai-jireh; as it 
is said to this day: ‘In the mount where 
the LORD is seen.’ 15And the angel of 
the LORD called unto Abraham a 
second time out of heaven, 16and said: 
‘By Myself have I sworn, saith the 
LORD, because thou hast done this 
thing, and hast not withheld thy son, 
thine only son, 17that in blessing I will 
bless thee, and in multiplying I will 
multiply thy seed as the stars of the 
heaven, and as the sand which is upon 
the seashore; and thy seed shall 
possess the gate of his enemies; 18and 
in thy seed shall all the nations of the 
earth be blessed; because thou hast 
hearkened to My voice.’ 19So Abraham 
returned unto his young men, and they 
rose up and went together to Beer-

a That is, The LORD seeth. 

sheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beer-
sheba. 

20And it came to pass after these 
things, that it was told Abraham, 
saying: ‘Behold, Milcah, she also hath 
borne children unto thy brother Nahor: 
21Uz his first-born, and Buz his 
brother, and Kemuel the father of 
Aram; 22and Chesed, and Hazo, and 
Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.’ 
23And Bethuel begot Rebekah; these 
eight did Milcah bear to Nahor, 
Abraham’s brother. 24And his 
concubine, whose name was Reumah, 
she also bore Tebah, and Gaham, and 
Tahash, and Maacah. 

... ... 

And the life of Sarah was a 
hundred and seven and twenty 
years; these were the years of the life 
of Sarah. 2And Sarah died in 
Kiriatharba—the same is Hebron—in 
the land of Canaan; and Abraham 
came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep 
for her. 3And Abraham rose up from 
before his dead, and spoke unto the 
children of Heth, saying: 4’I am a 
stranger and a sojourner with you: give 
me a possession of a burying-place 
with you, that I may bury my dead out 
of my sight.’ 5And the children of Heth 
answered Abraham, saying unto him: 
6’Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty 
prince among us; in the choice of our 
sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us 
shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, 
but that thou mayest bury thy dead.’ 
7And Abraham rose up, and bowed 
down to the people of the land, even to 
23 




the children of Heth. 8And he spoke 
with them, saying: ‘If it be your mind 
that I should bury my dead out of my 
sight, hear me, and entreat for me to 
Ephron the son of Zohar, 9that he may 
give me the cave of Machpelah, which 
he hath, which is in the end of his 
field; for the full price let him give it 
to me in the midst of you for a 
possession of a burying-place.’ 10Now 
Ephron was sitting in the midst of the 
children of Heth; and Ephron the 
Hittite answered Abraham in the 
hearing of the children of Heth, even 
of all that went in at the gate of his 
city, saying: 11’Nay, my lord, hear me: 
the field give I thee, and the cave that 
is therein, I give it thee; in the 
presence of the sons of my people give 
I it thee; bury thy dead.’ 12And 
Abraham bowed down before the 
people of the land. 13And he spoke 
unto Ephron in the hearing of the 
people of the land, saying: ‘But if thou 
wilt, I pray thee, hear me: I will give 
the price of the field; take it of me, and 
I will bury my dead there.’ 14And 
Ephron answered Abraham, saying 
unto him: 15’My lord, hearken unto 
me: a piece of land worth four hundred 
shekels of silver, what is that betwixt 
me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.’ 
16And Abraham hearkened unto 
Ephron; and Abraham weighed to 
Ephron the silver, which he had named 
in the hearing of the children of Heth, 
four hundred shekels of silver, current 
money with the merchant. 17So the 
field of Ephron, which was in 
Machpelah, which was before Mamre, 
the field, and the cave which was 
therein, and all the trees that were in 
the field, that were in all the border 
thereof round about, were made 
sure18unto Abraham for a possession 
in the presence of the children of Heth, 
before all that went in at the gate of his 
city. 19And after this, Abraham buried 
Sarah his wife in the cave of the field 
of Machpelah before Mamre—the 
same is Hebron—in the land of 
Canaan. 20And the field, and the cave 
that is therein, were made sure unto 
Abraham for a possession of a 
burying-place by the children of Heth. 

And Abraham was old, well 
stricken in age; and the LORD 
had blessed Abraham in all things. 
2And Abraham said unto his servant, 
the elder of his house, that ruled over 
all that he had: ‘Put, I pray thee, thy 
hand under my thigh. 3And I will make 
thee swear by the LORD, the God of 
heaven and the God of the earth, that 
thou shalt not take a wife for my son 
of the daughters of the Canaanites, 
among whom I dwell. 4But thou shalt 
go unto my country, and to my 
kindred, and take a wife for my son, 
even for Isaac.’ 5And the servant said 
unto him: ‘Peradventure the woman 
will not be willing to follow me unto 
this land; must I needs bring thy son 
back unto the land from whence thou 
camest?’ 6And Abraham said unto 
him: ‘Beware thou that thou bring not 
my son back thither. 7The LORD, the 
God of heaven, who took me from my 
24 




father’s house, and from the land of 
my nativity, and who spoke unto me, 
and who swore unto me, saying: Unto 
thy seed will I give this land; He will 
send His angel before thee, and thou 
shalt take a wife for my son from 
thence. 8And if the woman be not 
willing to follow thee, then thou shalt 
be clear from this my oath; only thou 
shalt not bring my son back thither.’ 
9And the servant put his hand under 
the thigh of Abraham his master, and 
swore to him concerning this matter. 
10And the servant took ten camels, of 
the camels of his master, and departed; 
having all goodly things of his 
master’s in his hand; and he arose, and 
went to aAram-naharaim, unto the city 
of Nahor. 11And he made the camels to 
kneel down without the city by the 
well of water at the time of evening, 
the time that women go out to draw 
water. 12And he said: ‘O LORD, the God 
of my master Abraham, send me, I 
pray Thee, good speed this day, and 
show kindness unto my master 
Abraham. 13Behold, I stand by the 
fountain of water; and the daughters of 
the men of the city come out to draw 
water. 14So let it come to pass, that the 
damsel to whom I shall say: Let down 
thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may 
drink; and she shall say: Drink, and I 
will give thy camels drink also; let the 
same be she that Thou hast appointed 
for Thy servant, even for Isaac; and 
thereby shall I know that Thou hast 

a That is, Mesopotamia. 

shown kindness unto my master.’ 
15And it came to pass, before he had 
done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah 
came out, who was born to Bethuel the 
son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, 
Abraham’s brother, with her pitcher 
upon her shoulder. 16And the damsel 
was very fair to look upon, a virgin, 
neither had any man known her; and 
she went down to the fountain, and 
filled her pitcher, and came up. 17And 
the servant ran to meet her, and said: 
‘Give me to drink, I pray thee, a little 
water of thy pitcher.’ 18And she said: 
‘Drink, my lord’; and she hastened, 
and let down her pitcher upon her 
hand, and gave him drink. 19And when 
she had done giving him drink, she 
said: ‘I will draw for thy camels also, 
until they have done drinking.’ 20And 
she hastened, and emptied her pitcher 
into the trough, and ran again unto the 
well to draw, and drew for all his 
camels. 21And the man looked 
stedfastly on her; holding his peace, to 
know whether the LORD had made his 
journey prosperous or not. 22And it 
came to pass, as the camels had done 
drinking, that the man took a golden 
ring of half a shekel weight, and two 
bracelets for her hands of ten shekels 
weight of gold; 23and said: ‘Whose 
daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee. 
Is there room in thy father’s house for 
us to lodge in?’ 24And she said unto 
him: ‘I am the daughter of Bethuel the 
son of Milcah, whom she bore unto 
Nahor.’ 25She said moreover unto him: 
‘We have both straw and provender 


enough, and room to lodge in.’ 26And 
the man bowed his head, and 
prostrated himself before the LORD. 
27And he said: ‘Blessed be the LORD, 
the God of my master Abraham, who 
hath not forsaken His mercy and His 
truth toward my master; as for me, the 
LORD hath led me in the way to the 
house of my master’s brethren.’ 28And 
the damsel ran, and told her mother’s 
house according to these words. 29And 
Rebekah had a brother, and his name 
was Laban; and Laban ran out unto the 
man, unto the fountain. 30And it came 
to pass, when he saw the ring, and the 
bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and 
when he heard the words of Rebekah 
his sister, saying: ‘Thus spoke the man 
unto me, ‘that he came unto the man; 
and, behold, he stood by the camels at 
the fountain. 31And he said: ‘Come in, 
thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore 
standest thou without? for I have 
cleared the house, and made room for 
the camels.’ 32And the man came into 
the house, and he ungirded the camels; 
and he gave straw and provender for 
the camels, and water to wash his feet 
and the feet of the men that were with 
him. 33And there was set food before 
him to eat; but he said: ‘I will not eat, 
until I have told mine errand.’ And he 
said: ‘Speak on.’ 34And he said: ‘I am 
Abraham’s servant. 35And the LORD 
hath blessed my master greatly; and he 
is become great; and He hath given 
him flocks and herds, and silver and 
gold, and men-servants and maid-
servants, and camels and asses. 36And 
Sarah my master’s wife bore a son to 
my master when she was old; and unto 
him hath he given all that he hath. 
37And my master made me swear, 
saying: Thou shalt not take a wife for 
my son of the daughters of the 
Canaanites, in whose land I dwell. 
38But thou shalt go unto my father’s 
house, and to my kindred, and take a 
wife for my son. 39And I said unto my 
master: Peradventure the woman will 
not follow me. 40And he said unto me: 
The LORD, before whom I walk, will 
send His angel with thee, and prosper 
thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for 
my son of my kindred, and of my 
father’s house; 41then shalt thou be 
clear from my oath, when thou comest 
to my kindred; and if they give her not 
to thee, thou shalt be clear from my 
oath. 42And I came this day unto the 
fountain, and said: O LORD, the God of 
my master Abraham, if now Thou do 
prosper my way which I go: 43behold, I 
stand by the fountain of water; and let 
it come to pass, that the maiden that 
cometh forth to draw, to whom I shall 
say: Give me, I pray thee, a little water 
from thy pitcher to drink; 44and she 
shall say to me: Both drink thou, and I 
will also draw for thy camels; let the 
same be the woman whom the LORD 
hath appointed for my master’s son. 
45And before I had done speaking to 
my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth 
with her pitcher on her shoulder; and 
she went down unto the fountain, and 
drew. And I said unto her: Let me 
drink, I pray thee. 46And she made 


haste, and let down her pitcher from 
her shoulder, and said: Drink, and I 
will give thy camels drink also. So I 
drank, and she made the camels drink 
also. 47And I asked her, and said: 
Whose daughter art thou? And she 
said: The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor’s 
son, whom Milcah bore unto him. And 
I put the ring upon her nose, and the 
bracelets upon her hands. 48And I 
bowed my head, and prostrated myself 
before the LORD, and blessed the LORD, 
the God of my master Abraham, who 
had led me in the right way to take my 
master’s brother’s daughter for his 
son. 49And now if ye will deal kindly 
and truly with my master, tell me; and 
if not, tell me; that I may turn to the 
right hand, or to the left.’ 50Then 
Laban and Bethuel answered and said: 
‘The thing proceedeth from the LORD; 
we cannot speak unto thee bad or 
good. 51Behold, Rebekah is before 
thee, take her, and go, and let her be 
thy master’s son’s wife, as the LORD 
hath spoken.’ 52And it came to pass, 
that, when Abraham’s servant heard 
their words, he bowed himself down to 
the earth unto the LORD. 53And the 
servant brought forth jewels of silver, 
and jewels of gold, and raiment, and 
gave them to Rebekah; he gave also to 
her brother and to her mother precious 
things. 54And they did eat and drink, 
he and the men that were with him, 
and tarried all night; and they rose up 
in the morning, and he said: ‘Send me 
away unto my master.’ 55And her 
brother and her mother said: ‘Let the 
damsel abide with us a few days, at the 
least ten; after that she shall go.’ 56And 
he said unto them: ‘Delay me not, 
seeing the LORD hath prospered my 
way; send me away that I may go to 
my master.’ 57And they said: ‘We will 
call the damsel, and inquire at her 
mouth.’ 58And they called Rebekah, 
and said unto her: ‘Wilt thou go with 
this man?’ And she said: ‘I will go.’ 
59And they sent away Rebekah their 
sister, and her nurse, and Abraham’s 
servant, and his men. 60And they 
blessed Rebekah, and said unto her: 
‘Our sister, be thou the mother of 
thousands of ten thousands, and let thy 
seed possess the gate of those that hate 
them.’ 61And Rebekah arose, and her 
damsels, and they rode upon the 
camels, and followed the man. And the 
servant took Rebekah, and went his 
way. 62And Isaac came from the way 
of Beer-lahai-roi; for he dwelt in the 
land of the South. 63And Isaac went 
out to meditate in the field at the 
eventide; and he lifted up his eyes, and 
saw, and, behold, there were camels 
coming. 64And Rebekah lifted up her 
eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she 
alighted from the camel. 65And she 
said unto the servant: ‘What man is 
this that walketh in the field to meet 
us?’ And the servant said: ‘It is my 
master.’ And she took her veil, and 
covered herself. 66And the servant told 
Isaac all the things that he had done. 
67And Isaac brought her into his 
mother Sarah’s tent, and took 
Rebekah, and she became his wife; 


and he loved her. And Isaac was 
comforted for his mother. 

And Abraham took another 
wife, and her name was 
Keturah. 2And she bore him Zimran, 
and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, 
and Ishbak, and Shuah. 3And Jokshan 
begot Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons 
of Dedan were Asshurim, and 
Letushim, and Leummim. 4And the 
sons of Midian: Ephah, and Epher, and 
Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All 
these were the children of Keturah. 
5And Abraham gave all that he had 
unto Isaac. 6But unto the sons of the 
concubines, that Abraham had, 
Abraham gave gifts; and he sent them 
away from Isaac his son, while he yet 
lived, eastward, unto the east country. 
7And these are the days of the years of 
Abraham’s life which he lived, a 
hundred threescore and fifteen years. 
8And Abraham expired, and died in a 
good old age, an old man, and full of 
years; and was gathered to his people. 
9And Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried 
him in the cave of Machpelah, in the 
field of Ephron the son of Zohar the 
Hittite, which is before Mamre; 10the 
field which Abraham purchased of the 
children of Heth; there was Abraham 
buried, and Sarah his wife. 11And it 
came to pass after the death of 
Abraham, that God blessed Isaac his 
son; and Isaac dwelt by Beer-lahai-roi. 

12Now these are the generations of 
Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar 
the Egyptian, Sarah’s handmaid, bore 
unto Abraham. 13And these are the 
names of the sons of Ishmael, by their 
names, according to their generations: 
the first-born of Ishmael, Nebaioth; 
and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 
14and Mishma, and Dumah, and 
Massa; 15Hadad, and Tema, Jetur, 
Naphish, and Kedem; 16these are the 
sons of Ishmael, and these are their 
names, by their villages, and by their 
encampments; twelve princes 
according to their nations. 17And these 
are the years of the life of Ishmael, a 
hundred and thirty and seven years; 
and he expired and died; and was 
gathered unto his people. 18And they 
dwelt from Havilah unto Shur that is 
before Egypt, as thou goest toward 
Asshur: over against all his brethren he 
did settle. 

..... 

19And these are the generations of 
Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham begot 
Isaac. 20And Isaac was forty years old 
when he took Rebekah, the daughter of 
Bethuel the Aramean, of Paddan-aram, 
the sister of Laban the Aramean, to be 
his wife. 21And Isaac entreated the 
LORD for his wife, because she was 
barren; and the LORD let Himself be 
entreated of him, and Rebekah his wife 
conceived. 22And the children 
struggled together within her; and she 
said: ‘If it be so, wherefore do I live?’ 
And she went to inquire of the LORD. 
23And the LORD said unto her: 

Two nations are in thy womb, 

And two peoples shall be separated 
from thy bowels; 
25 




And the one people shall be stronger 
than the other people; 

And the elder shall serve the 
younger. 

24And when her days to be delivered 
were fulfilled, behold, there were 
twins in her womb. 25And the first 
came forth ruddy, all over like a hairy 
mantle; and they called his name Esau. 
26And after that came forth his brother, 
and his hand had hold on Esau’s heel; 
and his name was called aJacob. And 
Isaac was threescore years old when 
she bore them. 27And the boys grew; 
and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man 
of the field; and Jacob was a quiet 
man, dwelling in tents. 28Now Isaac 
loved Esau, because he did eat of his 
venison; and Rebekah loved Jacob. 
29And Jacob sod pottage; and Esau 
came in from the field, and he was 
faint. 30And Esau said to Jacob: ‘Let 
me swallow, I pray thee, some of this 
red, red pottage; for I am faint.’ 
Therefore was his name called bEdom. 
31And Jacob said: ‘Sell me first thy 
birth right.’ 32And Esau said: ‘Behold, 
I am at the point to die; and what profit 
shall the birthright do to me?’ 33And 
Jacob said: ‘Swear to me first’; and he 
swore unto him; and he sold his 
birthright unto Jacob. 34And Jacob 
gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils; 
and he did eat and drink, and rose up, 

a That is, One that takes by the heel, 
or, supplants. 

b That is, Red. 

and went his way. So Esau despised 
his birthright. 

And there was a famine in the 
land, beside the first famine 
that was in the days of Abraham. And 
Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the 
Philistines unto Gerar. 2And the LORD 
appeared unto him, and said: ‘Go not 
down unto Egypt; dwell in the land 
which I shall tell thee of. 3Sojourn in 
this land, and I will be with thee, and 
will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto 
thy seed, I will give all these lands, 
and I will establish the oath which I 
swore unto Abraham thy father; 4and I 
will multiply thy seed as the stars of 
heaven, and will give unto thy seed all 
these lands; and by thy seed shall all 
the nations of the earth bless 
themselves; 5because that Abraham 
hearkened to My voice, and kept My 
charge, My commandments, My 
statutes, and My laws.’ 6And Isaac 
dwelt in Gerar. 7And the men of the 
place asked him of his wife; and he 
said: ‘She is my sister’; for he feared 
to say: ‘My wife’; ‘lest the men of the 
place should kill me for Rebekah, 
because she is fair to look upon.’ 8And 
it came to pass, when he had been 
there a long time, that Abimelech king 
of the Philistines looked out at a 
window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac 
was sporting with Rebekah his wife. 
9And Abimelech called Isaac, and said: 
‘Behold, of a surety she is thy wife; 
and how saidst thou: She is my sister?’ 
And Isaac said unto him: ‘Because I 
said: Lest I die because of her.’ 10And 
26 




Abimelech said: ‘What is this thou 
hast done unto us? one of the people 
might easily have lain with thy wife, 
and thou wouldest have brought 
guiltiness upon us.’ 11And Abimelech 
charged all the people, saying: ‘He that 
toucheth this man or his wife shall 
surely be put to death.’ 12And Isaac 
sowed in that land, and found in the 
same year a hundred-fold; and the 
LORD blessed him. 13And the man 
waxed great, and grew more and more 
until he became very great. 14And he 
had possessions of flocks, and 
possessions of herds, and a great 
household; and the Philistines envied 
him. 15Now all the wells which his 
father’s servants had digged in the 
days of Abraham his father, the 
Philistines had stopped them, and 
filled them with earth. 16And 
Abimelech said unto Isaac: ‘Go from 
us; for thou art much mightier than 
we.’ 17And Isaac departed thence, and 
encamped in the valley of Gerar, and 
dwelt there. 18And Isaac digged again 
the wells of water, which they had 
digged in the days of Abraham his 
father; for the Philistines had stopped 
them after the death of Abraham; and 
he called their names after the names 
by which his father had called them. 
19And Isaac’s servants digged in the 
valley, and found there a well of living 
water. 20And the herdmen of Gerar 
strove with Isaac’s herdmen, saying: 
‘The water is ours.’ And he called the 
name of the well aEsek; because they 
contended with him. 21And they 
digged another well, and they strove 
for that also. And he called the name 
of it bSitnah. 22And he removed from 
thence, and digged another well; and 
for that they strove not. And he called 
the name of it cRehoboth; and he said: 
‘For now the LORD hath made room for 
us, and we shall be fruitful in the 
land.’ 23And he went up from thence to 
Beer-sheba. 24And the LORD appeared 
unto him the same night, and said: ‘I 
am the God of Abraham thy father. 
Fear not, for I am with thee, and will 
bless thee, and multiply thy seed for 
My servant Abraham’s sake.’ 25And he 
builded an altar there, and called upon 
the name of the LORD, and pitched his 
tent there; and there Isaac’s servants 
digged a well. 26Then Abimelech went 
to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath his 
friend, and Phicol the captain of his 
host. 27And Isaac said unto them: 
‘Wherefore are ye come unto me, 
seeing ye hate me, and have sent me 
away from you?’ 28And they said: ‘We 
saw plainly that the LORD was with 
thee; and we said: Let there now be an 
oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and 
thee, and let us make a covenant with 
thee; 29that thou wilt do us no hurt, as 
we have not touched thee, and as we 
have done unto thee nothing but good, 
and have sent thee away in peace; thou 

a That is, Contention. 

b That is, Enmity. 

c That is, Room. 


art now the blessed of the LORD.’ 
30And he made them a feast, and they 
did eat and drink. 31And they rose up 
betimes in the morning, and swore one 
to another; and Isaac sent them away, 
and they departed from him in peace. 
32And it came to pass the same day, 
that Isaac’s servants came, and told 
him concerning the well which they 
had digged, and said unto him: ‘We 
have found water.’ 33And he called it 
Shibah. Therefore the name of the city 
is Beer-sheba unto this day. 

34And when Esau was forty years 
old, he took to wife Judith the 
daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and 
Basemath the daughter of Elon the 
Hittite. 35And they were a bitterness of 
spirit unto Isaac and to Rebekah. 

And it came to pass, that when 
Isaac was old, and his eyes 
were dim, so that he could not see, he 
called Esau his elder son, and said 
unto him: ‘My son’; and he said unto 
him: ‘Here am I.’ 2And he said: 
‘Behold now, I am old, I know not the 
day of my death. 3Now therefore take, 
I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver 
and thy bow, and go out to the field, 
and take me venison; 4and make me 
savoury food, such as I love, and bring 
it to me, that I may eat; that my soul 
may bless thee before I die.’ 5And 
Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to 
Esau his son. And Esau went to the 
field to hunt for venison, and to bring 
it. 6And Rebekah spoke unto Jacob her 
son, saying: ‘Behold, I heard thy father 
speak unto Esau thy brother, saying: 
7Bring me venison, and make me 
savoury food, that I may eat, and bless 
thee before the LORD before my death. 
8Now therefore, my son, hearken to 
my voice according to that which I 
command thee. 9Go now to the flock, 
and fetch me from thence two good 
kids of the goats; and I will make them 
savoury food for thy father, such as he 
loveth; 10and thou shalt bring it to thy 
father, that he may eat, so that he may 
bless thee before his death.’ 11And 
Jacob said to Rebekah his mother: 
‘Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy 
man, and I am a smooth man. 12My 
father peradventure will feel me, and I 
shall seem to him as a mocker; and I 
shall bring a curse upon me, and not a 
blessing.’ 13And his mother said unto 
him: ‘Upon me be thy curse, my son; 
only hearken to my voice, and go fetch 
me them.’ 14And he went, and fetched, 
and brought them to his mother; and 
his mother made savoury food, such as 
his father loved. 15And Rebekah took 
the choicest garments of Esau her 
elder son, which were with her in the 
house, and put them upon Jacob her 
younger son. 16And she put the skins 
of the kids of the goats upon his hands, 
and upon the smooth of his neck. 
17And she gave the savoury food and 
the bread, which she had prepared, 
into the hand of her son Jacob. 18And 
he came unto his father, and said: ‘My 
father’; and he said: ‘Here am I; who 
art thou, my son?’ 19And Jacob said 
unto his father: ‘I am Esau thy first-
born; I have done according as thou 
27 




badest me. Arise, I pray thee, sit and 
eat of my venison, that thy soul may 
bless me.’ 20And Isaac said unto his 
son: ‘How is it that thou hast found it 
so quickly, my son?’ And he said: 
‘Because the LORD thy God sent me 
good speed.’ 21And Isaac said unto 
Jacob: ‘Come near, I pray thee, that I 
may feel thee, my son, whether thou 
be my very son Esau or not.’ 22And 
Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; 
and he felt him, and said: ‘The voice is 
the voice of Jacob, but the hands are 
the hands of Esau.’ 23And he discerned 
him not, because his hands were hairy, 
as his brother Esau’s hands; so he 
blessed him. 24And he said: ‘Art thou 
my very son Esau?’ And he said: ‘I 
am.’ 25And he said: ‘Bring it near to 
me, and I will eat of my son’s venison, 
that my soul may bless thee.’ And he 
brought it near to him, and he did eat; 
and he brought him wine, and he 
drank. 26And his father Isaac said unto 
him: ‘Come near now, and kiss me, 
my son.’ 27And he came near, and 
kissed him. And he smelled the smell 
of his raiment, and blessed him, and 
said: 

See, the smell of my son 

Is as the smell of a field which the 
LORD hath blessed. 

28So God give thee of the dew of 
heaven, 

And of the fat places of the earth, 

And plenty of corn and wine. 

29Let peoples serve thee, 

And nations bow down to thee. 

Be lord over thy brethren, 

And let thy mother’s sons bow 
down to thee. 

Cursed be every one that curseth 
thee, 

And blessed be every one that 
blesseth thee. 

30And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac 
had made an end of blessing Jacob, 
and Jacob was yet scarce gone out 
from the presence of Isaac his father, 
that Esau his brother came in from his 
hunting. 31And he also made savoury 
food, and brought it unto his father; 
and he said unto his father: ‘Let my 
father arise, and eat of his son’s 
venison, that thy soul may bless me.’ 
32And Isaac his father said unto him: 
‘Who art thou?’ And he said: ‘I am thy 
son, thy first-born, Esau.’ 33And Isaac 
trembled very exceedingly, and said: 
‘Who then is he that hath taken 
venison, and brought it me, and I have 
eaten of all before thou camest, and 
have blessed him? yea, and he shall be 
blessed.’ 34When Esau heard the words 
of his father, he cried with an 
exceeding great and bitter cry, and said 
unto his father: ‘Bless me, even me 
also, O my father.’ 35And he said: ‘Thy 
brother came with guile, and hath 
taken away thy blessing.’ 36And he 
said: ‘Is not he rightly named Jacob? 
for he hath supplanted me these two 
times: he took away my birthright; 
and, behold, now he hath taken away 
my blessing.’ And he said: ‘Hast thou 
not reserved a blessing for me?’ 37And 
Isaac answered and said unto Esau: 
‘Behold, I have made him thy lord, 


and all his brethren have I given to 
him for servants; and with corn and 
wine have I sustained him; and what 
then shall I do for thee, my son?’ 
38And Esau said unto his father: ‘Hast 
thou but one blessing, my father? bless 
me, even me also, O my father.’ And 
Esau lifted up his voice, and wept. 
39And Isaac his father answered and 
said unto him: 

Behold, of the fat places of the earth 
shall be thy dwelling, 

And of the dew of heaven from 
above; 

40And by thy sword shalt thou live, 

And thou shalt serve thy brother; 

And it shall come to pass when thou 
shalt break loose, 

That thou shalt shake his yoke from 
off thy neck. 

41And Esau hated Jacob because of the 
blessing wherewith his father blessed 
him. And Esau said in his heart: ‘Let 
the days of mourning for my father be 
at hand; then will I slay my brother 
Jacob.’ 42And the words of Esau her 
elder son were told to Rebekah; and 
she sent and called Jacob her younger 
son, and said unto him: ‘Behold, thy 
brother Esau, as touching thee, doth 
comfort himself, purposing to kill thee. 
43Now therefore, my son, hearken to 
my voice; and arise, flee thou to Laban 
my brother to Haran; 44and tarry with 
him a few days, until thy brother’s 
fury turn away; 45until thy brother’s 
anger turn away from thee, and he 
forget that which thou hast done to 
him; then I will send, and fetch thee 
from thence; why should I be bereaved 
of you both in one day?’ 

46And Rebekah said to Isaac: ‘I am 
weary of my life because of the 
daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife 
of the daughters of Heth, such as these, 
of the daughters of the land, what good 
shall my life do me?’ 

And Isaac called Jacob, and 
blessed him, and charged him, 
and said unto him: ‘Thou shalt not take 
a wife of the daughters of Canaan. 
2Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the 
house of Bethuel thy mother’s father; 
and take thee a wife from thence of the 
daughters of Laban thy mother’s 
brother. 3And God Almighty bless 
thee, and make thee fruitful, and 
multiply thee, that thou mayest be a 
congregation of peoples; 4and give 
thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, 
and to thy seed with thee; that thou 
mayest inherit the land of thy 
sojournings, which God gave unto 
Abraham.’ 5And Isaac sent away 
Jacob; and he went to Paddan-aram 
unto Laban, son of Bethuel the 
Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, 
Jacob’s and Esau’s mother. 6Now Esau 
saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and 
sent him away to Paddan-aram, to take 
him a wife from thence; and that as he 
blessed him he gave him a charge, 
saying: ‘Thou shalt not take a wife of 
the daughters of Canaan’; 7and that 
Jacob hearkened to his father and his 
mother, and was gone to Paddan-aram; 
8and Esau saw that the daughters of 
Canaan pleased not Isaac his father; 
28 




9so Esau went unto Ishmael, and took 
unto the wives that he had Mahalath 
the daughter of Ishmael Abraham’s 
son, the sister of Nebaioth, to be his 
wife. 

.... 

10And Jacob went out from Beer-
sheba, and went toward Haran. 11And 
he lighted upon the place, and tarried 
there all night, because the sun was 
set; and he took one of the stones of 
the place, and put it under his head, 
and lay down in that place to sleep. 
12And he dreamed, and behold a ladder 
set up on the earth, and the top of it 
reached to heaven; and behold the 
angels of God ascending and 
descending on it. 13And, behold, the 
LORD stood beside him, and said: ‘I am 
the LORD, the God of Abraham thy 
father, and the God of Isaac. The land 
whereon thou liest, to thee will I give 
it, and to thy seed. 14And thy seed shall 
be as the dust of the earth, and thou 
shalt spread abroad to the west, and to 
the east, and to the north, and to the 
south. And in thee and in thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed. 15And, behold, I am with thee, 
and will keep thee whithersoever thou 
goest, and will bring thee back into 
this land; for I will not leave thee, until 
I have done that which I have spoken 
to thee of.’ 16And Jacob awaked out of 
his sleep, and he said: ‘Surely the LORD 
is in this place; and I knew it not.’ 
17And he was afraid, and said: ‘How 
full of awe is this place! this is none 
other than the house of God, and this is 
the gate of heaven.’ 18And Jacob rose 
up early in the morning, and took the 
stone that he had put under his head, 
and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil 
upon the top of it. 19And he called the 
name of that place aBeth-el, but the 
name of the city was Luz at the first. 
20And Jacob vowed a vow, saying: ‘If 
God will be with me, and will keep me 
in this way that I go, and will give me 
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, 
21so that I come back to my father’s 
house in peace, then shall the LORD be 
my God, 22and this stone, which I have 
set up for a pillar, shall be God’s 
house; and of all that Thou shalt give 
me I will surely give the tenth unto 
Thee.’ 

a That is, The house of God. 

29 



Then Jacob went on his 
journey, and came to the land 
of the children of the east. 2And he 
looked, and behold a well in the field, 
and, lo, three flocks of sheep lying 
there by it.—For out of that well they 
watered the flocks. And the stone upon 
the well’s mouth was great. 3And 
thither were all the flocks gathered; 
and they rolled the stone from the 
well’s mouth, and watered the sheep, 
and put the stone back upon the well’s 
mouth in its place.— 4And Jacob said 
unto them: ‘My brethren, whence are 
ye?’ And they said: ‘Of Haran are we.’ 
5And he said unto them: ‘Know ye 
Laban the son of Nahor?’ And they 
said: ‘We know him.’ 6And he said 
unto them: ‘Is it well with him?’ And 


they said: ‘It is well; and, behold, 
Rachel his daughter cometh with the 
sheep.’ 7And he said: ‘Lo, it is yet high 
day, neither is it time that the cattle 
should be gathered together; water ye 
the sheep, and go and feed them.’ 
8And they said: ‘We cannot, until all 
the flocks be gathered together, and 
they roll the stone from the well’s 
mouth; then we water the sheep.’ 
9While he was yet speaking with them, 
Rachel came with her father’s sheep; 
for she tended them. 10And it came to 
pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the 
daughter of Laban his mother’s 
brother, and the sheep of Laban his 
mother’s brother, that Jacob went near, 
and rolled the stone from the well’s 
mouth, and watered the flock of Laban 
his mother’s brother. 11And Jacob 
kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, 
and wept. 12And Jacob told Rachel that 
he was her father’s brother, and that he 
was Rebekah’s son; and she ran and 
told her father. 13And it came to pass, 
when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob 
his sister’s son, that he ran to meet 
him, and embraced him, and kissed 
him, and brought him to his house. 
And he told Laban all these things. 
14And Laban said to him: ‘Surely thou 
art my bone and my flesh.’ And he 
abode with him the space of a month. 
15And Laban said unto Jacob: 
‘Because thou art my brother, 
shouldest thou therefore serve me for 
nought? tell me, what shall thy wages 
be?’ 16Now Laban had two daughters: 
the name of the elder was Leah, and 
the name of the younger was Rachel. 
17And Leah’s eyes were weak; but 
Rachel was of beautiful form and fair 
to look upon. 18And Jacob loved 
Rachel; and he said: ‘I will serve thee 
seven years for Rachel thy younger 
daughter.’ 19And Laban said: ‘It is 
better that I give her to thee, than that I 
should give her to another man; abide 
with me.’ 20And Jacob served seven 
years for Rachel; and they seemed 
unto him but a few days, for the love 
he had to her. 21And Jacob said unto 
Laban: ‘Give me my wife, for my days 
are filled, that I may go in unto her.’ 
22And Laban gathered together all the 
men of the place, and made a feast. 
23And it came to pass in the evening, 
that he took Leah his daughter, and 
brought her to him; and he went in 
unto her. 24And Laban gave Zilpah his 
handmaid unto his daughter Leah for a 
handmaid. 25And it came to pass in the 
morning that, behold, it was Leah; and 
he said to Laban: ‘What is this thou 
hast done unto me? did not I serve 
with thee for Rachel? wherefore then 
hast thou beguiled me?’ 26And Laban 
said: ‘It is not so done in our place, to 
give the younger before the first-born. 
27Fulfil the week of this one, and we 
will give thee the other also for the 
service which thou shalt serve with me 
yet seven other years.’ 28And Jacob did 
so, and fulfilled her week; and he gave 
him Rachel his daughter to wife. 29And 
Laban gave to Rachel his daughter 
Bilhah his handmaid to be her 
handmaid. 30And he went in also unto 


Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than 
Leah, and served with him yet seven 
other years. 

31And the LORD saw that Leah was 
hated, and he opened her womb; but 
Rachel was barren. 32And Leah 
conceived, and bore a son, and she 
called his name Reuben; for she said: 
‘Because the LORD ahath looked upon 
my affliction; for now my husband 
will love me.’ 33And she conceived 
again, and bore a son; and said: 
‘Because the LORD bhath heard that I 
am hated, He hath therefore given me 
this son also.’ And she called his name 
cSimeon. 34And she conceived again, 
and bore a son; and said: ‘Now this 
time will my husband be djoined unto 
me, because I have borne him three 
sons.’ Therefore was his name called 
Levi. 35And she conceived again, and 
bore a son; and she said: ‘This time 
will I epraise the LORD.’ Therefore she 
called his name fJudah; and she left off 
bearing. 

a Heb. raah beonji. 

b Heb. shama. 

c Heb. Shimeon. 

d From the Heb. root lavah. 

e From the Heb. hodah. 

f Heb. Jehudah. 

30 



And when Rachel saw that she 
bore Jacob no children, Rachel 
envied her sister; and she said unto 
Jacob: ‘Give me children, or else I 
die.’ 2And Jacob’s anger was kindled 
against Rachel; and he said: ‘Am I in 
God’s stead, who hath withheld from 

thee the fruit of the womb?’ 3And she 
said: ‘Behold my maid Bilhah, go in 
unto her; that she may bear upon my 
knees, and I also may be builded up 
through her.’ 4And she gave him 
Bilhah her handmaid to wife; and 
Jacob went in unto her. 5And Bilhah 
conceived, and bore Jacob a son. 6And 
Rachel said: ‘God hath gjudged me, 
and hath also heard my voice, and hath 
given me a son.’ Therefore called she 
his name Dan. 7And Bilhah Rachel’s 
handmaid conceived again, and bore 
Jacob a second son. 8And Rachel said: 
‘With mighty wrestlings have I 
hwrestled with my sister, and have 
prevailed.’ And she called his name 
Naphtali. 9When Leah saw that she 
had left off bearing, she took Zilpah 
her handmaid, and gave her to Jacob to 
wife. 10And Zilpah Leah’s handmaid 
bore Jacob a son. 11And Leah said: 
‘Fortune is come! ’ And she called his 
name iGad. 12And Zilpah Leah’s 
handmaid bore Jacob a second son. 
13And Leah said: ‘Happy am I! for the 
daughters will call me happy.’ And she 
called his name jAsher. 14And Reuben 
went in the days of wheat harvest, and 
found mandrakes in the field, and 
brought them unto his mother Leah. 
Then Rachel said to Leah: ‘Give me, I 
pray thee, of thy son’s mandrakes.’ 
15And she said unto her: ‘Is it a small 

g Heb. dan, he judged. 

h Heb. niphtal, he wrestled. 

i That is, Fortune. 

j That is, Happy. 


matter that thou hast taken away my 
husband? and wouldest thou take away 
my son’s mandrakes also?’ And 
Rachel said: ‘Therefore he shall lie 
with thee to-night for thy son’s 
mandrakes.’ 16And Jacob came from 
the field in the evening, and Leah went 
out to meet him, and said: ‘Thou must 
come in unto me; for I have surely 
hired thee with my son’s mandrakes.’ 
And he lay with her that night. 17And 
God hearkened unto Leah, and she 
conceived, and bore Jacob a fifth son. 
18And Leah said: ‘God hath given me 
my ahire, because I gave my handmaid 
to my husband. And she called his 
name Issachar. 19And Leah conceived 
again, and bore a sixth son to Jacob. 
20And Leah said: ‘God hath endowed 
me with a good dowry; now will my 
husband bdwell with me, because I 
have borne him six sons.’ And she 
called his name Zebulun. 21And 
afterwards she bore a daughter, and 
called her name Dinah. 22And God 
remembered Rachel, and God 
hearkened to her, and opened her 
womb. 23And she conceived, and bore 
a son, and said: ‘God chath taken away 
my reproach.’ 24And she called his 
name Joseph, saying: ‘The LORD dadd 
to me another son.’ 

a Heb. sachar. 

b Heb. sabal, he dwelt. 

c Heb. asaph. 

d Heb. joseph. 

25And it came to pass, when Rachel 
had borne Joseph, that Jacob said unto 

Laban: ‘Send me away, that I may go 
unto mine own place, and to my 
country. 26Give me my wives and my 
children for whom I have served thee, 
and let me go; for thou knowest my 
service wherewith I have served thee.’ 
27And Laban said unto him: ‘If now I 
have found favour in thine eyes—I 
have observed the signs, and the LORD 
hath blessed me for thy sake.’ 28And 
he said: ‘Appoint me thy wages, and I 
will give it.’ 29And he said unto him: 
‘Thou knowest how I have served 
thee, and how thy cattle have fared 
with me. 30For it was little which thou 
hadst before I came, and it hath 
increased abundantly; and the LORD 
hath blessed thee whithersoever I 
turned. And now when shall I provide 
for mine own house also?’ 31And he 
said: ‘What shall I give thee?’ And 
Jacob said: ‘Thou shalt not give me 
aught; if thou wilt do this thing for me, 
I will again feed thy flock and keep it. 
32I will pass through all thy flock to-
day, removing from thence every 
speckled and spotted one, and every 
dark one among the sheep, and the 
spotted and speckled among the goats; 
and of such shall be my hire. 33So shall 
my righteousness witness against me 
hereafter, when thou shalt come to 
look over my hire that is before thee: 
every one that is not speckled and 
spotted among the goats, and dark 
among the sheep, that if found with me 
shall be counted stolen.’ 34And Laban 
said: ‘Behold, would it might be 
according to thy word.’ 35And he 


removed that day the he-goats that 
were streaked and spotted, and all the 
she-goats that were speckled and 
spotted, every one that had white in it, 
and all the dark ones among the sheep, 
and gave them into the hand of his 
sons. 36And he set three days’journey 
betwixt himself and Jacob. And Jacob 
fed the rest of Laban’s flocks. 37And 
Jacob took him rods of fresh poplar, 
and of the almond and of the plane-
tree; and peeled white streaks in them, 
making the white appear which was in 
the rods. 38And he set the rods which 
he had peeled over against the flocks 
in the gutters in the watering-troughs 
where the flocks came to drink; and 
they conceived when they came to 
drink. 39And the flocks conceived at 
the sight of the rods, and the flocks 
brought forth streaked, speckled, and 
spotted. 40And Jacob separated the 
lambs—he also set the faces of the 
flocks toward the streaked and all the 
dark in the flock of Laban— and put 
his own droves apart, and put them not 
unto Laban’s flock. 41And it came to 
pass, whensoever the stronger of the 
flock did conceive, that Jacob laid the 
rods before the eyes of the flock in the 
gutters, that they might conceive 
among the rods; 42but when the flock 
were feeble, he put them not in; so the 
feebler were Laban’s, and the stronger 
Jacob’s. 43And the man increased 
exceedingly, and had large flocks, and 
maid-servants and men-servants, and 
camels and asses. 

And he heard the words of 
Laban’s sons, saying: ‘Jacob hath 
taken away all that was our father’s; 
and of that which was our father’s hath 
he gotten all this wealth.’ 2And Jacob 
beheld the countenance of Laban, and, 
behold, it was not toward him as 
beforetime. 3And the LORD said unto 
Jacob: ‘Return unto the land of thy 
fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will 
be with thee.’ 4And Jacob sent and 
called Rachel and Leah to the field 
unto his flock, 5and said unto them: ‘I 
see your father’s countenance, that it is 
not toward me as beforetime; but the 
God of my father hath been with me. 
6And ye know that with all my power I 
have served your father. 7And your 
father hath mocked me, and changed 
my wages ten times; but God suffered 
him not to hurt me. 8If he said thus: 
The speckled shall be thy wages; then 
all the flock bore speckled; and if he 
said thus: The streaked shall be thy 
wages; then bore all the flock streaked. 
9Thus God hath taken away the cattle 
of your father, and given them to me. 
10And it came to pass at the time that 
the flock conceived, that I lifted up 
mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, 
behold, the he-goats which leaped 
upon the flock were streaked, 
speckled, and grizzled. 11And the angel 
of God said unto me in the dream: 
Jacob; and I said: Here am I. 12And he 
said: Lift up now thine eyes, and see, 
all the he-goats which leap upon the 
flock are streaked, speckled, and 
grizzled; for I have seen all that Laban 
doeth unto thee. 13I am the God of 31 




Beth-el, where thou didst anoint a 
pillar, where thou didst vow a vow 
unto Me. Now arise, get thee out from 
this land, and return unto the land of 
thy nativity.’ 14And Rachel and Leah 
answered and said unto him: ‘Is there 
yet any portion or inheritance for us in 
our father’s house? 15Are we not 
accounted by him strangers? for he 
hath sold us, and hath also quite 
devoured our price. 16For all the riches 
which God hath taken away from our 
father, that is ours and our children’s. 
Now then, whatsoever God hath said 
unto thee, do.’ 17Then Jacob rose up, 
and set his sons and his wives upon the 
camels; 18and he carried away all his 
cattle, and all his substance which he 
had gathered, the cattle of his getting, 
which he had gathered in Paddan-
aram, to go to Isaac his father unto the 
land of Canaan. 19Now Laban was 
gone to shear his sheep. And Rachel 
stole the teraphim that were her 
father’s. 20And Jacob outwitted Laban 
the Aramean, in that he told him not 
that he fled. 21So he fled with all that 
he had; and he rose up, and passed 
over athe River, and set his face toward 
the mountain of Gilead. 

a That is the Euphrates. 

22And it was told Laban on the third 
day that Jacob was fled. 23And he took 
his brethren with him, and pursued 
after him seven days’journey; and he 
overtook him in the mountain of 
Gilead. 24And God came to Laban the 
Aramean in a dream of the night, and 

said unto him: ‘Take heed to thyself 
that thou speak not to Jacob either 
good or bad.’ 25And Laban came up 
with Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his 
tent in the mountain; and Laban with 
his brethren pitched in the mountain of 
Gilead. 26And Laban said to Jacob: 
‘What hast thou done, that thou hast 
outwitted me, and carried away my 
daughters as though captives of the 
sword? 27Wherefore didst thou flee 
secretly, and outwit me; and didst not 
tell me, that I might have sent thee 
away with mirth and with songs, with 
tabret and with harp; 28and didst not 
suffer me to kiss my sons and my 
daughters? now hast thou done 
foolishly. 29It is in the power of my 
hand to do you hurt; but the God of 
your father spoke unto me yesternight, 
saying: Take heed to thyself that thou 
speak not to Jacob either good or bad. 
30And now that thou art surely gone, 
because thou sore longest after thy 
father’s house, wherefore hast thou 
stolen my gods?’ 31And Jacob 
answered and said to Laban: ‘Because 
I was afraid; for I said: Lest thou 
shouldest take thy daughters from me 
by force. 32With whomsoever thou 
findest thy gods, he shall not live; 
before our brethren discern thou what 
is thine with me, and take it to thee.’—
For Jacob knew not that Rachel had 
stolen them.— 33And Laban went into 
Jacob’s tent, and into Leah’s tent, and 
into the tent of the two maid-servants; 
but he found them not. And he went 
out of Leah’s tent, and entered into 


Rachel’s tent. 34Now Rachel had taken 
the teraphim, and put them in the 
saddle of the camel, and sat upon 
them. And Laban felt about all the 
tent, but found them not. 35And she 
said to her father: ‘Let not my lord be 
angry that I cannot rise up before thee; 
for the manner of women is upon me.’ 
And he searched, but found not the 
teraphim. 36And Jacob was wroth, and 
strove with Laban. And Jacob 
answered and said to Laban: ‘What is 
my trespass? what is my sin, that thou 
hast hotly pursued after me? 
37Whereas thou hast felt about all my 
stuff, what hast thou found of all thy 
household stuff? Set it here before my 
brethren and thy brethren, that they 
may judge betwixt us two. 38These 
twenty years have I been with thee; thy 
ewes and thy she-goats have not cast 
their young, and the rams of thy flocks 
have I not eaten. 39That which was torn 
of beasts I brought not unto thee; I 
bore the loss of it; of my hand didst 
thou require it, whether stolen by day 
or stolen by night. 40Thus I was: in the 
day the drought consumed me, and the 
frost by night; and my sleep fled from 
mine eyes. 41These twenty years have I 
been in thy house: I served thee 
fourteen years for thy two daughters, 
and six years for thy flock; and thou 
hast changed my wages ten times. 
42Except the God of my father, the 
God of Abraham, and the Fear of 
Isaac, had been on my side, surely now 
hadst thou sent me away empty. God 
hath seen mine affliction and the 
labour of my hands, and gave 
judgment yesternight.’ 43And Laban 
answered and said unto Jacob: ‘The 
daughters are my daughters, and the 
children are my children, and the 
flocks are my flocks, and all that thou 
seest is mine; and what can I do this 
day for these my daughters, or for their 
children whom they have borne? 
44And now come, let us make a 
covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a 
witness between me and thee.’ 45And 
Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a 
pillar. 46And Jacob said unto his 
brethren: ‘Gather stones’; and they 
took stones, and made a heap. And 
they did eat there by the heap. 47And 
Laban called it aJegar-sahadutha; but 
Jacob called it bGaleed. 48And Laban 
said: ‘This heap is witness between me 
and thee this day.’ Therefore was the 
name of it called Galeed; 49and 
cMizpah, for he said: ‘The LORD watch 
between me and thee, when we are 
absent one from another. 50If thou shalt 
afflict my daughters, and if thou shalt 
take wives beside my daughters, no 
man being with us; see, God is witness 
betwixt me and thee.’ 51And Laban 
said to Jacob: ‘Behold this heap, and 
behold the pillar, which I have set up 
betwixt me and thee. 52This heap be 
witness, and the pillar be witness, that 

a That is, The heap of witness in 
Aramaic. 

b That is, The heap of witness in 
Hebrew. 

c That is, The watch-post. 


I will not pass over this heap to thee, 
and that thou shalt not pass over this 
heap and this pillar unto me, for harm. 
53The God of Abraham, and the God of 
Nahor, the God of their father, judge 
betwixt us.’ And Jacob swore by the 
Fear of his father Isaac. 54And Jacob 
offered a sacrifice in the mountain, and 
called his brethren to eat bread; and 
they did eat bread, and tarried all night 
in the mountain. 

And early in the morning 
Laban rose up, and kissed his 
sons and his daughters, and blessed 
them. And Laban departed, and 
returned unto his place. 2And Jacob 
went on his way, and the angels of 
God met him. 3And Jacob said when 
he saw them: ‘This is God’s camp.’ 
And he called the name of that place 
aMahanaim. 

a That is, Two Camps. 

..... 

4And Jacob sent messengers before 
him to Esau his brother unto the land 
of Seir, the field of Edom. 5And he 
commanded them, saying: ‘Thus shall 
ye say unto my lord Esau: Thus saith 
thy servant Jacob: I have sojourned 
with Laban, and stayed until now. 
6And I have oxen, and asses and 
flocks, and men-servants and maid-
servants; and I have sent to tell my 
lord, that I may find favour in thy 
sight.’ 7And the messengers returned 
to Jacob, saying: ‘We came to thy 
brother Esau, and moreover he cometh 
to meet thee, and four hundred men 

with him.’ 8Then Jacob was greatly 
afraid and was distressed. And he 
divided the people that was with him, 
and the flocks, and the herds, and the 
camels, into two camps. 9And he said: 
‘If Esau come to the one camp, and 
smite it, then the camp which is left 
shall escape.’ 10And Jacob said: ‘O 
God of my father Abraham, and God 
of my father Isaac, O LORD, who saidst 
unto me: Return unto thy country, and 
to thy kindred, and I will do thee good; 
11I am not worthy of all the mercies, 
and of all the truth, which Thou hast 
shown unto Thy servant; for with my 
staff I passed over this Jordan; and 
now I am become two camps. 
12Deliver me, I pray Thee, from the 
hand of my brother, from the hand of 
Esau; for I fear him, lest he come and 
smite me, the mother with the 
children. 13And Thou saidst: I will 
surely do thee good, and make thy 
seed as the sand of the sea, which 
cannot be numbered for multitude.’ 
14And he lodged there that night; and 
took of that which he had with him a 
present for Esau his brother: 15two 
hundred she-goats and twenty he-
goats, two hundred ewes and twenty 
rams, 16thirty milch camels and their 
colts, forty kine and ten bulls, twenty 
she-asses and ten foals. 17And he 
delivered them into the hand of his 
servants, every drove by itself; and 
said unto his servants: ‘Pass over 
before me, and put a space betwixt 
drove and drove.’ 18And he 
commanded the foremost, saying: 
32 




‘When Esau my brother meeteth thee, 
and asketh thee, saying: Whose art 
thou? and whither goest thou? and 
whose are these before thee? 19then 
thou shalt say: They are thy servant 
Jacob’s; it is a present sent unto my 
lord, even unto Esau; and, behold, he 
also is behind us.’ 20And he 
commanded also the second, and the 
third, and all that followed the droves, 
saying: ‘In this manner shall ye speak 
unto Esau, when ye find him; 21and ye 
shall say: Moreover, behold, thy 
servant Jacob is behind us.’ For he 
said: ‘I will appease him with the 
present that goeth before me, and 
afterward I will see his face; 
peradventure he will accept me.’ 22So 
the present passed over before him; 
and he himself lodged that night in the 
camp. 

23And he rose up that night, and 
took his two wives, and his two 
handmaids, and his eleven children, 
and passed over the ford of the Jabbok. 
24And he took them, and sent them 
over the stream, and sent over that 
which he had. 25And Jacob was left 
alone; and there wrestled a man with 
him until the breaking of the day. 
26And when he saw that he prevailed 
not against him, he touched the hollow 
of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob’s 
thigh was strained, as he wrestled with 
him. 27And he said: ‘Let me go, for the 
day breaketh.’ And he said: ‘I will not 
let thee go, except thou bless me.’ 
28And he said unto him: ‘What is thy 
name?’ And be said: ‘Jacob.’ 29And he 
said: ‘Thy name shall be called no 
more Jacob, but aIsrael; for thou hast 
striven with God and with men, and 
hast prevailed.’ 30And Jacob asked 
him, and said: ‘Tell me, I pray thee, 
thy name.’ And he said: ‘Wherefore is 
it that thou dost ask after my name?’ 
And he blessed him there. 31And Jacob 
called the name of the place bPeniel: 
‘for I have seen God face to face, and 
my life is preserved.’ 32And the sun 
rose upon him as he passed over 
cPeniel, and he limped upon his thigh. 
33Therefore the children of Israel eat 
not the sinew of the thigh-vein which 
is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto 
this day; because he touched the 
hollow of Jacob’s thigh, even in the 
sinew of the thigh-vein. 

a That is, He who striveth with God. 

b That is, The face of God. 

c Heb. Penuel. 

 

33 



And Jacob lifted up his eyes 
and looked, and, behold, Esau 
came, and with him four hundred men. 
And he divided the children unto Leah, 
and unto Rachel, and unto the two 
handmaids. 2And he put the handmaids 
and their children foremost, and Leah 
and her children after, and Rachel and 
Joseph hindermost. 3And he himself 
passed over before them, and bowed 
himself to the ground seven times, 
until he came near to his brother. 4And 
Esau ran to meet him, and embraced 
him, and fell on his neck, and kissed 
him; and they wept. 5And he lifted up 


his eyes, and saw the women and the 
children; and said: ‘Who are these 
with thee?’ And he said: ‘The children 
whom God hath graciously given thy 
servant.’ 6Then the handmaids came 
near, they and their children, and they 
bowed down. 7And Leah also and her 
children came near, and bowed down; 
and after came Joseph near and 
Rachel, and they bowed down. 8And 
he said: ‘What meanest thou by all this 
camp which I met?’ And he said: ‘To 
find favour in the sight of my lord.’ 
9And Esau said: ‘I have enough; my 
brother, let that which thou hast be 
thine.’ 10And Jacob said: ‘Nay, I pray 
thee, if now I have found favour in thy 
sight, then receive my present at my 
hand; forasmuch as I have seen thy 
face, as one seeth the face of God, and 
thou wast pleased with me. 11Take, I 
pray thee, my gift that is brought to 
thee; because God hath dealt 
graciously with me, and because I 
have enough.’ And he urged him, and 
he took it. 12And he said: ‘Let us take 
our journey, and let us go, and I will 
go before thee.’ 13And he said unto 
him: ‘My lord knoweth that the 
children are tender, and that the flocks 
and herds giving suck are a care to me; 
and if they overdrive them one day, all 
the flocks will die. 14Let my lord, I 
pray thee, pass over before his servant; 
and I will journey on gently, according 
to the pace of the cattle that are before 
me and according to the pace of the 
children, until I come unto my lord 
unto Seir.’ 15And Esau said: ‘Let me 
now leave with thee some of the folk 
that are with me.’ And he said: ‘What 
needeth it? let me find favour in the 
sight of my lord.’ 16So Esau returned 
that day on his way unto Seir. 17And 
Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built 
him a house, and made booths for his 
cattle. Therefore the name of the place 
is called aSuccoth. 

a That is, Booths. 

b That is, God, the God of Israel. 

18And Jacob came in peace to the 
city of Shechem, which is in the land 
of Canaan, when he came from 
Paddan-aram; and encamped before 
the city. 19And he bought the parcel of 
ground, where he had spread his tent, 
at the hand of the children of Hamor, 
Shechem’s father, for a hundred pieces 
of money. 20And he erected there an 
altar, and called it bEl-elohe-Israel. 

34 



And Dinah the daughter of 
Leah, whom she had borne 
unto Jacob, went out to see the 
daughters of the land. 2And Shechem 
the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince 
of the land, saw her; and he took her, 
and lay with her, and humbled her. 
3And his soul did cleave unto Dinah 
the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the 
damsel, and spoke comfortingly unto 
the damsel. 4And Shechem spoke unto 
his father Hamor, saying: ‘Get me this 
damsel to wife.’ 5Now Jacob heard 
that he had defiled Dinah his daughter; 
and his sons were with his cattle in the 
field; and Jacob held his peace until 
they came. 6And Hamor the father of 


Shechem went out unto Jacob to speak 
with him. 7And the sons of Jacob came 
in from the field when they heard it; 
and the men were grieved, and they 
were very wroth, because he had 
wrought a vile deed in Israel in lying 
with Jacob’s daughter; which thing 
ought not to be done. 8And Hamor 
spoke with them, saying ‘The soul of 
my son Shechem longeth for your 
daughter. I pray you give her unto him 
to wife. 9And make ye marriages with 
us; give your daughters unto us, and 
take our daughters unto you. 10And ye 
shall dwell with us; and the land shall 
be before you; dwell and trade ye 
therein, and get you possessions 
therein.’ 11And Shechem said unto her 
father and unto her brethren: ‘Let me 
find favour in your eyes, and what ye 
shall say unto me I will give. 12Ask me 
never so much dowry and gift, and I 
will give according as ye shall say 
unto me; but give me the damsel to 
wife.’ 13And the sons of Jacob 
answered Shechem and Hamor his 
father with guile, and spoke, because 
he had defiled Dinah their sister, 14and 
said unto them: ‘We cannot do this 
thing, to give our sister to one that is 
uncircumcised; for that were a 
reproach unto us. 15Only on this 
condition will we consent unto you: if 
ye will be as we are, that every male of 
you be circumcised; 16then will we 
give our daughters unto you, and we 
will take your daughters to us, and we 
will dwell with you, and we will 
become one people. 17But if ye will not 
hearken unto us, to be circumcised; 
then will we take our daughter, and we 
will be gone.’ 18And their words 
pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor’s 
son. 19And the young man deferred not 
to do the thing, because he had delight 
in Jacob’s daughter. And he was 
honoured above all the house of his 
father. 20And Hamor and Shechem his 
son came unto the gate of their city, 
and spoke with the men of their city, 
saying: 21’These men are peaceable 
with us; therefore let them dwell in the 
land, and trade therein; for, behold, the 
land is large enough for them; let us 
take their daughters to us for wives, 
and let us give them our daughters. 
22Only on this condition will the men 
consent unto us to dwell with us, to 
become one people, if every male 
among us be circumcised, as they are 
circumcised. 23Shall not their cattle 
and their substance and all their beasts 
be ours? only let us consent unto them, 
and they will dwell with us.’ 24And 
unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son 
hearkened all that went out of the gate 
of his city; and every male was 
circumcised, all that went out of the 
gate of his city. 25And it came to pass 
on the third day, when they were in 
pain, that two of the sons of Jacob, 
Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren, 
took each man his sword, and came 
upon the city unawares, and slew all 
the males. 26And they slew Hamor and 
Shechem his son with the edge of the 
sword, and took Dinah out of 
Shechem’s house, and went forth. 


27The sons of Jacob came upon the 
slain, and spoiled the city, because 
they had defiled their sister. 28They 
took their flocks and their herds and 
their asses, and that which was in the 
city and that which was in the field; 
29and all their wealth, and all their little 
ones and their wives, took they captive 
and spoiled, even all that was in the 
house. 30And Jacob said to Simeon and 
Levi: ‘Ye have troubled me, to make 
me odious unto the inhabitants of the 
land, even unto the Canaanites and the 
Perizzites; and, I being few in number, 
they will gather themselves together 
against me and smite me; and I shall 
be destroyed, I and my house.’ 31And 
they said: ‘Should one deal with our 
sister as with a harlot?’ 

35 



And God said unto Jacob: 
‘Arise, go up to Beth-el, and 
dwell there; and make there an altar 
unto God, who appeared unto thee 
when thou didst flee from the face of 
Esau thy brother.’ 2Then Jacob said 
unto his household, and to all that 
were with him: ‘Put away the strange 
gods that are among you, and purify 
yourselves, and change your garments; 
3and let us arise, and go up to Beth-el; 
and I will make there an altar unto 
God, who answered me in the day of 
my distress, and was with me in the 
way which I went.’ 4And they gave 
unto Jacob all the foreign gods which 
were in their hand, and the rings which 
were in their ears; and Jacob hid them 
under the terebinth which was by 
Shechem. 5And they journeyed; and a 
terror of God was upon the cities that 
were round about them, and they did 
not pursue after the sons of Jacob. 6So 
Jacob came to Luz, which is in the 
land of Canaan—the same is Beth-el—
he and all the people that were with 
him. 7And he built there an altar, and 
called the place aEl-beth-el, because 
there God was revealed unto him, 
when he fled from the face of his 
brother. 8And Deborah Rebekah’s 
nurse died, and she was buried below 
Beth-el under the oak; and the name of 
it was called bAllon-bacuth. 

a That is, The God of Beth-el. 

b That is, The oak of weeping. 

9And God appeared unto Jacob 
again, when he came from Paddan-
aram, and blessed him. 10And God said 
unto him: ‘Thy name is Jacob: thy 
name shall not be called any more 
Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name’; 
and He called his name Israel. 11And 
God said unto him: ‘I am God 
Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply; a 
nation and a company of nations shall 
be of thee, and kings shall come out of 
thy loins; 12and the land which I gave 
unto Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will 
give it, and to thy seed after thee will I 
give the land.’ 13And God went up 
from him in the place where He spoke 
with him. 14And Jacob set up a pillar in 
the place where He spoke with him, a 
pillar of stone, and he poured out a 
drink-offering thereon, and poured oil 
thereon. 15And Jacob called the name 
of the place where God spoke with 


him, Beth-el. 16And they journeyed 
from Beth-el; and there was still some 
way to come to Ephrath; and Rachel 
travailed, and she had hard labour. 
17And it came to pass, when she was in 
hard labour, that the mid-wife said 
unto her: ‘Fear not; for this also is a 
son for thee.’ 18And it came to pass, as 
her soul was in departing—for she 
died—that she called his name aBen-
oni; but his father called him 
bBenjamin. 19And Rachel died, and 
was buried in the way to Ephrath—the 
same is Beth-lehem. 20And Jacob set 
up a pillar upon her grave; the same is 
the pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this 
day. 21And Israel journeyed, and 
spread his tent beyond Migdal-eder. 
22And it came to pass, while Israel 
dwelt in that land, that Reuben went 
and lay with Bilhah his father’s 
concubine; and Israel heard of it. 

a That is, The son of my sorrow. 

b That is, The son of the right hand. 

Now the sons of Jacob were twelve: 
23the sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob’s 
first-born, and Simeon, and Levi, and 
Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun; 
24the sons of Rachel: Joseph and 
Benjamin; 25and the sons of Bilhah, 
Rachel’s handmaid: Dan and Naphtali; 
26and the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s 
handmaid: Gad and Asher. These are 
the sons of Jacob, that were born to 
him in Paddan-aram. 27And Jacob 
came unto Isaac his father to Mamre, 
to Kiriatharba—the same is Hebron—
where Abraham and Isaac sojourned. 

28And the days of Isaac were a 
hundred and fourscore years. 29And 
Isaac expired, and died, and was 
gathered unto his people, old and full 
of days; and Esau and Jacob his sons 
buried him. 

36 



Now these are the generations 
of Esau—the same is Edom. 
2Esau took his wives of the daughters 
of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon 
the Hittite, and Oholibamah the 
daughter of Anah, the daughter of 
Zibeon the Hivite, 3and Basemath 
Ishmael’s daughter, sister of Nebaioth. 
4And Adah bore to Esau Eliphaz; and 
Basemath bore Reuel; 5and 
Oholibamah bore Jeush, and Jalam, 
and Korah. These are the sons of Esau, 
that were born unto him in the land of 
Canaan. 6And Esau took his wives, and 
his sons, and his daughters, and all the 
souls of his house, and his cattle, and 
all his beasts, and all his possessions, 
which he had gathered in the land of 
Canaan; and went into a land away 
from his brother Jacob. 7For their 
substance was too great for them to 
dwell together; and the land of their 
sojournings could not bear them 
because of their cattle. 8And Esau 
dwelt in the mountain-land of Seir—
Esau is Edom. 9And these are the 
generations of Esau the father of a cthe 
Edomites in the mountain-land of Seir. 
10These are the names of Esau’s sons: 
Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of 
Esau, Reuel the son of Basemath the 

c Heb. Edom. 


wife of Esau. 11And the sons of 
Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, 
and Gatam, and Kenaz. 12And Timna 
was concubine to Eliphaz Esau’s son; 
and she bore to Eliphaz Amalek. These 
are the sons of Adah Esau’s wife. 
13And these are the sons of Reuel: 
Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and 
Mizzah. These were the sons of 
Basemath Esau’s wife. 14And these 
were the sons of Oholibamah the 
daughter of Anah, the daughter of 
Zibeon, Esau’s wife; and she bore to 
Esau Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah. 
15These are the chiefs of the sons of 
Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the first-born 
of Esau: the chief of Teman, the chief 
of Omar, the chief of Zepho, the chief 
of Kenaz, 16the chief of Korah, the 
chief of Gatam, the chief of Amalek. 
These are the chiefs that came of 
Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are 
the sons of Adah. 17And these are the 
sons of Reuel Esau’s son: the chief of 
Nahath, the chief of Zerah, the chief of 
Shammah, the chief of Mizzah. These 
are the chiefs that came of Reuel in the 
land of Edom. These are the sons of 
Basemath Esau’s wife. 18And these are 
the sons of Oholibamah Esau’s wife: 
the chief of Jeush, the chief of Jalam, 
the chief of Korah. These are the 
chiefs that came of Oholibamah the 
daughter of Anah, Esau’s wife. 
19These are the sons of Esau, and these 
are their chiefs; the same is Edom. 

20These are the sons of Seir the 
Horite, the inhabitants of the land: 
Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and 
Anah, 21and Dishon and Ezer and 
Dishan. These are the chiefs that came 
of the Horites, the children of Seir in 
the land of Edom. 22And the children 
of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and 
Lotan’s sister was Timna. 23And these 
are the children of Shobal: Alvan and 
Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and 
Onam. 24And these are the children of 
Zibeon: Aiah and Anah—this is Anah 
who found the hot springs in the 
wilderness, as he fed the asses of 
Zibeon his father. 25And these are the 
children of Anah: Dishon and 
Oholibamah the daughter of Anah. 
26And these are the children of 
aDishon: Hemdan and Eshban and 
Ithran and Cheran. 27These are the 
children of Ezer: Bilhan and Zaavan 
and Akan. 28These are the children of 
Dishan: Uz and Aran. 29These are the 
chiefs that came of the Horites: the 
chief of Lotan, the chief of Shobal, the 
chief of Zibeon, the chief of Anah, 
30the chief of Dishon, the chief of 
Ezer, the chief of Dishan. These are 
the chiefs that came of the Horites, 
according to their chiefs in the land of 
Seir. 

a Heb. Dishan. 

31And these are the kings that 
reigned in the land of Edom, before 
there reigned any king over the 
children of Israel. 32And Bela the son 
of Beor reigned in Edom; and the 
name of his city was Dinhabah. 33And 
Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah 
of Bozrah reigned in his stead. 34And 


Jobab died, and Husham of the land of 
the Temanites reigned in his stead. 
35And Husham died, and Hadad the 
son of Bedad, who smote Midian in 
the field of Moab, reigned in his stead; 
and the name of his city was Avith. 
36And Hadad died, and Samlah of 
Masrekah reigned in his stead. 37And 
Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth 
by the River reigned in his stead. 
38And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the 
son of Achbor reigned in his stead. 
39And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor 
died, and Hadar reigned in his stead; 
and the name of the city was Pau; and 
his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the 
daughter of Matred, the daughter of 
Me-zahab. 40And these are the names 
of the chiefs that came of Esau, 
according to their families, after their 
places, by their names: the chief of 
Timna, the chief of Alvah, the chief of 
Jetheth; 41the chief of Oholibamah, the 
chief of Elah, the chief of Pinon; 42the 
chief of Kenaz, the chief of Teman, the 
chief of Mibzar; 43the chief of 
Magdiel, the chief of Iram. These are 
the chiefs of Edom, according to their 
habitations in the land of their 
possession. This is Esau the father of 
the Edomites. 

.... 

And Jacob dwelt in the land of 
his father’s sojournings, in the 
land of Canaan. 2These are the 
generations of Jacob. Joseph, being 
seventeen years old, was feeding the 
flock with his brethren, being still a 
lad even with the sons of Bilhah, and 
with the sons of Zilpah, his father’s 
wives; and Joseph brought evil report 
of them unto their father. 3Now Israel 
loved Joseph more than all his 
children, because he was the son of his 
old age; and he made him a coat of 
many colours. 4And when his brethren 
saw that their father loved him more 
than all his brethren, they hated him, 
and could not speak peaceably unto 
him. 5And Joseph dreamed a dream, 
and he told it to his brethren; and they 
hated him yet the more. 6And he said 
unto them: ‘Hear, I pray you, this 
dream which I have dreamed: 7for, 
behold, we were binding sheaves in 
the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and 
also stood upright; and, behold, your 
sheaves came round about, and bowed 
down to my sheaf.’ 8And his brethren 
said to him: ‘Shalt thou indeed reign 
over us? or shalt thou indeed have 
dominion over us?’ And they hated 
him yet the more for his dreams, and 
for his words. 9And he dreamed yet 
another dream, and told it to his 
brethren, and said: ‘Behold, I have 
dreamed yet a dream: and, behold, the 
sun and the moon and eleven stars 
bowed down to me.’ 10And he told it to 
his father, and to his brethren; and his 
father rebuked him, and said unto him: 
‘What is this dream that thou hast 
dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and 
thy brethren indeed come to bow down 
to thee to the earth?’ 11And his 
brethren envied him; but his father 
kept the saying in mind. 
37 




12And his brethren went to feed their 
father’s flock in Shechem. 13And Israel 
said unto Joseph: ‘Do not thy brethren 
feed the flock in Shechem? come, and 
I will send thee unto them.’ And he 
said to him: ‘Here am I.’ 14And he said 
to him: ‘Go now, see whether it is well 
with thy brethren, and well with the 
flock; and bring me back word.’ So he 
sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and 
he came to Shechem. 15And a certain 
man found him, and, behold, he was 
wandering in the field. And the man 
asked him, saying: ‘What seekest 
thou?’ 16And he said: ‘I seek my 
brethren. Tell me, I pray thee, where 
they are feeding the flock.’ 17And the 
man said: ‘They are departed hence; 
for I heard them say: Let us go to 
Dothan.’ And Joseph went after his 
brethren, and found them in Dothan. 
18And they saw him afar off, and 
before he came near unto them, they 
conspired against him to slay him. 
19And they said one to another: 
‘Behold, this dreamer cometh. 20Come 
now therefore, and let us slay him, and 
cast him into one of the pits, and we 
will say: An evil beast hath devoured 
him; and we shall see what will 
become of his dreams.’ 21And Reuben 
heard it, and delivered him out of their 
hand; and said: ‘Let us not take his 
life.’ 22And Reuben said unto them: 
‘Shed no blood; cast him into this pit 
that is in the wilderness, but lay no 
hand upon him’—that he might deliver 
him out of their hand, to restore him to 
his father. 23And it came to pass, when 
Joseph was come unto his brethren, 
that they stripped Joseph of his coat, 
the coat of many colours that was on 
him; 24and they took him, and cast him 
into the pit—and the pit was empty, 
there was no water in it. 25And they sat 
down to eat bread; and they lifted up 
their eyes and looked, and, behold, a 
caravan of Ishmaelites came from 
Gilead, with their camels bearing 
spicery and balm and ladanum, going 
to carry it down to Egypt. 26And Judah 
said unto his brethren: ‘What profit is 
it if we slay our brother and conceal 
his blood? 27Come, and let us sell him 
to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand 
be upon him; for he is our brother, our 
flesh.’ And his brethren hearkened 
unto him. 28And there passed by 
Midianites, merchantmen; and they 
drew and lifted up Joseph out of the 
pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites 
for twenty shekels of silver. And they 
brought Joseph into Egypt. 29And 
Reuben returned unto the pit; and, 
behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and 
he rent his clothes. 30And he returned 
unto his brethren, and said: ‘The child 
is not; and as for me, whither shall I 
go?’ 31And they took Joseph’s coat, 
and killed a he-goat, and dipped the 
coat in the blood; 32and they sent the 
coat of many colours, and they brought 
it to their father; and said: ‘This have 
we found. Know now whether it is thy 
son’s coat or not.’ 33And he knew it, 
and said: ‘It is my son’s coat; an evil 
beast hath devoured him; Joseph is 
without doubt torn in pieces.’ 34And 


Jacob rent his garments, and put 
sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned 
for his son many days. 35And all his 
sons and all his daughters rose up to 
comfort him; but he refused to be 
comforted; and he said: ‘Nay, but I 
will go down to the grave to my son 
mourning.’ And his father wept for 
him. 36And the aMidianites sold him 
into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of 
Pharaoh’s, the captain of the guard. 

a Heb. Medanites. 

And it came to pass at that 
time, that Judah went down 
from his brethren, and turned in to a 
certain Adullamite, whose name was 
Hirah. 2And Judah saw there a 
daughter of a certain Canaanite whose 
name was Shua; and he took her, and 
went in unto her. 3And she conceived, 
and bore a son; and he called his name 
Er. 4And she conceived again, and 
bore a son; and she called his name 
Onan. 5And she yet again bore a son, 
and called his name Shelah; and he 
was at Chezib, when she bore him. 
6And Judah took a wife for Er his first-
born, and her name was Tamar. 7And 
Er, Judah’s first-born, was wicked in 
the sight of the LORD; and the LORD 
slew him. 8And Judah said unto Onan: 
‘Go in unto thy brother’s wife, and 
perform the duty of a husband’s 
brother unto her, and raise up seed to 
thy brother.’ 9And Onan knew that the 
seed would not be his; and it came to 
pass when he went in unto his 
brother’s wife, that he spilled it on the 

ground, lest he should give seed to his 
brother. 10And the thing which he did 
was evil in the sight of the LORD; and 
He slew him also. 11Then said Judah to 
Tamar his daughter-in-law: ‘Remain a 
widow in thy father’s house, till 
Shelah my son be grown up’; for he 
said: ‘Lest he also die, like his 
brethren.’ And Tamar went and dwelt 
in her father’s house. 12And in process 
of time Shua’s daughter, the wife of 
Judah, died; and Judah was comforted, 
and went up unto his sheep-shearers to 
Timnah, he and his friend Hirah the 
Adullamite. 13And it was told Tamar, 
saying: ‘Behold, thy father-in-law 
goeth up to Timnah to shear his 
sheep.’ 14And she put off from her the 
garments of her widowhood, and 
covered herself with her veil, and 
wrapped herself, and sat in the 
entrance of Enaim, which is by the 
way to Timnah; for she saw that 
Shelah was grown up, and she was not 
given unto him to wife. 15When Judah 
saw her, he thought her to be a harlot; 
for she had covered her face. 16And he 
turned unto her by the way, and said: 
‘Come, I pray thee, let me come in 
unto thee’; for he knew not that she 
was his daughter-in-law. And she said: 
‘What wilt thou give me, that thou 
mayest come in unto me?’ 17And he 
said: ‘I will send thee a kid of the 
goats from the flock.’ And she said: 
‘Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou 
send it?’ 18And he said: ‘What pledge 
shall I give thee?’ And she said: ‘Thy 
signet and thy cord, and thy staff that 
38 




is in thy hand.’ And he gave them to 
her, and came in unto her, and she 
conceived by him. 19And she arose, 
and went away, and put off her veil 
from her, and put on the garments of 
her widowhood. 20And Judah sent the 
kid of the goats by the hand of his 
friend the Adullamite, to receive the 
pledge from the woman’s hand; but he 
found her not. 21Then he asked the 
men of her place, saying: ‘Where is 
the harlot, that was at Enaim by the 
wayside?’ And they said: ‘There hath 
been no harlot here.’ 22And he returned 
to Judah, and said: ‘I have not found 
her; and also the men of the place said: 
There hath been no harlot here.’ 23And 
Judah said: ‘Let her take it, lest we be 
put to shame; behold, I sent this kid, 
and thou hast not found her.’ 24And it 
came to pass about three months after, 
that it was told Judah, saying: ‘Tamar 
thy daughter-in-law hath played the 
harlot; and moreover, behold, she is 
with child by harlotry.’ And Judah 
said: ‘Bring her forth, and let her be 
burnt.’ 25When she was brought forth, 
she sent to her father-in-law, saying: 
‘By the man, whose these are, am I 
with child’; and she said: ‘Discern, I 
pray thee, whose are these, the signet, 
and the cords, and the staff.’ 26And 
Judah acknowledged them, and said: 
‘She is more righteous than I; 
forasmuch as I gave her not to Shelah 
my son.’ And he knew her again no 
more. 27And it came to pass in the time 
of her travail, that, behold, twins were 
in her womb. 28And it came to pass, 
when she travailed, that one put out a 
hand; and the midwife took and bound 
upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying: 
‘This came out first.’ 29And it came to 
pass, as he drew back his hand, that, 
behold his brother came out; and she 
said: ‘Wherefore hast thou made a 
breach for thyself?’ Therefore his 
name was called aPerez. 30And 
afterward came out his brother, that 
had the scarlet thread upon his hand; 
and his name was called Zerah. 

a That is, A breach. 

39 



And Joseph was brought down 
to Egypt; and Potiphar, an 
officer of Pharaoh’s, the captain of the 
guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the 
hand of the Ishmaelites, that had 
brought him down thither. 2And the 
LORD was with Joseph, and he was a 
prosperous man; and he was in the 
house of his master the Egyptian. 3And 
his master saw that the LORD was with 
him, and that the LORD made all that he 
did to prosper in his hand. 4And Joseph 
found favour in his sight, and he 
ministered unto him. And he appointed 
him overseer over his house, and all 
that he had he put into his hand. 5And 
it came to pass from the time that he 
appointed him overseer in his house, 
and over all that he had, that the LORD 
blessed the Egyptian’s house for 
Joseph’s sake; and the blessing of the 
LORD was upon all that he had, in the 
house and in the field. 6And he left all 
that he had in Joseph’s hand; and, 
having him, he knew not aught save 


the bread which he did eat. And 
Joseph was of beautiful form, and fair 
to look upon. 

7And it came to pass after these 
things, that his master’s wife cast her 
eyes upon Joseph; and she said: ‘Lie 
with me.’ 8But he refused, and said 
unto his master’s wife: ‘Behold, my 
master, having me, knoweth not what 
is in the house, and he hath put all that 
he hath into my hand; 9he is not greater 
in this house than I; neither hath he 
kept back any thing from me but thee, 
because thou art his wife. How then 
can I do this great wickedness, and sin 
against God?’ 10And it came to pass, as 
she spoke to Joseph day by day, that 
he hearkened not unto her, to lie by 
her, or to be with her. 11And it came to 
pass on a certain day, when he went 
into the house to do his work, and 
there was none of the men of the house 
there within, 12that she caught him by 
his garment, saying: ‘Lie with me.’ 
And he left his garment in her hand, 
and fled, and got him out. 13And it 
came to pass, when she saw that he 
had left his garment in her hand, and 
was fled forth, 14that she called unto 
the men of her house, and spoke unto 
them, saying: ‘See, he hath brought in 
a Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came 
in unto me to lie with me, and I cried 
with a loud voice. 15And it came to 
pass, when he heard that I lifted up my 
voice and cried, that he left his 
garment by me, and fled, and got him 
out.’ 16And she laid up his garment by 
her, until his master came home. 17And 
she spoke unto him according to these 
words, saying: ‘The Hebrew servant, 
whom thou hast brought unto us, came 
in unto me to mock me. 18And it came 
to pass, as I lifted up my voice and 
cried, that he left his garment by me, 
and fled out.’ 19And it came to pass, 
when his master heard the words of his 
wife, which she spoke unto him, 
saying: ‘After this manner did thy 
servant to me’; that his wrath was 
kindled. 20And Joseph’s master took 
him, and put him into the prison, the 
place where the king’s prisoners were 
bound; and he was there in the prison. 
21But the LORD was with Joseph, and 
showed kindness unto him, and gave 
him favour in the sight of the keeper of 
the prison. 22And the keeper of the 
prison committed to Joseph’s hand all 
the prisoners that were in the prison; 
and whatsoever they did there, he was 
the doer of it. 23The keeper of the 
prison looked not to any thing that was 
under his hand, because the LORD was 
with him; and that which he did, the 
LORD made it to prosper. 

And it came to pass after these 
things, that the butler of the 
king of Egypt and his baker offended 
their lord the king of Egypt. 2And 
Pharaoh was wroth against his two 
officers, against the chief of the 
butlers, and against the chief of the 
bakers. 3And he put them in ward in 
the house of the captain of the guard, 
into the prison, the place where Joseph 
was bound. 4And the captain of the 
guard charged Joseph to be with them, 
40 




and he ministered unto them; and they 
continued a season in ward. 5And they 
dreamed a dream both of them, each 
man his dream, in one night, each man 
according to the interpretation of his 
dream, the butler and the baker of the 
king of Egypt, who were bound in the 
prison. 6And Joseph came in unto them 
in the morning, and saw them, and, 
behold, they were sad. 7And he asked 
Pharaoh’s officers that were with him 
in the ward of his master’s house, 
saying: ‘Wherefore look ye so sad to-
day?’ 8And they said unto him: ‘We 
have dreamed a dream, and there is 
none that can interpret it.’ And Joseph 
said unto them: ‘Do not interpretations 
belong to God? tell it me, I pray you.’ 
9And the chief butler told his dream to 
Joseph, and said to him: ‘In my dream, 
behold, a vine was before me; 10and in 
the vine were three branches; and as it 
was budding, its blossoms shot forth, 
and the clusters thereof brought forth 
ripe grapes, 11and Pharaoh’s cup was 
in my hand; and I took the grapes, and 
pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and I 
gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.’ 
12And Joseph said unto him: ‘This is 
the interpretation of it: the three 
branches are three days; 13within yet 
three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy 
head, and restore thee unto thine 
office; and thou shalt give Pharaoh’s 
cup into his hand, after the former 
manner when thou wast his butler. 
14But have me in thy remembrance 
when it shall be well with thee, and 
show kindness, I pray thee, unto me, 
and make mention of me unto 
Pharaoh, and bring me out of this 
house. 15For indeed I was stolen away 
out of the land of the Hebrews; and 
here also have I done nothing that they 
should put me into the dungeon.’ 
16When the chief baker saw that the 
interpretation was good, he said unto 
Joseph: ‘I also saw in my dream, and, 
behold, three baskets of white bread 
were on my head; 17and in the 
uppermost basket there was of all 
manner of baked food for Pharaoh; 
and the birds did eat them out of the 
basket upon my head.’ 18And Joseph 
answered and said: ‘This is the 
interpretation thereof: the three baskets 
are three days; 19within yet three days 
shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off 
thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and 
the birds shall eat thy flesh from off 
thee.’ 20And it came to pass the third 
day, which was Pharaoh’s birthday, 
that he made a feast unto all his 
servants; and he lifted up the head of 
the chief butler and the head of the 
chief baker among his servants. 21And 
he restored the chief butler back unto 
his butlership; and he gave the cup into 
Pharaoh’s hand. 22But he hanged the 
chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted 
to them. 23Yet did not the chief butler 
remember Joseph, but forgot him. 

 

... 

And it came to pass at the end 
of two full years, that Pharaoh 41 




dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the 
ariver. 2And, behold, there came up out 
of the river seven kine, well-favoured 
and fat-fleshed; and they fed in the 
reed-grass. 3And, behold, seven other 
kine came up after them out of the 
river, ill favoured and lean-fleshed; 
and stood by the other kine upon the 
brink of the river. 4And the ill-
favoured and lean-fleshed kine did eat 
up the seven well-favoured and fat 
kine. So Pharaoh awoke. 5And he slept 
and dreamed a second time: and, 
behold, seven ears of corn came up 
upon one stalk, rank and good. 6And, 
behold, seven ears, thin and blasted 
with the east wind, sprung up after 
them. 7And the thin ears swallowed up 
the seven rank and full ears. And 
Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a 
dream. 8And it came to pass in the 
morning that his spirit was troubled; 
and he sent and called for all the 
magicians of Egypt, and all the wise 
men thereof; and Pharaoh told them 
his dream; but there was none that 
could interpret them unto Pharaoh. 
9Then spoke the chief butler unto 
Pharaoh, saying: ‘I make mention of 
my faults this day: 10Pharaoh was 
wroth with his servants, and put me in 
the ward of the house of the captain of 
the guard, me and the chief baker. 
11And we dreamed a dream in one 
night, I and he; we dreamed each man 
according to the interpretation of his 
dream. 12And there was with us there a 

a That is, the Nile. 

young man, a Hebrew, servant to the 
captain of the guard; and we told him, 
and he interpreted to us our dreams; to 
each man according to his dream he 
did interpret. 13And it came to pass, as 
he interpreted to us, so it was: I was 
restored unto mine office, and he was 
hanged.’ 14Then Pharaoh sent and 
called Joseph, and they brought him 
hastily out of the dungeon. And he 
shaved himself, and changed his 
raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh. 
15And Pharaoh said unto Joseph: ‘I 
have dreamed a dream, and there is 
none that can interpret it; and I have 
heard say of thee, that when thou 
hearest a dream thou canst interpret it.’ 
16And Joseph answered Pharaoh, 
saying: ‘It is not in me; God will give 
Pharaoh an answer of peace.’ 17And 
Pharaoh spoke unto Joseph: ‘In my 
dream, behold, I stood upon the brink 
of the river. 18And, behold, there came 
up out of the river seven kine, fat-
fleshed and well-favoured; and they 
fed in the reedgrass. 19And, behold, 
seven other kine came up after them, 
poor and very ill-favoured and lean-
fleshed, such as I never saw in all the 
land of Egypt for badness. 20And the 
lean and ill-favoured kine did eat up 
the first seven fat kine. 21And when 
they had eaten them up, it could not be 
known that they had eaten them; but 
they were still ill-favoured as at the 
beginning. So I awoke. 22And I saw in 
my dream, and, behold, seven ears 
came up upon one stalk, full and good. 
23And, behold, seven ears, withered, 


thin, and blasted with the east wind, 
sprung up after them. 24And the thin 
ears swallowed up the seven good 
ears. And I told it unto the magicians; 
but there was none that could declare it 
to me.’ 25And Joseph said unto 
Pharaoh: ‘The dream of Pharaoh is 
one; what God is about to do He hath 
declared unto Pharaoh. 26The seven 
good kine are seven years; and the 
seven good ears are seven years: the 
dream is one. 27And the seven lean and 
ill-favoured kine that came up after 
them are seven years, and also the 
seven empty ears blasted with the east 
wind; they shall be seven years of 
famine. 28That is the thing which I 
spoke unto Pharaoh: what God is 
about to do He hath shown unto 
Pharaoh. 29Behold, there come seven 
years of great plenty throughout all the 
land of Egypt. 30And there shall arise 
after them seven years of famine; and 
all the plenty shall be forgotten in the 
land of Egypt; and the famine shall 
consume the land; 31and the plenty 
shall not be known in the land by 
reason of that famine which followeth; 
for it shall be very grievous. 32And for 
that the dream was doubled unto 
Pharaoh twice, it is because the thing 
is established by God, and God will 
shortly bring it to pass. 33Now 
therefore let Pharaoh look out a man 
discreet and wise, and set him over the 
land of Egypt. 34Let Pharaoh do this, 
and let him appoint overseers over the 
land, and take up the fifth part of the 
land of Egypt in the seven years of 
plenty. 35And let them gather all the 
food of these good years that come, 
and lay up corn under the hand of 
Pharaoh for food in the cities, and let 
them keep it. 36And the food shall be 
for a store to the land against the seven 
years of famine, which shall be in the 
land of Egypt; that the land perish not 
through the famine.’ 37And the thing 
was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and 
in the eyes of all his servants. 38And 
Pharaoh said unto his servants: ‘Can 
we find such a one as this, a man in 
whom the spirit of God is?’ 39And 
Pharaoh said unto Joseph: ‘Forasmuch 
as God hath shown thee all this, there 
is none so discreet and wise as thou. 
40Thou shalt be over my house, and 
according unto thy word shall all my 
people be ruled; only in the throne will 
I be greater than thou.’ 41And Pharaoh 
said unto Joseph: ‘See, I have set thee 
over all the land of Egypt.’ 42And 
Pharaoh took off his signet ring from 
his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s 
hand, and arrayed him in vestures of 
fine linen, and put a gold chain about 
his neck. 43And he made him to ride in 
the second chariot which he had; and 
they cried before him: ‘Abrech’; and 
he set him over all the land of Egypt. 
44And Pharaoh said unto Joseph: ‘I am 
Pharaoh, and without thee shall no 
man lift up his hand or his foot in all 
the land of Egypt.’ 45And Pharaoh 
called Joseph’s name Zaphenath-
paneah; and he gave him to wife 
Asenath the daughter of Poti-phera 
priest of On. And Joseph went out 


over the land of Egypt.— 46And Joseph 
was thirty years old when he stood 
before Pharaoh king of Egypt.—And 
Joseph went out from the presence of 
Pharaoh, and went throughout all the 
land of Egypt. 47And in the seven years 
of plenty the earth brought forth in 
heaps. 48And he gathered up all the 
food of the seven years which were in 
the land of Egypt, and laid up the food 
in the cities; the food of the field, 
which was round about every city, laid 
he up in the same. 49And Joseph laid 
up corn as the sand of the sea, very 
much, until they left off numbering; 
for it was without number. 50And unto 
Joseph were born two sons before the 
year of famine came, whom Asenath 
the daughter of Poti-phera priest of On 
bore unto him. 51And Joseph called the 
name of the first-born aManasseh: ‘for 
God hath made me forget all my toil, 
and all my father’s house.’ 52And the 
name of the second called he 
bEphraim: ‘for God hath made me 
fruitful in the land of my affliction.’ 
53And the seven years of plenty, that 
was in the land of Egypt, came to an 
end. 54And the seven years of famine 
began to come, according as Joseph 
had said; and there was famine in all 
lands; but in all the land of Egypt there 
was bread. 55And when all the land of 
Egypt was famished, the people cried 
to Pharaoh for bread; and Pharaoh said 

a That is, Making to forget. 

b From a Hebrew word signifying to 
be fruitful, 

unto all the Egyptians: ‘Go unto 
Joseph; what he saith to you, do.’ 
56And the famine was over all the face 
of the earth; and Joseph opened all the 
storehouses, and sold unto the 
Egyptians; and the famine was sore in 
the land of Egypt. 57And all countries 
came into Egypt to Joseph to buy corn; 
because the famine was sore in all the 
earth. 

Now Jacob saw that there was 
corn in Egypt, and Jacob said 
unto his sons: ‘Why do ye look one 
upon another?’ 2And he said: ‘Behold, 
I have heard that there is corn in 
Egypt. Get you down thither, and buy 
for us from thence; that we may live, 
and not die.’ 3And Joseph’s ten 
brethren went down to buy corn from 
Egypt. 4But Benjamin, Joseph’s 
brother, Jacob sent not with his 
brethren; for he said: ‘Lest 
peradventure harm befall him.’ 5And 
the sons of Israel came to buy among 
those that came; for the famine was in 
the land of Caanan. 6And Joseph was 
the governor over the land; he it was 
that sold to all the people of the land. 
And Joseph’s brethren came, and 
bowed down to him with their faces to 
the earth. 7And Joseph saw his 
brethren, and he knew them, but made 
himself strange unto them, and spoke 
roughly with them; and he said unto 
them: ‘Whence come ye?’ And they 
said: ‘From the land of Canaan to buy 
food.’ 8And Joseph knew his brethren, 
but they knew him not. 9And Joseph 
remembered the dreams which he 
42 




dreamed of them, and said unto them: 
‘Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of 
the land ye are come.’ 10And they said 
unto him: ‘Nay, my lord, but to buy 
food are thy servants come. 11We are 
all one man’s sons; we are upright 
men, thy servants are no spies.’ 12And 
he said unto them: ‘Nay, but to see the 
nakedness of the land ye are come.’ 
13And they said: ‘We thy servants are 
twelve brethren, the sons of one man 
in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the 
youngest is this day with our father, 
and one is not.’ 14And Joseph said unto 
them: ‘That is it that I spoke unto you, 
saying: Ye are spies. 15Hereby ye shall 
be proved, as Pharaoh liveth, ye shall 
not go forth hence, except your 
youngest brother come hither. 16Send 
one of you, and let him fetch your 
brother, and ye shall be bound, that 
your words may be proved, whether 
there be truth in you; or else, as 
Pharaoh liveth, surely ye are spies.’ 
17And he put them all together into 
ward three days. 18And Joseph said 
unto them the third day.’ This do, and 
live; for I fear God: 19if ye be upright 
men, let one of your brethren be bound 
in your prison-house; but go ye, carry 
corn for the famine of your houses; 
20and bring your youngest brother unto 
me; so shall your words be verified, 
and ye shall not die.’ And they did so. 
21And they said one to another: ‘We 
are verily guilty concerning our 
brother, in that we saw the distress of 
his soul, when he besought us, and we 
would not hear; therefore is this 
distress come upon us.’ 22And Reuben 
answered them, saying: ‘Spoke I not 
unto you, saying: Do not sin against 
the child; and ye would not hear? 
therefore also, behold, his blood is 
required.’ 23And they knew not that 
Joseph understood them; for the 
interpreter was between them. 24And 
he turned himself about from them, 
and wept; and he returned to them, and 
spoke to them, and took Simeon from 
among them, and bound him before 
their eyes. 25Then Joseph commanded 
to fill their vessels with corn, and to 
restore every man’s money into his 
sack, and to give them provision for 
the way; and thus was it done unto 
them. 26And they laded their asses with 
their corn, and departed thence. 27And 
as one of them opened his sack to give 
his ass provender in the lodging-place, 
he espied his money; and, behold, it 
was in the mouth of his sack. 28And he 
said unto his brethren: ‘My money is 
restored; and, lo, it is even in my 
sack.’ And their heart failed them, and 
they turned trembling one to another, 
saying: ‘What is this that God hath 
done unto us?’ 29And they came unto 
Jacob their father unto the land of 
Canaan, and told him all that had 
befallen them, saying: 30’The man, the 
lord of the land, spoke roughly with 
us, and took us for spies of the 
country. 31And we said unto him: We 
are upright men; we are no spies. 32We 
are twelve brethren, sons of our father; 
one is not, and the youngest is this day 
with our father in the land of Canaan. 


33And the man, the lord of the land, 
said unto us: Hereby shall I know that 
ye are upright men: leave one of your 
brethren with me, and take corn for the 
famine of your houses, and go your 
way. 34And bring your youngest 
brother unto me; then shall I know that 
ye are no spies, but that ye are upright 
men; so will I deliver you your 
brother, and ye shall traffic in the 
land.’ 35And it came to pass as they 
emptied their sacks, that, behold, every 
man’s bundle of money was in his 
sack; and when they and their father 
saw their bundles of money, they were 
afraid. 36And Jacob their father said 
unto them: ‘Me have ye bereaved of 
my children: Joseph is not, and 
Simeon is not, and ye will take 
Benjamin away; upon me are all these 
things come.’ 37And Reuben spoke 
unto his father, saying: ‘Thou shalt 
slay my two sons, if I bring him not to 
thee; deliver him into my hand, and I 
will bring him back to thee.’ 38And he 
said: ‘My son shall not go down with 
you; for his brother is dead, and he 
only is left; if harm befall him by the 
way in which ye go, then will ye bring 
down my gray hairs with sorrow to the 
grave. 

And the famine was sore in the 
land. 2And it came to pass, 
when they had eaten up the corn which 
they had brought out of Egypt, that 
their father said unto them: ‘Go again, 
buy us a little food.’ 3And Judah spoke 
unto him, saying: ‘The man did 
earnestly forewarn us, saying: Ye shall 
not see my face, except your brother 
be with you. 4If thou wilt send our 
brother with us, we will go down and 
buy thee food; 5but if thou wilt not 
send him, we will not go down, for the 
man said unto us: Ye shall not see my 
face, except your brother be with you.’ 
6And Israel said: ‘Wherefore dealt ye 
so ill with me, as to tell the man 
whether ye had yet a brother?’ 7And 
they said: ‘The man asked straitly 
concerning ourselves, and concerning 
our kindred, saying: Is your father yet 
alive? have ye another brother? and we 
told him according to the tenor of 
these words; could we in any wise 
know that he would say: Bring your 
brother down?’ 8And Judah said unto 
Israel his father: ‘Send the lad with 
me, and we will arise and go, that we 
may live, and not die, both we, and 
thou, and also our little ones. 9I will be 
surety for him; of my hand shalt thou 
require him; if I bring him not unto 
thee, and set him before thee, then let 
me bear the blame for ever. 10For 
except we had lingered, surely we had 
now returned a second time.’ 11And 
their father Israel said unto them: ‘If it 
be so now, do this: take of the choice 
fruits of the land in your vessels, and 
carry down the man a present, a little 
balm, and a little honey, spicery and 
ladanum, nuts, and almonds; 12and 
take double money in your hand; and 
the money that was returned in the 
mouth of your sacks carry back in your 
hand; peradventure it was an 
oversight; 13take also your brother, and 
43 




arise, go again unto the man; 14and 
God Almighty give you mercy before 
the man, that he may release unto you 
your other brother and Benjamin. And 
as for me, if I be bereaved of my 
children, I am bereaved.’ 

15And the men took that present, and 
they took double money in their hand, 
and Benjamin; and rose up, and went 
down to Egypt, and stood before 
Joseph. 16And when Joseph saw 
Benjamin with them, he said to the 
steward of his house: ‘Bring the men 
into the house, and kill the beasts, and 
prepare the meat; for the men shall 
dine with me at noon.’ 17And the man 
did as Joseph bade; and the man 
brought the men into Joseph’s house. 
18And the men were afraid, because 
they were brought into Joseph’s house; 
and they said: ‘Because of the money 
that was returned in our sacks at the 
first time are we brought in; that he 
may seek occasion against us, and fall 
upon us, and take us for bondmen, and 
our asses.’ 19And they came near to the 
steward of Joseph’s house, and they 
spoke unto him at the door of the 
house, 20and said: ‘Oh my lord, we 
came indeed down at the first time to 
buy food. 21And it came to pass, when 
we came to the lodging-place, that we 
opened our sacks, and, behold, every 
man’s money was in the mouth of his 
sack, our money in full weight; and we 
have brought it back in our hand. 
22And other money have we brought 
down in our hand to buy food. We 
know not who put our money in our 
sacks.’ 23And he said: ‘Peace be to 
you, fear not; your God, and the God 
of your father, hath given you treasure 
in your sacks; I had your money.’ And 
he brought Simeon out unto them. 
24And the man brought the men into 
Joseph’s house, and gave them water, 
and they washed their feet; and he 
gave their asses provender. 25And they 
made ready the present against 
Joseph’s coming at noon; for they 
heard that they should eat bread there. 
26And when Joseph came home, they 
brought him the present which was in 
their hand into the house, and bowed 
down to him to the earth. 27And he 
asked them of their welfare, and said: 
‘Is your father well, the old man of 
whom ye spoke? Is he yet alive?’ 
28And they said: ‘Thy servant our 
father is well, he is yet alive.’ And 
they bowed the head, and made 
obeisance. 29And he lifted up his eyes, 
and saw Benjamin his brother, his 
mother’s son, and said: ‘Is this your 
youngest brother of whom ye spoke 
unto me?’ And he said: ‘God be 
gracious unto thee, my son.’ 30And 
Joseph made haste; for his heart 
yearned toward his brother; and he 
sought where to weep; and he entered 
into his chamber, and wept there. 
31And he washed his face, and came 
out; and he refrained himself, and said: 
‘Set on bread.’ 32And they set on for 
him by himself, and for them by 
themselves, and for the Egyptians, that 
did eat with him, by themselves; 
because the Egyptians might not eat 


bread with the Hebrews; for that is an 
abomination unto the Egyptians. 33And 
they sat before him, the firstborn 
according to his birthright, and the 
youngest according to his youth; and 
the men marvelled one with another. 
34And portions were taken unto them 
from before him; but Benjamin’s 
portion was five times so much as any 
of theirs. And they drank, and were 
merry with him. 

And he commanded the 
steward of his house, saying: 
‘Fill the men’s sacks with food, as 
much as they can carry, and put every 
man’s money in his sack’s mouth. 
2And put my goblet, the silver goblet, 
in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, 
and his corn money.’ And he did 
according to the word that Joseph had 
spoken. 3As soon as the morning was 
light, the men were sent away, they 
and their asses. 4And when they were 
gone out of the city, and were not yet 
far off, Joseph said unto his steward: 
‘Up, follow after the men; and when 
thou dost overtake them, say unto 
them: Wherefore have ye rewarded 
evil for good? 5Is not this it in which 
my lord drinketh, and whereby he 
indeed divineth? ye have done evil in 
so doing.’ 6And he overtook them, and 
he spoke unto them these words. 7And 
they said unto him: ‘Wherefore 
speaketh my lord such words as these? 
Far be it from thy servants that they 
should do such a thing. 8Behold, the 
money, which we found in our 
sacks’mouths, we brought back unto 
thee out of the land of Canaan; how 
then should we steal out of thy lord’s 
house silver or gold? 9With 
whomsoever of thy servants it be 
found, let him die, and we also will be 
my lord’s bondmen.’ 10And he said: 
‘Now also let it be according unto your 
words: he with whom it is found shall 
be my bondman; and ye shall be 
blameless.’ 11Then they hastened, and 
took down every man his sack to the 
ground, and opened every man his 
sack. 12And he searched, beginning at 
the eldest, and leaving off at the 
youngest; and the goblet was found in 
Benjamin’s sack. 13And they rent their 
clothes, and laded every man his ass, 
and returned to the city. 14And Judah 
and his brethren came to Joseph’s 
house, and he was yet there; and they 
fell before him on the ground. 15And 
Joseph said unto them: ‘What deed is 
this that ye have done? know ye not 
that such a man as I will indeed 
divine?’ 16And Judah said: ‘What shall 
we say unto my lord? what shall we 
speak? or how shall we clear 
ourselves? God hath found out the 
iniquity of thy servants; behold, we are 
my lord’s bondmen, both we, and he 
also in whose hand the cup is found.’ 
17And he said: ‘Far be it from me that I 
should do so; the man in whose hand 
the goblet is found, he shall be my 
bondman; but as for you, get you up in 
peace unto your father.’ 

 

 

 

 
44 




.... 

 

18Then Judah came near unto him, 
and said: ‘Oh my lord, let thy servant, 
I pray thee, speak a word in my lord’s 
ears, and let not thine anger burn 
against thy servant; for thou art even 
as Pharaoh. 19My lord asked his 
servants, saying: Have ye a father, or a 
brother? 20And we said unto my lord: 
We have a father, an old man, and a 
child of his old age, a little one; and 
his brother is dead, and he alone is left 
of his mother, and his father loveth 
him. 21And thou saidst unto thy 
servants: Bring him down unto me, 
that I may set mine eyes upon him. 
22And we said unto my lord: The lad 
cannot leave his father; for if he should 
leave his father, his father would die. 
23And thou saidst unto thy servants: 
Except your youngest brother come 
down with you, ye shall see my face 
no more. 24And it came to pass when 
we came up unto thy servant my 
father, we told him the words of my 
lord. 25And our father said: Go again, 
buy us a little food. 26And we said: We 
cannot go down; if our youngest 
brother be with us, then will we go 
down; for we may not see the man’s 
face, except our youngest brother be 
with us. 27And thy servant my father 
said unto us: Ye know that my wife 
bore me two sons; 28and the one went 
out from me, and I said: Surely he is 
torn in pieces; and I have not seen him 
since; 29and if ye take this one also 
from me, and harm befall him, ye will 
bring down my gray hairs with sorrow 
to the grave. 30Now therefore when I 
come to thy servant my father, and the 
lad is not with us; seeing that his soul 
is bound up with the lad’s soul; 31it 
will come to pass, when he seeth that 
the lad is not with us, that he will die; 
and thy servants will bring down the 
gray hairs of thy servant our father 
with sorrow to the grave. 32For thy 
servant became surety for the lad unto 
my father, saying: If I bring him not 
unto thee, then shall I bear the blame 
to my father for ever. 33Now therefore, 
let thy servant, I pray thee, abide 
instead of the lad a bondman to my 
lord; and let the lad go up with his 
brethren. 34For how shall I go up to my 
father, if the lad be not with me? lest I 
look upon the evil that shall come on 
my father.’ 

Then Joseph could not refrain 
himself before all them that 
stood by him; and he cried: ‘Cause 
every man to go out from me.’ And 
there stood no man with him, while 
Joseph made himself known unto his 
brethren. 2And he wept aloud; and the 
Egyptians heard, and the house of 
Pharaoh heard. 3And Joseph said unto 
his brethren: ‘I am Joseph; doth my 
father yet live?’ And his brethren 
could not answer him; for they were 
affrighted at his presence. 4And Joseph 
said unto his brethren: ‘Come near to 
me, I pray you.’ And they came near. 
And he said: ‘I am Joseph your 
brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. 
5And now be not grieved, nor angry 
45 




with yourselves, that ye sold me 
hither; for God did send me before you 
to preserve life. 6For these two years 
hath the famine been in the land; and 
there are yet five years, in which there 
shall be neither plowing nor harvest. 
7And God sent me before you to give 
you a remnant on the earth, and to save 
you alive for a great deliverance. 8So 
now it was not you that sent me hither, 
but God; and He hath made me a 
father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his 
house, and ruler over all the land of 
Egypt. 9Hasten ye, and go up to my 
father, and say unto him: Thus saith 
thy son Joseph: God hath made me 
lord of all Egypt; come down unto me, 
tarry not. 10And thou shalt dwell in the 
land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near 
unto me, thou, and thy children, and 
thy children’s children, and thy flocks, 
and thy herds, and all that thou hast; 
11and there will I sustain thee; for there 
are yet five years of famine; lest thou 
come to poverty, thou, and thy 
household, and all that thou hast. 
12And, behold, your eyes see, and the 
eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is 
my mouth that speaketh unto you. 
13And ye shall tell my father of all my 
glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have 
seen; and ye shall hasten and bring 
down my father hither.’ 14And he fell 
upon his brother Benjamin’s neck, and 
wept; and Benjamin wept upon his 
neck. 15And he kissed all his brethren, 
and wept upon them; and after that his 
brethren talked with him. 

16And the report thereof was heard 
in Pharaoh’s house, saying: ‘Joseph’s 
brethren are come’; and it pleased 
Pharaoh well, and his servants. 17And 
Pharaoh said unto Joseph: ‘Say unto 
thy brethren: This do ye: lade your 
beasts, and go, get you unto the land of 
Canaan; 18and take your father and 
your households, and come unto me; 
and I will give you the good of the 
land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat 
of the land. 19Now thou art 
commanded, this do ye: take you 
wagons out of the land of Egypt for 
your little ones, and for your wives, 
and bring your father, and come. 
20Also regard not your stuff; for the 
good things of all the land of Egypt are 
yours.’ 21And the sons of Israel did so; 
and Joseph gave them wagons, 
according to the commandment of 
Pharaoh, and gave them provision for 
the way. 22To all of them he gave each 
man changes of raiment; but to 
Benjamin he gave three hundred 
shekels of silver, and five changes of 
raiment. 23And to his father he sent in 
like manner ten asses laden with the 
good things of Egypt, and ten she-
asses laden with corn and bread and 
victual for his father by the way. 24So 
he sent his brethren away, and they 
departed; and he said unto them: ‘See 
that ye fall not out by the way.’ 25And 
they went up out of Egypt, and came 
into the land of Canaan unto Jacob 
their father. 26And they told him, 
saying: ‘Joseph is yet alive, and he is 
ruler over all the land of Egypt.’ And 


his heart fainted, for he believed them 
not. 27And they told him all the words 
of Joseph, which he had said unto 
them; and when he saw the wagons 
which Joseph had sent to carry him, 
the spirit of Jacob their father revived. 
28And Israel said: ‘It is enough; Joseph 
my son is yet alive; I will go and see 
him before I die.’ 

And Israel took his journey 
with all that he had, and came 
to Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices 
unto the God of his father Isaac. 2And 
God spoke unto Israel in the visions of 
the night, and said: ‘Jacob, Jacob.’ 
And he said: ‘Here am I.’ 3And He 
said: ‘I am God, the God of thy father; 
fear not to go down into Egypt; for I 
will there make of thee a great nation. 
4I will go down with thee into Egypt; 
and I will also surely bring thee up 
again; and Joseph shall put his hand 
upon thine eyes.’ 5And Jacob rose up 
from Beer-sheba; and the sons of 
Israel carried Jacob their father, and 
their little ones, and their wives, in the 
wagons which Pharaoh had sent to 
carry him. 6And they took their cattle, 
and their goods, which they had gotten 
in the land of Canaan, and came into 
Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with 
him; 7his sons, and his sons’sons with 
him, his daughters, and his 
sons’daughters, and all his seed 
brought he with him into Egypt. 

8And these are the names of the 
children of Israel, who came into 
Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, 
Jacob’s first-born. 9And the sons of 
Reuben: Hanoch, and Pallu, and 
Hezron, and Carmi. 10And the sons of 
Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, 
and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the 
son of a Canaanitish woman. 11And the 
sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and 
Merari. 12And the sons of Judah: Er, 
and Onan, and Shelah, and Perez, and 
Zerah; but Er and Onan died in the 
land of Canaan. And the sons of Perez 
were Hezron and Hamul. 13And the 
sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puvah, and 
Iob, and Shimron. 14And the sons of 
Zebulun: Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel. 
15These are the sons of Leah, whom 
she bore unto Jacob in Paddan-aram, 
with his daughter Dinah; all the souls 
of his sons and his daughters were 
thirty and three. 16And the sons of 
Gad: Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and 
Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli. 
17And the sons of Asher: Imnah, and 
Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and 
Serah their sister; and the sons of 
Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel. 18These 
are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban 
gave to Leah his daughter, and these 
she bore unto Jacob, even sixteen 
souls. 19The sons of Rachel Jacob’s 
wife: Joseph and Benjamin. 20And 
unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were 
born Manasseh and Ephraim, whom 
Asenath the daughter of Poti-phera 
priest of On bore unto him. 21And the 
sons of Benjamin: Bela, and Becher, 
and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, 
and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and 
Ard. 22These are the sons of Rachel, 
who were born to Jacob; all the souls 
46 




were fourteen. 23And the sons of Dan: 
Hushim. 24And the sons of Naphtali: 
Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and 
Shillem. 25These are the sons of 
Bilhah, whom Laban gave unto Rachel 
his daughter, and these she bore unto 
Jacob; all the souls were seven. 26All 
the souls belonging to Jacob that came 
into Egypt, that came out of his loins, 
besides Jacob’s sons’wives, all the 
souls were threescore and six. 27And 
the sons of Joseph, who were born to 
him in Egypt, were two souls; all the 
souls of the house of Jacob, that came 
into Egypt, were threescore and ten. 

28And he sent Judah before him unto 
Joseph, to show the way before him 
unto Goshen; and they came into the 
land of Goshen. 29And Joseph made 
ready his chariot, and went up to meet 
Israel his father, to Goshen; and he 
presented himself unto him, and fell on 
his neck, and wept on his neck a good 
while. 30And Israel said unto Joseph: 
‘Now let me die, since I have seen thy 
face, that thou art yet alive.’ 31And 
Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto 
his father’s house: ‘I will go up, and 
tell Pharaoh, and will say unto him: 
My brethren, and my father’s house, 
who were in the land of Canaan, are 
come unto me; 32and the men are 
shepherds, for they have been keepers 
of cattle; and they have brought their 
flocks, and their herds, and all that 
they have. 33And it shall come to pass, 
when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall 
say: What is your occupation? 34that ye 
shall say: Thy servants have been 
keepers of cattle from our youth even 
until now, both we, and our fathers; 
that ye may dwell in the land of 
Goshen; for every shepherd is an 
abomination unto the Egyptians.’ 

Then Joseph went in and told 
Pharaoh, and said: ‘My father 
and my brethren, and their flocks, and 
their herds, and all that they have, are 
come out of the land of Canaan; and, 
behold, they are in the land of 
Goshen.’ 2And from among his 
brethren he took five men, and 
presented them unto Pharaoh. 3And 
Pharaoh said unto his brethren: ‘What 
is your occupation?’ And they said 
unto Pharaoh: ‘Thy servants are 
shepherds, both we, and our fathers.’ 
4And they said unto Pharaoh: ‘To 
sojourn in the land are we come; for 
there is no pasture for thy 
servants’flocks; for the famine is sore 
in the land of Canaan. Now therefore, 
we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in 
the land of Goshen.’ 5And Pharaoh 
spoke unto Joseph, saying: ‘Thy father 
and thy brethren are come unto thee; 
6the land of Egypt is before thee; in the 
best of the land make thy father and 
thy brethren to dwell; in the land of 
Goshen let them dwell. And if thou 
knowest any able men among them, 
then make them rulers over my cattle.’ 
7And Joseph brought in Jacob his 
father, and set him before Pharaoh. 
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 8And 
Pharaoh said unto Jacob: ‘How many 
are the days of the years of thy life?’ 
9And Jacob said unto Pharaoh: ‘The 
47 




days of the years of my sojournings 
are a hundred and thirty years; few and 
evil have been the days of the years of 
my life, and they have not attained 
unto the days of the years of the life of 
my fathers in the days of their 
sojournings.’ 10And Jacob blessed 
Pharaoh, and went out from the 
presence of Pharaoh. 11And Joseph 
placed his father and his brethren, and 
gave them a possession in the land of 
Egypt, in the best of the land, in the 
land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had 
commanded. 12And Joseph sustained 
his father, and his brethren, and all his 
father’s household, with bread, 
according to the want of their little 
ones. 

13And there was no bread in all the 
land; for the famine was very sore, so 
that the land of Egypt and the land of 
Canaan languished by reason of the 
famine. 14And Joseph gathered up all 
the money that was found in the land 
of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, 
for the corn which they bought; and 
Joseph brought the money into 
Pharaoh’s house. 15And when the 
money was all spent in the land of 
Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all 
the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and 
said: ‘Give us bread; for why should 
we die in thy presence? for our money 
faileth.’ 16And Joseph said: ‘Give your 
cattle, and I will give you [bread] for 
your cattle, if money fail.’ 17And they 
brought their cattle unto Joseph. And 
Joseph gave them bread in exchange 
for the horses, and for the flocks, and 
for the herds, and for the asses; and he 
fed them with bread in exchange for 
all their cattle for that year. 18And 
when that year was ended, they came 
unto him the second year, and said 
unto him: ‘We will not hide from my 
lord, how that our money is all spent; 
and the herds of cattle are my lord’s; 
there is nought left in the sight of my 
lord, but our bodies, and our lands. 
19Wherefore should we die before 
thine eyes, both we and our land? buy 
us and our land for bread, and we and 
our land will be bondmen unto 
Pharaoh; and give us seed, that we 
may live, and not die, and that the land 
be not desolate.’ 20So Joseph bought 
all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for 
the Egyptians sold every man his field, 
because the famine was sore upon 
them; and the land became Pharaoh’s. 
21And as for the people, he removed 
them city by city, from one end of the 
border of Egypt even to the other end 
thereof. 22Only the land of the priests 
bought he not, for the priests had a 
portion from Pharaoh, and did eat their 
portion which Pharaoh gave them; 
wherefore they sold not their land. 
23Then Joseph said unto the people: 
‘Behold, I have bought you this day 
and your land for Pharaoh. Lo, here is 
seed for you, and ye shall sow the 
land. 24And it shall come to pass at the 
ingatherings, that ye shall give a fifth 
unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be 
your own, for seed of the field, and for 
your food, and for them of your 
households, and for food for your little 


ones.’ 25And they said: ‘Thou hast 
saved our lives. Let us find favour in 
the sight of my lord, and we will be 
Pharaoh’s bondmen.’ 26And Joseph 
made it a statute concerning the land 
of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh 
should have the fifth; only the land of 
the priests alone became not 
Pharaoh’s. 27And Israel dwelt in the 
land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen; 
and they got them possessions therein, 
and were fruitful, and multiplied 
exceedingly. 

.... 

28And Jacob lived in the land of 
Egypt seventeen years; so the days of 
Jacob, the years of his life, were a 
hundred forty and seven years. 29And 
the time drew near that Israel must die; 
and he called his son Joseph, and said 
unto him: ‘If now I have found favour 
in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand 
under my thigh, and deal kindly and 
truly with me; bury me not, I pray 
thee, in Egypt. 30But when I sleep with 
my fathers, thou shalt carry me out of 
Egypt, and bury me in their burying-
place.’ And he said: ‘I will do as thou 
hast said.’ 31And he said: ‘Swear unto 
me.’ And he swore unto him. And 
Israel bowed down upon the bed’s 
head. 

And it came to pass after these 
things, that one said to Joseph: 
‘Behold, thy father is sick.’ And he 
took with him his two sons, Manasseh 
and Ephraim. 2And one told Jacob, and 
said: ‘Behold, thy son Joseph cometh 
unto thee.’ And Israel strengthened 
himself, and sat upon the bed. 3And 
Jacob said unto Joseph: ‘God 
Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in 
the land of Canaan, and blessed me, 
4and said unto me: Behold, I will make 
thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I 
will make of thee a company of 
peoples; and will give this land to thy 
seed after thee for an everlasting 
possession. 5And now thy two sons, 
who were born unto thee in the land of 
Egypt before I came unto thee into 
Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and 
Manasseh, even as Reuben and 
Simeon, shall be mine. 6And thy issue, 
that thou begettest after them, shall be 
thine; they shall be called after the 
name of their brethren in their 
inheritance. 7And as for me, when I 
came from Paddan, Rachel died unto 
me in the land of Canaan in the way, 
when there was still some way to come 
unto Ephrath; and I buried her there in 
the way to Ephrath—the same is Beth-
lehem.’ 8And Israel beheld Joseph’s 
sons, and said: ‘Who are these?’ 9And 
Joseph said unto his father: ‘They are 
my sons, whom God hath given me 
here.’ And he said: ‘Bring them, I pray 
thee, unto me, and I will bless them.’ 
10Now the eyes of Israel were dim for 
age, so that he could not see. And he 
brought them near unto him; and he 
kissed them, and embraced them. 
11And Israel said unto Joseph: ‘I had 
not thought to see thy face; and, lo, 
God hath let me see thy seed also.’ 
12And Joseph brought them out from 
between his knees; and he fell down 
48 




on his face to the earth. 13And Joseph 
took them both, Ephraim in his right 
hand toward Israel’s left hand, and 
Manasseh in his left hand toward 
Israel’s right hand, and brought them 
near unto him. 14And Israel stretched 
out his right hand, and laid it upon 
Ephraim’s head, who was the younger, 
and his left hand upon Manasseh’s 
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for 
Manasseh was the first-born. 15And he 
blessed Joseph, and said: ‘The God 
before whom my fathers Abraham and 
Isaac did walk, the God who hath been 
my shepherd all my life long unto this 
day, 16the angel who hath redeemed 
me from all evil, bless the lads; and let 
my name be named in them, and the 
name of my fathers Abraham and 
Isaac; and let them grow into a 
multitude in the midst of the earth.’ 
17And when Joseph saw that his father 
was laying his right hand upon the 
head of Ephraim, it displeased him, 
and he held up his father’s hand, to 
remove it from Ephraim’s head unto 
Manasseh’s head. 18And Joseph said 
unto his father: ‘Not so, my father, for 
this is the first-born; put thy right hand 
upon his head.’ 19And his father 
refused, and said: ‘I know it, my son, I 
know it; he also shall become a 
people, and he also shall be great; 
howbeit his younger brother shall be 
greater than he, and his seed shall 
become a multitude of nations.’ 20And 
he blessed them that day, saying: ‘By 
thee shall Israel bless, saying: God 
make thee as Ephraim and as 
Manasseh.’ And he set Ephraim before 
Manasseh. 21And Israel said unto 
Joseph: ‘Behold, I die; but God will be 
with you, and bring you back unto the 
land of your fathers. 22Moreover I have 
given to thee one aportion above thy 
brethren, which I took out of the hand 
of the Amorite with my sword and 
with my bow.’ 

a Heb. schechem, shoulder. 

 

49 



And Jacob called unto his 
sons, and said: ‘Gather 
yourselves together, that I may tell you 
that which shall befall you in the end 
of days. 

2Assemble yourselves, and hear, ye 
sons of Jacob; 

And hearken unto Israel your father. 

3Reuben, thou art my first-born, 

My might, and the first-fruits of my 
strength; 

The excellency of dignity, and the 
excellency of power. 

4Unstable as water, have not thou 
the excellency; 

Because thou wentest up to thy 
father’s bed; 

Then defiledst thou it—he went up 
to my couch. 

 

5Simeon and Levi are brethren; 

Weapons of violence their kinship. 

6Let my soul not come into their 
council; 

Unto their assembly let my glory not 
be not united; 

For in their anger they slew men, 


And in their self-will they houghed 
oxen. 

7Cursed be their anger, for it was 
fierce, 

And their wrath, for it was cruel; 

I will divide them in Jacob, 

And scatter them in Israel 

 

8Judah, thee shall thy brethren 
praise; 

Thy hand shall be on the neck of 
thine enemies; 

Thy father’s sons shall bow down 
before thee. 

9Judah is a lion’s whelp; 

From the prey, my son, thou art 
gone up. 

He stooped down, he couched as a 
lion, 

And as a lioness; who shall rouse 
him up? 

10The sceptre shall not depart from 
Judah, 

Nor the ruler’s staff from between 
his feet, 

As long as men come to Shiloh; 

And unto him shall the obedience of 
the peoples be. 

11Binding his foal unto the vine, 

And his ass’s colt unto the choice 
vine; 

He washeth his garments in wine, 

And his vesture in the blood of 
grapes; 

12His eyes shall be red with wine, 

And his teeth white with milk. 

 

13Zebulun shall dwell at the shore of 
the sea, 

And he shall be a shore for ships, 

And his flank shall be upon Zidon. 

 

14Issachar is a large-boned ass, 

Couching down between the sheep-
folds. 

15For he saw a resting-place that it 
was good, 

And the land that it was pleasant; 

And he bowed his shoulder to bear, 

And became a servant under task-
work 

 

16Dan shall judge his people, 

As one of the tribes of Israel. 

17Dan shall be a serpent in the way, 

A horned snake in the path, 

That biteth the horse’s heels, 

So that his rider falleth backward. 

18I wait for Thy salvation, O Lord. 

 

19Gad, aa troop bshall troop upon 
him; 

a Heb. gedud. 

b From the Heb. root gadad. 

But he shall troop upon their heel. 

 

20As for Asher, his bread shall be 
fat, 

And he shall yield royal dainties. 

 

21Naphtali is a hind let loose: 

He giveth goodly words. 

 

22Joseph is a fruitful vine, 

A fruitful vine by a fountain; 

Its branches run over the wall. 


23The archers have dealt bitterly 
with him, 

And shot at him, and hated him; 

24But his bow abode firm, 

And the arms of his hands were 
made supple, 

By the hands of the Mighty One of 
Jacob, 

From thence, from the Shepherd, the 
Stone of Israel, 

25Even by the God of thy father, 
who shall help thee, 

And by the Almighty, who shall 
bless thee, 

With blessings of heaven above, 

Blessings of the deep that coucheth 
beneath, 

Blessings of the breasts, and of the 
womb. 

26The blessings of thy father 

Are mighty beyond the blessings of 
my progenitors 

Unto the utmost bound of the 
everlasting hills; 

They shall be on the head of Joseph, 

And on the crown of the head of the 
prince among his brethren. 

 

27Benjamin is a wolf that raveneth; 

In the morning he devoureth the 
prey, 

And at even he divideth the spoil.’ 

 

28All these are the twelve tribes of 
Israel, and this is it that their father 
spoke unto them and blessed them; 
every one according to his blessing he 
blessed them. 29And be charged them, 
and said unto them: ‘I am to be 
gathered unto my people; bury me 
with my fathers in the cave that is in 
the field of Ephron the Hittite, 30in the 
cave that is in the field of Machpelah, 
which is before Mamre, in the land of 
Canaan, which Abraham bought with 
the field from Ephron the Hittite for a 
possession of a burying-place. 31There 
they buried Abraham and Sarah his 
wife; there they buried Isaac and 
Rebekah his wife; and there I buried 
Leah. 32The field and the cave that is 
therein, which was purchased from the 
children of Heth.’ 33And when Jacob 
made an end of charging his sons, he 
gathered up his feet into the bed, and 
expired, and was gathered unto his 
people. 

And Joseph fell upon his 
father’s face, and wept upon 
him, and kissed him. 2And Joseph 
commanded his servants the 
physicians to embalm his father. And 
the physicians embalmed Israel. 3And 
forty days were fulfilled for him; for 
so are fulfilled the days of embalming. 
And the Egyptians wept for him 
threescore and ten days. 

4And when the days of weeping for 
him were past, Joseph spoke unto the 
house of Pharaoh, saying: ‘If now I 
have found favour in your eyes, speak, 
I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, 
saying: 5My father made me swear, 
saying: Lo, I die; in my grave which I 
have digged for me in the land of 
Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now 
therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and 
bury my father, and I will come back.’ 
50 




6And Pharaoh said: ‘Go up, and bury 
thy father, according as he made thee 
swear.’ 7And Joseph went up to bury 
his father; and with him went up all 
the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of 
his house, and all the elders of the land 
of Egypt, 8and all the house of Joseph, 
and his brethren, and his father’s 
house; only their little ones, and their 
flocks, and their herds, they left in the 
land of Goshen. 9And there went up 
with him both chariots and horsemen; 
and it was a very great company. 
10And they came to the threshing-floor 
of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan, 
and there they wailed with a very great 
and sore wailing; and he made a 
mourning for his father seven days. 
11And when the inhabitants of the land, 
the Canaanites, saw the mourning in 
the floor of Atad, they said: ‘This is a 
grievous amourning to the Egyptians.’ 
Wherefore the name of it was called 
Abel-mizraim, which is beyond the 
Jordan. 12And his sons did unto him 
according as he commanded them. 
13For his sons carried him into the land 
of Canaan, and buried him in the cave 
of the field of Machpelah, which 
Abraham bought with the field, for a 
possession of a burying-place, of 
Ephron the Hittite, in front of Mamre. 

a Heb. ebel. 

14And Joseph returned into Egypt, 
he, and his brethren, and all that went 
up with him to bury his father, after he 
had buried his father. 15And when 
Joseph’s brethren saw that their father 

was dead, they said: ‘It may be that 
Joseph will hate us, and will fully 
requite us all the evil which we did 
unto him.’ 16And they sent a message 
unto Joseph, saying: ‘Thy father did 
command before he died, saying: 17So 
shall ye say unto Joseph: Forgive, I 
pray thee now, the transgression of thy 
brethren, and their sin, for that they did 
unto thee evil. And now, we pray thee, 
forgive the transgression of the 
servants of the God of thy father.’ And 
Joseph wept when they spoke unto 
him. 18And his brethren also went and 
fell down before his face; and they 
said: ‘Behold, we are thy bondmen.’ 
19And Joseph said unto them: ‘Fear 
not; for am I in the place of God? 
20And as for you, ye meant evil against 
me; but God meant it for good, to 
bring to pass, as it is this day, to save 
much people alive. 21Now therefore 
fear ye not; I will sustain you, and 
your little ones.’ And he comforted 
them, and spoke kindly unto them. 

22And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, 
and his father’s house; and Joseph 
lived a hundred and ten years. 23And 
Joseph saw Ephraim’s children of the 
third generation; the children also of 
Machir the son of Manasseh were born 
upon Joseph’s knees. 24And Joseph 
said unto his brethren: ‘I die; but God 
will surely remember you, and bring 
you up out of this land unto the land 
which He swore to Abraham, to Isaac, 
and to Jacob.’ 25And Joseph took an 
oath of the children of Israel, saying: 
‘God will surely remember you, and 


ye shall carry up my bones from 
hence.’ 26So Joseph died, being a 
hundred and ten years old. And they 
embalmed him, and he was put in a 
coffin in Egypt. 

 




.... 

EXODUS 

 

NOW THESE are the names of the 
sons of Israel, who came into 
Egypt with Jacob; every man came 
with his household: 2Reuben, Simeon, 
Levi, and Judah; 3Issachar, Zebulun, 
and Benjamin; 4Dan and Naphtali, Gad 
and Asher. 5And all the souls that 
came out of the loins of Jacob were 
seventy souls; and Joseph was in 
Egypt already. 6And Joseph died, and 
all his brethren, and all that generation. 
7And the children of Israel were 
fruitful, and increased abundantly, and 
multiplied, and waxed exceeding 
mighty; and the land was filled with 
them. 

 

8Now there arose a new king over 
Egypt, who knew not Joseph. 9And he 
said unto his people: ‘Behold, the 
people of the children of Israel are too 
many and too mighty for us; 10come, 
let us deal wisely with them, lest they 
multiply, and it come to pass, that, 
when there befalleth us any war, they 
also join themselves unto our enemies, 
and fight against us, and get them up 
out of the land.’ 11Therefore they did 
set over them taskmasters to afflict 
them with their burdens. And they 
built for Pharaoh store-cities, Pithom 
and Raamses. 12But the more they 
afflicted them, the more they 
multiplied and the more they spread 
abroad. And they were adread because 
of the children of Israel. 13And the 
Egyptians made the children of Israel 
to serve with rigour. 14And they made 
their lives bitter with hard service, in 
mortar and in brick, and in all manner 
of service in the field; in all their 
service, wherein they made them serve 
with rigour. 

15And the king of Egypt spoke to the 
Hebrew midwives, of whom the name 
of the one was Shiphrah, and the name 
of the other Puah; 16and he said: 
‘When ye do the office of a midwife to 
the Hebrew women, ye shall look upon 
the birthstool: if it be a son, then ye 
shall kill him; but if it be a daughter, 
then she shall live.’ 17But the 
midwives feared God, and did not as 
the king of Egypt commanded them, 
but saved the men-children alive. 
18And the king of Egypt called for the 
midwives, and said unto them: ‘Why 
have ye done this thing, and have 
saved the men-children alive?’ 19And 
the midwives said unto Pharaoh: 
‘Because the Hebrew women are not 
as the Egyptian women; for they are 
lively, and are delivered ere the 
midwife come unto them.’ 20And God 
dealt well with the midwives; and the 
people multiplied, and waxed very 
mighty. 21And it came to pass, because 
the midwives feared God, that He 
1 




made them houses. 22And Pharaoh 
charged all his people, saying: ‘Every 
son that is born ye shall cast into the 
river, and every daughter ye shall save 
alive.’ 

2 



And there went a man of the 
house of Levi, and took to wife a 
daughter of Levi. 2And the woman 
conceived, and bore a son; and when 
she saw him that he was a goodly 
child, she hid him three months. 3And 
when she could not longer hide him, 
she took for him an ark of bulrushes, 
and daubed it with slime and with 
pitch; and she put the child therein, 
and laid it in the flags by the river’s 
brink. 4And his sister stood afar off, to 
know what would be done to him. 
5And the daughter of Pharaoh came 
down to bathe in the river; and her 
maidens walked along by the river-
side; and she saw the ark among the 
flags, and sent her handmaid to fetch 
it. 6And she opened it, and saw it, even 
the child; and behold a boy that wept. 
And she had compassion on him, and 
said: ‘This is one of the 
Hebrews’children.’ 7Then said his 
sister to Pharaoh’s daughter: ‘Shall I 
go and call thee a nurse of the Hebrew 
women, that she may nurse the child 
for thee?’ 8And Pharaoh’s daughter 
said to her: ‘Go.’ And the maiden went 
and called the child’s mother. 9And 
Pharaoh’s daughter said unto her: 
‘Take this child away, and nurse it for 
me, and I will give thee thy wages.’ 
And the woman took the child, and 
nursed it. 10And the child grew, and 
she brought him unto Pharaoh’s 
daughter, and he became her son. And 
she called his name aMoses, and said: 
‘Because I bdrew him out of the 
water.’ 

a Heb. Mosheh. 

b Heb. mashah, to draw out. 

11And it came to pass in those days, 
when Moses was grown up, that he 
went out unto his brethren, and looked 
on their burdens; and he saw an 
Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his 
brethren. 12And he looked this way and 
that way, and when he saw that there 
was no man, he smote the Egyptian, 
and hid him in the sand. 13And he went 
out the second day, and, behold, two 
men of the Hebrews were striving 
together; and he said to him that did 
the wrong: ‘Wherefore smitest thou 
thy fellow?’ 14And he said: ‘Who 
made thee a ruler and a judge over us? 
thinkest thou to kill me, as thou didst 
kill the Egyptian?’ And Moses feared, 
and said: ‘Surely the thing is known.’ 
15Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, 
he sought to slay Moses. But Moses 
fled from the face of Pharaoh, and 
dwelt in the land of Midian; and he sat 
down by a well. 16Now the priest of 
Midian had seven daughters; and they 
came and drew water, and filled the 
troughs to water their father’s flock. 
17And the shepherds came and drove 
them away; but Moses stood up and 
helped them, and watered their flock. 
18And when they came to Reuel their 
father, he said: ‘How is it that ye are 


come so soon to-day?’ 19And they 
said: ‘An Egyptian delivered us out of 
the hand of the shepherds, and 
moreover he drew water for us, and 
watered the flock.’ 20And he said unto 
his daughters: ‘And where is he? Why 
is it that ye have left the man? call 
him, that he may eat bread.’ 21And 
Moses was content to dwell with the 
man; and he gave Moses Zipporah his 
daughter. 22And she bore a son, and he 
called his name Gershom; for he said: 
‘I have been aa stranger in a strange 
land.’ 

a Heb. ger. 

 

23And it came to pass in the course 
of those many days that the king of 
Egypt died; and the children of Israel 
sighed by reason of the bondage, and 
they cried, and their cry came up unto 
God by reason of the bondage. 24And 
God heard their groaning, and God 
remembered His covenant with 
Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. 
25And God saw the children of Israel, 
and God took cognizance of them. 

Now Moses was keeping the 
flock of Jethro his father-in-law, 
the priest of Midian; and he led the 
flock to the farthest end of the 
wilderness, and came to the mountain 
of God, unto Horeb. 2And the angel of 
the LORD appeared unto him in a flame 
of fire out of the midst of a bush; and 
he looked, and, behold, the bush 
burned with fire, and the bush was not 
consumed. 3And Moses said: ‘I will 

turn aside now, and see this great 
sight, why the bush is not burnt.’ 4And 
when the LORD saw that he turned 
aside to see, God called unto him out 
of the midst of the bush, and said: 
‘Moses, Moses.’ And he said: ‘Here 
am I.’ 5And He said: ‘Draw not nigh 
hither; put off thy shoes from off thy 
feet, for the place whereon thou 
standest is holy ground.’ 6Moreover 
He said: ‘I am the God of thy father, 
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob.’ And Moses hid 
his face; for he was afraid to look upon 
God. 7And the LORD said: ‘I have 
surely seen the affliction of My people 
that are in Egypt, and have heard their 
cry by reason of their taskmasters; for 
I know their pains; 8and I am come 
down to deliver them out of the hand 
of the Egyptians, and to bring them up 
out of that land unto a good land and a 
large, unto a land flowing with milk 
and honey; unto the place of the 
Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the 
Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the 
Hivite, and the Jebusite. 9And now, 
behold, the cry of the children of Israel 
is come unto Me; moreover I have 
seen the oppression wherewith the 
Egyptians oppress them. 10Come now 
therefore, and I will send thee unto 
Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth 
My people the children of Israel out of 
Egypt.’ 11And Moses said unto God: 
‘Who am I, that I should go unto 
Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth 
the children of Israel out of Egypt?’ 
12And He said: ‘Certainly I will be 
3 




with thee; and this shall be the token 
unto thee, that I have sent thee: when 
thou hast brought forth the people out 
of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this 
mountain.’ 13And Moses said unto 
God: ‘Behold, when I come unto the 
children of Israel, and shall say unto 
them: The God of your fathers hath 
sent me unto you; and they shall say to 
me: What is His name? what shall I 
say unto them?’ 14And God said unto 
Moses: ‘I AM THAT I AM’; and He 
said: ‘Thus shalt thou say unto the 
children of Israel: I AM hath sent me 
unto you.’ 15And God said moreover 
unto Moses: ‘Thus shalt thou say unto 
the children of Israel: The LORD, the 
God of your fathers, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the 
God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you; 
this is My name for ever, and this is 
My memorial unto all generations. 
16Go, and gather the elders of Israel 
together, and say unto them: The LORD, 
the God of your fathers, the God of 
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, hath 
appeared unto me, saying: I have 
surely remembered you, and seen that 
which is done to you in Egypt. 17And I 
have said: I will bring you up out of 
the affliction of Egypt unto the land of 
the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the 
Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the 
Hivite, and the Jebusite, unto a land 
flowing with milk and honey. 18And 
they shall hearken to thy voice. And 
thou shalt come, thou and the elders of 
Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye 
shall say unto him: The LORD, the God 
of the Hebrews, hath met with us. And 
now let us go, we pray thee, three 
days’journey into the wilderness, that 
we may sacrifice to the LORD our God. 
19And I know that the king of Egypt 
will not give you leave to go, except 
by a mighty hand. 20And I will put 
forth My hand, and smite Egypt with 
all My wonders which I will do in the 
midst thereof. And after that he will let 
you go. 21And I will give this people 
favour in the sight of the Egyptians. 
And it shall come to pass, that, when 
ye go, ye shall not go empty; 22but 
every woman shall ask of her 
neighbour, and of her that sojourneth 
in her house, jewels of silver, and 
jewels of gold, and raiment; and ye 
shall put them upon your sons, and 
upon your daughters; and ye shall 
spoil the Egyptians.’ 

And Moses answered and said: 
‘But, behold, they will not believe 
me, nor hearken unto my voice; for 
they will say: The lord hath not 
appeared unto thee.’ 2And the LORD 
said unto him: ‘What is that in thy 
hand?’ And he said: ‘A rod.’ 3And He 
said: ‘Cast it on the ground.’ And he 
cast it on the ground, and it became a 
serpent; and Moses fled from before it. 
4And the LORD said unto Moses: ‘Put 
forth thy hand, and take it by the tail—
and he put forth his hand, and laid hold 
of it, and it became a rod in his hand— 
5that they may believe that the LORD, 
the God of their fathers, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the 
God of Jacob, hath appeared unto 
4 




thee.’ 6And the LORD said furthermore 
unto him: ‘Put now thy hand into thy 
bosom.’ And he put his hand into his 
bosom; and when he took it out, 
behold, his hand was leprous, as white 
as snow. 7And He said: ‘Put thy hand 
back into thy bosom.—And he put his 
hand back into his bosom; and when 
he took it out of his bosom, behold, it 
was turned again as his other flesh.— 
8And it shall come to pass, if they will 
not believe thee, neither hearken to the 
voice of the first sign, that they will 
believe the voice of the latter sign. 
9And it shall come to pass, if they will 
not believe even these two signs, 
neither hearken unto thy voice, that 
thou shalt take of the water of the 
river, and pour it upon the dry land; 
and the water which thou takest out of 
the river shall become blood upon the 
dry land.’ 10And Moses said unto the 
LORD: ‘Oh Lord, I am not a man of 
words, neither heretofore, nor since 
Thou hast spoken unto Thy servant; 
for I am slow of speech, and of a slow 
tongue.’ 11And the LORD said unto him: 
‘Who hath made man’s mouth? or who 
maketh a man dumb, or deaf, or 
seeing, or blind? is it not I the LORD? 
12Now therefore go, and I will be with 
thy mouth, and teach thee what thou 
shalt speak.’ 13And he said: ‘Oh Lord, 
send, I pray Thee, by the hand of him 
whom Thou wilt send.’ 14And the 
anger of the LORD was kindled against 
Moses, and He said: ‘Is there not 
Aaron thy brother the Levite? I know 
that he can speak well. And also, 
behold, he cometh forth to meet thee; 
and when he seeth thee, he will be glad 
in his heart. 15And thou shalt speak 
unto him, and put the words in his 
mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, 
and with his mouth, and will teach you 
what ye shall do. 16And he shall be thy 
spokesman unto the people; and it 
shall come to pass, that he shall be to 
thee a mouth, and thou shalt be to him 
in God’s stead. 17And thou shalt take 
in thy hand this rod, wherewith thou 
shalt do the signs.’ 

18And Moses went and returned to 
aJethro his father-in-law, and said unto 
him: ‘Let me go, I pray thee, and unto 
my brethren that are in Egypt, and see 
whether they be yet alive.’ And Jethro 
said to Moses: ‘Go in peace.’ 19And 
the LORD said unto Moses in Midian: 
‘Go, return into Egypt; for all the men 
are dead that sought thy life.’ 20And 
Moses took his wife and his sons, and 
set them upon an ass, and he returned 
to the land of Egypt; and Moses took 
the rod of God in his hand. 21And the 
LORD said unto Moses: ‘When thou 
goest back into Egypt, see that thou do 
before Pharaoh all the wonders which 
I have put in thy hand; but I will 
harden his heart, and he will not let the 
people go. 22And thou shalt say unto 
Pharaoh: Thus saith the LORD: Israel is 
My son, My first-born. 23And I have 
said unto thee: Let My son go, that he 
may serve Me; and thou hast refused 
to let him go. Behold, I will slay thy 

a Heb. Jether. 


son, thy first-born.’— 24And it came to 
pass on the way at the lodging-place, 
that the LORD met him, and sought to 
kill him. 25Then Zipporah took a flint, 
and cut off the foreskin of her son, and 
cast it at his feet; and she said: ‘Surely 
a bridegroom of blood art thou to me.’ 
26So He let him alone. Then she said: 
‘A bridegroom of blood in regard of 
the circumcision.’ 

27And the LORD said to Aaron: ‘Go 
into the wilderness to meet Moses.’ 
And he went, and met him in the 
mountain of God, and kissed him. 
28And Moses told Aaron all the words 
of the LORD wherewith He had sent 
him, and all the signs wherewith He 
had charged him. 29And Moses and 
Aaron went and gathered together all 
the elders of the children of Israel. 
30And Aaron spoke all the words 
which the LORD had spoken unto 
Moses, and did the signs in the sight of 
the people. 31And the people believed; 
and when they heard that the LORD had 
remembered the children of Israel, and 
that He had seen their affliction, then 
they bowed their heads and 
worshipped. 

And afterward Moses and Aaron 
came, and said unto Pharaoh: 
‘Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel: Let My people go, that they 
may hold a feast unto Me in the 
wilderness.’ 2And Pharaoh said: ‘Who 
is the LORD, that I should hearken unto 
His voice to let Israel go? I know not 
the LORD, and moreover I will not let 
Israel go.’ 3And they said: ‘The God of 
the Hebrews hath met with us. Let us 
go, we pray thee, three days’journey 
into the wilderness, and sacrifice unto 
the LORD our God; lest He fall upon us 
with pestilence, or with the sword.’ 
4And the king of Egypt said unto them: 
‘Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, 
cause the people to break loose from 
their work? get you unto your 
burdens.’ 5And Pharaoh said: ‘Behold, 
the people of the land are now many, 
and will ye make them rest from their 
burdens?’ 6And the same day Pharaoh 
commanded the taskmasters of the 
people, and their officers, saying: 7’Ye 
shall no more give the people straw to 
make brick, as heretofore. Let them go 
and gather straw for themselves. 8And 
the tale of the bricks, which they did 
make heretofore, ye shall lay upon 
them; ye shall not diminish aught 
thereof; for they are idle; therefore 
they cry, saying: Let us go and 
sacrifice to our God. 9Let heavier work 
be laid upon the men, that they may 
labour therein; and let them not regard 
lying words.’ 10And the taskmasters of 
the people went out, and their officers, 
and they spoke to the people, saying: 
‘Thus saith Pharaoh: I will not give 
you straw. 11Go yourselves, get you 
straw where ye can find it; for nought 
of your work shall be diminished.’ 
12So the people were scattered abroad 
throughout all the land of Egypt to 
gather stubble for straw. 13And the 
taskmasters were urgent, saying: 
‘Fulfil your work, your daily task, as 
when there was straw.’ 14And the 
5 




officers of the children of Israel, whom 
Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over 
them, were beaten, saying: ‘Wherefore 
have ye not fulfilled your appointed 
task in making brick both yesterday 
and today as heretofore?’ 15Then the 
officers of the children of Israel came 
and cried unto Pharaoh, saying: 
‘Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy 
servants? 16There is no straw given 
unto thy servants, and they say to us: 
Make brick; and, behold, thy servants 
are beaten, but the fault is in thine own 
people.’ 17But he said: ‘Ye are idle, ye 
are idle; therefore ye say: Let us go 
and sacrifice to the LORD. 18Go 
therefore now, and work; for there 
shall no straw be given you, yet shall 
ye deliver the tale of bricks.’ 19And the 
officers of the children of Israel did 
see that they were set on mischief, 
when they said: ‘Ye shall not diminish 
aught from your bricks, your daily 
task.’ 20And they met Moses and 
Aaron, who stood in the way, as they 
came forth from Pharaoh; 21and they 
said unto them: ‘The LORD look upon 
you, and judge; because ye have made 
our savour to be abhorred in the eyes 
of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his 
servants, to put a sword in their hand 
to slay us.’ 22And Moses returned unto 
the LORD, and said: ‘Lord, wherefore 
hast Thou dealt ill with this people? 
why is it that Thou hast sent me? 23For 
since I came to Pharaoh to speak in 
Thy name, he hath dealt ill with this 
people; neither hast Thou delivered 
Thy people at all.’ 

6 



And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Now shalt thou see what I will 
do to Pharaoh; for by a strong hand 
shall he let them go, and by a strong 
hand shall he drive them out of his 
land.’ 

.... 

2And God spoke unto Moses, and 
said unto him: ‘I am the LORD; 3and I 
appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, 
and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, but 
by My name ....a I made Me not 
known to them. 4And I have also 
established My covenant with them, to 
give them the land of Canaan, the land 
of their sojournings, wherein they 
sojourned. 5And moreover I have 
heard the groaning of the children of 
Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in 
bondage; and I have remembered My 
covenant. 6Wherefore say unto the 
children of Israel: I am the LORD, and I 
will bring you out from under the 
burdens of the Egyptians, and I will 
deliver you from their bondage, and I 
will redeem you with an outstretched 
arm, and with great judgments; 7and I 
will take you to Me for a people, and I 
will be to you a God; and ye shall 
know that I am the LORD your God, 
who brought you out from under the 
burdens of the Egyptians. 8And I will 
bring you in unto the land, concerning 
which I lifted up My hand to give it to 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I 
will give it you for a heritage: I am the 

a The ineffable name, read Adonai, 
which means, the Lord. 


LORD.’ 9And Moses spoke so unto the 
children of Israel; but they hearkened 
not unto Moses for impatience of 
spirit, and for cruel bondage. 

10And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 11’Go in, speak unto Pharaoh 
king of Egypt, that he let the children 
of Israel go out of his land.’ 12And 
Moses spoke before the LORD, saying: 
‘Behold, the children of Israel have not 
hearkened unto me; how then shall 
Pharaoh hear me, who am of 
uncircumcised lips?’ 

13And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, and gave them a 
charge unto the children of Israel, and 
unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring 
the children of Israel out of the land of 
Egypt. 

14These are the heads of their 
fathers’houses: the sons of Reuben the 
first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, 
Hezron, and Carmi. These are the 
families of Reuben. 15And the sons of 
Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, 
and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the 
son of a Canaanitish woman. These are 
the families of Simeon. 16And these 
are the names of the sons of Levi 
according to their generations: 
Gershon and Kohath, and Merari. And 
the years of the life of Levi were a 
hundred thirty and seven years. 17The 
sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, 
according to their families. 18And the 
sons of Kohath: Amram, and Izhar, 
and Hebron, and Uzziel. And the years 
of the life of Kohath were a hundred 
thirty and three years. 19And the sons 
of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are 
the families of the Levites according to 
their generations. 20And Amram took 
him Jochebed his father’s sister to 
wife; and she bore him Aaron and 
Moses. And the years of the life of 
Amram were a hundred and thirty and 
seven years. 21And the sons of Izhar: 
Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri. 22And 
the sons of Uzziel: Mishael, and 
Elzaphan, and Sithri. 23And Aaron 
took him Elisheba, the daughter of 
Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon, to 
wife; and she bore him Nadab and 
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 24And the 
sons of Korah: Assir, and Elkanah, and 
Abiasaph; these are the families of the 
Korahites. 25And Eleazar Aaron’s son 
took him one of the daughters of Putiel 
to wife; and she bore him Phinehas. 
These are the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the Levites 
according to their families. 26These are 
that Aaron and Moses, to whom the 
LORD said: ‘Bring out the children of 
Israel from the land of Egypt 
according to their hosts.’ 27These are 
they that spoke to Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, to bring out the children of 
Israel from Egypt. These are that 
Moses and Aaron. 28And it came to 
pass on the day when the LORD spoke 
unto Moses in the land of Egypt, 29that 
the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying: ‘I 
am the LORD; speak thou unto Pharaoh 
king of Egypt all that I speak unto 
thee.’ 30And Moses said before the 
LORD: ‘Behold, I am of uncircumcised 
lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken 


unto me?’ 1And the LORD said 
unto Moses: ‘See, I have set thee 
in God’s stead to Pharaoh; and Aaron 
thy brother shall be thy prophet. 2Thou 
shalt speak all that I command thee; 
and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto 
Pharaoh, that he let the children of 
Israel go out of his land. 3And I will 
harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply 
My signs and My wonders in the land 
of Egypt. 4But Pharaoh will not 
hearken unto you, and I will lay My 
hand upon Egypt, and bring forth My 
hosts, My people the children of Israel, 
out of the land of Egypt, by great 
judgments. 5And the Egyptians shall 
know that I am the LORD, when I 
stretch forth My hand upon Egypt, and 
bring out the children of Israel from 
among them.’ 6And Moses and Aaron 
did so; as the LORD commanded them, 
so did they. 7And Moses was fourscore 
years old, and Aaron fourscore and 
three years old, when they spoke unto 
Pharaoh. 

 

8And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying: 9’When 
Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying: 
Show a wonder for you; then thou 
shalt say unto Aaron: Take thy rod, 
and cast it down before Pharaoh, that it 
become a serpent.’ 10And Moses and 
Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they 
did so, as the LORD had commanded; 
and Aaron cast down his rod before 
Pharaoh and before his servants, and it 
became a serpent. 11Then Pharaoh also 
called for the wise men and the 
sorcerers; and they also, the magicians 
of Egypt, did in like manner with their 
secret arts. 12For they cast down every 
man his rod, and they became 
serpents; but Aaron’s rod swallowed 
up their rods. 13And Pharaoh’s heart 
was hardened, and he hearkened not 
unto them; as the LORD had spoken. 

14And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Pharaoh’s heart is stubborn, he 
refuseth to let the people go. 15Get thee 
unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he 
goeth out unto the water; and thou 
shalt stand by the river’s brink to meet 
him; and the rod which was turned to a 
serpent shalt thou take in thy hand. 
16And thou shalt say unto him: The 
LORD, the God of the Hebrews, hath 
sent me unto thee, saying: Let My 
people go, that they may serve Me in 
the wilderness; and, behold, hitherto 
thou hast not hearkened; 17thus saith 
the LORD: In this thou shalt know that I 
am the LORD—behold, I will smite 
with the rod that is in my hand upon 
the waters which are in the river, and 
they shall be turned to blood. 18And 
the fish that are in the river shall die, 
and the river shall become foul; and 
the Egyptians shall loathe to drink 
water from the river.’ 

19And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Say unto Aaron: Take thy rod, and 
stretch out thy hand over the waters of 
Egypt, over their rivers, over their 
streams, and over their pools, and over 
all their ponds of water, that they may 
become blood; and there shall be 
blood throughout all the land of Egypt, 
7 




both in vessels of wood and in vessels 
of stone.’ 20And Moses and Aaron did 
so, as the LORD commanded; and he 
lifted up the rod, and smote the waters 
that were in the river, in the sight of 
Pharaoh, and in the sight of his 
servants; and all the waters that were 
in the river were turned to blood. 
21And the fish that were in the river 
died; and the river became foul, and 
the Egyptians could not drink water 
from the river; and the blood was 
throughout all the land of Egypt. 22And 
the magicians of Egypt did in like 
manner with their secret arts; and 
Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he 
hearkened not unto them; as the LORD 
had spoken. 23And Pharaoh turned and 
went into his house, neither did he lay 
even this to heart. 24And all the 
Egyptians digged round about the river 
for water to drink; for they could not 
drink of the water of the river. 25And 
seven days were fulfilled, after that the 
LORD had smitten the river. 26And the 
LORD spoke unto Moses: ‘Go in unto 
Pharaoh, and say unto him: Thus saith 
the LORD: Let My people go, that they 
may serve Me. 27And if thou refuse to 
let them go, behold, I will smite all thy 
borders with frogs. 28And the river 
shall swarm with frogs, which shall go 
up and come into thy house, and into 
thy bed-chamber, and upon thy bed, 
and into the house of thy servants, and 
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, 
and into thy kneading-troughs. 29And 
the frogs shall come up both upon 
thee, and upon thy people, and upon 

all thy servants.’ 1And the LORD 
said unto Moses: ‘Say unto 
Aaron: Stretch forth thy hand with thy 
rod over the rivers, over the canals, 
and over the pools, and cause frogs to 
come up upon the land of Egypt.’ 2And 
Aaron stretched out his hand over the 
waters of Egypt; and the frogs came 
up, and covered the land of Egypt. 
3And the magicians did in like manner 
with their secret arts, and brought up 
frogs upon the land of Egypt. 4Then 
Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, 
and said: ‘Entreat the LORD, that He 
take away the frogs from me, and from 
my people; and I will let the people go, 
that they may sacrifice unto the LORD.’ 
5And Moses said unto Pharaoh: ‘Have 
thou this glory over me; against what 
time shall I entreat for thee, and for thy 
servants, and for thy people, that the 
frogs be destroyed from thee and thy 
houses, and remain in the river only?’ 
6And he said: ‘Against to-morrow.’ 
And he said: ‘Be it according to thy 
word; that thou mayest know that there 
is none like unto the LORD our God. 
7And the frogs shall depart from thee, 
and from thy houses, and from thy 
servants, and from thy people; they 
shall remain in the river only.’ 8And 
Moses and Aaron went out from 
Pharaoh; and Moses cried unto the 
LORD concerning the frogs, which He 
had brought upon Pharaoh. 9And the 
LORD did according to the word of 
Moses; and the frogs died out of the 
houses, out of the courts, and out of 
the fields. 10And they gathered them 
8 




together in heaps; and the land stank. 
11But when Pharaoh saw that there was 
respite, he hardened his heart, and 
hearkened not unto them; as the LORD 
had spoken. 12And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Say unto Aaron: Stretch out 
thy rod, and smite the dust of the earth, 
that it may become gnats throughout 
all the land of Egypt.’ 13And they did 
so; and Aaron stretched out his hand 
with his rod, and smote the dust of the 
earth, and there were gnats upon man, 
and upon beast; all the dust of the 
earth became gnats throughout all the 
land of Egypt. 14And the magicians did 
so with their secret arts to bring forth 
gnats, but they could not; and there 
were gnats upon man, and upon beast. 
15Then the magicians said unto 
Pharaoh: ‘This is the finger of God’; 
and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and 
he hearkened not unto them; as the 
LORD had spoken. 

16And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Rise up early in the morning, and 
stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh 
forth to the water; and say unto him: 
Thus saith the LORD: Let My people 
go, that they may serve Me. 17Else, if 
thou wilt not let My people go, behold, 
I will send swarms of flies upon thee, 
and upon thy servants, and upon thy 
people, and into thy houses; and the 
houses of the Egyptians shall be full of 
swarms of flies, and also the ground 
whereon they are. 18And I will set 
apart in that day the land of Goshen, in 
which My people dwell, that no 
swarms of flies shall be there; to the 
end that thou mayest know that I am 
the LORD in the midst of the earth. 
19And I will put a division between My 
people and thy people—by to-morrow 
shall this sign be.’ 20And the LORD did 
so; and there came grievous swarms of 
flies into the house of Pharaoh, and 
into his servants’houses; and in all the 
land of Egypt the land was ruined by 
reason of the swarms of flies. 21And 
Pharaoh called for Moses and for 
Aaron, and said: ‘Go ye, sacrifice to 
your God in the land.’ 22And Moses 
said: ‘It is not meet so to do; for we 
shall sacrifice the abomination of the 
Egyptians to the LORD our God; lo, if 
we sacrifice the abomination of the 
Egyptians before their eyes, will they 
not stone us? 23We will go three 
days’journey into the wilderness, and 
sacrifice to the LORD our God, as He 
shall command us.’ 24And Pharaoh 
said: ‘I will let you go, that ye may 
sacrifice to the LORD your God in the 
wilderness; only ye shall not go very 
far away; entreat for me.’ 25And Moses 
said: ‘Behold, I go out from thee, and I 
will entreat the LORD that the swarms 
of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from 
his servants, and from his people, 
tomorrow; only let not Pharaoh deal 
deceitfully any more in not letting the 
people go to sacrifice to the LORD.’ 
26And Moses went out from Pharaoh, 
and entreated the LORD. 27And the 
LORD did according to the word of 
Moses; and He removed the swarms of 
flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, 
and from his people; there remained 


not one. 28And Pharaoh hardened his 
heart this time also, and he did not let 
the people go. 

 

Then the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him: 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of the 
Hebrews: Let My people go, that they 
may serve Me. 2For if thou refuse to 
let them go, and wilt hold them still, 
3behold, the hand of the LORD is upon 
thy cattle which are in the field, upon 
the horses, upon the asses, upon the 
camels, upon the herds, and upon the 
flocks; there shall be a very grievous 
murrain. 4And the LORD shall make a 
division between the cattle of Israel 
and the cattle of Egypt; and there shall 
nothing die of all that belongeth to the 
children of Israel.’ 5And the LORD 
appointed a set time, saying: 
‘Tomorrow the LORD shall do this 
thing in the land.’ 6And the LORD did 
that thing on the morrow, and all the 
cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle 
of the children of Israel died not one. 
7And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there 
was not so much as one of the cattle of 
the Israelites dead. But the heart of 
Pharaoh was stubborn, and he did not 
let the people go. 

8And the LORD said unto Moses and 
unto Aaron: ‘Take to you handfuls of 
soot of the furnace, and let Moses 
throw it heavenward in the sight of 
Pharaoh. 9And it shall become small 
dust over all the land of Egypt, and 
shall be a boil breaking forth with 
blains upon man and upon beast, 
throughout all the land of Egypt.’ 
10And they took soot of the furnace, 
and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses 
threw it up heavenward; and it became 
a boil breaking forth with blains upon 
man and upon beast. 11And the 
magicians could not stand before 
Moses because of the boils; for the 
boils were upon the magicians, and 
upon all the Egyptians. 12And the LORD 
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he 
hearkened not unto them; as the LORD 
had spoken unto Moses. 

13And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Rise up early in the morning, and 
stand before Pharaoh, and say unto 
him: Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
the Hebrews: Let My people go, that 
they may serve Me. 14For I will this 
time send all My plagues upon thy 
person, and upon thy servants, and 
upon thy people; that thou mayest 
know that there is none like Me in all 
the earth. 15Surely now I had put forth 
My hand, and smitten thee and thy 
people with pestilence, and thou hadst 
been cut off from the earth. 16But in 
very deed for this cause have I made 
thee to stand, to show thee My power, 
and that My name may be declared 
throughout all the earth. 17As yet 
exaltest thou thyself against My 
people, that thou wilt not let them go? 
18Behold, tomorrow about this time I 
will cause it to rain a very grievous 
hail, such as hath not been in Egypt 
since the day it was founded even until 
now. 19Now therefore send, hasten in 
thy cattle and all that thou hast in the 
9 




field; for every man and beast that 
shall be found in the field, and shall 
not be brought home, the hail shall 
come down upon them, and they shall 
die.’ 20He that feared the word of the 
LORD among the servants of Pharaoh 
made his servants and his cattle flee 
into the houses; 21and he that regarded 
not the word of the LORD left his 
servants and his cattle in the field. 

22And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Stretch forth thy hand toward heaven, 
that there may be hail in all the land of 
Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and 
upon every herb of the field, 
throughout the land of Egypt.’ 23And 
Moses stretched forth his rod toward 
heaven; and the LORD sent thunder and 
hail, and fire ran down unto the earth; 
and the LORD caused to hail upon the 
land of Egypt. 24So there was hail, and 
fire flashing up amidst the hail, very 
grievous, such as had not been in all 
the land of Egypt since it became a 
nation. 25And the hail smote 
throughout all the land of Egypt all 
that was in the field, both man and 
beast; and the hail smote every herb of 
the field, and broke every tree of the 
field. 26Only in the land of Goshen, 
where the children of Israel were, was 
there no hail. 27And Pharaoh sent, and 
called for Moses and Aaron, and said 
unto them: ‘I have sinned this time; the 
LORD is righteous, and I and my people 
are wicked. 28Entreat the LORD, and let 
there be enough of these mighty 
thunderings and hail; and I will let you 
go, and ye shall stay no longer.’ 29And 
Moses said unto him: ‘As soon as I am 
gone out of the city, I will spread forth 
my hands unto the LORD; the thunders 
shall cease, neither shall there be any 
more hail; that thou mayest know that 
the earth is the LORD’s. 30But as for 
thee and thy servants, I know that ye 
will not yet fear the LORD God.’— 
31And the flax and the barley were 
smitten; for the barley was in the ear, 
and the flax was in bloom. 32But the 
wheat and the spelt were not smitten; 
for they ripen late.— 33And Moses 
went out of the city from Pharaoh, and 
spread forth his hands unto the LORD; 
and the thunders and hail ceased, and 
the rain was not poured upon the earth. 
34And when Pharaoh saw that the rain 
and the hail and the thunders were 
ceased, he sinned yet more, and 
hardened his heart, he and his servants. 
35And the heart of Pharaoh was 
hardened, and he did not let the 
children of Israel go; as the LORD had 
spoken by Moses. 

 

.. 

And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Go in unto Pharaoh; 
for I have hardened his heart, and the 
heart of his servants, that I might show 
these My signs in the midst of them; 
2and that thou mayest tell in the ears of 
thy son, and of thy son’s son, what I 
have wrought upon Egypt, and My 
signs which I have done among them; 
that ye may know that I am the LORD.’ 
3And Moses and Aaron went in unto 
Pharaoh, and said unto him: ‘Thus 
10 




saith the LORD, the God of the 
Hebrews: How long wilt thou refuse to 
humble thyself before Me? let My 
people go, that they may serve Me. 
4Else, if thou refuse to let My people 
go, behold, to-morrow will I bring 
locusts into thy border; 5and they shall 
cover the face of the earth, that one 
shall not be able to see the earth; and 
they shall eat the residue of that which 
is escaped, which remaineth unto you 
from the hail, and shall eat every tree 
which groweth for you out of the field; 
6and thy houses shall be filled, and the 
houses of all thy servants, and the 
houses of all the Egyptians; as neither 
thy fathers nor thy fathers’fathers have 
seen, since the day that they were upon 
the earth unto this day.’ And he turned, 
and went out from Pharaoh. 7And 
Pharaoh’s servants said unto him: 
‘How long shall this man be a snare 
unto us? let the men go, that they may 
serve the LORD their God, knowest 
thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?’ 
8And Moses and Aaron were brought 
again unto Pharaoh; and he said unto 
them: ‘Go, serve the LORD your God; 
but who are they that shall go?’ 9And 
Moses said: ‘We will go with our 
young and with our old, with our sons 
and with our daughters, with our 
flocks and with our herds we will go; 
for we must hold a feast unto the 
LORD.’ 10And he said unto them: ‘So be 
the LORD with you, as I will let you go, 
and your little ones; see ye that evil is 
before your face. 11Not so; go now ye 
that are men, and serve the LORD; for 
that is what ye desire.’ And they were 
driven out from Pharaoh’s presence. 

12And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Stretch out thy hand over the land of 
Egypt for the locusts, that they may 
come up upon the land of Egypt, and 
eat every herb of the land, even all that 
the hail hath left.’ 13And Moses 
stretched forth his rod over the land of 
Egypt, and the LORD brought an east 
wind upon the land all that day, and all 
the night; and when it was morning, 
the east wind brought the locusts. 
14And the locusts went up over all the 
land of Egypt, and rested in all the 
borders of Egypt; very grievous were 
they; before them there were no such 
locusts as they, neither after them shall 
be such. 15For they covered the face of 
the whole earth, so that the land was 
darkened; and they did eat every herb 
of the land, and all the fruit of the trees 
which the hail had left; and there 
remained not any green thing, either 
tree or herb of the field, through all the 
land of Egypt. 16Then Pharaoh called 
for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he 
said: ‘I have sinned against the LORD 
your God, and against you. 17Now 
therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin 
only this once, and entreat the LORD 
your God, that He may take away from 
me this death only.’ 18And he went out 
from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD. 
19And the LORD turned an exceeding 
strong west wind, which took up the 
locusts, and drove them into the Red 
Sea; there remained not one locust in 
all the border of Egypt. 20But the LORD 


hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did 
not let the children of Israel go. 

21And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Stretch out thy hand toward heaven, 
that there may be darkness over the 
land of Egypt, even darkness which 
may be felt.’ 22And Moses stretched 
forth his hand toward heaven; and 
there was a thick darkness in all the 
land of Egypt three days; 23they saw 
not one another, neither rose any from 
his place for three days; but all the 
children of Israel had light in their 
dwellings. 24And Pharaoh called unto 
Moses, and said: ‘Go ye, serve the 
LORD; only let your flocks and your 
herds be stayed; let your little ones 
also go with you.’ 25And Moses said: 
‘Thou must also give into our hand 
sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we 
may sacrifice unto the LORD our God. 
26Our cattle also shall go with us; there 
shall not a hoof be left behind; for 
thereof must we take to serve the LORD 
our God; and we know not with what 
we must serve the LORD, until we come 
thither.’ 27But the LORD hardened 
Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let 
them go. 28And Pharaoh said unto him: 
‘Get thee from me, take heed to 
thyself, see my face no more; for in the 
day thou seest my face thou shalt die.’ 
29And Moses said: ‘Thou hast spoken 
well; I will see thy face again no 
more.’ 

 

And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Yet one plague more 
will I bring upon Pharaoh, and upon 
Egypt; afterwards he will let you go 
hence; when he shall let you go, he 
shall surely thrust you out hence 
altogether. 2Speak now in the ears of 
the people, and let them ask every man 
of his neighbour, and every woman of 
her neighbour, jewels of silver, and 
jewels of gold.’ 3And the LORD gave 
the people favour in the sight of the 
Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses 
was very great in the land of Egypt, in 
the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in 
the sight of the people. 

4And Moses said: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD: About midnight will I go out 
into the midst of Egypt; 5and all the 
first-born in the land of Egypt shall 
die, from the first-born of Pharaoh that 
sitteth upon his throne, even unto the 
first-born of the maid-servant that is 
behind the mill; and all the first-born 
of cattle. 6And there shall be a great 
cry throughout all the land of Egypt, 
such as there hath been none like it, 
nor shall be like it any more. 7But 
against any of the children of Israel 
shall not a dog whet his tongue, 
against man or beast; that ye may 
know how that the LORD doth put a 
difference between the Egyptians and 
Israel. 8And all these thy servants shall 
come down unto me, and bow down 
unto me, saying: Get thee out, and all 
the people that follow thee; and after 
that I will go out.’ And he went out 
from Pharaoh in hot anger. 

9And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Pharaoh will not hearken unto you; 
that My wonders may be multiplied in 
11 




the land of Egypt.’ 10And Moses and 
Aaron did all these wonders before 
Pharaoh; and the LORD hardened 
Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the 
children of Israel go out of his land. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses and Aaron in the land 
of Egypt, saying: 2’This month shall be 
unto you the beginning of months; it 
shall be the first month of the year to 
you. 3Speak ye unto all the 
congregation of Israel, saying: In the 
tenth day of this month they shall take 
to them every man a lamb, according 
to their fathers’houses, a lamb for a 
household; 4and if the household be 
too little for a lamb, then shall he and 
his neighbour next unto his house take 
one according to the number of the 
souls; according to every man’s eating 
ye shall make your count for the lamb. 
5Your lamb shall be without blemish, a 
male of the first year; ye shall take it 
from the sheep, or from the goats; 6and 
ye shall keep it unto the fourteenth day 
of the same month; and the whole 
assembly of the congregation of Israel 
shall kill it at dusk. 7And they shall 
take of the blood, and put it on the two 
side-posts and on the lintel, upon the 
houses wherein they shall eat it. 8And 
they shall eat the flesh in that night, 
roast with fire, and unleavened bread; 
with bitter herbs they shall eat it. 9Eat 
not of it raw, nor sodden at all with 
water, but roast with fire; its head with 
its legs and with the inwards thereof. 
10And ye shall let nothing of it remain 
until the morning; but that which 
remaineth of it until the morning ye 
shall burn with fire. 11And thus shall 
ye eat it: with your loins girded, your 
shoes on your feet, and your staff in 
your hand; and ye shall eat it in 
haste—it is the LORD’s passover. 12For 
I will go through the land of Egypt in 
that night, and will smite all the first-
born in the land of Egypt, both man 
and beast; and against all the gods of 
Egypt I will execute judgments: I am 
the LORD. 13And the blood shall be to 
you for a token upon the houses where 
ye are; and when I see the blood, I will 
pass over you, and there shall no 
plague be upon you to destroy you, 
when I smite the land of Egypt. 14And 
this day shall be unto you for a 
memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast 
to the LORD; throughout your 
generations ye shall keep it a feast by 
an ordinance for ever. 15Seven days 
shall ye eat unleavened bread; howbeit 
the first day ye shall put away leaven 
out of your houses; for whosoever 
eateth leavened bread from the first 
day until the seventh day, that soul 
shall be cut off from Israel. 16And in 
the first day there shall be to you a 
holy convocation, and in the seventh 
day a holy convocation; no manner of 
work shall be done in them, save that 
which every man must eat, that only 
may be done by you. 17And ye shall 
observe the feast of unleavened bread; 
for in this selfsame day have I brought 
your hosts out of the land of Egypt; 
therefore shall ye observe this day 
throughout your generations by an 
12 




ordinance for ever. 18In the first month, 
on the fourteenth day of the month at 
even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, 
until the one and twentieth day of the 
month at even. 19Seven days shall 
there be no leaven found in your 
houses; for whosoever eateth that 
which is leavened, that soul shall be 
cut off from the congregation of Israel, 
whether he be a sojourner, or one that 
is born in the land. 20Ye shall eat 
nothing leavened; in all your 
habitations shall ye eat unleavened 
bread.’ 

21Then Moses called for all the 
elders of Israel, and said unto them: 
‘Draw out, and take you lambs 
according to your families, and kill the 
passover lamb. 22And ye shall take a 
bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the 
blood that is in the basin, and strike the 
lintel and the two side-posts with the 
blood that is in the basin; and none of 
you shall go out of the door of his 
house until the morning. 23For the 
LORD will pass through to smite the 
Egyptians; and when He seeth the 
blood upon the lintel, and on the two 
side-posts, the LORD will pass over the 
door, and will not suffer the destroyer 
to come in unto your houses to smite 
you. 24And ye shall observe this thing 
for an ordinance to thee and to thy 
sons for ever. 25And it shall come to 
pass, when ye be come to the land 
which the LORD will give you, 
according as He hath promised, that ye 
shall keep this service. 26And it shall 
come to pass, when your children shall 
say unto you: What mean ye by this 
service? 27that ye shall say: It is the 
sacrifice of the LORD’s passover, for 
that He passed over the houses of the 
children of Israel in Egypt, when He 
smote the Egyptians, and delivered our 
houses.’ And the people bowed the 
head and worshipped. 28And the 
children of Israel went and did so; as 
the LORD had commanded Moses and 
Aaron, so did they. 

29And it came to pass at midnight, 
that the LORD smote all the firstborn in 
the land of Egypt, from the first-born 
of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto 
the first-born of the captive that was in 
the dungeon; and all the first-born of 
cattle. 30And Pharaoh rose up in the 
night, he, and all his servants, and all 
the Egyptians; and there was a great 
cry in Egypt; for there was not a house 
where there was not one dead. 31And 
he called for Moses and Aaron by 
night and said: ‘Rise up, get you forth 
from among my people, both ye and 
the children of Israel; and go, serve the 
LORD, as ye have said. 32Take both 
your flocks and your herds, as ye have 
said, and be gone; and bless me also.’ 
33And the Egyptians were urgent upon 
the people, to send them out of the 
land in haste; for they said: ‘We are all 
dead men.’ 34And the people took their 
dough before it was leavened, their 
kneading-troughs being bound up in 
their clothes upon their shoulders. 
35And the children of Israel did 
according to the word of Moses; and 
they asked of the Egyptians jewels of 


silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment. 
36And the LORD gave the people favour 
in the sight of the Egyptians, so that 
they let them have what they asked. 
And they despoiled the Egyptians. 

 

37And the children of Israel 
journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, 
about six hundred thousand men on 
foot, beside children. 38And a mixed 
multitude went up also with them; and 
flocks, and herds, even very much 
cattle. 39And they baked unleavened 
cakes of the dough which they brought 
forth out of Egypt, for it was not 
leavened; because they were thrust out 
of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither 
had they prepared for themselves any 
victual. 40Now the time that the 
children of Israel dwelt in Egypt was 
four hundred and thirty years. 41And it 
came to pass at the end of four 
hundred and thirty years, even the 
selfsame day it came to pass, that all 
the host of the LORD went out from the 
land of Egypt. 42It was a night of 
watching unto the LORD for bringing 
them out from the land of Egypt; this 
same night is a night of watching unto 
the LORD for all the children of Israel 
throughout their generations. 

43And the LORD said unto Moses and 
Aaron: ‘This is the ordinance of the 
passover: there shall no alien eat 
thereof; 44but every man’s servant that 
is bought for money, when thou hast 
circumcised him, then shall he eat 
thereof. 45A sojourner and a hired 
servant shall not eat thereof. 46In one 
house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not 
carry forth aught of the flesh abroad 
out of the house; neither shall ye break 
a bone thereof. 47All the congregation 
of Israel shall keep it. 48And when a 
stranger shall sojourn with thee, and 
will keep the passover to the LORD, let 
all his males be circumcised, and then 
let him come near and keep it; and he 
shall be as one that is born in the land; 
but no uncircumcised person shall eat 
thereof. 49One law shall be to him that 
is homeborn, and unto the stranger that 
sojourneth among you.’ 50Thus did all 
the children of Israel; as the LORD 
commanded Moses and Aaron, so did 
they. 

51And it came to pass the selfsame 
day that the LORD did bring the 
children of Israel out of the land of 
Egypt by their hosts. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Sanctify unto 
Me all the first-born, whatsoever 
openeth the womb among the children 
of Israel, both of man and of beast, it is 
Mine.’ 

3And Moses said unto the people: 
‘Remember this day, in which ye came 
out from Egypt, out of the house of 
bondage; for by strength of hand the 
LORD brought you out from this place; 
there shall no leavened bread be eaten. 
4This day ye go forth in the month 
Abib. 5And it shall be when the LORD 
shall bring thee into the land of the 
Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the 
Amorite, and the Hivite, and the 
Jebusite, which He swore unto thy 
13 




fathers to give thee, a land flowing 
with milk and honey, that thou shalt 
keep this service in this month. 6Seven 
days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, 
and in the seventh day shall be a feast 
to the LORD. 7Unleavened bread shall 
be eaten throughout the seven days; 
and there shall no leavened bread be 
seen with thee, neither shall there be 
leaven seen with thee, in all thy 
borders. 8And thou shalt tell thy son in 
that day, saying: It is because of that 
which the LORD did for me when I 
came forth out of Egypt. 9And it shall 
be for a sign unto thee upon thy hand, 
and for a memorial between thine 
eyes, that the law of the LORD may be 
in thy mouth; for with a strong hand 
hath the LORD brought thee out of 
Egypt. 10Thou shalt therefore keep this 
ordinance in its season from year to 
year. 

11And it shall be when the LORD 
shall bring thee into the land of the 
Canaanite, as He swore unto thee and 
to thy fathers, and shall give it thee, 
12that thou shalt set apart unto the LORD 
all that openeth the womb; every 
firstling that is a male, which thou hast 
coming of a beast, shall be the LORD’s. 
13And every firstling of an ass thou 
shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou 
wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt 
break its neck; and all the first-born of 
man among thy sons shalt thou 
redeem. 14And it shall be when thy son 
asketh thee in time to come, saying: 
What is this? that thou shalt say unto 
him: By strength of hand the LORD 
brought us out from Egypt, from the 
house of bondage; 15and it came to 
pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let 
us go that the LORD slew all the 
firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the 
first-born of man, and the first-born of 
beast; therefore I sacrifice to the LORD 
all that openeth the womb, being 
males; but all the first-born of my sons 
I redeem. 16And it shall be for a sign 
upon thy hand, and for frontlets 
between thine eyes; for by strength of 
hand the LORD brought us forth out of 
Egypt.’ 

.... 

17And it came to pass, when Pharaoh 
had let the people go, that God led 
them not by the way of the land of the 
Philistines, although that was near; for 
God said: ‘Lest peradventure the 
people repent when they see war, and 
they return to Egypt.’ 18But God led 
the people about, by the way of the 
wilderness by the Red Sea; and the 
children of Israel went up armed out of 
the land of Egypt. 19And Moses took 
the bones of Joseph with him; for he 
had straitly sworn the children of 
Israel, saying: ‘God will surely 
remember you; and ye shall carry up 
my bones away hence with you.’ 
20And they took their journey from 
Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in 
the edge of the wilderness. 21And the 
LORD went before them by day in a 
pillar of cloud, to lead them the way; 
and by night in a pillar of fire, to give 
them light; that they might go by day 
and by night: 22the pillar of cloud by 


day, and the pillar of fire by night, 
departed not from before the people. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Speak unto 
the children of Israel, that they turn 
back and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, 
between Migdol and the sea, before 
Baal-zephon, over against it shall ye 
encamp by the sea. 3And Pharaoh will 
say of the children of Israel: They are 
entangled in the land, the wilderness 
hath shut them in. 4And I will harden 
Pharaoh’s heart, and he shall follow 
after them; and I will get Me honour 
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; 
and the Egyptians shall know that I am 
the LORD.’ And they did so. 5And it 
was told the king of Egypt that the 
people were fled; and the heart of 
Pharaoh and of his servants was turned 
towards the people, and they said: 
‘What is this we have done, that we 
have let Israel go from serving us? 
6And he made ready his chariots, and 
took his people with him. 7And he took 
six hundred chosen chariots, and all 
the chariots of Egypt, and captains 
over all of them. 8And the LORD 
hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, and he pursued after the 
children of Israel; for the children of 
Israel went out with a high hand. 9And 
the Egyptians pursued after them, all 
the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and 
his horsemen, and his army, and 
overtook them encamping by the sea, 
beside Pi-hahiroth, in front of Baal-
zephon. 10And when Pharaoh drew 
nigh, the children of Israel lifted up 
their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians 
were marching after them; and they 
were sore afraid; and the children of 
Israel cried out unto the LORD. 11And 
they said unto Moses: ‘Because there 
were no graves in Egypt, hast thou 
taken us away to die in the wilderness? 
wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, 
to bring us forth out of Egypt? 12Is not 
this the word that we spoke unto thee 
in Egypt, saying: Let us alone, that we 
may serve the Egyptians? For it were 
better for us to serve the Egyptians, 
than that we should die in the 
wilderness.’ 13And Moses said unto the 
people: ‘Fear ye not, stand still, and 
see the salvation of the LORD, which 
He will work for you to-day; for 
whereas ye have seen the Egyptians 
to-day, ye shall see them again no 
more for ever. 14The LORD will fight 
for you, and ye shall hold your peace.’ 

15And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Wherefore criest thou unto Me? speak 
unto the children of Israel, that they go 
forward. 16And lift thou up thy rod, 
and stretch out thy hand over the sea, 
and divide it; and the children of Israel 
shall go into the midst of the sea on 
dry ground. 17And I, behold, I will 
harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and 
they shall go in after them; and I will 
get Me honour upon Pharaoh, and 
upon all his host, upon his chariots, 
and upon his horsemen. 18And the 
Egyptians shall know that I am the 
LORD, when I have gotten Me honour 
upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and 
upon his horsemen.’ 19And the angel 
14 




of God, who went before the camp of 
Israel, removed and went behind them; 
and the pillar of cloud removed from 
before them, and stood behind them; 
20and it came between the camp of 
Egypt and the camp of Israel; and 
there was the cloud and the darkness 
here, yet gave it light by night there; 
and the one came not near the other all 
the night. 21And Moses stretched out 
his hand over the sea; and the LORD 
caused the sea to go back by a strong 
east wind all the night, and made the 
sea dry land, and the waters were 
divided. 22And the children of Israel 
went into the midst of the sea upon the 
dry ground; and the waters were a wall 
unto them on their right hand, and on 
their left. 23And the Egyptians pursued, 
and went in after them into the midst 
of the sea, all Pharaoh’s horses, his 
chariots, and his horsemen. 24And it 
came to pass in the morning watch, 
that the LORD looked forth upon the 
host of the Egyptians through the pillar 
of fire and of cloud, and discomfited 
the host of the Egyptians. 25And He 
took off their chariot wheels, and made 
them to drive heavily; so that the 
Egyptians said: ‘Let us flee from the 
face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for 
them against the Egyptians.’ 

26And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Stretch out thy hand over the sea, that 
the waters may come back upon the 
Egyptians, upon their chariots, and 
upon their horsemen.’ 27And Moses 
stretched forth his hand over the sea, 
and the sea returned to its strength 
when the morning appeared; and the 
Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD 
overthrew the Egyptians in the midst 
of the sea. 28And the waters returned, 
and covered the chariots, and the 
horsemen, even all the host of Pharaoh 
that went in after them into the sea; 
there remained not so much as one of 
them. 29But the children of Israel 
walked upon dry land in the midst of 
the sea; and the waters were a wall 
unto them on their right hand, and on 
their left. 30Thus the LORD saved Israel 
that day out of the hand of the 
Egyptians; and Israel saw the 
Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore. 
31And Israel saw the great work which 
the LORD did upon the Egyptians, and 
the people feared the LORD; and they 
believed in the LORD, and in His 
servant Moses. 

 

Then sang Moses and the 
children of Israel this song 
unto the LORD, and spoke, saying: 

I will sing unto the LORD, for He is 
highly exalted; 

The horse and his rider hath He 
thrown into the sea. 

2The LORD is my strength and song, 

And He is become my salvation; 

This is my God, and I will glorify 
Him; 

My father’s God, and I will exalt 
Him. 

3The LORD is a man of war, 

The LORD is His name. 

4Pharaoh’s chariots and his host 
hath He cast into the sea, 
15 




And his chosen captains are sunk in 
the Red Sea. 

5The deeps cover them— 

They went down into the depths like 
a stone. 

6Thy right hand, O LORD, glorious in 
power, 

Thy right hand, O LORD, dasheth in 
pieces the enemy. 

7And in the greatness of Thine 
excellency Thou overthrowest 
them that rise up against Thee; 

Thou sendest forth Thy wrath, it 
consumeth them as stubble. 

8And with the blast of Thy nostrils 
the waters were piled up— 

The floods stood upright as a heap; 

The deeps were congealed in the 
heart of the sea. 

9The enemy said: 

‘I will pursue, I will overtake, I will 
divide the spoil; 

My lust shall be satisfied upon 
them; 

I will draw my sword, my hand shall 
destroy them.’ 

10Thou didst blow with Thy wind, 
the sea covered them; 

They sank as lead in the mighty 
waters. 

11Who is like unto Thee, O LORD, 
among the mighty? 

Who is like unto Thee, glorious in 
holiness, 

Fearful in praises, doing wonders? 

12Thou stretchedst out Thy right 
hand— 

The earth swallowed them. 

13Thou in Thy love hast led the 
people that Thou hast redeemed; 

Thou hast guided them in Thy 
strength to Thy holy habitation. 

14The peoples have heard, they 
tremble; 

Pangs have taken hold on the 
inhabitants of Philistia. 

15Then were the chiefs of Edom 
affrighted; 

The mighty men of Moab, trembling 
taketh hold upon them; 

All the inhabitants of Canaan are 
melted away. 

16Terror and dread falleth upon 
them; 

By the greatness of Thine arm they 
are as still as a stone; 

Till Thy people pass over, O LORD, 

Till the people pass over that Thou 
hast gotten. 

17Thou bringest them in, and 
plantest them in the mountain of 
Thine inheritance, 

The place, O LORD, which Thou hast 
made for Thee to dwell in, 

The sanctuary, O Lord, which Thy 
hands have established. 

18The LORD shall reign for ever and 
ever. 

19For the horses of Pharaoh went in 
with his chariots and with his 
horsemen into the sea, and the LORD 
brought back the waters of the sea 
upon them; but the children of Israel 
walked on dry land in the midst of the 
sea. 

20And Miriam the prophetess, the 
sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her 


hand; and all the women went out after 
her with timbrels and with dances. 
21And Miriam sang unto them: 

Sing ye to the LORD, for He is highly 
exalted: 

The horse and his rider hath He 
thrown into the sea. 

 

22And Moses led Israel onward from 
the Red Sea, and they went out into the 
wilderness of Shur; and they went 
three days in the wilderness, and found 
no water. 23And when they came to 
Marah, they could not drink of the 
waters of Marah, for they were bitter. 
Therefore the name of it was called 
aMarah. 24And the people murmured 
against Moses, saying: ‘What shall we 
drink?’ 25And he cried unto the LORD; 
and the LORD showed him a tree, and 
he cast it into the waters, and the 
waters were made sweet. There He 
made for them a statute and an 
ordinance, and there He proved them; 
26and He said: ‘If thou wilt diligently 
hearken to the voice of the LORD thy 
God, and wilt do that which is right in 
His eyes, and wilt give ear to His 
commandments, and keep all His 
statutes, I will put none of the diseases 
upon thee, which I have put upon the 
Egyptians; for I am the LORD that 
healeth thee.’ 

a That is, Bitterness. 

27And they came to Elim, where 
were twelve springs of water, and 
three score and ten palm-trees; and 
they encamped there by the waters. 

And they took their journey 
from Elim, and all the 
congregation of the children of Israel 
came unto the wilderness of Sin, 
which is between Elim and Sinai, on 
the fifteenth day of the second month 
after their departing out of the land of 
Egypt. 2And the whole congregation of 
the children of Israel murmured 
against Moses and against Aaron in 
the wilderness; 3and the children of 
Israel said unto them: ‘Would that we 
had died by the hand of the LORD in the 
land of Egypt, when we sat by the 
flesh-pots, when we did eat bread to 
the full; for ye have brought us forth 
into this wilderness, to kill this whole 
assembly with hunger.’ 

4Then said the LORD unto Moses: 
‘Behold, I will cause to rain bread 
from heaven for you; and the people 
shall go out and gather a day’s portion 
every day, that I may prove them, 
whether they will walk in My law, or 
not. 5And it shall come to pass on the 
sixth day that they shall prepare that 
which they bring in, and it shall be 
twice as much as they gather daily.’ 
6And Moses and Aaron said unto all 
the children of Israel: ‘At even, then 
ye shall know that the LORD hath 
brought you out from the land of 
Egypt; 7and in the morning, then ye 
shall see the glory of the LORD; for that 
He hath heard your murmurings 
against the LORD; and what are we, that 
ye murmur against us?’ 8And Moses 
said: ‘This shall be, when the LORD 
shall give you in the evening flesh to 
16 




eat, and in the morning bread to the 
full; for that the LORD heareth your 
murmurings which ye murmur against 
Him; and what are we? your 
murmurings are not against us, but 
against the LORD.’ 9And Moses said 
unto Aaron: ‘Say unto all the 
congregation of the children of Israel: 
Come near before the LORD; for He 
hath heard your murmurings.’ 10And it 
came to pass, as Aaron spoke unto the 
whole congregation of the children of 
Israel, that they looked toward the 
wilderness, and, behold, the glory of 
the LORD appeared in the cloud. 11And 
the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying: 
12’I have heard the murmurings of the 
children of Israel. Speak unto them, 
saying: At dusk ye shall eat flesh, and 
in the morning ye shall be filled with 
bread; and ye shall know that I am the 
LORD your God.’ 13And it came to pass 
at even, that the quails came up, and 
covered the camp; and in the morning 
there was a layer of dew round about 
the camp. 14And when the layer of dew 
was gone up, behold upon the face of 
the wilderness a fine, scale-like thing, 
fine as the hoar-frost on the ground. 
15And when the children of Israel saw 
it, they said one to another: a‘What is 
it?’—for they knew not what it was. 
And Moses said unto them: ‘It is the 
bread which the LORD hath given you 
to eat. 16This is the thing which the 
LORD hath commanded: Gather ye of it 
every man according to his eating; an 

a Heb. Man hu. 

omer a head, according to the number 
of your persons, shall ye take it, every 
man for them that are in his tent.’ 
17And the children of Israel did so, and 
gathered some more, some less. 18And 
when they did mete it with an omer, he 
that gathered much had nothing over, 
and he that gathered little had no lack; 
they gathered every man according to 
his eating. 19And Moses said unto 
them: ‘Let no man leave of it till the 
morning.’ 20Notwithstanding they 
hearkened not unto Moses; but some 
of them left of it until the morning, and 
it bred worms, and rotted; and Moses 
was wroth with them. 21And they 
gathered it morning by morning, every 
man according to his eating; and as the 
sun waxed hot, it melted. 22And it 
came to pass that on the sixth day they 
gathered twice as much bread, two 
omers for each one; and all the rulers 
of the congregation came and told 
Moses. 23And he said unto them: ‘This 
is that which the LORD hath spoken: 
To-morrow is a solemn rest, a holy 
sabbath unto the LORD. Bake that 
which ye will bake, and seethe that 
which ye will seethe; and all that 
remaineth over lay up for you to be 
kept until the morning.’ 24And they 
laid it up till the morning, as Moses 
bade; and it did not rot, neither was 
there any worm therein. 25And Moses 
said: ‘Eat that to-day; for to-day is a 
sabbath unto the LORD; to-day ye shall 
not find it in the field. 26Six days ye 
shall gather it; but on the seventh day 
is the sabbath, in it there shall be 


none.’ 27And it came to pass on the 
seventh day, that there went out some 
of the people to gather, and they found 
none. 28And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘How long refuse ye to keep My 
commandments and My laws? 29See 
that the LORD hath given you the 
sabbath; therefore He giveth you on 
the sixth day the bread of two days; 
abide ye every man in his place, let no 
man go out of his place on the seventh 
clay.’ 30So the people rested on the 
seventh day. 31And the house of Israel 
called the name thereof aManna; and it 
was like coriander seed, white; and the 
taste of it was like wafers made with 
honey. 32And Moses said: ‘This is the 
thing which the LORD hath 
commanded: Let an omerful of it be 
kept throughout your generations; that 
they may see the bread wherewith I 
fed you in the wilderness, when I 
brought you forth from the land of 
Egypt.’ 33And Moses said unto Aaron: 
‘Take a jar, and put an omerful of 
manna therein, and lay it up before the 
LORD, to be kept throughout your 
generations.’ 34As the LORD 
commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up 
before the Testimony, to be kept. 
35And the children of Israel did eat the 
manna forty years, until they came to a 
land inhabited; they did eat the manna, 
until they came unto the borders of the 
land of Canaan. 36Now an omer is the 
tenth part of an ephah. 

a Heb. Man. 

17 



And all the congregation of 
the children of Israel 
journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, 
by their stages, according to the 
commandment of the LORD, and 
encamped in Rephidim; and there was 
no water for the people to drink. 
2Wherefore the people strove with 
Moses, and said: ‘Give us water that 
we may drink.’ And Moses said unto 
them: ‘Why strive ye with me? 
wherefore do ye try the LORD?’ 3And 
the people thirsted there for water; and 
the people murmured against Moses, 
and said: ‘Wherefore hast thou brought 
us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our 
children and our cattle with thirst?’ 
4And Moses cried unto the LORD, 
saying: ‘What shall I do unto this 
people? they are almost ready to stone 
me.’ 5And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Pass on before the people, and take 
with thee of the elders of Israel; and 
thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the 
river, take in thy hand, and go. 
6Behold, I will stand before thee there 
upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt 
smite the rock, and there shall come 
water out of it, that the people may 
drink.’ And Moses did so in the sight 
of the elders of Israel. 7And the name 
of the place was called bMassah, and 
cMeribah, because of the striving of 
the children of Israel, and because they 
tried the LORD, saying: ‘Is the LORD 
among us, or not?’ 

b That is, Trying. 

c That is Strife. 


8Then came Amalek, and fought 
with Israel in Rephidim. 9And Moses 
said unto Joshua: ‘Choose us out men, 
and go out, fight with Amalek; 
tomorrow I will stand on the top of the 
hill with the rod of God in my hand.’ 
10So Joshua did as Moses had said to 
him, and fought with Amalek; and 
Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the 
top of the hill. 11And it came to pass, 
when Moses held up his hand, that 
Israel prevailed; and when he let down 
his hand, Amalek prevailed. 12But 
Moses’hands were heavy; and they 
took a stone, and put it under him, and 
he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur 
stayed up his hands, the one on the one 
side, and the other on the other side; 
and his hands were steady until the 
going down of the sun. 13And Joshua 
discomfited Amalek and his people 
with the edge of the sword. 

14And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Write this for a memorial in the book, 
and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: 
for I will utterly blot out the 
remembrance of Amalek from under 
heaven.’ 15And Moses built an altar, 
and called the name of it aAdonai-
nissi. 16And he said: ‘The hand upon 
the throne of the LORD: the LORD will 
have war with Amalek from 
generation to generation.’ 

a That is, The Lord is my banner. 

 

.... 

18 



1Now Jethro, the priest of 
Midian, Moses’father-in-law, 

heard of all that God had done for 
Moses, and for Israel His people, how 
that the LORD had brought Israel out of 
Egypt. 2And Jethro, Moses’father-in-
law, took Zipporah, Moses’wife, after 
he had sent her away, 3and her two 
sons; of whom the name of the one 
was Gershom; for he said: ‘I have been 
a stranger in a strange land’; 4and the 
name of the other was bEliezer: ‘for 
the God of my father was my help, and 
delivered me from the sword of 
Pharaoh.’ 5And Jethro, Moses’father-
in-law, came with his sons and his 
wife unto Moses into the wilderness 
where he was encamped, at the mount 
of God; 6and he said unto Moses: ‘I 
thy father-in-law Jethro am coming 
unto thee, and thy wife, and her two 
sons with her.’ 7And Moses went out 
to meet his father-in-law, and bowed 
down and kissed him; and they asked 
each other of their welfare; and they 
came into the tent. 8And Moses told 
his father-in-law all that the LORD had 
done unto Pharaoh and to the 
Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the 
travail that had come upon them by the 
way, and how the LORD delivered 
them. 9And Jethro rejoiced for all the 
goodness which the LORD had done to 
Israel, in that He had delivered them 
out of the hand of the Egyptians. 10And 
Jethro said: ‘Blessed be the LORD, who 
hath delivered you out of the hand of 
the Egyptians, and out of the hand of 
Pharaoh; who hath delivered the 

b Heb. El, God, and ezer, help. 


people from under the hand of the 
Egyptians. 11Now I know that the LORD 
is greater than all gods; yea, for that 
they dealt proudly against them.’ 
12And Jethro, Moses’father-in-law, 
took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for 
God; and Aaron came, and all the 
elders of Israel, to eat bread with 
Moses’father-in-law before God. 
13And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that Moses sat to judge the people; and 
the people stood about Moses from the 
morning unto the evening. 14And when 
Moses’father-in-law saw all that he did 
to the people, he said: ‘What is this 
thing that thou doest to the people? 
why sittest thou thyself alone, and all 
the people stand about thee from 
morning unto even?’ 15And Moses said 
unto his father-in-law: ‘Because the 
people come unto me to inquire of 
God; 16when they have a matter, it 
cometh unto me; and I judge between 
a man and his neighbour, and I make 
them know the statutes of God, and 
His laws.’ 17And Moses’father-in-law 
said unto him: ‘The thing that thou 
doest is not good. 18Thou wilt surely 
wear away, both thou, and this people 
that is with thee; for the thing is too 
heavy for thee; thou art not able to 
perform it thyself alone. 19Hearken 
now unto my voice, I will give thee 
counsel, and God be with thee: be thou 
for the people before God, and bring 
thou the causes unto God. 20And thou 
shalt teach them the statutes and the 
laws, and shalt show them the way 
wherein they must walk, and the work 
that they must do. 21Moreover thou 
shalt provide out of all the people able 
men, such as fear God, men of truth, 
hating unjust gain; and place such over 
them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers 
of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers 
of tens. 22And let them judge the 
people at all seasons; and it shall be, 
that every great matter they shall bring 
unto thee, but every small matter they 
shall judge themselves; so shall they 
make it easier for thee and bear the 
burden with thee. 23If thou shalt do this 
thing, and God command thee so, then 
thou shalt be able to endure, and all 
this people also shall go to their place 
in peace.’ 24So Moses hearkened to the 
voice of his father-in-law, and did all 
that he had said. 25And Moses chose 
able men out of all Israel, and made 
them heads over the people, rulers of 
thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of 
fifties, and rulers of tens. 26And they 
judged the people at all seasons: the 
hard causes they brought unto Moses, 
but every small matter they judged 
themselves. 27And Moses let his 
father-in-law depart; and he went his 
way into his own land. 

In the third month after the 
children of Israel were gone 
forth out of the land of Egypt, the 
same day came they into the 
wilderness of Sinai. 2And when they 
were departed from Rephidim, and 
were come to the wilderness of Sinai, 
they encamped in the wilderness; and 
there Israel encamped before the 
mount. 3And Moses went up unto God, 
19 




and the LORD called unto him out of 
the mountain, saying: ‘Thus shalt thou 
say to the house of Jacob, and tell the 
children of Israel: 4Ye have seen what 
I did unto the Egyptians, and how I 
bore you on eagles’wings, and brought 
you unto Myself. 5Now therefore, if ye 
will hearken unto My voice indeed, 
and keep My covenant, then ye shall 
be Mine own treasure from among all 
peoples; for all the earth is Mine; 6and 
ye shall be unto Me a kingdom of 
priests, and a holy nation. These are 
the words which thou shalt speak unto 
the children of Israel.’ 7And Moses 
came and called for the elders of the 
people, and set before them all these 
words which the LORD commanded 
him. 8And all the people answered 
together, and said: ‘All that the LORD 
hath spoken we will do.’ And Moses 
reported the words of the people unto 
the LORD. 9And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Lo, I come unto thee in a 
thick cloud, that the people may hear 
when I speak with thee, and may also 
believe thee for ever.’ And Moses told 
the words of the people unto the LORD. 
10And the LORD said unto Moses: ‘Go 
unto the people, and sanctify them to-
day and to-morrow, and let them wash 
their garments, 11and be ready against 
the third day; for the third day the 
LORD will come down in the sight of 
all the people upon mount Sinai. 12And 
thou shalt set bounds unto the people 
round about, saying: Take heed to 
yourselves, that ye go not up into the 
mount, or touch the border of it; 
whosoever toucheth the mount shall be 
surely put to death; 13no hand shall 
touch him, but he shall surely be 
stoned, or shot through; whether it be 
beast or man, it shall not live; when 
the ram’s horn soundeth long, they 
shall come up to the mount.’ 14And 
Moses went down from the mount 
unto the people, and sanctified the 
people; and they washed their 
garments. 15And he said unto the 
people: ‘Be ready against the third 
day; come not near a woman.’ 16And it 
came to pass on the third day, when it 
was morning, that there were thunders 
and lightnings and a thick cloud upon 
the mount, and the voice of a horn 
exceeding loud; and all the people that 
were in the camp trembled. 17And 
Moses brought forth the people out of 
the camp to meet God; and they stood 
at the nether part of the mount. 18Now 
mount Sinai was altogether on smoke, 
because the LORD descended upon it in 
fire; and the smoke thereof ascended 
as the smoke of a furnace, and the 
whole mount quaked greatly. 19And 
when the voice of the horn waxed 
louder and louder, Moses spoke, and 
God answered him by a voice. 20And 
the LORD came down upon mount 
Sinai, to the top of the mount; and the 
LORD called Moses to the top of the 
mount; and Moses went up. 21And the 
LORD said unto Moses: ‘Go down, 
charge the people, lest they break 
through unto the LORD to gaze, and 
many of them perish. 22And let the 
priests also, that come near to the 


LORD, sanctify themselves, lest the 
LORD break forth upon them.’ 23And 
Moses said unto the LORD: ‘The people 
cannot come up to mount Sinai; for 
thou didst charge us, saying: Set 
bounds about the mount, and sanctify 
it.’ 24And the LORD said unto him: ‘Go, 
get thee down, and thou shalt come up, 
thou, and Aaron with thee; but let not 
the priests and the people break 
through to come up unto the LORD, lest 
He break forth upon them.’ 25So 
Moses went down unto the people, and 
told them. 

And God spoke all these 
words, saying: 

2I am the LORD thy God, who 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, 
out of the house of bondage. 

3Thou shalt have no other gods 
before Me. 4Thou shalt not make unto 
thee a graven image, nor any manner 
of likeness, of any thing that is in 
heaven above, or that is in the earth 
beneath, or that is in the water under 
the earth; 5thou shalt not bow down 
unto them, nor serve them; for I the 
LORD thy God am a jealous God, 
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon 
the children unto the third and fourth 
generation of them that hate Me; 6and 
showing mercy unto the thousandth 
generation of them that love Me and 
keep My commandments. 

7Thou shalt not take the name of the 
LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD 
will not hold him guiltless that taketh 
His name in vain. 

8Remember the sabbath day, to keep 
it holy. 9Six days shalt thou labour, 
and do all thy work; 10but the seventh 
day is a sabbath unto the LORD thy 
God, in it thou shalt not do any manner 
of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy 
daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy 
maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy 
stranger that is within thy gates; 11for 
in six days the LORD made heaven and 
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, 
and rested on the seventh day; 
wherefore the LORD blessed the 
sabbath day, and hallowed it. 

12Honour thy father and thy mother, 
that thy days may be long upon the 
land which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee. 

13Thou shalt not murder. 

Thou shalt not commit adultery. 

Thou shalt not steal. 

Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbour. 

14Thou shalt not covet thy 
neighbour’s house; thou shalt not 
covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his 
man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor 
his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is 
thy neighbour’s. 

 

15And all the people perceived the 
thunderings, and the lightnings, and 
the voice of the horn, and the 
mountain smoking; and when the 
people saw it, they trembled, and stood 
afar off. 16And they said unto Moses: 
‘Speak thou with us, and we will hear; 
but let not God speak with us, lest we 
die.’ 17And Moses said unto the 
20 




people: ‘Fear not; for God is come to 
prove you, and that His fear may be 
before you, that ye sin not.’ 18And the 
people stood afar off; but Moses drew 
near unto the thick darkness where 
God was. 

19And the LORD said unto Moses: 
Thus thou shalt say unto the children 
of Israel: Ye yourselves have seen that 
I have talked with you from heaven. 
20Ye shall not make with Me—gods of 
silver, or gods of gold, ye shall not 
make unto you. 21An altar of earth thou 
shalt make unto Me, and shalt sacrifice 
thereon thy burnt-offerings, and thy 
peace-offerings, thy sheep, and thine 
oxen; in every place where I cause My 
name to be mentioned I will come unto 
thee and bless thee. 22And if thou make 
Me an altar of stone, thou shalt not 
build it of hewn stones; for if thou lift 
up thy tool upon it, thou hast profaned 
it. 23Neither shalt thou go up by steps 
unto Mine altar, that thy nakedness be 
not uncovered thereon. 

 

...... 

21 



Now these are the ordinances 
which thou shalt set before 
them. 

2If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six 
years he shall serve; and in the seventh 
he shall go out free for nothing. 3If he 
come in by himself, he shall go out by 
himself; if he be married, then his wife 
shall go out with him. 4If his master 
give him a wife, and she bear him sons 
or daughters; the wife and her children 
shall be her master’s, and he shall go 
out by himself. 5But if the servant shall 
plainly say: I love my master, my wife, 
and my children; I will not go out free; 
6then his master shall bring him unto 
aGod, and shall bring him to the door, 
or unto the door-post; and his master 
shall bore his ear through with an awl; 
and he shall serve him for ever. 

a That is, the judges. 

7And if a man sell his daughter to be 
a maid-servant, she shall not go out as 
the men-servants do. 8If she please not 
her master, who hath espoused her to 
himself, then shall he let her be 
redeemed; to sell her unto a foreign 
people he shall have no power, seeing 
he hath dealt deceitfully with her. 
9And if he espouse her unto his son, he 
shall deal with her after the manner of 
daughters. 10If he take him another 
wife, her food, her raiment, and her 
conjugal rights, shall he not diminish. 
11And if he do not these three unto her, 
then shall she go out for nothing, 
without money. 

12He that smiteth a man, so that he 
dieth, shall surely be put to death. 
13And if a man lie not in wait, but God 
cause it to come to hand; then I will 
appoint thee a place whither he may 
flee. 

14And if a man come 
presumptuously upon his neighbour, to 
slay him with guile; thou shalt take 
him from Mine altar, that he may die. 

15And he that smiteth his father, or 
his mother, shall be surely put to 
death. 


16And he that stealeth a man, and 
selleth him, or if he be found in his 
hand, he shall surely be put to death. 

17And he that curseth his father or 
his mother, shall surely be put to 
death. 

18And if men contend, and one smite 
the other with a stone, or with his fist, 
and he die not, but keep his bed; 19if he 
rise again, and walk abroad upon his 
staff, then shall he that smote him be 
quit; only he shall pay for the loss of 
his time, and shall cause him to be 
thoroughly healed. 

20And if a man smite his bondman, 
or his bondwoman, with a rod, and he 
die under his hand, he shall surely be 
punished. 21Notwithstanding if he 
continue a day or two, he shall not be 
punished; for he is his money. 

22And if men strive together, and 
hurt a woman with child, so that her 
fruit depart, and yet no harm follow, 
he shall be surely fined, according as 
the woman’s husband shall lay upon 
him; and he shall pay as the judges 
determine. 23But if any harm follow, 
then thou shalt give life for life, 24eye 
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, 
foot for foot, 25burning for burning, 
wound for wound, stripe for stripe. 

26And if a man smite the eye of his 
bondman, or the eye of his 
bondwoman, and destroy it, he shall 
let him go free for his eye’s sake. 
27And if he smite out his bondman’s 
tooth, or his bondwoman’s tooth, he 
shall let him go free for his tooth’s 
sake. 

28And if an ox gore a man or a 
woman, that they die, the ox shall be 
surely stoned, and its flesh shall not be 
eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be 
quit. 29But if the ox was wont to gore 
in time past, and warning hath been 
given to its owner, and he hath not 
kept it in, but it hath killed a man or a 
woman; the ox shall be stoned, and its 
owner also shall be put to death. 30If 
there be laid on him a ransom, then he 
shall give for the redemption of his life 
whatsoever is laid upon him. 
31Whether it have gored a son, or have 
gored a daughter, according to this 
judgment shall it be done unto him. 
32If the ox gore a bondman or a 
bondwoman, he shall give unto their 
master thirty shekels of silver, and the 
ox shall be stoned. 

33And if a man shall open a pit, or if 
a man shall dig a pit and not cover it, 
and an ox or an ass fall therein, 34the 
owner of the pit shall make it good; he 
shall give money unto the owner of 
them, and the dead beast shall be his. 

35And if one man’s ox hurt 
another’s, so that it dieth; then they 
shall sell the live ox, and divide the 
price of it; and the dead also they shall 
divide. 36Or if it be known that the ox 
was wont to gore in time past, and its 
owner hath not kept it in; he shall 
surely pay ox for ox, and the dead 
beast shall be his own. 

37If a man steal an ox, or a sheep, 
and kill it, or sell it, he shall pay five 
oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a 


sheep. 1If a thief be found 
breaking in, and be smitten so 
that he dieth, there shall be no 
bloodguiltiness for him. 2If the sun be 
risen upon him, there shall be 
bloodguiltiness for him—he shall 
make restitution; if he have nothing, 
then he shall be sold for his theft. 3If 
the theft be found in his hand alive, 
whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep, he 
shall pay double. 

4If a man cause a field or vineyard 
to be eaten, and shall let his beast 
loose, and it feed in another man’s 
field; of the best of his own field, and 
of the best of his own vineyard, shall 
he make restitution. 

5If fire break out, and catch in 
thorns, so that the shocks of corn, or 
the standing corn, or the field are 
consumed; he that kindled the fire 
shall surely make restitution. 

6If a man deliver unto his neighbour 
money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen 
out of the man’s house; if the thief be 
found, he shall pay double. 7If the thief 
be not found, then the master of the 
house shall come near unto aGod, to 
see whether he have not put his hand 
unto his neighbour’s goods. 8For every 
matter of trespass, whether it be for ox, 
for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for 
any manner of lost thing, whereof one 
saith: ‘This is it, ‘the cause of both 
parties shall come before God; he 
whom God shall condemn shall pay 
double unto his neighbour. 

a That is, the judges. 

9If a man deliver unto his neighbour 
an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any 
beast, to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or 
driven away, no man seeing it; 10the 
oath of the LORD shall be between 
them both, to see whether he have not 
put his hand unto his neighbour’s 
goods; and the owner thereof shall 
accept it, and he shall not make 
restitution. 11But if it be stolen from 
him, he shall make restitution unto the 
owner thereof. 12If it be torn in pieces, 
let him bring it for witness; he shall 
not make good that which was torn. 

13And if a man borrow aught of his 
neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the 
owner thereof not being with it, he 
shall surely make restitution. 14If the 
owner thereof be with it, he shall not 
make it good; if it be a hireling, he 
loseth his hire. 

15And if a man entice a virgin that is 
not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall 
surely pay a dowry for her to be his 
wife. 16If her father utterly refuse to 
give her unto him, he shall pay money 
according to the dowry of virgins. 

17Thou shalt not suffer a sorceress to 
live. 

18Whosoever lieth with a beast shall 
surely be put to death. 

19He that sacrificeth unto the gods, 
save unto the LORD only, shall be 
utterly destroyed. 

20And a stranger shalt thou not 
wrong, neither shalt thou oppress him; 
for ye were strangers in the land of 
Egypt. 21Ye shall not afflict any 
widow, or fatherless child. 22 If thou 
22 




afflict them in any wise—for if they 
cry at all unto Me, I will surely hear 
their cry— 23My wrath shall wax hot, 
and I will kill you with the sword; and 
your wives shall be widows, and your 
children fatherless. 

24If thou lend money to any of My 
people, even to the poor with thee, 
thou shalt not be to him as a creditor; 
neither shall ye lay upon him interest. 
25If thou at all take thy neighbour’s 
garment to pledge, thou shalt restore it 
unto him by that the sun goeth down; 
26for that is his only covering, it is his 
garment for his skin; wherein shall he 
sleep? and it shall come to pass, when 
he crieth unto Me, that I will hear; for 
I am gracious. 

27Thou shalt not revile aGod, nor 
curse a ruler of thy people. 28Thou 
shalt not delay to offer of the fulness 
of thy harvest, and of the outflow of 
thy presses. The first-born of thy sons 
shalt thou give unto Me. 29Likewise 
shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with 
thy sheep; seven days it shall be with 
its dam; on the eighth day thou shalt 
give it Me. 30And ye shall be holy men 
unto Me; therefore ye shall not eat any 
flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; 
ye shall cast it to the dogs. 

a That is, the judges. 

Thou shalt not utter a false 
report; put not thy hand with 
the wicked to be an unrighteous 
witness. 2Thou shalt not follow a 
multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou 
bear witness in a cause to turn aside 

after a multitude to pervert justice; 
3neither shalt thou favour a poor man 
in his cause. 

4If thou meet thine enemy’s ox or 
his ass going astray, thou shalt surely 
bring it back to him again. 

5If thou see the ass of him that 
hateth thee lying under its burden, thou 
shalt forbear to pass by him; thou shalt 
surely release it with him. 

6Thou shalt not wrest the judgment 
of thy poor in his cause. 7Keep thee far 
from a false matter; and the innocent 
and righteous slay thou not; for I will 
not justify the wicked. 8And thou shalt 
take no gift; for a gift blindeth them 
that have sight, and perverteth the 
words of the righteous. 9And a stranger 
shalt thou not oppress; for ye know the 
heart of a stranger, seeing ye were 
strangers in the land of Egypt. 

10And six years thou shalt sow thy 
land, and gather in the increase 
thereof; 11but the seventh year thou 
shalt let it rest and lie fallow, that the 
poor of thy people may eat; and what 
they leave the beast of the field shall 
eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with 
thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard. 
12Six days thou shalt do thy work, but 
on the seventh day thou shalt rest; that 
thine ox and thine ass may have rest, 
and the son of thy handmaid, and the 
stranger, may be refreshed. 13And in 
all things that I have said unto you 
take ye heed; and make no mention of 
the name of other gods, neither let it be 
heard out of thy mouth. 
23 




14Three times thou shalt keep a feast 
unto Me in the year. 15The feast of 
unleavened bread shalt thou keep; 
seven days thou shalt eat unleavened 
bread, as I commanded thee, at the 
time appointed in the month Abib—for 
in it thou camest out from Egypt; and 
none shall appear before Me empty; 
16and the feast of harvest, the first-
fruits of thy labours, which thou 
sowest in the field; and the feast of 
ingathering, at the end of the year, 
when thou gatherest in thy labours out 
of the field. 17Three times in the year 
all thy males shall appear before the 
Lord GOD. 

18Thou shalt not offer the blood of 
My sacrifice with leavened bread; 
neither shall the fat of My feast remain 
all night until the morning. 19The 
choicest first-fruits of thy land thou 
shalt bring into the house of the LORD 
thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in 
its mother’s milk. 

20Behold, I send an angel before 
thee, to keep thee by the way, and to 
bring thee into the place which I have 
prepared. 21Take heed of him, and 
hearken unto his voice; be not 
rebellious against him; for he will not 
pardon your transgression; for My 
name is in him. 22But if thou shalt 
indeed hearken unto his voice, and do 
all that I speak; then I will be an 
enemy unto thine enemies, and an 
adversary unto thine adversaries. 23For 
Mine angel shall go before thee, and 
bring thee in unto the Amorite, and the 
Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the 
Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; 
and I will cut them off. 24Thou shalt 
not bow down to their gods, nor serve 
them, nor do after their doings; but 
thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and 
break in pieces their pillars. 25And ye 
shall serve the LORD your God, and He 
will bless thy bread, and thy water; 
and I will take sickness away from the 
midst of thee. 26None shall miscarry, 
nor be barren, in thy land; the number 
of thy days I will fulfil. 27I will send 
My terror before thee, and will 
discomfit all the people to whom thou 
shalt come, and I will make all thine 
enemies turn their backs unto thee. 
28And I will send the hornet before 
thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, 
the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from 
before thee. 29I will not drive them out 
from before thee in one year, lest the 
land become desolate, and the beasts 
of the field multiply against thee. 30By 
little and little I will drive them out 
from before thee, until thou be 
increased, and inherit the land. 31And I 
will set thy border from the Red Sea 
even unto the sea of the Philistines, 
and from the wilderness unto athe 
River; for I will deliver the inhabitants 
of the land into your hand; and thou 
shalt drive them out before thee. 
32Thou shalt make no covenant with 
them, nor with their gods. 33They shall 
not dwell in thy land—lest they make 
thee sin against Me, for thou wilt serve 

a That is, the Euphrates. 


their gods—for they will be a snare 
unto thee. 

 

And unto Moses He said: 
‘Come up unto the LORD, thou, 
and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and 
seventy of the elders of Israel; and 
worship ye afar off; 2and Moses alone 
shall come near unto the LORD; but 
they shall not come near; neither shall 
the people go up with him.’ 3And 
Moses came and told the people all the 
words of the LORD, and all the 
ordinances; and all the people 
answered with one voice, and said: 
‘All the words which the Lord hath 
spoken will we do.’ 4And Moses wrote 
all the words of the LORD, and rose up 
early in the morning, and builded an 
altar under the mount, and twelve 
pillars, according to the twelve tribes 
of Israel. 5And he sent the young men 
of the children of Israel, who offered 
burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace-
offerings of oxen unto the LORD. 6And 
Moses took half of the blood, and put 
it in basins; and half of the blood he 
dashed against the altar. 7And he took 
the book of the covenant, and read in 
the hearing of the people; and they 
said: ‘All that the LORD hath spoken 
will we do, and obey.’ 8And Moses 
took the blood, and sprinkled it on the 
people, and said: ‘Behold the blood of 
the covenant, which the LORD hath 
made with you in agreement with all 
these words.’ 9Then went up Moses, 
and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and 
seventy of the elders of Israel; 10and 
they saw the God of Israel; and there 
was under His feet the like of a paved 
work of sapphire stone, and the like of 
the very heaven for clearness. 11And 
upon the nobles of the children of 
Israel He laid not His hand; and they 
beheld God, and did eat and drink. 

12And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Come up to Me into the mount and be 
there; and I will give thee the tables of 
stone, and the law and the 
commandment, which I have written, 
that thou mayest teach them.’ 13And 
Moses rose up, and Joshua his 
minister; and Moses went up into the 
mount of God. 14And unto the elders 
he said: ‘Tarry ye here for us, until we 
come back unto you; and, behold, 
Aaron and Hur are with you; 
whosoever hath a cause, let him come 
near unto them.’ 15And Moses went up 
into the mount, and the cloud covered 
the mount. 16And the glory of the LORD 
abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud 
covered it six days; and the seventh 
day He called unto Moses out of the 
midst of the cloud. 17And the 
appearance of the glory of the LORD 
was like devouring fire on the top of 
the mount in the eyes of the children 
of Israel. 18And Moses entered into the 
midst of the cloud, and went up into 
the mount; and Moses was in the 
mount forty days and forty nights. 

 

..... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Speak unto 
the children of Israel, that they take for 
24 

25 




Me an offering; of every man whose 
heart maketh him willing ye shall take 
My offering. 3And this is the offering 
which ye shall take of them: gold, and 
silver, and brass; 4and blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and 
goats’hair; 5and rams’skins dyed red, 
and sealskins, and acacia-wood; 6oil 
for the light, spices for the anointing 
oil, and for the sweet incense; 7onyx 
stones, and stones to be set, for the 
ephod, and for the breastplate. 8And let 
them make Me a sanctuary, that I may 
dwell among them. 9According to all 
that I show thee, the pattern of the 
tabernacle, and the pattern of all the 
furniture thereof, even so shall ye 
make it. 

10And they shall make an ark of 
acacia-wood: two cubits and a half 
shall be the length thereof, and a cubit 
and a half the breadth thereof, and a 
cubit and a half the height thereof. 
11And thou shalt overlay it with pure 
gold, within and without shalt thou 
overlay it, and shalt make upon it a 
crown of gold round about. 12And thou 
shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and 
put them in the four feet thereof; and 
two rings shall be on the one side of it, 
and two rings on the other side of it. 
13And thou shalt make staves of 
acacia-wood, and overlay them with 
gold. 14And thou shalt put the staves 
into the rings on the sides of the ark, 
wherewith to bear the ark. 15The staves 
shall be in the rings of the ark; they 
shall not be taken from it. 16And thou 
shalt put into the ark the testimony 
which I shall give thee. 17And thou 
shalt make an ark-cover of pure gold: 
two cubits and a half shall be the 
length thereof, and a cubit and a half 
the breadth thereof. 18And thou shalt 
make two cherubim of gold; of beaten 
work shalt thou make them, at the two 
ends of the ark-cover. 19And make one 
cherub at the one end, and one cherub 
at the other end; of one piece with the 
ark-cover shall ye make the cherubim 
of the two ends thereof. 20And the 
cherubim shall spread out their wings 
on high, screening the ark-cover with 
their wings, with their faces one to 
another; toward the ark-cover shall the 
faces of the cherubim be. 21And thou 
shalt put the ark-cover above upon the 
ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the 
testimony that I shall give thee. 22And 
there I will meet with thee, and I will 
speak with thee from above the ark-
cover, from between the two cherubim 
which are upon the ark of the 
testimony, of all things which I will 
give thee in commandment unto the 
children of Israel. 

23And thou shalt make a table of 
acacia-wood: two cubits shall be the 
length thereof, and a cubit the breadth 
thereof, and a cubit and a half the 
height thereof. 24And thou shalt 
overlay it with pure gold, and make 
thereto a crown of gold round about. 
25And thou shalt make unto it a border 
of a handbreadth round about, and 
thou shalt make a golden crown to the 
border thereof round about. 26And thou 
shalt make for it four rings of gold, 


and put the rings in the four corners 
that are on the four feet thereof. 
27Close by the border shall the rings 
be, for places for the staves to bear the 
table. 28And thou shalt make the staves 
of acacia-wood, and overlay them with 
gold, that the table may be borne with 
them. 29And thou shalt make the dishes 
thereof, and the pans thereof, and the 
jars thereof, and the bowls thereof, 
wherewith to pour out; of pure gold 
shalt thou make them. 30And thou shalt 
set upon the table showbread before 
Me alway. 

31And thou shalt make a candlestick 
of pure gold: of beaten work shall the 
candlestick be made, even its base, and 
its shaft; its cups, its knops, and its 
flowers, shall be of one piece with it. 
32And there shall be six branches going 
out of the sides thereof: three branches 
of the candlestick out of the one side 
thereof, and three branches of the 
candle-stick out of the other side 
thereof; 33three cups made like 
almond-blossoms in one branch, a 
knop and a flower; and three cups 
made like almond-blossoms in the 
other branch, a knop and a flower; so 
for the six branches going out of the 
candlestick. 34And in the candlestick 
four cups made like almond-blossoms, 
the knops thereof, and the flowers 
thereof. 35And a knop under two 
branches of one piece with it, and a 
knop under two branches of one piece 
with it, and a knop under two branches 
of one piece with it, for the six 
branches going out of the candlestick. 
36Their knops and their branches shall 
be of one piece with it; the whole of it 
one beaten work of pure gold. 37And 
thou shalt make the lamps thereof, 
seven; and they shall light the lamps 
thereof, to give light over against it. 
38And the tongs thereof, and the 
snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure 
gold. 39Of a talent of pure gold shall it 
be made, with all these vessels. 40And 
see that thou make them after their 
pattern, which is being shown thee in 
the mount. 

Moreover thou shalt make the 
tabernacle with ten curtains: of 
fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, 
and scarlet, with cherubim the work of 
the skilful workman shalt thou make 
them. 2The length of each curtain shall 
be eight and twenty cubits, and the 
breadth of each curtain four cubits; all 
the curtains shall have one measure. 
3Five curtains shall be coupled 
together one to another; and the other 
five curtains shall be coupled one to 
another. 4And thou shalt make loops of 
blue upon the edge of the one curtain 
that is outmost in the first set; and 
likewise shalt thou make in the edge of 
the curtain that is outmost in the 
second set. 5Fifty loops shalt thou 
make in the one curtain, and fifty 
loops shalt thou make in the edge of 
the curtain that is in the second set; the 
loops shall be opposite one to another. 
6And thou shalt make fifty clasps of 
gold, and couple the curtains one to 
another with the clasps, that the 
tabernacle may be one whole. 7And 
26 




thou shalt make curtains of goats’hair 
for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven 
curtains shalt thou make them. 8The 
length of each curtain shall be thirty 
cubits, and the breadth of each curtain 
four cubits; the eleven curtains shall 
have one measure. 9And thou shalt 
couple five curtains by themselves, 
and six curtains by themselves, and 
shalt double over the sixth curtain in 
the forefront of the tent. 10And thou 
shalt make fifty loops on the edge of 
the one curtain that is outmost in the 
first set, and fifty loops upon the edge 
of the curtain which is outmost in the 
second set. 11And thou shalt make fifty 
clasps of brass, and put the clasps into 
the loops, and couple the tent together, 
that it may be one. 12And as for the 
overhanging part that remaineth of the 
curtains of the tent, the half curtain 
that remaineth over shall hang over the 
back of the tabernacle. 13And the cubit 
on the one side, and the cubit on the 
other side, of that which remaineth 
over in the length of the curtains of the 
tent, shall hang over the sides of the 
tabernacle on this side and on that 
side, to cover it. 14And thou shalt make 
a covering for the tent of rams’skins 
dyed red and a covering of sealskins 
above. 

15And thou shalt make the boards 
for the tabernacle of acacia-wood, 
standing up. 16Ten cubits shall be the 
length of a board, and a cubit and a 
half the breadth of each board. 17Two 
tenons shall there be in each board, 
joined one to another; thus shalt thou 
make for all the boards of the 
tabernacle. 18And thou shalt make the 
boards for the tabernacle, twenty 
boards for the south side southward: 
19And thou shalt make forty sockets of 
silver under the twenty boards: two 
sockets under one board for its two 
tenons, and two sockets under another 
board for its two tenons; 20and for the 
second side of the tabernacle, on the 
north side, twenty boards. 21And their 
forty sockets of silver: two sockets 
under one board, and two sockets 
under another board. 22And for the 
hinder part of the tabernacle westward 
thou shalt make six boards. 23And two 
boards shalt thou make for the corners 
of the tabernacle in the hinder part. 
24And they shall be double beneath, 
and in like manner they shall be 
complete unto the top thereof unto the 
first ring; thus shall it be for them 
both; they shall be for the two corners. 
25Thus there shall be eight boards, and 
their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets: 
two sockets under one board, and two 
sockets under another board. 26And 
thou shalt make bars of acacia-wood: 
five for the boards of the one side of 
the tabernacle, 27and five bars for the 
boards of the other side of the 
tabernacle, and five bars for the boards 
of the side of the tabernacle, for the 
hinder part westward; 28and the middle 
bar in the midst of the boards, which 
shall pass through from end to end. 
29And thou shalt overlay the boards 
with gold, and make their rings of gold 
for holders for the bars; and thou shalt 


overlay the bars with gold. 30And thou 
shalt rear up the tabernacle according 
to the fashion thereof which hath been 
shown thee in the mount. 

31And thou shalt make a veil of blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine 
twined linen; with cherubim the work 
of the skilful workman shall it be 
made. 32And thou shalt hang it upon 
four pillars of acacia overlaid with 
gold, their hooks being of gold, upon 
four sockets of silver. 33And thou shalt 
hang up the veil under the clasps, and 
shalt bring in thither within the veil the 
ark of the testimony; and the veil shall 
divide unto you between the holy 
place and the most holy. 34And thou 
shalt put the ark-cover upon the ark of 
the testimony in the most holy place. 
35And thou shalt set the table without 
the veil, and the candlestick over 
against the table on the side of the 
tabernacle toward the south; and thou 
shalt put the table on the north side. 
36And thou shalt make a screen for the 
door of the Tent, of blue, and purple, 
and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the 
work of the weaver in colours. 37And 
thou shalt make for the screen five 
pillars of acacia, and overlay them 
with gold; their hooks shall be of gold; 
and thou shalt cast five sockets of 
brass for them. 

And thou shalt make the altar 
of acacia-wood, five cubits 
long, and five cubits broad; the altar 
shall be four-square; and the height 
thereof shall be three cubits. 2And thou 
shalt make the horns of it upon the 
four corners thereof; the horns thereof 
shall be of one piece with it; and thou 
shalt overlay it with brass. 3And thou 
shalt make its pots to take away its 
ashes, and its shovels, and its basins, 
and its flesh-hooks, and its fire-pans; 
all the vessels thereof thou shalt make 
of brass. 4And thou shalt make for it a 
grating of network of brass; and upon 
the net shalt thou make four brazen 
rings in the four corners thereof. 5And 
thou shalt put it under the ledge round 
the altar beneath, that the net may 
reach halfway up the altar. 6And thou 
shalt make staves for the altar, staves 
of acacia-wood, and overlay them with 
brass. 7And the staves thereof shall be 
put into the rings, and the staves shall 
be upon the two sides of the altar, in 
bearing it. 8Hollow with planks shalt 
thou make it; as it hath been shown 
thee in the mount, so shall they make 
it. 

9And thou shalt make the court of 
the tabernacle: for the south side 
southward there shall be hangings for 
the court of fine twined linen a 
hundred cubits long for one side. 
10And the pillars thereof shall be 
twenty, and their sockets twenty, of 
brass; the hooks of the pillars and their 
fillets shall be of silver. 11And likewise 
for the north side in length there shall 
be hangings a hundred cubits long, and 
the pillars thereof twenty, and their 
sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of 
the pillars and their fillets of silver. 
12And for the breadth of the court on 
the west side shall be hangings of fifty 
27 




cubits: their pillars ten, and their 
sockets ten. 13And the breadth of the 
court on the east side eastward shall be 
fifty cubits. 14The hangings for the one 
side [of the gate] shall be fifteen 
cubits: their pillars three, and their 
sockets three. 15And for the other side 
shall be hangings of fifteen cubits: 
their pillars three, and their sockets 
three. 16And for the gate of the court 
shall be a screen of twenty cubits, of 
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine 
twined linen, the work of the weaver 
in colours: their pillars four, and their 
sockets four. 17All the pillars of the 
court round about shall be filleted with 
silver; their hooks of silver, and their 
sockets of brass. 18The length of the 
court shall be a hundred cubits, and the 
breadth fifty every where, and the 
height five cubits, of fine twined linen, 
and their sockets of brass. 19All the 
instruments of the tabernacle in all the 
service thereof, and all the pins 
thereof, and all the pins of the court, 
shall be of brass. 

.... 

20And thou shalt command the 
children of Israel, that they bring unto 
thee pure olive oil beaten for the light, 
to cause a lamp to burn continually. 
21In the tent of meeting, without the 
veil which is before the testimony, 
Aaron and his sons shall set it in order, 
to burn from evening to morning 
before the LORD; it shall be a statute for 
ever throughout their generations on 
the behalf of the children of Israel. 

 

And bring thou near unto thee 
Aaron thy brother, and his 
sons with him, from among the 
children of Israel, that they may 
minister unto Me in the priest’s office, 
even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar 
and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 2And thou 
shalt make holy garments for Aaron 
thy brother, for splendour and for 
beauty. 3And thou shalt speak unto all 
that are wise-hearted, whom I have 
filled with the spirit of wisdom, that 
they make Aaron’s garments to 
sanctify him, that he may minister unto 
Me in the priest’s office. 4And these 
are the garments which they shall 
make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and 
a robe, and a tunic of chequer work, a 
mitre, and a girdle; and they shall 
make holy garments for Aaron thy 
brother, and his sons, that he may 
minister unto Me in the priest’s office. 
5And they shall take the gold, and the 
blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, 
and the fine linen. 

6And they shall make the ephod of 
gold, of blue, and purple, scarlet, and 
fine twined linen, the work of the 
skilful workman. 7It shall have two 
shoulder-pieces joined to the two ends 
thereof, that it may be joined together. 
8And the skilfully woven band, which 
is upon it, wherewith to gird it on, 
shall be like the work thereof and of 
the same piece: of gold, of blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined 
linen. 9And thou shalt take two onyx 
stones, and grave on them the names 
of the children of Israel: 10six of their 
28 




names on the one stone, and the names 
of the six that remain on the other 
stone, according to their birth. 11With 
the work of an engraver in stone, like 
the engravings of a signet, shalt thou 
engrave the two stones, according to 
the names of the children of Israel; 
thou shalt make them to be inclosed in 
settings of gold. 12And thou shalt put 
the two stones upon the shoulder-
pieces of the ephod, to be stones of 
memorial for the children of Israel; 
and Aaron shall bear their names 
before the LORD upon his two 
shoulders for a memorial. 

13And thou shalt make settings of 
gold; 14and two chains of pure gold; of 
plaited thread shalt thou make them, of 
wreathen work; and thou shalt put the 
wreathen chains on the settings. 

15And thou shalt make a breastplate 
of judgment, the work of the skilful 
workman; like the work of the ephod 
thou shalt make it: of gold, of blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine 
twined linen, shalt thou make it. 
16Four-square it shall be and double: a 
span shall be the length thereof, and a 
span the breadth thereof. 17And thou 
shalt set in it settings of stones, four 
rows of stones: a row of carnelian, 
topaz, and smaragd shall be the first 
row; 18and the second row a carbuncle, 
a sapphire, and an emerald; 19and the 
third row a jacinth, an agate, and an 
amethyst; 20and the fourth row a beryl, 
and an onyx, and a jasper; they shall 
be inclosed in gold in their settings. 
21And the stones shall be according to 
the names of the children of Israel, 
twelve, according to their names; like 
the engravings of a signet, every one 
according to his name, they shall be 
for the twelve tribes. 22And thou shalt 
make upon the breastplate plaited 
chains of wreathen work of pure gold. 
23And thou shalt make upon the 
breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt 
put the two rings on the two ends of 
the breastplate. 24And thou shalt put 
the two wreathen chains of gold on the 
two rings at the ends of the breastplate. 
25And the other two ends of the two 
wreathen chains thou shalt put on the 
two settings, and put them on the 
shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the 
forepart thereof. 26And thou shalt make 
two rings of gold, and thou shalt put 
them upon the two ends of the 
breastplate, upon the edge thereof, 
which is toward the side of the ephod 
inward. 27And thou shalt make two 
rings of gold, and shalt put them on the 
two shoulder-pieces of the ephod 
underneath, in the forepart thereof, 
close by the coupling thereof, above 
the skilfully woven band of the ephod. 
28And they shall bind the breastplate 
by the rings thereof unto the rings of 
the ephod with a thread of blue, that it 
may be upon the skilfully woven band 
of the ephod, and that the breastplate 
be not loosed from the ephod. 29And 
Aaron shall bear the names of the 
children of Israel in the breastplate of 
judgment upon his heart, when he 
goeth in unto the holy place, for a 
memorial before the LORD continually. 


30And thou shalt put in the breastplate 
of judgment the Urim and the 
Thummim; and they shall be upon 
Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before 
the LORD; and Aaron shall bear the 
judgment of the children of Israel upon 
his heart before the LORD continually. 

31And thou shalt make the robe of 
the ephod all of blue. 32And it shall 
have a hole for the head in the midst 
thereof; it shall have a binding of 
woven work round about the hole of it, 
as it were the hole of a coat of mail 
that it be not rent. 33And upon the 
skirts of it thou shalt make 
pomegranates of blue, and of purple, 
and of scarlet, round about the skirts 
thereof; and bells of gold between 
them round about: 34a golden bell and 
a pomegranate, a golden bell and a 
pomegranate, upon the skirts of the 
robe round about. 35And it shall be 
upon Aaron to minister; and the sound 
thereof shall be heard when he goeth 
in unto the holy place before the LORD, 
and when he cometh out, that he die 
not. 

36And thou shalt make a plate of 
pure gold, and engrave upon it, like the 
engravings of a signet: HOLY TO 
THE LORD. 37And thou shalt put it on a 
thread of blue, and it shall be upon the 
mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it 
shall be. 38And it shall be upon 
Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron shall 
bear the iniquity committed in the holy 
things, which the children of Israel 
shall hallow, even in all their holy 
gifts; and it shall be always upon his 
forehead, that they may be accepted 
before the LORD. 39And thou shalt 
weave the tunic in chequer work of 
fine linen, and thou shalt make a mitre 
of fine linen, and thou shalt make a 
girdle, the work of the weaver in 
colours. 40And for Aaron’s sons thou 
shalt make tunics, and thou shalt make 
for them girdles, and head-tires shalt 
thou make for them, for splendour and 
for beauty. 41And thou shalt put them 
upon Aaron thy brother, and upon his 
sons with him; and shalt anoint them, 
and consecrate them, and sanctify 
them, that they may minister unto Me 
in the priest’s office. 42And thou shalt 
make them linen breeches to cover the 
flesh of their nakedness; from the loins 
even unto the thighs they shall reach. 
43And they shall be upon Aaron, and 
upon his sons, when they go in unto 
the tent of meeting, or when they come 
near unto the altar to minister in the 
holy place; that they bear not iniquity, 
and die; it shall be a statute for ever 
unto him and unto his seed after him. 

 

And this is the thing that thou 
shalt do unto them to hallow 
them, to minister unto Me in the 
priest’s office: take one young bullock 
and two rams without blemish, 2and 
unleavened bread, and cakes 
unleavened mingled with oil, and 
wafers unleavened spread with oil; of 
fine wheaten flour shalt thou make 
them. 3And thou shalt put them into 
one basket, and bring them in the 
basket, with the bullock and the two 
29 




rams. 4And Aaron and his sons thou 
shalt bring unto the door of the tent of 
meeting, and shalt wash them with 
water. 5And thou shalt take the 
garments, and put upon Aaron the 
tunic, and the robe of the ephod, and 
the ephod, and the breastplate, and 
gird him with the skilfully woven band 
of the ephod. 6And thou shalt set the 
mitre upon his head, and put the holy 
crown upon the mitre. 7Then shalt thou 
take the anointing oil, and pour it upon 
his head, and anoint him. 8And thou 
shalt bring his sons, and put tunics 
upon them. 9And thou shalt gird them 
with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and 
bind head-tires on them; and they shall 
have the priesthood by a perpetual 
statute; and thou shalt consecrate 
Aaron and his sons. 10And thou shalt 
bring the bullock before the tent of 
meeting; and Aaron and his sons shall 
lay their hands upon the head of the 
bullock. 11And thou shalt kill the 
bullock before the LORD, at the door of 
the tent of meeting. 12And thou shalt 
take of the blood of the bullock, and 
put it upon the horns of the altar with 
thy finger; and thou shalt pour out all 
the remaining blood at the base of the 
altar. 13And thou shalt take all the fat 
that covereth the inwards, and the lobe 
above the liver, and the two kidneys, 
and the fat that is upon them, and 
make them smoke upon the altar. 14But 
the flesh of the bullock, and its skin, 
and its dung, shalt thou burn with fire 
without the camp; it is a sin-offering. 
15Thou shalt also take the one ram; and 
Aaron and his sons shall lay their 
hands upon the head of the ram. 16And 
thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt 
take its blood, and dash it round about 
against the altar. 17And thou shalt cut 
the ram into its pieces, and wash its 
inwards, and its legs, and put them 
with its pieces, and with its head. 
18And thou shalt make the whole ram 
smoke upon the altar; it is a burnt-
offering unto the LORD; it is a sweet 
savour, an offering made by fire unto 
the LORD. 19And thou shalt take the 
other ram; and Aaron and his sons 
shall lay their hands upon the head of 
the ram. 20Then shalt thou kill the ram, 
and take of its blood, and put it upon 
the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and 
upon the tip of the right ear of his 
sons, and upon the thumb of their right 
hand, and upon the great toe of their 
right foot, and dash the blood against 
the altar round about. 21And thou shalt 
take of the blood that is upon the altar, 
and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it 
upon Aaron, and upon his garments, 
and upon his sons, and upon the 
garments of his sons with him; and he 
and his garments shall be hallowed, 
and his sons and his sons’garments 
with him. 22Also thou shalt take of the 
ram the fat, and the fat tail, and the fat 
that covereth the inwards, and the lobe 
of the liver, and the two kidneys, and 
the fat that is upon them, and the right 
thigh; for it is a ram of consecration; 
23and one loaf of bread, and one cake 
of oiled bread, and one wafer, out of 
the basket of unleavened bread that is 


before the LORD. 24And thou shalt put 
the whole upon the hands of Aaron, 
and upon the hands of his sons; and 
shalt wave them for a wave-offering 
before the LORD. 25And thou shalt take 
them from their hands, and make them 
smoke on the altar upon the burnt-
offering, for a sweet savour before the 
LORD; it is an offering made by fire 
unto the LORD. 26And thou shalt take 
the breast of Aaron’s ram of 
consecration, and wave it for a wave-
offering before the LORD; and it shall 
be thy portion. 27And thou shalt 
sanctify the breast of the wave-
offering, and the thigh of the heave-
offering, which is waved, and which is 
heaved up, of the ram of consecration, 
even of that which is Aaron’s, and of 
that which is his sons’. 28And it shall 
be for Aaron and his sons as a due for 
ever from the children of Israel; for it 
is a heave-offering; and it shall be a 
heave-offering from the children of 
Israel of their sacrifices of peace-
offerings, even their heave-offering 
unto the LORD. 29And the holy 
garments of Aaron shall be for his sons 
after him, to be anointed in them, and 
to be consecrated in them. 30Seven 
days shall the son that is priest in his 
stead put them on, even he who 
cometh into the tent of meeting to 
minister in the holy place. 31And thou 
shalt take the ram of consecration, and 
seethe its flesh in a holy place. 32And 
Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh 
of the ram, and the bread that is in the 
basket, at the door of the tent of 
meeting. 33And they shall eat those 
things wherewith atonement was 
made, to consecrate and to sanctify 
them; but a stranger shall not eat 
thereof, because they are holy. 34And if 
aught of the flesh of the consecration, 
or of the bread, remain unto the 
morning, then thou shalt burn the 
remainder with fire; it shall not be 
eaten, because it is holy. 35And thus 
shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his 
sons, according to all that I have 
commanded thee; seven days shalt 
thou consecrate them. 36And every day 
shalt thou offer the bullock of sin-
offering, beside the other offerings of 
atonement; and thou shalt do the 
purification upon the altar when thou 
makest atonement for it; and thou shalt 
anoint it, to sanctify it. 37Seven days 
thou shalt make atonement for the 
altar, and sanctify it; thus shall the 
altar be most holy; whatsoever 
toucheth the altar shall be holy. 

38Now this is that which thou shalt 
offer upon the altar: two lambs of the 
first year day by day continually. 39The 
one lamb thou shalt offer in the 
morning; and the other lamb thou shalt 
offer at dusk. 40And with the one lamb 
a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour 
mingled with the fourth part of a hin of 
beaten oil; and the fourth part of a hin 
of wine for a drink-offering. 41And the 
other lamb thou shalt offer at dusk, 
and shalt do thereto according to the 
meal-offering of the morning, and 
according to the drink-offering thereof, 
for a sweet savour, an offering made 


by fire unto the LORD. 42It shall be a 
continual burnt-offering throughout 
your generations at the door of the tent 
of meeting before the LORD, where I 
will meet with you, to speak there unto 
thee. 43And there I will meet with the 
children of Israel; and [the Tent] shall 
be sanctified by My glory. 44And I will 
sanctify the tent of meeting, and the 
altar; Aaron also and his sons will I 
sanctify, to minister to Me in the 
priest’s office. 45And I will dwell 
among the children of Israel, and will 
be their God. 46And they shall know 
that I am the LORD their God, that 
brought them forth out of the land of 
Egypt, that I may dwell among them. I 
am the LORD their God. 

And thou shalt make an altar 
to burn incense upon; of 
acacia-wood shalt thou make it. 2A 
cubit shall be the length thereof, and a 
cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare 
shall it be; and two cubits shall be the 
height thereof; the horns thereof shall 
be of one piece with it. 3And thou shalt 
overlay it with pure gold, the top 
thereof, and the sides thereof round 
about, and the horns thereof; and thou 
shalt make unto it a crown of gold 
round about. 4And two golden rings 
shalt thou make for it under the crown 
thereof, upon the two ribs thereof, 
upon the two sides of it shalt thou 
make them; and they shall be for 
places for staves wherewith to bear it. 
5And thou shalt make the staves of 
acacia-wood, and overlay them with 
gold. 6And thou shalt put it before the 
veil that is by the ark of the testimony, 
before the ark-cover that is over the 
testimony, where I will meet with thee. 
7And Aaron shall burn thereon incense 
of sweet spices; every morning, when 
he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn it. 
8And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at 
dusk, he shall burn it, a perpetual 
incense before the LORD throughout 
your generations. 9Ye shall offer no 
strange incense thereon, nor burnt-
offering, nor meal-offering; and ye 
shall pour no drink-offering thereon. 
10And Aaron shall make atonement 
upon the horns of it once in the year; 
with the blood of the sin-offering of 
atonement once in the year shall he 
make atonement for it throughout your 
generations; it is most holy unto the 
LORD.’ 

... .. 

11And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 12’When thou takest the sum of 
the children of Israel, according to 
their number, then shall they give 
every man a ransom for his soul unto 
the LORD, when thou numberest them; 
that there be no plague among them, 
when thou numberest them. 13This 
they shall give, every one that passeth 
among them that are numbered, half a 
shekel after the shekel of the 
sanctuary—the shekel is twenty 
gerahs—half a shekel for an offering 
to the LORD. 14Every one that passeth 
among them that are numbered, from 
twenty years old and upward, shall 
give the offering of the LORD. 15The 
rich shall not give more, and the poor 
30 




shall not give less, than the half shekel, 
when they give the offering of the 
LORD, to make atonement for your 
souls. 16And thou shalt take the 
atonement money from the children of 
Israel, and shalt appoint it for the 
service of the tent of meeting, that it 
may be a memorial for the children of 
Israel before the LORD, to make 
atonement for your souls.’ 

17And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 18’Thou shalt also make a laver 
of brass, and the base thereof of brass, 
whereat to wash; and thou shalt put it 
between the tent of meeting and the 
altar, and thou shalt put water therein. 
19And Aaron and his sons shall wash 
their hands and their feet thereat; 
20when they go into the tent of 
meeting, they shall wash with water, 
that they die not; or when they come 
near to the altar to minister, to cause 
an offering made by fire to smoke unto 
the LORD; 21so they shall wash their 
hands and their feet, that they die not; 
and it shall be a statute for ever to 
them, even to him and to his seed 
throughout their generations.’ 

22Moreover the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 23’Take thou also unto 
thee the chief spices, of flowing myrrh 
five hundred shekels, and of sweet 
cinnamon half so much, even two 
hundred and fifty, and of sweet 
calamus two hundred and fifty, 24and 
of cassia five hundred, after the shekel 
of the sanctuary, and of olive oil a hin. 
25And thou shalt make it a holy 
anointing oil, a perfume compounded 
after the art of the perfumer; it shall be 
a holy anointing oil. 26And thou shalt 
anoint therewith the tent of meeting, 
and the ark of the testimony, 27and the 
table and all the vessels thereof, and 
the candlestick and the vessels thereof, 
and the altar of incense, 28and the altar 
of burnt-offering with all the vessels 
thereof, and the laver and the base 
thereof. 29And thou shalt sanctify 
them, that they may be most holy; 
whatsoever toucheth them shall be 
holy. 30And thou shalt anoint Aaron 
and his sons, and sanctify them, that 
they may minister unto Me in the 
priest’s office. 31And thou shalt speak 
unto the children of Israel, saying: 
This shall be a holy anointing oil unto 
Me throughout your generations. 
32Upon the flesh of man shall it not be 
poured, neither shall ye make any like 
it, according to the composition 
thereof; it is holy, and it shall be holy 
unto you. 33Whosoever compoundeth 
any like it, or whosoever putteth any 
of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut 
off from his people.’ 

34And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, 
and onycha, and galbanum; sweet 
spices with pure frankincense; of each 
shall there be a like weight. 35And thou 
shalt make of it incense, a perfume 
after the art of the perfumer, seasoned 
with salt, pure and holy. 36And thou 
shalt beat some of it very small, and 
put of it before the testimony in the 
tent of meeting, where I will meet with 
thee; it shall be unto you most holy. 


37And the incense which thou shalt 
make, according to the composition 
thereof ye shall not make for 
yourselves; it shall be unto thee holy 
for the LORD. 38Whosoever shall make 
like unto that, to smell thereof, he shall 
be cut off from his people.’ 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’See, I have 
called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, 
the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah; 
3and I have filled him with the spirit of 
God, in wisdom, and in understanding, 
and in knowledge, and in all manner of 
workmanship, 4to devise skilful works, 
to work in gold, and in silver, and in 
brass, 5and in cutting of stones for 
setting, and in carving of wood, to 
work in all manner of workmanship. 
6And I, behold, I have appointed with 
him Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of 
the tribe of Dan; and in the hearts of 
all that are wise-hearted I have put 
wisdom, that they may make all that I 
have commanded thee: 7the tent of 
meeting, and the ark of the testimony, 
and the ark-cover that is thereupon, 
and all the furniture of the Tent; 8and 
the table and its vessels, and the pure 
candlestick with all its vessels, and the 
altar of incense; 9and the altar of burnt-
offering with all its vessels, and the 
laver and its base; 10and the plaited 
garments, and the holy garments for 
Aaron the priest, and the garments of 
his sons, to minister in the priest’s 
office; 11and the anointing oil, and the 
incense of sweet spices for the holy 
place; according to all that I have 
commanded thee shall they do.’ 

12And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 13’Speak thou also unto the 
children of Israel, saying: Verily ye 
shall keep My sabbaths, for it is a sign 
between Me and you throughout your 
generations, that ye may know that I 
am the LORD who sanctify you. 14Ye 
shall keep the sabbath therefore, for it 
is holy unto you; every one that 
profaneth it shall surely be put to 
death; for whosoever doeth any work 
therein, that soul shall be cut off from 
among his people. 15Six days shall 
work be done; but on the seventh day 
is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to the 
LORD; whosoever doeth any work in 
the sabbath day, he shall surely be put 
to death. 16Wherefore the children of 
Israel shall keep the sabbath, to 
observe the sabbath throughout their 
generations, for a perpetual covenant. 
17It is a sign between Me and the 
children of Israel for ever; for in six 
days the LORD made heaven and earth, 
and on the seventh day He ceased from 
work and rested.’ 

18And He gave unto Moses, when 
He had made an end of speaking with 
him upon mount Sinai, the two tables 
of the testimony, tables of stone, 
written with the finger of God. 

And when the people saw that 
Moses delayed to come down 
from the mount, the people gathered 
themselves together unto Aaron, and 
said unto him: ‘Up, make us a god 
who shall go before us; for as for this 
31 

32 




Moses, the man that brought us up out 
of the land of Egypt, we know not 
what is become of him.’ 2And Aaron 
said unto them: ‘Break off the golden 
rings, which are in the ears of your 
wives, of your sons, and of your 
daughters, and bring them unto me.’ 
3And all the people broke off the 
golden rings which were in their ears, 
and brought them unto Aaron. 4And he 
received it at their hand, and fashioned 
it with a graving tool, and made it a 
molten calf; and they said: ‘This is thy 
god, O Israel, which brought thee up 
out of the land of Egypt.’ 5And when 
Aaron saw this, he built an altar before 
it; and Aaron made proclamation, and 
said: ‘To-morrow shall be a feast to 
the LORD.’ 6And they rose up early on 
the morrow, and offered burnt-
offerings, and brought peace-offerings; 
and the people sat down to eat and to 
drink, and rose up to make merry. 

7And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 
‘Go, get thee down; for thy people, 
that thou broughtest up out of the land 
of Egypt, have dealt corruptly; 8they 
have turned aside quickly out of the 
way which I commanded them; they 
have made them a molten calf, and 
have worshipped it, and have 
sacrificed unto it, and said: This is thy 
god, O Israel, which brought thee up 
out of the land of Egypt.’ 9And the 
LORD said unto Moses: ‘I have seen 
this people, and, behold, it is a 
stiffnecked people. 10Now therefore let 
Me alone, that My wrath may wax hot 
against them, and that I may consume 
them; and I will make of thee a great 
nation.’ 11And Moses besought the 
LORD his God, and said: ‘LORD, why 
doth Thy wrath wax hot against Thy 
people, that Thou hast brought forth 
out of the land of Egypt with great 
power and with a mighty hand? 
12Wherefore should the Egyptians 
speak, saying: For evil did He bring 
them forth, to slay them in the 
mountains, and to consume them from 
the face of the earth? Turn from Thy 
fierce wrath, and repent of this evil 
against Thy people. 13Remember 
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, Thy 
servants, to whom Thou didst swear by 
Thine own self, and saidst unto them: I 
will multiply your seed as the stars of 
heaven, and all this land that I have 
spoken of will I give unto your seed, 
and they shall inherit it for ever.’ 
14And the LORD repented of the evil 
which He said He would do unto His 
people. 

15And Moses turned, and went down 
from the mount, with the two tables of 
the testimony in his hand; tables that 
were written on both their sides; on the 
one side and on the other were they 
written. 16And the tables were the 
work of God, and the writing was the 
writing of God, graven upon the 
tables. 17And when Joshua heard the 
noise of the people as they shouted, he 
said unto Moses: ‘There is a noise of 
war in the camp.’ 18And he said: ‘It is 
not the voice of them that shout for 
mastery, neither is it the voice of them 
that cry for being overcome, but the 


noise of them that sing do I hear.’ 
19And it came to pass, as soon as he 
came nigh unto the camp, that he saw 
the calf and the dancing; and 
Moses’anger waxed hot, and he cast 
the tables out of his hands, and broke 
them beneath the mount. 20And he 
took the calf which they had made, 
and burnt it with fire, and ground it to 
powder, and strewed it upon the water, 
and made the children of Israel drink 
of it. 21And Moses said unto Aaron: 
‘What did this people unto thee, that 
thou hast brought a great sin upon 
them?’ 22And Aaron said: ‘Let not the 
anger of my lord wax hot; thou 
knowest the people, that they are set 
on evil. 23So they said unto me: Make 
us a god, which shall go before us; for 
as for this Moses, the man that brought 
us up out of the land of Egypt, we 
know not what is become of him. 
24And I said unto them: Whosoever 
hath any gold, let them break it off; so 
they gave it me; and I cast it into the 
fire, and there came out this calf.’ 
25And when Moses saw that the people 
were broken loose—for Aaron had let 
them loose for a derision among their 
enemies— 26then Moses stood in the 
gate of the camp, and said: ‘Whoso is 
on the LORD’S side, let him come unto 
me.’ And all the sons of Levi gathered 
themselves together unto him. 27And 
he said unto them: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel: Put ye every 
man his sword upon his thigh, and go 
to and fro from gate to gate throughout 
the camp, and slay every man his 
brother, and every man his companion, 
and every man his neighbour.’ 28And 
the sons of Levi did according to the 
word of Moses; and there fell of the 
people that day about three thousand 
men. 29And Moses said: ‘Consecrate 
yourselves to-day to the LORD, for 
every man hath been against his son 
and against his brother; that He may 
also bestow upon you a blessing this 
day.’ 30And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that Moses said unto the 
people: ‘Ye have sinned a great sin; 
and now I will go up unto the LORD, 
peradventure I shall make atonement 
for your sin.’ 31And Moses returned 
unto the LORD, and said: ‘Oh, this 
people have sinned a great sin, and 
have made them a god of gold. 32Yet 
now, if Thou wilt forgive their sin—; 
and if not, blot me, I pray Thee, out of 
Thy book which Thou hast written.’ 
33And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Whosoever hath sinned against Me, 
him will I blot out of My book. 34And 
now go, lead the people unto the place 
of which I have spoken unto thee; 
behold, Mine angel shall go before 
thee; nevertheless in the day when I 
visit, I will visit their sin upon them.’ 
35And the LORD smote the people, 
because they made the calf, which 
Aaron made. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses: ‘Depart, go up hence, 
thou and the people that thou hast 
brought up out of the land of Egypt, 
unto the land of which I swore unto 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, 
33 




saying: Unto thy seed will I give it— 
2and I will send an angel before thee; 
and I will drive out the Canaanite, the 
Amorite, and the Hittite, and the 
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the 
Jebusite— 3unto a land flowing with 
milk and honey; for I will not go up in 
the midst of thee; for thou art a 
stiffnecked people; lest I consume thee 
in the way.’ 4And when the people 
heard these evil tidings, they mourned; 
and no man did put on him his 
ornaments. 5And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Say unto the children of 
Israel: Ye are a stiffnecked people; if I 
go up into the midst of thee for one 
moment, I shall consume thee; 
therefore now put off thy ornaments 
from thee, that I may know what to do 
unto thee.’ 6And the children of Israel 
stripped themselves of their ornaments 
from mount Horeb onward. 

7Now Moses used to take the tent 
and to pitch it without the camp, afar 
off from the camp; and he called it The 
tent of meeting. And it came to pass, 
that every one that sought the LORD 
went out unto the tent of meeting, 
which was without the camp. 8And it 
came to pass, when Moses went out 
unto the Tent, that all the people rose 
up, and stood, every man at his tent 
door, and looked after Moses, until he 
was gone into the Tent. 9And it came 
to pass, when Moses entered into the 
Tent, the pillar of cloud descended, 
and stood at the door of the Tent; and 
[the LORD] spoke with Moses. 10And 
when all the people saw the pillar of 
cloud stand at the door of the Tent, all 
the people rose up and worshipped, 
every man at his tent door. 11And the 
LORD spoke unto Moses face to face, as 
a man speaketh unto his friend. And he 
would return into the camp; but his 
minister Joshua, the son of Nun, a 
young man, departed not out of the 
Tent. 

12And Moses said unto the LORD: 
‘See, Thou sayest unto me: Bring up 
this people; and Thou hast not let me 
know whom Thou wilt send with me. 
Yet Thou hast said: I know thee by 
name, and thou hast also found grace 
in My sight. 13Now therefore, I pray 
Thee, if I have found grace in Thy 
sight, show me now Thy ways, that I 
may know Thee, to the end that I may 
find grace in Thy sight; and consider 
that this nation is Thy people.’ 14And 
He said: ‘My presence shall go with 
thee, and I will give thee rest.’ 15And 
he said unto Him: ‘If Thy presence go 
not with me, carry us not up hence. 
16For wherein now shall it be known 
that I have found grace in Thy sight, I 
and Thy people? is it not in that Thou 
goest with us, so that we are 
distinguished, I and Thy people, from 
all the people that are upon the face of 
the earth?’ 

17And the LORD said unto Moses: ‘I 
will do this thing also that thou hast 
spoken, for thou hast found grace in 
My sight, and I know thee by name.’ 
18And he said: ‘Show me, I pray Thee, 
Thy glory.’ 19And He said: ‘I will 
make all My goodness pass before 


thee, and will proclaim the name of the 
LORD before thee; and I will be 
gracious to whom I will be gracious, 
and will show mercy on whom I will 
show mercy.’ 20And He said: ‘Thou 
canst not see My face, for man shall 
not see Me and live.’ 21And the LORD 
said: ‘Behold, there is a place by Me, 
and thou shalt stand upon the rock. 
22And it shall come to pass, while My 
glory passeth by, that I will put thee in 
a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee 
with My hand until I have passed by. 
23And I will take away My hand, and 
thou shalt see My back; but My face 
shall not be seen.’ 

And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Hew thee two tables 
of stone like unto the first; and I will 
write upon the tables the words that 
were on the first tables, which thou 
didst break. 2And be ready by the 
morning, and come up in the morning 
unto mount Sinai, and present thyself 
there to Me on the top of the mount. 
3And no man shall come up with thee, 
neither let any man be seen throughout 
all the mount; neither let the flocks nor 
herds feed before that mount.’ 4And he 
hewed two tables of stone like unto the 
first; and Moses rose up early in the 
morning, and went up unto mount 
Sinai, as the LORD had commanded 
him, and took in his hand two tables of 
stone. 5And the LORD descended in the 
cloud, and stood with him there, and 
proclaimed the name of the LORD. 
6And the LORD passed by before him, 
and proclaimed: ‘The LORD, the LORD, 
God, merciful and gracious, long-
suffering, and abundant in goodness 
and truth; 7keeping mercy unto the 
thousandth generation, forgiving 
iniquity and transgression and sin; and 
that will by no means clear the guilty; 
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon 
the children, and upon the children’s 
children, unto the third and unto the 
fourth generation.’ 8And Moses made 
haste, and bowed his head toward the 
earth, and worshipped. 9And he said: 
‘If now I have found grace in Thy 
sight, O Lord, let the Lord, I pray 
Thee, go in the midst of us; for it is a 
stiffnecked people; and pardon our 
iniquity and our sin, and take us for 
Thine inheritance.’ 10And He said: 
‘Behold, I make a covenant; before all 
thy people I will do marvels, such as 
have not been wrought in all the earth, 
nor in any nation; and all the people 
among which thou art shall see the 
work of the LORD that I am about to do 
with thee, that it is tremendous. 
11Observe thou that which I am 
commanding thee this day; behold, I 
am driving out before thee the 
Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the 
Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the 
Hivite, and the Jebusite. 12Take heed to 
thyself, lest thou make a covenant with 
the inhabitants of the land whither 
thou goest, lest they be for a snare in 
the midst of thee. 13But ye shall break 
down their altars, and dash in pieces 
their pillars, and ye shall cut down 
their Asherim. 14For thou shalt bow 
down to no other god; for the LORD, 
34 




whose name is Jealous, is a jealous 
God; 15lest thou make a covenant with 
the inhabitants of the land, and they go 
astray after their gods, and do sacrifice 
unto their gods, and they call thee, and 
thou eat of their sacrifice; 16and thou 
take of their daughters unto thy sons, 
and their daughters go astray after 
their gods, and make thy sons go 
astray after their gods. 17Thou shalt 
make thee no molten gods. 18The feast 
of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. 
Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened 
bread, as I commanded thee, at the 
time appointed in the month Abib, for 
in the month Abib thou camest out 
from Egypt. 19All that openeth the 
womb is Mine; and of all thy cattle 
thou shalt sanctify the males, the 
firstlings of ox and sheep. 20And the 
firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem 
with a lamb; and if thou wilt not 
redeem it, then thou shalt break its 
neck. All the first-born of thy sons 
thou shalt redeem. And none shall 
appear before Me empty. 21Six days 
thou shalt work, but on the seventh 
day thou shalt rest; in plowing time 
and in harvest thou shalt rest. 22And 
thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, 
even of the first-fruits of wheat 
harvest, and the feast of ingathering at 
the turn of the year. 23Three times in 
the year shall all thy males appear 
before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel. 
24For I will cast out nations before 
thee, and enlarge thy borders; neither 
shall any man covet thy land, when 
thou goest up to appear before the 
LORD thy God three times in the year. 
25Thou shalt not offer the blood of My 
sacrifice with leavened bread; neither 
shall the sacrifice of the feast of the 
passover be left unto the morning. 
26The choicest first-fruits of thy land 
thou shalt bring unto the house of the 
LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a 
kid in its mother’s milk.’ 

27And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Write thou these words, for after the 
tenor of these words I have made a 
covenant with thee and with Israel.’ 
28And he was there with the LORD forty 
days and forty nights; he did neither 
eat bread, nor drink water. And he 
wrote upon the tables the words of the 
covenant, the ten words. 29And it came 
to pass, when Moses came down from 
mount Sinai with the two tables of the 
testimony in Moses’hand, when he 
came down from the mount, that 
Moses knew not that the skin of his 
face sent forth abeams while He talked 
with him. 30And when Aaron and all 
the children of Israel saw Moses, 
behold, the skin of his face sent forth 
beams; and they were afraid to come 
nigh him. 31And Moses called unto 
them; and Aaron and all the rulers of 
the congregation returned unto him; 
and Moses spoke to them. 32And 
afterward all the children of Israel 
came nigh, and he gave them in 
commandment all that the LORD had 
spoken with him in mount Sinai. 33And 
when Moses had done speaking with 

a Heb. horns. 


them, he put a veil on his face. 34But 
when Moses went in before the LORD 
that He might speak with him, he took 
the veil off, until he came out; and he 
came out; and spoke unto the children 
of Israel that which he was 
commanded. 35And the children of 
Israel saw the face of Moses, that the 
skin of Moses’face sent forth beams; 
and Moses put the veil back upon his 
face, until he went in to speak with 
Him. 

..... 

And Moses assembled all the 
congregation of the children of 
Israel, and said unto them: ‘These are 
the words which the LORD hath 
commanded, that ye should do them. 
2Six days shall work be done, but on 
the seventh day there shall be to you a 
holy day, a sabbath of solemn rest to 
the LORD; whosoever doeth any work 
therein shall be put to death. 3Ye shall 
kindle no fire throughout your 
habitations upon the sabbath day.’ 

4And Moses spoke unto all the 
congregation of the children of Israel, 
saying: ‘This is the thing which the 
LORD commanded, saying: 5Take ye 
from among you an offering unto the 
LORD, whosoever is of a willing heart, 
let him bring it, the LORD’S offering: 
gold, and silver, and brass; 6and blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, 
and goats’hair; 7and rams’skins dyed 
red, and sealskins, and acacia-wood; 
8and oil for the light, and spices for the 
anointing oil, and for the sweet 
incense; 9and onyx stones, and stones 
to be set, for the ephod, and for the 
breastplate. 10And let every wise-
hearted man among you come, and 
make all that the LORD hath 
commanded: 11the tabernacle, its tent, 
and its covering, its clasps, and its 
boards, its bars, its pillars, and its 
sockets; 12the ark, and the staves 
thereof, the ark-cover, and the veil of 
the screen; 13the table, and its staves, 
and all its vessels, and the showbread; 
14the candlestick also for the light, and 
its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil 
for the light; 15and the altar of incense, 
and its staves, and the anointing oil, 
and the sweet incense, and the screen 
for the door, at the door of the 
tabernacle; 16the altar of burnt-
offering, with its grating of brass, its 
staves, and all its vessels, the laver and 
its base; 17the hangings of the court, 
the pillars thereof, and their sockets, 
and the screen for the gate of the court; 
18the pins of the tabernacle, and the 
pins of the court, and their cords; 19the 
plaited garments, for ministering in the 
holy place, the holy garments for 
Aaron the priest, and the garments of 
his sons, to minister in the priest’s 
office.’ 

20And all the congregation of the 
children of Israel departed from the 
presence of Moses. 21And they came, 
every one whose heart stirred him up, 
and every one whom his spirit made 
willing, and brought the LORD’S 
offering, for the work of the tent of 
meeting, and for all the service 
thereof, and for the holy garments. 
35 




22And they came, both men and 
women, as many as were willing-
hearted, and brought nose-rings, and 
ear-rings, and signet-rings, and girdles, 
all jewels of gold; even every man that 
brought an offering of gold unto the 
LORD. 23And every man, with whom 
was found blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’hair, 
and rams’skins dyed red, and 
sealskins, brought them. 24Every one 
that did set apart an offering of silver 
and brass brought the LORD’S offering; 
and every man, with whom was found 
acacia-wood for any work of the 
service, brought it. 25And all the 
women that were wise-hearted did spin 
with their hands, and brought that 
which they had spun, the blue, and the 
purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen. 
26And all the women whose heart 
stirred them up in wisdom spun the 
goats’hair. 27And the rulers brought the 
onyx stones, and the stones to be set, 
for the ephod, and for the breastplate; 
28and the spice, and the oil, for the 
light, and for the anointing oil, and for 
the sweet incense. 29The children of 
Israel brought a freewill-offering unto 
the LORD; every man and woman, 
whose heart made them willing to 
bring for all the work, which the LORD 
had commanded by the hand of Moses 
to be made. 

30And Moses said unto the children 
of Israel: ‘See, the LORD hath called by 
name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of 
Hur, of the tribe of Judah. 31And He 
hath filled him with the spirit of God, 
in wisdom, in understanding, and in 
knowledge, and in all manner of 
workmanship. 32And to devise skilful 
works, to work in gold, and in silver, 
and in brass, 33and in cutting of stones 
for setting, and in carving of wood, to 
work in all manner of skilful 
workmanship. 34And He hath put in his 
heart that he may teach, both he, and 
Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the 
tribe of Dan. 35Them hath He filled 
with wisdom of heart, to work all 
manner of workmanship, of the 
craftsman, and of the skilful workman, 
and of the weaver in colours, in blue, 
and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine 
linen, and of the weaver, even of them 
that do any workmanship, and of those 
that devise skilful works. 

And Bezalel and Oholiab shall 
work, and every wise-hearted 
man, in whom the LORD hath put 
wisdom and understanding to know 
how to work all the work for the 
service of the sanctuary, according to 
all that the LORD hath commanded.’ 

2And Moses called Bezalel and 
Oholiab, and every wise-hearted man, 
in whose heart the LORD had put 
wisdom, even every one whose heart 
stirred him up to come unto the work 
to do it. 3And they received of Moses 
all the offering, which the children of 
Israel had brought for the work of the 
service of the sanctuary, wherewith to 
make it. And they brought yet unto 
him freewill-offerings every morning. 
4And all the wise men, that wrought all 
the work of the sanctuary, came every 
36 




man from his work which they 
wrought. 5And they spoke unto Moses, 
saying: ‘The people bring much more 
than enough for the service of the 
work, which the LORD commanded to 
make.’ 6And Moses gave 
commandment, and they caused it to 
be proclaimed throughout the camp, 
saying: ‘Let neither man nor woman 
make any more work for the offering 
of the sanctuary.’ So the people were 
restrained from bringing. 7For the stuff 
they had was sufficient for all the work 
to make it, and too much. 

8And every wise-hearted man 
among them that wrought the work 
made the tabernacle with ten curtains: 
of fine twined linen, and blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, with cherubim the 
work of the skilful workman made he 
them. 9The length of each curtain was 
eight and twenty cubits, and the 
breadth of each curtain four cubits; all 
the curtains had one measure. 10And he 
coupled five curtains one to another; 
and the other five curtains he coupled 
one to another. 11And he made loops of 
blue upon the edge of the one curtain 
that was outmost in the first set; 
likewise he made in the edge of the 
curtain that was outmost in the second 
set. 12Fifty loops made he in the one 
curtain, and fifty loops made he in the 
edge of the curtain that was in the 
second set; the loops were opposite 
one to another. 13And he made fifty 
clasps of gold, and coupled the 
curtains one to another with the clasps; 
so the tabernacle was one. 

14And he made curtains of goats’hair 
for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven 
curtains he made them. 15The length of 
each curtain was thirty cubits, and four 
cubits the breadth of each curtain; the 
eleven curtains had one measure. 
16And he coupled five curtains by 
themselves, and six curtains by 
themselves. 17And he made fifty loops 
on the edge of the curtain that was 
outmost in the first set, and fifty loops 
made he upon the edge of the curtain 
which was outmost in the second set. 
18And he made fifty clasps of brass to 
couple the tent together, that it might 
be one. 19And he made a covering for 
the tent of rams’skins dyed red, and a 
covering of sealskins above. 

20And he made the boards for the 
tabernacle of acacia-wood, standing 
up. 21Ten cubits was the length of a 
board, and a cubit and a half the 
breadth of each board. 22Each board 
had two tenons, joined one to another. 
Thus did he make for all the boards of 
the tabernacle. 23And he made the 
boards for the tabernacle; twenty 
boards for the south side southward. 
24And he made forty sockets of silver 
under the twenty boards: two sockets 
under one board for its two tenons, and 
two sockets under another board for its 
two tenons. 25And for the second side 
of the tabernacle, on the north side, he 
made twenty boards, 26and their forty 
sockets of silver: two sockets under 
one board, and two sockets under 
another board. 27And for the hinder 
part of the tabernacle westward he 


made six boards. 28And two boards 
made he for the corners of the 
tabernacle in the hinder part; 29that 
they might be double beneath, and in 
like manner they should be complete 
unto the top thereof unto the first ring. 
Thus he did to both of them in the two 
corners. 30And there were eight boards, 
and their sockets of silver, sixteen 
sockets: under every board two 
sockets. 31And he made bars of acacia-
wood: five for the boards of the one 
side of the tabernacle, 32and five bars 
for the boards of the other side of the 
tabernacle, and five bars for the boards 
of the tabernacle for the hinder part 
westward. 33And he made the middle 
bar to pass through in the midst of the 
boards from the one end to the other. 
34And he overlaid the boards with 
gold, and made their rings of gold for 
holders for the bars, and overlaid the 
bars with gold. 

35And he made the veil of blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined 
linen; with the cherubim the work of 
the skilful workman made he it. 36And 
he made thereunto four pillars of 
acacia, and overlaid them with gold, 
their hooks being of gold; and he cast 
for them four sockets of silver. 37And 
he made a screen for the door of the 
Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, 
and fine twined linen, the work of the 
weaver in colours; 38and the five 
pillars of it with their hooks; and he 
overlaid their capitals and their fillets 
with gold; and their five sockets were 
of brass. 

And Bezalel made the ark of 
acacia-wood: two cubits and a 
half was the length of it, and a cubit 
and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit 
and a half the height of it. 2And he 
overlaid it with pure gold within and 
without, and made a crown of gold to 
it round about. 3And he cast for it four 
rings of gold, in the four feet thereof: 
even two rings on the one side of it, 
and two rings on the other side of it. 
4And he made staves of acacia-wood, 
and overlaid them with gold. 5And he 
put the staves into the rings on the 
sides of the ark, to bear the ark. 6And 
he made an ark-cover of pure gold: 
two cubits and a half was the length 
thereof, and a cubit and a half the 
breadth thereof. 7And he made two 
cherubim of gold: of beaten work 
made he them, at the two ends of the 
ark-cover: 8one cherub at the one end, 
and one cherub at the other end; of one 
piece with the ark-cover made he the 
cherubim at the two ends thereof. 9And 
the cherubim spread out their wings on 
high, screening the ark-cover with 
their wings, with their faces one to 
another; toward the ark-cover were the 
faces of the cherubim. 

10And he made the table of acacia-
wood: two cubits was the length 
thereof, and a cubit the breadth 
thereof, and a cubit and a half the 
height thereof. 11And he overlaid it 
with pure gold, and made thereto a 
crown of gold round about. 12And he 
made unto it a border of a hand-
breadth round about, and made a 
37 




golden crown to the border thereof 
round about. 13And he cast for it four 
rings of gold, and put the rings in the 
four corners that were on the four feet 
thereof. 14Close by the border were the 
rings, the holders for the staves to bear 
the table. 15And he made the staves of 
acacia-wood, and overlaid them with 
gold, to bear the table. 16And he made 
the vessels which were upon the table, 
the dishes thereof, and the pans 
thereof, and the bowls thereof, and the 
jars thereof, wherewith to pour out, of 
pure gold. 

17And he made the candlestick of 
pure gold: of beaten work made he the 
candlestick, even its base, and its 
shaft; its cups, its knops, and its 
flowers, were of one piece with it. 
18And there were six branches going 
out of the sides thereof: three branches 
of the candlestick out of the one side 
thereof, and three branches of the 
candlestick out of the other side 
thereof; 19three cups made like 
almond-blossoms in one branch, a 
knop and a flower; and three cups 
made like almond-blossoms in the 
other branch, a knop and a flower. So 
for the six branches going out of the 
candlestick. 20And in the candlestick 
were four cups made like almond-
blossoms, the knops thereof, and the 
flowers thereof; 21and a knop under 
two branches of one piece with it, and 
a knop under two branches of one 
piece with it, and a knop under two 
branches of one piece with it, for the 
six branches going out of it. 22Their 
knops and their branches were of one 
piece with it; the whole of it was one 
beaten work of pure gold. 23And he 
made the lamps thereof, seven, and the 
tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes 
thereof, of pure gold. 24Of a talent of 
pure gold made he it, and all the 
vessels thereof. 

25And he made the altar of incense 
of acacia-wood: a cubit was the length 
thereof, and a cubit the breadth 
thereof, four-square; and two cubits 
was the height thereof; the horns 
thereof were of one piece with it. 
26And he overlaid it with pure gold, the 
top thereof, and the sides thereof round 
about, and the horns of it; and he made 
unto it a crown of gold round about. 
27And he made for it two golden rings 
under the crown thereof, upon the two 
ribs thereof, upon the two sides of it, 
for holders for staves wherewith to 
bear it. 28And he made the staves of 
acacia-wood, and overlaid them with 
gold. 29And he made the holy 
anointing oil, and the pure incense of 
sweet spices, after the art of the 
perfumer. 

And he made the altar of 
burnt-offering of acacia-wood: 
five cubits was the length thereof, and 
five cubits the breadth thereof, four-
square, and three cubits the height 
thereof. 2And he made the horns 
thereof upon the four corners of it; the 
horns thereof were of one piece with 
it; and he overlaid it with brass. 3And 
he made all the vessels of the altar, the 
pots, and the shovels, and the basins, 
38 




the flesh-hooks, and the fire-pans; all 
the vessels thereof made he of brass. 
4And he made for the altar a grating of 
network of brass, under the ledge 
round it beneath, reaching halfway up. 
5And he cast four rings for the four 
ends of the grating of brass, to be 
holders for the staves. 6And he made 
the staves of acacia-wood, and 
overlaid them with brass. 7And he put 
the staves into the rings on the sides of 
the altar, wherewith to bear it; he made 
it hollow with planks. 

8And he made the laver of brass, and 
the base thereof of brass, of the 
mirrors of the serving women that did 
service at the door of the tent of 
meeting. 

9And he made the court; for the 
south side southward the hangings of 
the court were of fine twined linen, a 
hundred cubits. 10Their pillars were 
twenty, and their sockets twenty, of 
brass; the hooks of the pillars and their 
fillets were of silver. 11And for the 
north side a hundred cubits, their 
pillars twenty, and their sockets 
twenty, of brass; the hooks of the 
pillars and their fillets of silver. 12And 
for the west side were hangings of fifty 
cubits, their pillars ten, and their 
sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars 
and their fillets of silver. 13And for the 
east side eastward fifty cubits. 14The 
hangings for the one side [of the gate] 
were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, 
and their sockets three. 15And so for 
the other side; on this hand and that 
hand by the gate of the court were 
hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars 
three, and their sockets three. 16All the 
hangings of the court round about 
were of fine twined linen. 17And the 
sockets for the pillars were of brass; 
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets 
of silver; and the overlaying of their 
capitals of silver; and all the pillars of 
the court were filleted with silver. 
18And the screen for the gate of the 
court was the work of the weaver in 
colours, of blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and fine twined linen; and 
twenty cubits was the length, and the 
height in the breadth was five cubits, 
answerable to the hangings of the 
court. 19And their pillars were four, 
and their sockets four of brass; their 
hooks of silver, and the overlaying of 
their capitals and their fillets of silver. 
20And all the pins of the tabernacle, 
and of the court round about, were of 
brass. 

..... 

21These are the accounts of the 
tabernacle, even the tabernacle of the 
testimony, as they were rendered 
according to the commandment of 
Moses, through the service of the 
Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the 
son of Aaron the priest. 22And Bezalel 
the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the 
tribe of Judah, made all that the LORD 
commanded Moses. 23And with him 
was Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of 
the tribe of Dan, a craftsman, and a 
skilful workman, and a weaver in 
colours, in blue, and in purple, and in 
scarlet, and fine linen.— 24All the gold 


that was used for the work in all the 
work of the sanctuary, even the gold of 
the offering, was twenty and nine 
talents, and seven hundred and thirty 
shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary. 25And the silver of them 
that were numbered of the 
congregation was a hundred talents, 
and a thousand seven hundred and 
three-score and fifteen shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary: 26a beka a 
head, that is, half a shekel, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary, for every one 
that passed over to them that are 
numbered, from twenty years old and 
upward, for six hundred thousand and 
three thousand and five hundred and 
fifty men. 27And the hundred talents of 
silver were for casting the sockets of 
the sanctuary, and the sockets of the 
veil: a hundred sockets for the hundred 
talents, a talent for a socket. 28And of 
the thousand seven hundred seventy 
and five shekels he made hooks for the 
pillars, and overlaid their capitals, and 
made fillets for them. 29And the brass 
of the offering was seventy talents and 
two thousand and four hundred 
shekels. 30And therewith he made the 
sockets to the door of the tent of 
meeting, and the brazen altar, and the 
brazen grating for it, and all the 
vessels of the altar, 31and the sockets 
of the court round about, and the 
sockets of the gate of the court, and all 
the pins of the tabernacle, and all the 
pins of the court round about. 

And of the blue, and purple, 
and scarlet, they made plaited 
garments, for ministering in the holy 
place, and made the holy garments for 
Aaron, as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

2And he made the ephod of gold, 
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine 
twined linen. 3And they did beat the 
gold into thin plates, and cut it into 
threads, to work it in the blue, and in 
the purple, and in the scarlet, and in 
the fine linen, the work of the skilful 
workman. 4They made shoulder-pieces 
for it, joined together; at the two ends 
was it joined together. 5And the 
skilfully woven band, that was upon it, 
wherewith to gird it on, was of the 
same piece and like the work thereof: 
of gold, of blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and fine twined linen, as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

6And they wrought the onyx stones, 
inclosed in settings of gold, graven 
with the engravings of a signet, 
according to the names of the children 
of Israel. 7And he put them on the 
shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be 
stones of memorial for the children of 
Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses. 

8And he made the breastplate, the 
work of the skilful workman, like the 
work of the ephod: of gold, of blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine 
twined linen. 9It was four-square; they 
made the breastplate double; a span 
was the length thereof, and a span the 
breadth thereof, being double. 10And 
they set in it four rows of stones: a row 
of carnelian, topaz, and smaragd was 
the first row. 11And the second row, a 39 




carbuncle, a sapphire, and an emerald. 
12And the third row, a jacinth, an 
agate, and an amethyst. 13And the 
fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a 
jasper; they were inclosed in fittings of 
gold in their settings. 14And the stones 
were according to the names of the 
children of Israel, twelve, according to 
their names, like the engravings of a 
signet, every one according to his 
name, for the twelve tribes. 15And they 
made upon the breastplate plaited 
chains, of wreathen work of pure gold. 
16And they made two settings of gold, 
and two gold rings; and put the two 
rings on the two ends of the 
breastplate. 17And they put the two 
wreathen chains of gold on the two 
rings at the ends of the breastplate. 
18And the other two ends of the two 
wreathen chains they put on the two 
settings, and put them on the shoulder-
pieces of the ephod, in the forepart 
thereof. 19And they made two rings of 
gold, and put them upon the two ends 
of the breastplate, upon the edge 
thereof, which was toward the side of 
the ephod inward. 20And they made 
two rings of gold, and put them on the 
two shoulder-pieces of the ephod 
underneath, in the forepart thereof, 
close by the coupling thereof, above 
the skilfully woven band of the ephod. 
21And they did bind the breastplate by 
the rings thereof unto the rings of the 
ephod with a thread of blue, that it 
might be upon the skilfully woven 
band of the ephod, and that the 
breastplate might not be loosed from 
the ephod; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

22And he made the robe of the ephod 
of woven work, all of blue; 23and the 
hole of the robe in the midst thereof, as 
the hole of a coat of mail, with a 
binding round about the hole of it, that 
it should not be rent. 24And they made 
upon the skirts of the robe 
pomegranates of blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and twined linen. 25And they 
made bells of pure gold, and put the 
bells between the pomegranates upon 
the skirts of the robe round about, 
between the pomegranates: 26a bell and 
a pomegranate, a bell and a 
pomegranate, upon the skirts of the 
robe round about, to minister in; as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

27And they made the tunics of fine 
linen of woven work for Aaron, and 
for his sons, 28and the mitre of fine 
linen, and the goodly head-tires of fine 
linen, and the linen breeches of fine 
twined linen, 29and the girdle of fine 
twined linen, and blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, the work of the weaver in 
colours; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

30And they made the plate of the 
holy crown of pure gold, and wrote 
upon it a writing, like the engravings 
of a signet: HOLY TO THE LORD. 
31And they tied unto it a thread of blue, 
to fasten it upon the mitre above; as 
the LORD commanded Moses. 

32Thus was finished all the work of 
the tabernacle of the tent of meeting; 
and the children of Israel did 


according to all that the LORD 
commanded Moses, so did they. 

33And they brought the tabernacle 
unto Moses, the Tent, and all its 
furniture, its clasps, its boards, its bars, 
and its pillars, and its sockets; 34and 
the covering of rams’skins dyed red, 
and the covering of sealskins, and the 
veil of the screen; 35the ark of the 
testimony, and the staves thereof, and 
the ark-cover; 36the table, all the 
vessels thereof, and the showbread; 
37the pure candlestick, the lamps 
thereof, even the lamps to be set in 
order, and all the vessels thereof, and 
the oil for the light; 38and the golden 
altar, and the anointing oil, and the 
sweet incense, and the screen for the 
door of the Tent; 39the brazen altar, 
and its grating of brass, its staves, and 
all its vessels, the laver and its base; 
40the hangings of the court, its pillars, 
and its sockets, and the screen for the 
gate of the court, the cords thereof, and 
the pins thereof, and all the 
instruments of the service of the 
tabernacle of the tent of meeting; 41the 
plaited garments for ministering in the 
holy place; the holy garments for 
Aaron the priest, and the garments of 
his sons, to minister in the priest’s 
office. 42According to all that the LORD 
commanded Moses, so the children of 
Israel did all the work. 43And Moses 
saw all the work, and, behold, they had 
done it; as the LORD had commanded, 
even so had they done it. And Moses 
blessed them. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’On the first 
day of the first month shalt thou rear 
up the tabernacle of the tent of 
meeting. 3And thou shalt put therein 
the ark of the testimony, and thou shalt 
screen the ark with the veil. 4And thou 
shalt bring in the table, and set in order 
the bread that is upon it; and thou shalt 
bring in the candlestick, and light the 
lamps thereof. 5And thou shalt set the 
golden altar for incense before the ark 
of the testimony, and put the screen of 
the door to the tabernacle. 6And thou 
shalt set the altar of burnt-offering 
before the door of the tabernacle of the 
tent of meeting. 7And thou shalt set the 
laver between the tent of meeting and 
the altar, and shalt put water therein. 
8And thou shalt set up the court round 
about, and hang up the screen of the 
gate of the court. 9And thou shalt take 
the anointing oil, and anoint the 
tabernacle, and all that is therein, and 
shalt hallow it, and all the furniture 
thereof; and it shall be holy. 10And 
thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt-
offering, and all its vessels, and 
sanctify the altar; and the altar shall be 
most holy. 11And thou shalt anoint the 
laver and its base, and sanctify it. 
12And thou shalt bring Aaron and his 
sons unto the door of the tent of 
meeting, and shalt wash them with 
water. 13And thou shalt put upon 
Aaron the holy garments; and thou 
shalt anoint him, and sanctify him, that 
he may minister unto Me in the 
priest’s office. 14And thou shalt bring 
40 




his sons, and put tunics upon them. 
15And thou shalt anoint them, as thou 
didst anoint their father, that they may 
minister unto Me in the priest’s office; 
and their anointing shall be to them for 
an everlasting priesthood throughout 
their generations.’ 16Thus did Moses; 
according to all that the LORD 
commanded him, so did he. 

17And it came to pass in the first 
month in the second year, on the first 
day of the month, that the tabernacle 
was reared up. 18And Moses reared up 
the tabernacle, and laid its sockets, and 
set up the boards thereof, and put in 
the bars thereof, and reared up its 
pillars. 19And he spread the tent over 
the tabernacle, and put the covering of 
the tent above upon it; as the LORD 
commanded Moses. 

20And he took and put the testimony 
into the ark, and set the staves on the 
ark, and put the ark-cover above upon 
the ark. 21And he brought the ark into 
the tabernacle, and set up the veil of 
the screen, and screened the ark of the 
testimony; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

22And he put the table in the tent of 
meeting, upon the side of the 
tabernacle northward, without the veil. 
23And he set a row of bread in order 
upon it before the LORD; as the LORD 
commanded Moses. 

24And he put the candlestick in the 
tent of meeting, over against the table, 
on the side of the tabernacle 
southward. 25And he lighted the lamps 
before the LORD; as the LORD 
commanded Moses. 

26And he put the golden altar in the 
tent of meeting before the veil; 27and 
he burnt thereon incense of sweet 
spices; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

28And he put the screen of the door 
to the tabernacle. 29And the altar of 
burnt-offering he set at the door of the 
tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and 
offered upon it the burnt-offering and 
the meal-offering; as the LORD 
commanded Moses. 

30And he set the laver between the 
tent of meeting and the altar, and put 
water therein, wherewith to wash; 
31that Moses and Aaron and his sons 
might wash their hands and their feet 
thereat; 32when they went into the tent 
of meeting, and when they came near 
unto the altar, they should wash; as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

33And he reared up the court round 
about the tabernacle and the altar, and 
set up the screen of the gate of the 
court. So Moses finished the work. 

34Then the cloud covered the tent of 
meeting, and the glory of the LORD 
filled the tabernacle. 35And Moses was 
not able to enter into the tent of 
meeting, because the cloud abode 
thereon, and the glory of the LORD 
filled the tabernacle.— 36And 
whenever the cloud was taken up from 
over the tabernacle, the children of 
Israel went onward, throughout all 
their journeys. 37But if the cloud was 
not taken up, then they journeyed not 


till the day that it was taken up. 38For 
the cloud of the LORD was upon the 
tabernacle by day, and there was fire 
therein by night, in the sight of all the 
house of Israel, throughout all their 
journeys.— 




..... 

LEVITICUS 

 

And tHE LORD called unto Moses, 
and spoke unto him out of the tent 
of meeting, saying: 2Speak unto the 
children of Israel, and say unto them: 

When any man of you bringeth an 
offering unto the LORD, ye shall bring 
your offering of the cattle, even of the 
herd or of the flock. 

3If his offering be a burnt-offering 
of the herd, he shall offer it a male 
without blemish; he shall bring it to 
the door of the tent of meeting, that he 
may be accepted before the LORD. 
4And he shall lay his hand upon the 
head of the burnt-offering; and it shall 
be accepted for him to make 
atonement for him. 5And he shall kill 
the bullock before the LORD; and 
Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall present 
the blood, and dash the blood round 
about against the altar that is at the 
door of the tent of meeting. 6And he 
shall flay the burnt-offering, and cut it 
into its pieces. 7And the sons of Aaron 
the priest shall put fire upon the altar, 
and lay wood in order upon the fire. 
8And Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall 
lay the pieces, and the head, and the 
suet, in order upon the wood that is on 
the fire which is upon the altar; 9but its 
inwards and its legs shall he wash with 
water; and the priest shall make the 
whole smoke on the altar, for a burnt-
offering, an offering made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto the LORD. 

10And if his offering be of the flock, 
whether of the sheep, or of the goats, 
for a burnt-offering, he shall offer it a 
male without blemish. 11And he shall 
kill it on the side of the altar northward 
before the LORD; and Aaron’s sons, the 
priests, shall dash its blood against the 
altar round about. 12And he shall cut it 
into its pieces; and the priest shall lay 
them, with its head and its suet, in 
order on the wood that is on the fire 
which is upon the altar. 13But the 
inwards and the legs shall he wash 
with water; and the priest shall offer 
the whole, and make it smoke upon the 
altar; it is a burnt-offering, an offering 
made by fire, of a sweet savour unto 
the LORD. 

14And if his offering to the LORD be 
a burnt-offering of fowls, then he shall 
bring his offering of turtle-doves, or of 
young pigeons. 15And the priest shall 
bring it unto the altar, and pinch off its 
head, and make it smoke on the altar; 
and the blood thereof shall be drained 
out on the side of the altar. 16And he 
shall take away its crop with the 
feathers thereof, and cast it beside the 
altar on the east part, in the place of 
the ashes. 17And he shall rend it by the 
wings thereof, but shall not divide it 
asunder; and the priest shall make it 
1 




smoke upon the altar, upon the wood 
that is upon the fire; it is a burnt-
offering, an offering made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto the LORD. 

And when any one bringeth a 
meal-offering unto the LORD, his 
offering shall be of fine flour; and he 
shall pour oil upon it, and put 
frankincense thereon. 2And he shall 
bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests; 
and he shall take thereout his handful 
of the fine flour thereof, and of the oil 
thereof, together with all the 
frankincense thereof; and the priest 
shall make the memorial-part thereof 
smoke upon the altar, an offering made 
by fire, of a sweet savour unto the 
LORD. 3But that which is left of the 
meal-offering shall be Aaron’s and his 
sons’; it is a thing most holy of the 
offerings of the LORD made by fire. 

4And when thou bringest a meal-
offering baked in the oven, it shall be 
unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled 
with oil, or unleavened wafers spread 
with oil. 

5And if thy offering be a meal-
offering baked on a griddle, it shall be 
of fine flour unleavened, mingled with 
oil. 6Thou shalt break it in pieces, and 
pour oil thereon; it is a meal-offering. 

7And if thy offering be a meal-
offering of the stewing-pan, it shall be 
made of fine flour with oil. 8And thou 
shalt bring the meal-offering that is 
made of these things unto the LORD; 
and it shall be presented unto the 
priest, and he shall bring it unto the 
altar. 9And the priest shall take off 
from the meal-offering the memorial-
part thereof, and shall make it smoke 
upon the altar—an offering made by 
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. 
10But that which is left of the meal-
offering shall be Aaron’s and his 
sons’; it is a thing most holy of the 
offerings of the LORD made by fire. 
11No meal-offering, which ye shall 
bring unto the LORD, shall be made 
with leaven; for ye shall make no 
leaven, nor any honey, smoke as an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD. 
12As an offering of first-fruits ye may 
bring them unto the LORD; but they 
shall not come up for a sweet savour 
on the altar. 13And every meal-offering 
of thine shalt thou season with salt; 
neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the 
covenant of thy God to be lacking 
from thy meal-offering; with all thy 
offerings thou shalt offer salt. 

14And if thou bring a meal-offering 
of first-fruits unto the LORD, thou shalt 
bring for the meal-offering of thy first-
fruits corn in the ear parched with fire, 
even groats of the fresh ear. 15And 
thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay 
frankincense thereon; it is a meal-
offering. 16And the priest shall make 
the memorial-part of it smoke, even of 
the groats thereof, and of the oil 
thereof, with all the frankincense 
thereof; it is an offering made by fire 
unto the LORD. 

And if his offering be a sacrifice 
of peace-offerings: if he offer of 
the herd, whether male or female, he 
shall offer it without blemish before 
2 

3 




the LORD. 2And he shall lay his hand 
upon the head of his offering, and kill 
it at the door of the tent of meeting; 
and Aaron’s sons the priests shall dash 
the blood against the altar round about. 
3And he shall present of the sacrifice 
of peace-offerings an offering made by 
fire unto the LORD: the fat that covereth 
the inwards, and all the fat that is upon 
the inwards, 4and the two kidneys, and 
the fat that is on them, which is by the 
loins, and the lobe above the liver, 
which he shall take away hard by the 
kidneys. 5And Aaron’s sons shall make 
it smoke on the altar upon the burnt-
offering, which is upon the wood that 
is on the fire; it is an offering made by 
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. 

6And if his offering for a sacrifice of 
peace-offerings unto the LORD be of 
the flock, male or female, he shall 
offer it without blemish. 7If he bring a 
lamb for his offering, then shall he 
present it before the LORD. 8And he 
shall lay his hand upon the head of his 
offering, and kill it before the tent of 
meeting; and Aaron’s sons shall dash 
the blood thereof against the altar 
round about. 9And he shall present of 
the sacrifice of peace-offerings an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD: 
the fat thereof, the fat tail entire, which 
he shall take away hard by the rump-
bone; and the fat that covereth the 
inwards, and all the fat that is upon the 
inwards, 10and the two kidneys, and 
the fat that is upon them, which is by 
the loins, and the lobe above the liver, 
which he shall take away by the 
kidneys. 11And the priest shall make it 
smoke upon the altar; it is the food of 
the offering made by fire unto the 
LORD. 

12And if his offering be a goat, then 
he shall present it before the LORD. 
13And he shall lay his hand upon the 
head of it, and kill it before the tent of 
meeting; and the sons of Aaron shall 
dash the blood thereof against the altar 
round about. 14And he shall present 
thereof his offering, even an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD: the fat that 
covereth the inwards, and all the fat 
that is upon the inwards, 15and the two 
kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, 
which is by the loins, and the lobe 
above the liver, which he shall take 
away by the kidneys. 16And the priest 
shall make them smoke upon the altar; 
it is the food of the offering made by 
fire, for a sweet savour; all the fat is 
the LORD’S. 17It shall be a perpetual 
statute throughout your generations in 
all your dwellings, that ye shall eat 
neither fat nor blood. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 2Speak unto the children 
of Israel, saying: 

If any one shall sin through error, in 
any of the things which the LORD hath 
commanded not to be done, and shall 
do any one of them: 3if the anointed 
priest shall sin so as to bring guilt on 
the people, then let him offer for his 
sin, which he hath sinned, a young 
bullock without blemish unto the LORD 
for a sin-offering. 4And he shall bring 
4 




the bullock unto the door of the tent of 
meeting before the LORD; and he shall 
lay his hand upon the head of the 
bullock, and kill the bullock before the 
LORD. 5And the anointed priest shall 
take of the blood of the bullock, and 
bring it to the tent of meeting. 6And 
the priest shall dip his finger in the 
blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven 
times before the LORD, in front of the 
veil of the sanctuary. 7And the priest 
shall put of the blood upon the horns 
of the altar of sweet incense before the 
LORD, which is in the tent of meeting; 
and all the remaining blood of the 
bullock shall he pour out at the base of 
the altar of burnt-offering, which is at 
the door of the tent of meeting. 8And 
all the fat of the bullock of the sin-
offering he shall take off from it; the 
fat that covereth the inwards, and all 
the fat that is upon the inwards, 9and 
the two kidneys, and the fat that is 
upon them, which is by the loins, and 
the lobe above the liver, which he shall 
take away by kidneys, 10as it is taken 
off from the ox of the sacrifice of 
peace-offerings; and the priest shall 
make them smoke upon the altar of 
burnt-offering. 11But the skin of the 
bullock, and all its flesh, with its head, 
and with its legs, and its inwards, and 
its dung, 12even the whole bullock 
shall he carry forth without the camp 
unto a clean place, where the ashes are 
poured out, and burn it on wood with 
fire; where the ashes are poured out 
shall it be burnt. 

13And if the whole congregation of 
Israel shall err, the thing being hid 
from the eyes of the assembly, and do 
any of the things which the LORD hath 
commanded not to be done, and are 
guilty: 14when the sin wherein they 
have sinned is known, then the 
assembly shall offer a young bullock 
for a sin-offering, and bring it before 
the tent of meeting. 15And the elders of 
the congregation shall lay their hands 
upon the head of the bullock before the 
LORD; and the bullock shall be killed 
before the LORD. 16And the anointed 
priest shall bring of the blood of the 
bullock to the tent of meeting. 17And 
the priest shall dip his finger in the 
blood, and sprinkle it seven times 
before the LORD, in front of the veil. 
18And he shall put of the blood upon 
the horns of the altar which is before 
the LORD, that is in the tent of meeting, 
and all the remaining blood shall he 
pour out at the base of the altar of 
burnt-offering, which is at the door of 
the tent of meeting. 19And all the fat 
thereof shall he take off from it, and 
make it smoke upon the altar. 20Thus 
shall he do with the bullock; as he did 
with the bullock of the sin-offering, so 
shall he do with this; and the priest 
shall make atonement for them, and 
they shall be forgiven. 21And he shall 
carry forth the bullock without the 
camp, and burn it as he burned the first 
bullock; it is the sin-offering for the 
assembly. 

22When a ruler sinneth, and doeth 
through error any one of all the things 


which the LORD his God hath 
commanded not to be done, and is 
guilty: 23if his sin, wherein he hath 
sinned, be known to him, he shall 
bring for his offering a goat, a male 
without blemish. 24And he shall lay his 
hand upon the head of the goat, and 
kill it in the place where they kill the 
burnt-offering before the LORD; it is a 
sin-offering. 25And the priest shall take 
of the blood of the sin-offering with 
his finger, and put it upon the horns of 
the altar of burnt-offering, and the 
remaining blood thereof shall he pour 
out at the base of the altar of burnt-
offering. 26And all the fat thereof shall 
he make smoke upon the altar, as the 
fat of the sacrifice of peace-offerings; 
and the priest shall make atonement 
for him as concerning his sin, and he 
shall be forgiven. 

27And if any one of the common 
people sin through error, in doing any 
of the things which the LORD hath 
commanded not to be done, and be 
guilty: 28if his sin, which he hath 
sinned, be known to him, then he shall 
bring for his offering a goat, a female 
without blemish, for his sin which he 
hath sinned. 29And he shall lay his 
hand upon the head of the sin-offering, 
and kill the sin-offering in the place of 
burnt-offering. 30And the priest shall 
take of the blood thereof with his 
finger, and put it upon the horns of the 
altar of burnt-offering, and all the 
remaining blood thereof shall he pour 
out at the base of the altar. 31And all 
the fat thereof shall he take away, as 
the fat is taken away from off the 
sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the 
priest shall make it smoke upon the 
altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD; 
and the priest shall make atonement 
for him, and he shall be forgiven. 

32And if he bring a lamb as his 
offering for a sin-offering, he shall 
bring it a female without blemish. 
33And he shall lay his hand upon the 
head of the sin-offering, and kill it for 
a sin-offering in the place where they 
kill the burnt-offering. 34And the priest 
shall take of the blood of the sin-
offering with his finger, and put it 
upon the horns of the altar of burnt-
offering, and all the remaining blood 
thereof shall he pour out at the base of 
the altar. 35And all the fat thereof shall 
he take away, as the fat of the lamb is 
taken away from the sacrifice of 
peace-offerings; and the priest shall 
make them smoke on the altar, upon 
the offerings of the LORD made by fire; 
and the priest shall make atonement 
for him as touching his sin that he hath 
sinned, and he shall be forgiven. 

And if any one sin, in that he 
heareth the voice of adjuration, he 
being a witness, whether he hath seen 
or known, if he do not utter it, then he 
shall bear his iniquity; 2or if any one 
touch any unclean thing, whether it be 
the carcass of an unclean beast, or the 
carcass of unclean cattle, or the carcass 
of unclean swarming things, and be 
guilty, it being hidden from him that 
he is unclean; 3or if he touch the 
uncleanness of man, whatsoever his 
5 




uncleanness be wherewith he is 
unclean, and it be hid from him; and, 
when he knoweth of it, be guilty; 4or if 
any one swear clearly with his lips to 
do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be 
that a man shall utter clearly with an 
oath, and it be hid from him; and, 
when he knoweth of it, be guilty in one 
of these things; 5and it shall be, when 
he shall be guilty in one of these 
things, that he shall confess that 
wherein he hath sinned; 6and he shall 
bring his forfeit unto the LORD for his 
sin which he hath sinned, a female 
from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a 
sin-offering; and the priest shall make 
atonement for him as concerning his 
sin. 7And if his means suffice not for a 
lamb, then he shall bring his forfeit for 
that wherein he hath sinned, two turtle-
doves, or two young pigeons, unto the 
LORD: one for a sin-offering, and the 
other for a burnt-offering. 8And he 
shall bring them unto the priest, who 
shall offer that which is for the sin-
offering first, and pinch off its head 
close by its neck, but shall not divide it 
asunder. 9And he shall sprinkle of the 
blood of the sin-offering upon the side 
of the altar; and the rest of the blood 
shall be drained out at the base of the 
altar; it is a sin-offering. 10And he shall 
prepare the second for a burnt-
offering, according to the ordinance; 
and the priest shall make atonement 
for him as concerning his sin which he 
hath sinned, and he shall be forgiven. 

11But if his means suffice not for 
two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, 
then he shall bring his offering for that 
wherein he hath sinned, the tenth part 
of an ephah of fine flour for a sin-
offering; he shall put no oil upon it, 
neither shall he put any frankincense 
thereon; for it is a sin-offering. 12And 
he shall bring it to the priest, and the 
priest shall take his handful of it as the 
memorial-part thereof, and make it 
smoke on the altar, upon the offerings 
of the LORD made by fire; it is a sin-
offering. 13And the priest shall make 
atonement for him as touching his sin 
that he hath sinned in any of these 
things, and he shall be forgiven; and 
the remnant shall be the priest’s, as the 
meal-offering. 

14And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 15If any one commit a trespass, 
and sin through error, in the holy 
things of the LORD, then he shall bring 
his forfeit unto the LORD, a ram 
without blemish out of the flock, 
according to thy valuation in silver by 
shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary, for a guilt-offering. 16And 
he shall make restitution for that which 
he hath done amiss in the holy thing, 
and shall add the fifth part thereto, and 
give it unto the priest; and the priest 
shall make atonement for him with the 
ram of the guilt-offering, and he shall 
be forgiven. 

17And if any one sin, and do any of 
the things which the LORD hath 
commanded not to be done, though he 
know it not, yet is he guilty, and shall 
bear his iniquity. 18And he shall bring 
a ram without blemish out of the flock, 


according to thy valuation, for a guilt-
offering, unto the priest; and the priest 
shall make atonement for him 
concerning the error which he 
committed, though he knew it not, and 
he shall be forgiven. 19It is a guilt-
offering—he is certainly guilty before 
the LORD. 

20And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 21If any one sin, and commit a 
trespass against the LORD, and deal 
falsely with his neighbour in a matter 
of deposit, or of pledge, or of robbery, 
or have oppressed his neighbour; 22or 
have found that which was lost, and 
deal falsely therein, and swear to a lie; 
in any of all these that a man doeth, 
sinning therein; 23then it shall be, if he 
hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall 
restore that which he took by robbery, 
or the thing which he hath gotten by 
oppression, or the deposit which was 
deposited with him, or the lost thing 
which he found, 24or any thing about 
which he hath sworn falsely, he shall 
even restore it in full, and shall add the 
fifth part more thereto; unto him to 
whom it appertaineth shall he give it, 
in the day of his being guilty. 25And he 
shall bring his forfeit unto the LORD, a 
ram without blemish out of the flock, 
according to thy valuation, for a guilt-
offering, unto the priest. 26And the 
priest shall make atonement for him 
before the LORD, and he shall be 
forgiven, concerning whatsoever he 
doeth so as to be guilty thereby. 

 

.. 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 2 Command Aaron and his 
sons, saying: 

This is the law of the burnt-offering: 
it is that which goeth up on its 
firewood upon the altar all night unto 
the morning; and the fire of the altar 
shall be kept burning thereby. 3And the 
priest shall put on his linen garment, 
and his linen breeches shall he put 
upon his flesh; and he shall take up the 
ashes whereto the fire hath consumed 
the burnt-offering on the altar, and he 
shall put them beside the altar. 4And he 
shall put off his garments, and put on 
other garments, and carry forth the 
ashes without the camp unto a clean 
place. 5And the fire upon the altar shall 
be kept burning thereby, it shall not go 
out; and the priest shall kindle wood 
on it every morning; and he shall lay 
the burnt-offering in order upon it, and 
shall make smoke thereon the fat of 
the peace-offerings. 6Fire shall be kept 
burning upon the altar continually; it 
shall not go out. 

7And this is the law of the meal-
offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer 
it before the LORD, in front of the altar. 
8And he shall take up therefrom his 
handful, of the fine flour of the meal-
offering, and of the oil thereof, and all 
the frankincense which is upon the 
meal-offering, and shall make the 
memorial-part thereof smoke upon the 
altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD. 
9And that which is left thereof shall 
Aaron and his sons eat; it shall be 
eaten without leaven in a holy place; in 
6 




the court of the tent of meeting they 
shall eat it. 10It shall not be baked with 
leaven. I have given it as their portion 
of My offerings made by fire; it is 
most holy, as the sin-offering, and as 
the guilt-offering. 11Every male among 
the children of Aaron may eat of it, as 
a due for ever throughout your 
generations, from the offerings of the 
LORD made by fire; whatsoever 
toucheth them shall be holy. 

12And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 13This is the offering of Aaron 
and of his sons, which they shall offer 
unto the LORD in the day when he is 
anointed: the tenth part of an ephah of 
fine flour for a meal-offering 
perpetually, half of it in the morning, 
and half thereof in the evening. 14On a 
griddle it shall be made with oil; when 
it is soaked, thou shalt bring it in; in 
broken pieces shalt thou offer the 
meal-offering for a sweet savour unto 
the LORD. 15And the anointed priest 
that shall be in his stead from among 
his sons shall offer it, it is a due for 
ever; it shall be wholly made to smoke 
unto the LORD. 16And every meal-
offering of the priest shall be wholly 
made to smoke; it shall not be eaten. 

17And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 18Speak unto Aaron and to his 
sons, saying: 

This is the law of the sin-offering: in 
the place where the burnt-offering is 
killed shall the sin-offering be killed 
before the LORD; it is most holy. 19The 
priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it; 
in a holy place shall it be eaten, in the 
court of the tent of meeting. 
20Whatsoever shall touch the flesh 
thereof shall be holy; and when there 
is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon 
any garment, thou shalt wash that 
whereon it was sprinkled in a holy 
place. 21But the earthen vessel wherein 
it is sodden shall be broken; and if it 
be sodden in a brazen vessel, it shall 
be scoured, and rinsed in water. 
22Every male among the priests may 
eat thereof; it is most holy. 23And no 
sin-offering, whereof any of the blood 
is brought into the tent of meeting to 
make atonement in the holy place, 
shall be eaten; it shall be burnt with 
fire. 

And this is the law of the guilt-
offering: it is most holy. 2In the 
place where they kill the burnt-
offering shall they kill the guilt-
offering: and the blood thereof shall be 
dashed against the altar round about. 
3And he shall offer of it all the fat 
thereof: the fat tail, and the fat that 
covereth the inwards, 4and the two 
kidneys, and the fat that is on them, 
which is by the loins, and the lobe 
above the liver, which he shall take 
away by the kidneys. 5And the priest 
shall make them smoke upon the altar 
for an offering made by fire unto the 
LORD; it is a guilt-offering. 6Every 
male among the priests may eat 
thereof; it shall be eaten in a holy 
place; it is most holy. 7As is the sin-
offering, so is the guilt-offering; there 
is one law for them; the priest that 
maketh atonement therewith, he shall 
7 




have it. 8And the priest that offereth 
any man’s burnt-offering, even the 
priest shall have to himself the skin of 
the burnt-offering which he hath 
offered. 9And every meal-offering that 
is baked in the oven, and all that is 
dressed in the stewing-pan, and on the 
griddle, shall be the priest’s that 
offereth it. 10And every meal-offering, 
mingled with oil, or dry, shall all the 
sons of Aaron have, one as well as 
another. 

11And this is the law of the sacrifice 
of peace-offerings, which one may 
offer unto the LORD. 12If he offer it for 
a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with 
the sacrifice of thanksgiving 
unleavened cakes mingled with oil, 
and unleavened wafers spread with oil, 
and cakes mingled with oil, of fine 
flour soaked. 13With cakes of leavened 
bread he shall present his offering with 
the sacrifice of his peace-offerings for 
thanksgiving. 14And of it he shall 
present one out of each offering for a 
gift unto the LORD; it shall be the 
priest’s that dasheth the blood of the 
peace-offerings against the altar. 15And 
the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-
offerings for thanksgiving shall be 
eaten on the day of his offering; he 
shall not leave any of it until the 
morning. 16But if the sacrifice of his 
offering be a vow, or a freewill-
offering, it shall be eaten on the day 
that he offereth his sacrifice; and on 
the morrow that which remaineth of it 
may be eaten. 17But that which 
remaineth of the flesh of the sacrifice 
on the third day shall be burnt with 
fire. 18And if any of the flesh of the 
sacrifice of his peace-offerings be at 
all eaten on the third day, it shall not 
be accepted, neither shall it be imputed 
unto him that offereth it; it shall be an 
abhorred thing, and the soul that eateth 
of it shall bear his iniquity. 19And the 
flesh that toucheth any unclean thing 
shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt 
with fire. And as for the flesh, every 
one that is clean may eat thereof. 20But 
the soul that eateth of the flesh of the 
sacrifice of peace-offerings, that 
pertain unto the LORD, having his 
uncleanness upon him, that soul shall 
be cut off from his people. 21And when 
any one shall touch any unclean thing, 
whether it be the uncleanness of man, 
or an unclean beast, or any unclean 
detestable thing, and eat of the flesh of 
the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which 
pertain unto the LORD, that soul shall 
be cut off from his people. 

22And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 23Speak unto the children of 
Israel, saying: 

Ye shall eat no fat, of ox, or sheep, 
or goat. 24And the fat of that which 
dieth of itself, and the fat of that which 
is torn of beasts, may be used for any 
other service; but ye shall in no wise 
eat of it. 25For whosoever eateth the fat 
of the beast, of which men present an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD, 
even the soul that eateth it shall be cut 
off from his people. 26And ye shall eat 
no manner of blood, whether it be of 
fowl or of beast, in any of your 


dwellings. 27Whosoever it be that 
eateth any blood, that soul shall be cut 
off from his people. 

28And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 29Speak unto the children of 
Israel, saying: 

He that offereth his sacrifice of 
peace-offerings unto the LORD shall 
bring his offering unto the LORD out of 
his sacrifice of peace-offerings. 30His 
own hands shall bring the offerings of 
the LORD made by fire: the fat with the 
breast shall he bring, that the breast 
may be waved for a wave-offering 
before the LORD. 31And the priest shall 
make the fat smoke upon the altar; but 
the breast shall be Aaron’s and his 
sons’. 32And the right thigh shall ye 
give unto the priest for a heave-
offering out of your sacrifices of 
peace-offerings. 33He among the sons 
of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the 
peace-offerings, and the fat, shall have 
the right thigh for a portion. 34For the 
breast of waving and the thigh of 
heaving have I taken of the children of 
Israel out of their sacrifices of peace-
offerings, and have given them unto 
Aaron the priest and unto his sons as a 
due for ever from the children of 
Israel. 

35This is the consecrated portion of 
Aaron, and the consecrated portion of 
his sons, out of the offerings of the 
LORD made by fire, in the day when 
they were presented to minister unto 
the LORD in the priest’s office; 36which 
the LORD commanded to be given them 
of the children of Israel, in the day that 
they were anointed. It is a due for ever 
throughout their generations. 

37This is the law of the burnt-
offering, of the meal-offering, and of 
the sin-offering, and of the guilt-
offering, and of the consecration-
offering, and of the sacrifice of peace-
offerings; 38which the LORD 
commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in 
the day that he commanded the 
children of Israel to present their 
offerings unto the LORD, in the 
wilderness of Sinai. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 2’Take Aaron and his sons 
with him, and the garments, and the 
anointing oil, and the bullock of the 
sin-offering, and the two rams, and the 
basket of unleavened bread; 3and 
assemble thou all the congregation at 
the door of the tent of meeting.’ 4And 
Moses did as the LORD commanded 
him; and the congregation was 
assembled at the door of the tent of 
meeting. 5And Moses said unto the 
congregation: ‘This is the thing which 
the LORD hath commanded to be done.’ 
6And Moses brought Aaron and his 
sons, and washed them with water. 
7And he put upon him the tunic, and 
girded him with the girdle, and clothed 
him with the robe, and put the ephod 
upon him, and he girded him with the 
skilfully woven band of the ephod, and 
bound it unto him therewith. 8And he 
placed the breastplate upon him; and 
in the breastplate he put the Urim and 
the Thummim. 9And he set the mitre 
8 




upon his head; and upon the mitre, in 
front, did he set the golden plate, the 
holy crown; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 10And Moses took the 
anointing oil, and anointed the 
tabernacle and all that was therein, and 
sanctified them. 11And he sprinkled 
thereof upon the altar seven times, and 
anointed the altar and all its vessels, 
and the laver and its base, to sanctify 
them. 12And he poured of the anointing 
oil upon Aaron’s head, and anointed 
him, to sanctify him. 13And Moses 
brought Aaron’s sons, and clothed 
them with tunics, and girded them with 
girdles, and bound head-tires upon 
them; as the LORD commanded Moses. 
14And the bullock of the sin-offering 
was brought; and Aaron and his sons 
laid their hands upon the head of the 
bullock of the sin-offering. 15And 
when it was slain, Moses took the 
blood, and put it upon the horns of the 
altar round about with his finger, and 
purified the altar, and poured out the 
remaining blood at the base of the 
altar, and sanctified it, to make 
atonement for it. 16And he took all the 
fat that was upon the inwards, and the 
lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys, 
and their fat, and Moses made it 
smoke upon the altar. 17But the 
bullock, and its skin, and its flesh, and 
its dung, were burnt with fire without 
the camp; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 18And the ram of the burnt-
offering was presented; and Aaron and 
his sons laid their hands upon the head 
of the ram. 19And when it was killed, 
Moses dashed the blood against the 
altar round about. 20And when the ram 
was cut into its pieces, Moses made 
the head, and the pieces, and the suet 
smoke. 21And when the inwards and 
the legs were washed with water, 
Moses made the whole ram smoke 
upon the altar; it was a burnt-offering 
for a sweet savour; it was an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD; as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 22And the 
other ram was presented, the ram of 
consecration, and Aaron and his sons 
laid their hands upon the head of the 
ram. 23And when it was slain, Moses 
took of the blood thereof, and put it 
upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, and 
upon the thumb of his right hand, and 
upon the great toe of his right foot. 
24And Aaron’s sons were brought, and 
Moses put of the blood upon the tip of 
their right ear, and upon the thumb of 
their right hand, and upon the great toe 
of their right foot; and Moses dashed 
the blood against the altar round about. 
25And he took the fat, and the fat tail, 
and all the fat that was upon the 
inwards, and the lobe of the liver, and 
the two kidneys, and their fat, and the 
right thigh. 26And out of the basket of 
unleavened bread, that was before the 
LORD, he took one unleavened cake, 
and one cake of oiled bread, and one 
wafer, and placed them on the fat, and 
upon the right thigh. 27And he put the 
whole upon the hands of Aaron, and 
upon the hands of his sons, and waved 
them for a wave-offering before the 
LORD. 28And Moses took them from off 


their hands, and made them smoke on 
the altar upon the burnt-offering; they 
were a consecration-offering for a 
sweet savour; it was an offering made 
by fire unto the LORD. 29And Moses 
took the breast, and waved it for a 
wave-offering before the LORD; it was 
Moses’portion of the ram of 
consecration; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 30And Moses took of the 
anointing oil, and of the blood which 
was upon the altar, and sprinkled it 
upon Aaron, and upon his garments, 
and upon his sons, and upon his 
sons’garments with him, and sanctified 
Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, 
and his sons’garments with him. 31And 
Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons: 
‘Boil the flesh at the door of the tent of 
meeting; and there eat it and the bread 
that is in the basket of consecration, as 
I commanded, saying: Aaron and his 
sons shall eat it. 32And that which 
remaineth of the flesh and of the bread 
shall ye burn with fire. 33And ye shall 
not go out from the door of the tent of 
meeting seven days, until the days of 
your consecration be fulfilled; for He 
shall consecrate you seven days. 34As 
hath been done this day, so the LORD 
hath commanded to do, to make 
atonement for you. 35And at the door 
of the tent of meeting shall ye abide 
day and night seven days, and keep the 
charge of the LORD, that ye die not; for 
so I am commanded. 36And Aaron and 
his sons did all the things which the 
LORD commanded by the hand of 
Moses. 

 

 

..... 

And it came to pass on the eighth 
day, that Moses called Aaron and 
his sons, and the elders of Israel; 2and 
he said unto Aaron: ‘Take thee a bull-
calf for a sin-offering, and a ram for a 
burnt-offering, without blemish, and 
offer them before the LORD. 3And unto 
the children of Israel thou shalt speak, 
saying: Take ye a he-goat for a sin-
offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of 
the first year, without blemish, for a 
burnt-offering; 4and an ox and a ram 
for peace-offerings, to sacrifice before 
the LORD; and a meal-offering mingled 
with oil; for to-day the LORD appeareth 
unto you.’ 5And they brought that 
which Moses commanded before the 
tent of meeting; and all the 
congregation drew near and stood 
before the LORD. 6And Moses said: 
‘This is the thing which the LORD 
commanded that ye should do; that the 
glory of the LORD may appear unto 
you.’ 7And Moses said unto Aaron: 
‘Draw near unto the altar, and offer 
thy sin-offering, and thy burnt-
offering, and make atonement for 
thyself, and for the people; and present 
the offering of the people, and make 
atonement for them; as the LORD 
commanded.’ 8So Aaron drew near 
unto the altar, and slew the calf of the 
sin-offering, which was for himself. 
9And the sons of Aaron presented the 
blood unto him; and he dipped his 
finger in the blood, and put it upon the 
9 




horns of the altar, and poured out the 
blood at the base of the altar. 10But the 
fat, and the kidneys, and the lobe of 
the liver of the sin-offering, he made 
smoke upon the altar; as the LORD 
commanded Moses. 11And the flesh 
and the skin were burnt with fire 
without the camp. 12And he slew the 
burnt-offering; and Aaron’s sons 
delivered unto him the blood, and he 
dashed it against the altar round about. 
13And they delivered the burnt-offering 
unto him, piece by piece, and the head; 
and he made them smoke upon the 
altar. 14And he washed the inwards and 
the legs, and made them smoke upon 
the burnt-offering on the altar. 15And 
the people’s offering was presented; 
and he took the goat of the sin-offering 
which was for the people, and slew it, 
and offered it for sin, as the first. 
16And the burnt-offering was 
presented; and he offered it according 
to the ordinance. 17And the meal-
offering was presented; and he filled 
his hand therefrom, and made it smoke 
upon the altar, besides the burnt-
offering of the morning. 18He slew also 
the ox and the ram, the sacrifice of 
peace-offerings, which was for the 
people; and Aaron’s sons delivered 
unto him the blood, and he dashed it 
against the altar round about, 19and the 
fat of the ox, and of the ram, the fat 
tail, and that which covereth the 
inwards, and the kidneys, and the lobe 
of the liver. 20And they put the fat 
upon the breasts, and he made the fat 
smoke upon the altar. 21And the 
breasts and the right thigh Aaron 
waved for a wave-offering before the 
LORD; as Moses commanded. 22And 
Aaron lifted up his hands toward the 
people, and blessed them; and he came 
down from offering the sin-offering, 
and the burnt-offering, and the peace-
offerings. 23And Moses and Aaron 
went into the tent of meeting, and 
came out, and blessed the people; and 
the glory of the LORD appeared unto all 
the people. 24And there came forth fire 
from before the LORD, and consumed 
upon the altar the burnt-offering and 
the fat; and when all the people saw it, 
they shouted, and fell on their faces. 

And Nadab and Abihu, the 
sons of Aaron, took each of 
them his censer, and put fire therein, 
and laid incense thereon, and offered 
strange fire before the LORD, which He 
had not commanded them. 2And there 
came forth fire from before the LORD, 
and devoured them, and they died 
before the LORD. 3Then Moses said 
unto Aaron: ‘This is it that the LORD 
spoke, saying: Through them that are 
nigh unto Me I will be sanctified, and 
before all the people I will be 
glorified.’ And Aaron held his peace. 
4And Moses called Mishael and 
Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle 
of Aaron, and said unto them: ‘Draw 
near, carry your brethren from before 
the sanctuary out of the camp.’ 5So 
they drew near, and carried them in 
their tunics out of the camp, as Moses 
had said. 6And Moses said unto Aaron, 
and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his 
10 




sons: ‘Let not the hair of your heads 
go loose, neither tend your clothes, 
that ye die not, and that He be not 
wroth with all the congregation; but let 
your brethren, the whole house of 
Israel, bewail the burning which the 
LORD hath kindled. 7And ye shall not 
go out from the door of the tent of 
meeting, lest ye die; for the anointing 
oil of the LORD is upon you.’ And they 
did according to the word of Moses. 

 

8And the LORD spoke unto Aaron, 
saying: 9’Drink no wine nor strong 
drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, 
when ye go into the tent of meeting, 
that ye die not; it shall be a statute 
forever throughout your generations. 
10And that ye may put difference 
between the holy and the common, and 
between the unclean and the clean; 
11and that ye may teach the children of 
Israel all the statutes which the LORD 
hath spoken unto them by the hand of 
Moses.’ 

12And Moses spoke unto Aaron, and 
unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his 
sons that were left: ‘Take the meal-
offering that remaineth of the offerings 
of the LORD made by fire, and eat it 
without leaven beside the altar; for it is 
most holy. 13And ye shall eat it in a 
holy place, because it is thy due, and 
thy sons’due, of the offerings of the 
LORD made by fire; for so I am 
commanded. 14And the breast of 
waving and the thigh of heaving shall 
ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy 
sons, and thy daughters with thee; for 
they are given as thy due, and thy 
sons’due, out of the sacrifices of the 
peace-offerings of the children of 
Israel. 15The thigh of heaving and the 
breast of waving shall they bring with 
the offerings of the fat made by fire, to 
wave it for a wave-offering before the 
LORD; and it shall be thine, and thy 
sons’with thee, as a due for ever; as 
the LORD hath commanded.’ 

16And Moses diligently inquired for 
the goat of the sin-offering, and, 
behold, it was burnt; and he was angry 
with Eleazar and with Ithamar, the 
sons of Aaron that were left, saying: 
17’Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-
offering in the place of the sanctuary, 
seeing it is most holy, and He hath 
given it you to bear the iniquity of the 
congregation, to make atonement for 
them before the LORD? 18Behold, the 
blood of it was not brought into the 
sanctuary within; ye should certainly 
have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I 
commanded.’ 19And Aaron spoke unto 
Moses: ‘Behold, this day have they 
offered their sin-offering and their 
burnt-offering before the LORD, and 
there have befallen me such things as 
these; and if I had eaten the sin-
offering to-day, would it have been 
well-pleasing in the sight of the LORD? 
20And when Moses heard that, it was 
well-pleasing in his sight. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses and to Aaron, saying 
unto them: 2Speak unto the children of 
Israel, saying: 
11 




These are the living things which ye 
may eat among all the beasts that are 
on the earth. 3Whatsoever parteth the 
hoof, and is wholly cloven-footed, and 
cheweth the cud, among the beasts, 
that may ye eat. 4Nevertheless these 
shall ye not eat of them that only chew 
the cud, or of them that only part the 
hoof: the camel, because he cheweth 
the cud but parteth not the hoof, he is 
unclean unto you. 5And the rock-
badger, because he cheweth the cud 
but parteth not the hoof, he is unclean 
unto you. 6And the hare, because she 
cheweth the cud but parteth not the 
hoof, she is unclean unto you 7And the 
swine, because he parteth the hoof, 
and is cloven-footed, but cheweth not 
the cud, he is unclean unto you. 8Of 
their flesh ye shall not eat, and their 
carcasses ye shall not touch; they are 
unclean unto you. 

9These may ye eat of all that are in 
the waters: whatsoever hath fins and 
scales in the waters, in the seas, and in 
the rivers, them may ye eat. 10And all 
that have not fins and scales in the 
seas, and in the rivers, of all that 
swarm in the waters, and of all the 
living creatures that are in the waters, 
they are a detestable thing unto you, 
11and they shall be a detestable thing 
unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, 
and their carcasses ye shall have in 
detestation. 12Whatsoever hath no fins 
nor scales in the waters, that is a 
detestable thing unto you. 

13And these ye shall have in 
detestation among the fowls; they shall 
not be eaten, they are a detestable 
thing: the great vulture, and the 
bearded vulture, and the ospray; 14and 
the kite, and the falcon after its kinds; 
15every raven after its kinds; 16and the 
ostrich, and the night-hawk, and the 
sea-mew, and the hawk after its kinds; 
17and the little owl, and the cormorant, 
and the great owl; 18and the horned 
owl, and the pelican, and the carrion-
vulture; 19and the stork, and the heron 
after its kinds, and the hoopoe, and the 
bat. 

20All winged swarming things that 
go upon all fours are a detestable thing 
unto you. 21Yet these may ye eat of all 
winged swarming things that go upon 
all fours, which have jointed legs 
above their feet, wherewith to leap 
upon the earth; 22even these of them ye 
may eat: the locust after its kinds, and 
the bald locust after its kinds, and the 
cricket after its kinds, and the 
grasshopper after its kinds. 23But all 
winged swarming things, which have 
four feet, are a detestable thing unto 
you. 

24And by these ye shall become 
unclean; whosoever toucheth the 
carcass of them shall be unclean until 
even. 25And whosoever beareth aught 
of the carcass of them shall wash his 
clothes, and be unclean until the even. 
26Every beast which parteth the hoof, 
but is not cloven footed, nor cheweth 
the cud, is unclean unto you; every one 
that to toucheth them shall be unclean. 
27And whatsoever goeth upon its paws, 
among all beasts that go on all fours, 


they are unclean unto you; whoso 
toucheth their carcass shall be unclean 
until the even. 28And he that beareth 
the carcass of them shall wash his 
clothes, and be unclean until the even; 
they are unclean unto you. 

29And these are they which are 
unclean unto you among the swarming 
things that swarm upon the earth: the 
weasel, and the mouse, and the great 
lizard after its kinds, 30and the gecko, 
and the land-crocodile, and the lizard, 
and the sand-lizard, and the 
chameleon. 31These are they which are 
unclean to you among all that swarm; 
whosoever doth touch them, when 
they are dead, shall be unclean until 
the even. 32And upon whatsoever any 
of them, when they are dead, doth fall, 
it shall be unclean; whether it be any 
vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or 
sack, whatsoever vessel it be, 
wherewith any work is done, it must 
be put into water, and it shall be 
unclean until the even; then shall it be 
clean. 33And every earthen vessel 
whereinto any of them falleth, 
whatsoever is in it shall be unclean, 
and it ye shall break. 34All food therein 
which may be eaten, that on which 
water cometh, shall be unclean; and all 
drink in every such vessel that may be 
drunk shall be unclean. 35And every 
thing whereupon any part of their 
carcass falleth shall be unclean; 
whether oven, or range for pots, it 
shall be broken in pieces; they are 
unclean, and shall be unclean unto 
you. 36Nevertheless a fountain or a 
cistern wherein is a gathering of water 
shall be clean; but he who toucheth 
their carcass shall be unclean. 37And if 
aught of their carcass fall upon any 
sowing seed which is to be sown, it is 
clean. 38But if water be put upon the 
seed, and aught of their carcass fall 
thereon, it is unclean unto you. 

39And if any beast, of which ye may 
eat, die, he that toucheth the carcass 
thereof shall be unclean until the even. 
40And he that eateth of the carcass of it 
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean 
until the even; he also that beareth the 
carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and 
be unclean until the even. 

41And every swarming thing that 
swarmeth upon the earth is a 
detestable thing; it shall not be eaten. 
42Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, 
and whatsoever goeth upon all fours, 
or whatsoever hath many feet, even all 
swarming things that swarm upon the 
earth, them ye shall not eat; for they 
are a detestable thing. 43Ye shall not 
make yourselves detestable with any 
swarming thing that swarmeth, neither 
shall ye make yourselves unclean with 
them, that ye should be defiled 
thereby. 44For I am the LORD your God; 
sanctify yourselves therefore, and be 
ye holy; for I am holy; neither shall ye 
defile yourselves with any manner of 
swarming thing that moveth upon the 
earth. 45For I am the LORD that brought 
you up out of the land of Egypt, to be 
your God; ye shall therefore be holy, 
for I am holy. 


46This is the law of the beast, and of 
the fowl, and of every living creature 
that moveth in the waters, and of every 
creature that swarmeth upon the earth; 
47to make a difference between the 
unclean and the clean, and between the 
living thing that may be eaten and the 
living thing that may not be eaten. 

..... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
the children of Israel, saying: 

If a woman be delivered, and bear a 
man-child, then she shall be unclean 
seven days; as in the days of the 
impurity of her sickness shall she be 
unclean. 3And in the eighth day the 
flesh of his foreskin shall be 
circumcised. 4And she shall continue 
in the blood of purification three and 
thirty days; she shall touch no 
hallowed thing, nor come into the 
sanctuary, until the days of her 
purification be fulfilled. 5But if she 
bear a maid-child, then she shall be 
unclean two weeks, as in her impurity; 
and she shall continue in the blood of 
purification threescore and six days. 
6And when the days of her purification 
are fulfilled, for a son, or for a 
daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the 
first year for a burnt-offering, and a 
young pigeon, or a turtle-dove, for a 
sin-offering, unto the door of the tent 
of meeting, unto the priest. 7And he 
shall offer it before the LORD, and 
make atonement for her; and she shall 
be cleansed from the fountain of her 
blood. This is the law for her that 
beareth, whether a male or a female. 
8And if her means suffice not for a 
lamb, then she shall take two turtle-
doves, or two young pigeons: the one 
for a burnt-offering, and the other for a 
sin-offering; and the priest shall make 
atonement for her, and she shall be 
clean. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses and unto Aaron, 
saying: 

2When a man shall have in the skin 
of his flesh a rising, or a scab, or a 
bright spot, and it become in the skin 
of his flesh the plague of leprosy, then 
he shall be brought unto Aaron the 
priest, or unto one of his sons the 
priests. 3And the priest shall look upon 
the plague in the skin of the flesh; and 
if the hair in the plague be turned 
white, and the appearance of the 
plague be deeper than the skin of his 
flesh, it is the plague of leprosy; and 
the priest shall look on him, and 
pronounce him unclean. 4And if the 
bright spot be white in the skin of his 
flesh, and the appearance thereof be 
not deeper than the skin, and the hair 
thereof be not turned white, then the 
priest shall shut up him that hath the 
plague seven days. 5And the priest 
shall look on him the seventh day; and, 
behold, if the plague stay in its 
appearance, and the plague be not 
spread in the skin, then the priest shall 
shut him up seven days more. 6And the 
priest shall look on him again the 
seventh day; and, behold, if the plague 
12 

13 




be dim, and the plague be not spread in 
the skin, then the priest shall 
pronounce him clean: it is a scab; and 
he shall wash his clothes, and be clean. 
7But if the scab spread abroad in the 
skin, after that he hath shown himself 
to the priest for his cleansing, he shall 
show himself to the priest again. 8And 
the priest shall look, and, behold, if the 
scab be spread in the skin, then the 
priest shall pronounce him unclean: it 
is leprosy. 

9When the plague of leprosy is in a 
man, then he shall be brought unto the 
priest. 10And the priest shall look, and, 
behold, if there be a white rising in the 
skin, and it have turned the hair white, 
and there be quick raw flesh in the 
rising, 11it is an old leprosy in the skin 
of his flesh, and the priest shall 
pronounce him unclean; he shall not 
shut him up; for he is unclean. 12And if 
the leprosy break out abroad in the 
skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin 
of him that hath the plague from his 
head even to his feet, as far as 
appeareth to the priest; 13then the priest 
shall look; and, behold, if the leprosy 
have covered all his flesh, he shall 
pronounce him clean that hath the 
plague; it is all turned white: he is 
clean. 14But whensoever raw flesh 
appeareth in him, he shall be unclean. 
15And the priest shall look on the raw 
flesh, and pronounce him unclean; the 
raw flesh is unclean: it is leprosy. 
16But if the raw flesh again be turned 
into white, then he shall come unto the 
priest; 17and the priest shall look on 
him; and, behold, if the plague be 
turned into white, then the priest shall 
pronounce him clean that hath the 
plague: he is clean. 

18And when the flesh hath in the 
skin thereof a boil, and it is healed, 
19and in the place of the boil there is a 
white rising, or a bright spot, reddish-
white, then it shall be shown to the 
priest. 20And the priest shall look; and, 
behold, if the appearance thereof be 
lower than the skin, and the hair 
thereof be turned white, then the priest 
shall pronounce him unclean: it is the 
plague of leprosy, it hath broken out in 
the boil. 21But if the priest look on it, 
and, behold, there be no white hairs 
therein, and it be not lower than the 
skin, but be dim, then the priest shall 
shut him up seven days. 22And if it 
spread abroad in the skin, then the 
priest shall pronounce him unclean: it 
is a plague. 23But if the bright spot stay 
in its place, and be not spread, it is the 
scar of the boil; and the priest shall 
pronounce him clean. 

24Or when the flesh hath in the skin 
thereof a burning by fire, and the quick 
flesh of the burning become a bright 
spot, reddish-white, or white; 25then 
the priest shall look upon it; and, 
behold, if the hair in the bright spot be 
turned white, and the appearance 
thereof be deeper than the skin, it is 
leprosy, it hath broken out in the 
burning; and the priest shall pronounce 
him unclean: it is the plague of 
leprosy. 26But if the priest look on it, 
and, behold, there be no white hair in 


the bright spot, and it be no lower than 
the skin, but be dim; then the priest 
shall shut him up seven days. 27And 
the priest shall look upon him the 
seventh day; if it spread abroad in the 
skin, then the priest shall pronounce 
him unclean: it is the plague of 
leprosy. 28And if the bright spot stay in 
its place, and be not spread in the skin, 
but be dim, it is the rising of the 
burning, and the priest shall pronounce 
him clean; for it is the scar of the 
burning. 

29And when a man or woman hath a 
plague upon the head or upon the 
beard, 30then the priest shall look on 
the plague; and, behold, if the 
appearance thereof be deeper than the 
skin, and there be in it yellow thin 
hair, then the priest shall pronounce 
him unclean: it is a scall, it is leprosy 
of the head or of the beard. 31And if 
the priest look on the plague of the 
scall, and, behold, the appearance 
thereof be not deeper than the skin, 
and there be no black hair in it, then 
the priest shall shut up him that hath 
the plague of the scall seven days. 
32And in the seventh day the priest 
shall look on the plague; and, behold, 
if the scall be not spread, and there be 
in it no yellow hair, and the 
appearance of the scall be not deeper 
than the skin, 33then he shall be 
shaven, but the scall shall he not 
shave; and the priest shall shut up him 
that hath the scall seven days more. 
34And in the seventh day the priest 
shall look on the scall; and, behold, if 
the scall be not spread in the skin, and 
the appearance thereof be not deeper 
than the skin, then the priest shall 
pronounce him clean; and he shall 
wash his clothes, and be clean. 35But if 
the scall spread abroad in the skin after 
his cleansing, 36then the priest shall 
look on him; and, behold, if the scall 
be spread in the skin, the priest shall 
not seek for the yellow hair: he is 
unclean. 37But if the scall stay in its 
appearance, and black hair be grown 
up therein; the scall is healed, he is 
clean; and the priest shall pronounce 
him clean. 

38And if a man or a woman have in 
the skin of their flesh bright spots, 
even white bright spots; 39then the 
priest shall look; and, behold, if the 
bright spots in the skin of their flesh be 
of a dull white, it is a tetter, it hath 
broken out in the skin: he is clean. 

40And if a man’s hair be fallen off 
his head, he is bald; yet is he clean. 
41And if his hair be fallen off from the 
front part of his head, he is forehead-
bald; yet is he clean. 42But if there be 
in the bald head, or the bald forehead, 
a reddish-white plague, it is leprosy 
breaking out in his bald head, or his 
bald forehead. 43Then the priest shall 
look upon him; and, behold, if the 
rising of the plague be reddish-white 
in his bald head, or in his bald 
forehead, as the appearance of leprosy 
in the skin of the flesh, 44he is a 
leprous man, he is unclean; the priest 
shall surely pronounce him unclean: 
his plague is in his head. 


45And the leper in whom the plague 
is, his clothes shall be rent, and the 
hair of his head shall go loose, and he 
shall cover his upper lip, and shall cry: 
‘Unclean, unclean.’ 46All the days 
wherein the plague is in him he shall 
be unclean; he is unclean; he shall 
dwell alone; without the camp shall his 
dwelling be. 

47And when the plague of leprosy is 
in a garment, whether it be a woolen 
garment, or a linen garment; 48or in the 
warp, or in the woof, whether they be 
of linen, or of wool; or in a skin, or in 
any thing made of skin. 49If the plague 
be greenish or reddish in the garment, 
or in the skin, or in the warp, or in the 
woof, or in any thing of skin, it is the 
plague of leprosy, and shall be shown 
unto the priest. 50And the priest shall 
look upon the plague, and shut up that 
which hath the plague seven days. 
51And he shall look on the plague on 
the seventh day: if the plague be 
spread in the garment, or in the warp, 
or in the woof, or in the skin, whatever 
service skin is used for, the plague is a 
malignant leprosy: it is unclean. 52And 
he shall burn the garment, or the warp, 
or the woof, whether it be of wool or 
of linen, or any thing of skin, wherein 
the plague is; for it is a malignant 
leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire. 
53And if the priest shall look, and, 
behold, the plague be not spread in the 
garment, or in the warp, or in the 
woof, or in any thing of skin; 54then 
the priest shall command that they 
wash the thing wherein the plague is, 
and he shall shut it up seven days 
more. 55And the priest shall look, after 
that the plague is washed; and, behold, 
if the plague have not changed its 
colour, and the plague be not spread, it 
is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the 
fire; it is a fret, whether the bareness 
be within or without. 56And if the 
priest look, and, behold, the plague be 
dim after the washing thereof, then he 
shall rend it out of the garment, or out 
of the skin, or out of the warp, or out 
of the woof. 57And if it appear still in 
the garment, or in the warp, or in the 
woof, or in any thing of skin, it is 
breaking out, thou shalt burn that 
wherein the plague is with fire. 58And 
the garment, or the warp, or the woof, 
or whatsoever thing of skin it be, 
which thou shalt wash, if the plague be 
departed from them, then it shall be 
washed the second time, and shall be 
clean. 59This is the law of the plague of 
leprosy in a garment of wool or linen, 
or in the warp, or in the woof, or in 
any thing of skin, to pronounce it 
clean, or to pronounce it unclean. 

 

.... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 

2This shall be the law of the leper in 
the day of his cleansing: he shall be 
brought unto the priest. 3And the priest 
shall go forth out of the camp; and the 
priest shall look, and, behold, if the 
plague of leprosy be healed in the 
leper; 4then shall the priest command 
to take for him that is to be cleansed 
14 




two living clean birds, and cedar-
wood, and scarlet, and hyssop. 5And 
the priest shall command to kill one of 
the birds in an earthen vessel over 
running water. 6As for the living bird, 
he shall take it, and the cedar-wood, 
and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and 
shall dip them and the living bird in 
the blood of the bird that was killed 
over the running water. 7And he shall 
sprinkle upon him that is to be 
cleansed from the leprosy seven times, 
and shall pronounce him clean, and 
shall let go the living bird into the 
open field. 8And he that is to be 
cleansed shall wash his clothes, and 
shave off all his hair, and bathe 
himself in water, and he shall be clean; 
and after that he may come into the 
camp, but shall dwell outside his tent 
seven days. 9And it shall be on the 
seventh day, that he shall shave all his 
hair off his head and his beard and his 
eyebrows, even all his hair he shall 
shave off; and he shall wash his 
clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in 
water, and he shall be clean. 10And on 
the eighth day he shall take two he-
lambs without blemish, and one ewe-
lamb of the first year without blemish, 
and three tenth parts of an ephah of 
fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled 
with oil, and one log of oil. 11And the 
priest that cleanseth him shall set the 
man that is to be cleansed, and those 
things, before the LORD, at the door of 
the tent of meeting. 12And the priest 
shall take one of the he-lambs, and 
offer him for a guilt-offering, and the 
log of oil, and wave them for a wave-
offering before the LORD. 13And he 
shall kill the he-lamb in the place 
where they kill the sin-offering and the 
burnt-offering, in the place of the 
sanctuary; for as the sin-offering is the 
priest’s, so is the guilt-offering; it is 
most holy. 14And the priest shall take 
of the blood of the guilt-offering, and 
the priest shall put it upon the tip of 
the right ear of him that is to be 
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his 
right hand, and upon the great toe of 
his right foot. 15And the priest shall 
take of the log of oil, and pour it into 
the palm of his own left hand. 16And 
the priest shall dip his right finger in 
the oil that is in his left hand, and shall 
sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven 
times before the LORD. 17And of the 
rest of the oil that is in his hand shall 
the priest put upon the tip of the right 
ear of him that is to be cleansed, and 
upon the thumb of his right hand, and 
upon the great toe of his right foot, 
upon the blood of the guilt-offering. 
18And the rest of the oil that is in the 
priest’s hand he shall put upon the 
head of him that is to be cleansed; and 
the priest shall make atonement for 
him before the LORD. 19And the priest 
shall offer the sin-offering, and make 
atonement for him that is to be 
cleansed because of his uncleanness; 
and afterward he shall kill the burnt-
offering. 20And the priest shall offer 
the burnt-offering and the meal-
offering upon the altar; and the priest 


shall make atonement for him, and he 
shall be clean. 

21And if he be poor, and his means 
suffice not, then he shall take one he-
lamb for a guilt-offering to be waved, 
to make atonement for him, and one 
tenth part of an ephah of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a meal-offering, 
and a log of oil; 22and two turtle-doves, 
or two young pigeons, such as his 
means suffice for; and the one shall be 
a sin-offering, and the other a burnt-
offering. 23And on the eighth day he 
shall bring them for his cleansing unto 
the priest, unto the door of the tent of 
meeting, before the LORD. 24And the 
priest shall take the lamb of the guilt-
offering, and the log of oil, and the 
priest shall wave them for a wave-
offering before the LORD. 25And he 
shall kill the lamb of the guilt-offering, 
and the priest shall take of the blood of 
the guilt-offering, and put it upon the 
tip of the right ear of him that is to be 
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his 
right hand, and upon the great toe of 
his right foot. 26And the priest shall 
pour of the oil into the palm of his own 
left hand. 27And the priest shall 
sprinkle with his right finger some of 
the oil that is in his left hand seven 
times before the LORD. 28And the priest 
shall put of the oil that is in his hand 
upon the tip of the right ear of him that 
is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb 
of his right hand, and upon the great 
toe of his right foot, upon the place of 
the blood of the guilt-offering. 29And 
the rest of the oil that is in the priest’s 
hand he shall put upon the head of him 
that is to be cleansed, to make 
atonement for him before the LORD. 
30And he shall offer one of the turtle-
doves, or of the young pigeons, such 
as his means suffice for; 31even such as 
his means suffice for, the one for a sin-
offering, and the other for a burnt-
offering, with the meal-offering; and 
the priest shall make atonement for 
him that is to be cleansed before the 
LORD. 32This is the law of him in whom 
is the plague of leprosy, whose means 
suffice not for that which pertaineth to 
his cleansing. 

33And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying: 

34When ye are come into the land of 
Canaan, which I give to you for a 
possession, and I put the plague of 
leprosy in a house of the land of your 
possession; 35then he that owneth the 
house shall come and tell the priest, 
saying: ‘There seemeth to me to be as 
it were a plague in the house.’ 36And 
the priest shall command that they 
empty the house, before the priest go 
in to see the plague, that all that is in 
the house be not made unclean; and 
afterward the priest shall go in to see 
the house. 37And he shall look on the 
plague, and, behold, if the plague be in 
the walls of the house with hollow 
streaks, greenish or reddish, and the 
appearance thereof be lower than the 
wall; 38then the priest shall go out of 
the house to the door of the house, and 
shut up the house seven days. 39And 
the priest shall come again the seventh 


day, and shall look; and, behold, if the 
plague be spread in the walls of the 
house; 40then the priest shall command 
that they take out the stones in which 
the plague is, and cast them into an 
unclean place without the city. 41And 
he shall cause the house to be scraped 
within round about, and they shall 
pour out the mortar that they scrape off 
without the city into an unclean place. 
42And they shall take other stones, and 
put them in the place of those stones; 
and he shall take other mortar, and 
shall plaster the house. 43And if the 
plague come again, and break out in 
the house, after that the stones have 
been taken out, and after the house 
hath been scraped, and after it is 
plastered; 44then the priest shall come 
in and look; and, behold, if the plague 
be spread in the house, it is a 
malignant leprosy in the house: it is 
unclean. 45And he shall break down 
the house, the stones of it, and the 
timber thereof, and all the mortar of 
the house; and he shall carry them 
forth out of the city into an unclean 
place. 46Moreover he that goeth into 
the house all the while that it is shut up 
shall be unclean until the even. 47And 
he that lieth in the house shall wash his 
clothes; and he that eateth in the house 
shall wash his clothes. 48And if the 
priest shall come in, and look, and, 
behold, the plague hath not spread in 
the house, after the house was 
plastered; then the priest shall 
pronounce the house clean, because 
the plague is healed. 49And he shall 
take to cleanse the house two birds, 
and cedar-wood, and scarlet, and 
hyssop. 50And he shall kill one of the 
birds in an earthen vessel over running 
water. 51And he shall take the cedar-
wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, 
and the living bird, and dip them in the 
blood of the slain bird, and in the 
running water, and sprinkle the house 
seven times. 52And he shall cleanse the 
house with the blood of the bird, and 
with the running water, and with the 
living bird, and with the cedar-wood, 
and with the hyssop, and with the 
scarlet. 53But he shall let go the living 
bird out of the city into the open field; 
so shall he make atonement for the 
house; and it shall be clean. 

54This is the law for all manner of 
plague of leprosy, and for a scall; 55and 
for the leprosy of a garment, and for a 
house; 56and for a rising, and for a 
scab, and for a bright spot; 57to teach 
when it is unclean, and when it is 
clean; this is the law of leprosy. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses and to Aaron, saying: 
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them: 

When any man hath an issue out of 
his flesh, his issue is unclean. 3And 
this shall be his uncleanness in his 
issue: whether his flesh run with his 
issue, or his flesh be stopped from his 
issue, it is his uncleanness. 4Every bed 
whereon he that hath the issue lieth 
shall be unclean; and every thing 
whereon he sitteth shall be unclean. 
15 




5And whosoever toucheth his bed shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even. 
6And he that sitteth on any thing 
whereon he that hath the issue sat shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even. 
7And he that toucheth the flesh of him 
that hath the issue shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water, 
and be unclean until the even. 8And if 
he that hath the issue spit upon him 
that is clean, then he shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water, 
and be unclean until the even. 9And 
what saddle soever he that hath the 
issue rideth upon shall be unclean. 
10And whosoever toucheth any thing 
that was under him shall be unclean 
until the even; and he that beareth 
those things shall wash his clothes, and 
bathe himself in water, and be unclean 
until the even. 11And whomsoever he 
that hath the issue toucheth, without 
having rinsed his hands in water, he 
shall wash his clothes, and bathe 
himself in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 12And the earthen vessel, 
which he that hath the issue toucheth, 
shall be broken; and every vessel of 
wood shall be rinsed in water. 13And 
when he that hath an issue is cleansed 
of his issue, then he shall number to 
himself seven days for his cleansing, 
and wash his clothes; and he shall 
bathe his flesh in running water, and 
shall be clean. 14And on the eighth day 
he shall take to him two turtle-doves, 
or two young pigeons, and come 
before the LORD unto the door of the 
tent of meeting, and give them unto 
the priest. 15And the priest shall offer 
them, the one for a sin-offering, and 
the other for a burnt-offering; and the 
priest shall make atonement for him 
before the LORD for his issue. 

16And if the flow of seed go out 
from a man, then he shall bathe all his 
flesh in water, and be unclean until the 
even. 17And every garment, and every 
skin, whereon is the flow of seed, shall 
be washed with water, and be unclean 
until the even. 18The woman also with 
whom a man shall lie carnally, they 
shall both bathe themselves in water, 
and be unclean until the even. 

19And if a woman have an issue, and 
her issue in her flesh be blood, she 
shall be in her impurity seven days; 
and whosoever toucheth her shall be 
unclean until the even. 20And every 
thing that she lieth upon in her 
impurity shall be unclean; every thing 
also that she sitteth upon shall be 
unclean. 21And whosoever toucheth 
her bed shall wash his clothes, and 
bathe himself in water, and be unclean 
until the even. 22And whosoever 
toucheth any thing that she sitteth 
upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe 
himself in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 23And if he be on the bed, or 
on any thing whereon she sitteth, when 
he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until 
the even. 24And if any man lie with 
her, and her impurity be upon him, he 
shall be unclean seven days; and every 
bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean. 


25And if a woman have an issue of 
her blood many days not in the time of 
her impurity, or if she have an issue 
beyond the time of her impurity; all 
the days of the issue of her 
uncleanness she shall be as in the days 
of her impurity: she is unclean. 
26Every bed whereon she lieth all the 
days of her issue shall be unto her as 
the bed of her impurity; and every 
thing whereon she sitteth shall be 
unclean, as the uncleanness of her 
impurity. 27And whosoever toucheth 
those things shall be unclean, and shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even. 
28But if she be cleansed of her issue, 
then she shall number to herself seven 
days, and after that she shall be clean. 
29And on the eighth day she shall take 
unto her two turtle-doves, or two 
young pigeons, and bring them unto 
the priest, to the door of the tent of 
meeting. 30And the priest shall offer 
the one for a sin-offering, and the 
other for a burnt-offering; and the 
priest shall make atonement for her 
before the LORD for the issue of her 
uncleanness. 

31Thus shall ye separate the children 
of Israel from their uncleanness; that 
they die not in their uncleanness, when 
they defile My tabernacle that is in the 
midst of them. 

32This is the law of him that hath an 
issue, and of him from whom the flow 
of seed goeth out, so that he is unclean 
thereby; 33and of her that is sick with 
her impurity, and of them that have an 
issue, whether it be a man, or a 
woman; and of him that lieth with her 
that is unclean. 

 

.... ... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, after the death of the 
two sons of Aaron, when they drew 
near before the LORD, and died; 2and 
the LORD said unto Moses: ‘Speak unto 
Aaron thy brother, that he come not at 
all times into the holy place within the 
veil, before the ark-cover which is 
upon the ark; that he die not; for I 
appear in the cloud upon the ark-cover. 
3Herewith shall Aaron come into the 
holy place: with a young bullock for a 
sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-
offering. 4He shall put on the holy 
linen tunic, and he shall have the linen 
breeches upon his flesh, and shall be 
girded with the linen girdle, and with 
the linen mitre shall he be attired; they 
are the holy garments; and he shall 
bathe his flesh in water, and put them 
on. 5And he shall take of the 
congregation of the children of Israel 
two he-goats for a sin-offering, and 
one ram for a burnt-offering. 6And 
Aaron shall present the bullock of the 
sin-offering, which is for himself, and 
make atonement for himself, and for 
his house. 7And he shall take the two 
goats, and set them before the LORD at 
the door of the tent of meeting. 8And 
Aaron shall cast lots upon the two 
goats: one lot for the LORD, and the 
other lot for Azazel. 9And Aaron shall 
present the goat upon which the lot fell 
16 




for the LORD, and offer him for a sin-
offering. 10But the goat, on which the 
lot fell for Azazel, shall be set alive 
before the LORD, to make atonement 
over him, to send him away for Azazel 
into the wilderness. 11And Aaron shall 
present the bullock of the sin-offering, 
which is for himself, and shall make 
atonement for himself, and for his 
house, and shall kill the bullock of the 
sin-offering which is for himself. 
12And he shall take a censer full of 
coals of fire from off the altar before 
the LORD, and his hands full of sweet 
incense beaten small, and bring it 
within the veil. 13And he shall put the 
incense upon the fire before the LORD, 
that the cloud of the incense may cover 
the ark-cover that is upon the 
testimony, that he die not. 14And he 
shall take of the blood of the bullock, 
and sprinkle it with his finger upon the 
ark-cover on the east; and before the 
ark-cover shall he sprinkle of the 
blood with his finger seven times. 
15Then shall he kill the goat of the sin-
offering, that is for the people, and 
bring his blood within the veil, and do 
with his blood as he did with the blood 
of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the 
ark-cover, and before the ark-cover. 
16And he shall make atonement for the 
holy place, because of the 
uncleannesses of the children of Israel, 
and because of their transgressions, 
even all their sins; and so shall he do 
for the tent of meeting, that dwelleth 
with them in the midst of their 
uncleannesses. 17And there shall be no 
man in the tent of meeting when he 
goeth in to make atonement in the holy 
place, until he come out, and have 
made atonement for himself, and for 
his household, and for all the assembly 
of Israel. 18And he shall go out unto 
the altar that is before the LORD, and 
make atonement for it; and shall take 
of the blood of the bullock, and of the 
blood of the goat, and put it upon the 
horns of the altar round about. 19And 
he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it 
with his finger seven times, and 
cleanse it, and hallow it from the 
uncleannesses of the children of Israel. 
20And when he hath made an end of 
atoning for the holy place, and the tent 
of meeting, and the altar, he shall 
present the live goat. 21And Aaron 
shall lay both his hands upon the head 
of the live goat, and confess over him 
all the iniquities of the children of 
Israel, and all their transgressions, 
even all their sins; and he shall put 
them upon the head of the goat, and 
shall send him away by the hand of an 
appointed man into the wilderness. 
22And the goat shall bear upon him all 
their iniquities unto a land which is cut 
off; and he shall let go the goat in the 
wilderness. 23And Aaron shall come 
into the tent of meeting, and shall put 
off the linen garments, which he put 
on when he went into the holy place, 
and shall leave them there. 24And he 
shall bathe his flesh in water in a holy 
place and put on his other vestments, 
and come forth, and offer his burnt-
offering and the burnt-offering of the 


people, and make atonement for 
himself and for the people. 25And the 
fat of the sin-offering shall he make 
smoke upon the altar. 26And he that 
letteth go the goat for Azazel shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in 
water, and afterward he may come into 
the camp. 27And the bullock of the sin-
offering, and the goat of the sin-
offering, whose blood was brought in 
to make atonement in the holy place, 
shall be carried forth without the 
camp; and they shall burn in the fire 
their skins, and their flesh, and their 
dung. 28And he that burneth them shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in 
water, and afterward he may come into 
the camp. 

29And it shall be a statute for ever unto 
you: in the seventh month, on the tenth 
day of the month, ye shall afflict your 
souls, and shall do no manner of work, 
the home-born, or the stranger that 
sojourneth among you. 30For on this 
day shall atonement be made for you, 
to cleanse you; from all your sins shall 
ye be clean before the LORD. 31It is a 
sabbath of solemn rest unto you, and 
ye shall afflict your souls; it is a statute 
for ever. 32And the priest, who shall be 
anointed and who shall be consecrated 
to be priest in his father’s stead, shall 
make the atonement, and shall put on 
the linen garments, even the holy 
garments. 33And he shall make 
atonement for the most holy place, and 
he shall make atonement for the tent of 
meeting and for the altar; and he shall 
make atonement for the priests and for 
all the people of the assembly. 34And 
this shall be an everlasting statute unto 
you, to make atonement for the 
children of Israel because of all their 
sins once in the year.’ And he did as 
the LORD commanded Moses. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all 
the children of Israel, and say unto 
them: This is the thing which the LORD 
hath commanded, saying: 

3What man soever there be of the 
house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or 
lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that 
killeth it without the camp, 4and hath 
not brought it unto the door of the tent 
of meeting, to present it as an offering 
unto the LORD before the tabernacle of 
the LORD, blood shall be imputed unto 
that man; he hath shed blood; and that 
man shall be cut off from among his 
people. 5To the end that the children of 
Israel may bring their sacrifices, which 
they sacrifice in the open field, even 
that they may bring them unto the 
LORD, unto the door of the tent of 
meeting, unto the priest, and sacrifice 
them for sacrifices of peace-offerings 
unto the LORD. 6And the priest shall 
dash the blood against the altar of the 
LORD at the door of the tent of meeting, 
and make the fat smoke for a sweet 
savour unto the LORD. 7And they shall 
no more sacrifice their sacrifices unto 
the satyrs, after whom they go astray. 
This shall be a statute for ever unto 
them throughout their generations. 
17 




8And thou shalt say unto them: 
Whatsoever man there be of the house 
of Israel, or of the strangers that 
sojourn among them, that offereth a 
burnt-offering or sacrifice, 9and 
bringeth it not unto the door of the tent 
of meeting, to sacrifice it unto the 
LORD, even that man shall be cut off 
from his people. 

10And whatsoever man there be of 
the house of Israel, or of the strangers 
that sojourn among them, that eateth 
any manner of blood, I will set My 
face against that soul that eateth blood, 
and will cut him off from among his 
people. 11For the life of the flesh is in 
the blood; and I have given it to you 
upon the altar to make atonement for 
your souls; for it is the blood that 
maketh atonement by reason of the 
life. 12Therefore I said unto the 
children of Israel: No soul of you shall 
eat blood, neither shall any stranger 
that sojourneth among you eat blood. 
13And whatsoever man there be of the 
children of Israel, or of the strangers 
that sojourn among them, that taketh in 
hunting any beast or fowl that may be 
eaten, he shall pour out the blood 
thereof, and cover it with dust. 14For as 
to the life of all flesh, the blood thereof 
is all one with the life thereof; 
therefore I said unto the children of 
Israel: Ye shall eat the blood of no 
manner of flesh; for the life of all flesh 
is the blood thereof; whosoever eateth 
it shall be cut off. 15And every soul 
that eateth that which dieth of itself, or 
that which is torn of beasts, whether he 
be home-born or a stranger, he shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in 
water, and be unclean until the even; 
then shall he be clean. 16But if he wash 
them not, nor bathe his flesh, then he 
shall bear his iniquity. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
the children of Israel, and say unto 
them: 

I am the LORD your God. 3After the 
doings of the land of Egypt, wherein 
ye dwelt, shall ye not do; and after the 
doings of the land of Canaan, whither I 
bring you, shall ye not do; neither shall 
ye walk in their statutes. 4Mine 
ordinances shall ye do, and My 
statutes shall ye keep, to walk therein: 
I am the LORD your God. 5Ye shall 
therefore keep My statutes, and Mine 
ordinances, which if a man do, he shall 
live by them: I am the LORD. 

6None of you shall approach to any 
that is near of kin to him, to uncover 
their nakedness. I am the LORD. 

7The nakedness of thy father, and 
the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou 
not uncover: she is thy mother; thou 
shalt not uncover her nakedness. 

8The nakedness of thy father’s wife 
shalt thou not uncover: it is thy 
father’s nakedness. 

9The nakedness of thy sister, the 
daughter of thy father, or the daughter 
of thy mother, whether born at home, 
or born abroad, even their nakedness 
thou shalt not uncover. 
18 




10The nakedness of thy son’s 
daughter, or of thy daughter’s 
daughter, even their nakedness thou 
shalt not uncover; for theirs is thine 
own nakedness. 

11The nakedness of thy father’s 
wife’s daughter, begotten of thy father, 
she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover 
her nakedness. 

12Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy father’s sister: she is 
thy father’s near kinswoman. 

13Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy mother’s sister; for 
she is thy mother’s near kinswoman. 

14Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy fathers brother, thou 
shalt not approach to his wife: she is 
thine aunt. 

15Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy daughter-in-law: she 
is thy son’wife; thou shalt not uncover 
her nakedness. 

16Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy brother’s wife: it is 
thy brother’s nakedness. 17Thou shalt 
not uncover the nakedness of a woman 
and her daughter; thou shalt not take 
her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s 
daughter, to uncover her nakedness: 
they are near kinswomen; it is 
lewdness. 18And thou shalt not take a 
woman to her sister, to be a rival to 
her, to uncover her nakedness, beside 
the other in her lifetime. 19And thou 
shalt not approach unto a woman to 
uncover her nakedness, as long as she 
is impure by her uncleanness. 20And 
thou shalt not lie carnally with thy 
neighbour’s wife, to defile thyself with 
her. 21And thou shalt not give any of 
thy seed to set them apart to Molech, 
neither shalt thou profane the name of 
thy God: I am the LORD. 22Thou shalt 
not lie with mankind, as with 
womankind; it is abomination. 23And 
thou shalt not lie with any beast to 
defile thyself therewith; neither shall 
any woman stand before a beast, to lie 
down thereto; it is perversion. 

24Defile not ye yourselves in any of 
these things; for in all these the nations 
are defiled, which I cast out from 
before you. 25And the land was defiled, 
therefore I did visit the iniquity thereof 
upon it, and the land vomited out her 
inhabitants. 26Ye therefore shall keep 
My statutes and Mine ordinances, and 
shall not do any of these abominations; 
neither the home-born, nor the stranger 
that sojourneth among you— 27for all 
these abominations have the men of 
the land done, that were before you, 
and the land is defiled— 28that the land 
vomit not you out also, when ye defile 
it, as it vomited out the nation that was 
before you. 29For whosoever shall do 
any of these abominations, even the 
souls that do them shall be cut off 
from among their people. 30Therefore 
shall ye keep My charge, that ye do 
not any of these abominable customs, 
which were done before you, and that 
ye defile not yourselves therein: I am 
the LORD your God. 

..... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto all 19 




the congregation of the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: 

Ye shall be holy; for I the LORD your 
God am holy. 3Ye shall fear every man 
his mother, and his father, and ye shall 
keep My sabbaths: I am the LORD your 
God. 4Turn ye not unto the idols, nor 
make to yourselves molten gods: I am 
the LORD your God. 

5And when ye offer a sacrifice of 
peace-offerings unto the LORD, ye shall 
offer it that ye may be accepted. 6It 
shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, 
and on the morrow; and if aught 
remain until the third day, it shall be 
burnt with fire. 7And if it be eaten at 
all on the third day, it is a vile thing; it 
shall not be accepted. 8But every one 
that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, 
because he hath profaned the holy 
thing of the LORD; and that soul shall 
be cut off from his people. 

9And when ye reap the harvest of 
your land, thou shalt not wholly reap 
the corner of thy field, neither shalt 
thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest. 
10And thou shalt not glean thy 
vineyard, neither shalt thou gather the 
fallen fruit of thy vineyard; thou shalt 
leave them for the poor and for the 
stranger: I am the LORD your God. 11Ye 
shall not steal; neither shall ye deal 
falsely, nor lie one to another. 12And 
ye shall not swear by My name falsely, 
so that thou profane the name of thy 
God: I am the LORD. 13Thou shalt not 
oppress thy neighbour, nor rob him; 
the wages of a hired servant shall not 
abide with thee all night until the 
morning. 14Thou shalt not curse the 
deaf, nor put a stumbling-block before 
the blind, but thou shalt fear thy God: I 
am the LORD. 15Ye shall do no 
unrighteousness in judgment; thou 
shalt not respect the person of the 
poor, nor favour the person of the 
mighty; but in righteousness shalt thou 
judge thy neighbour. 16Thou shalt not 
go up and down as a talebearer among 
thy people; neither shalt thou stand 
idly by the blood of thy neighbour: I 
am the LORD. 17Thou shalt not hate thy 
brother in thy heart; thou shalt surely 
rebuke thy neighbour, and not bear sin 
because of him. 18Thou shalt not take 
vengeance, nor bear any grudge 
against the children of thy people, but 
thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself: I am the LORD. 19Ye shall keep 
My statutes. Thou shalt not let thy 
cattle gender with a diverse kind; thou 
shalt not sow thy field with two kinds 
of seed; neither shall there come upon 
thee a garment of two kinds of stuff 
mingled together. 20And whosoever 
lieth carnally with a woman, that is a 
bondmaid, designated for a man, and 
not at all redeemed, nor was freedom 
given her; there shall be inquisition; 
they shall not be put to death, because 
she was not free. 21And he shall bring 
his forfeit unto the LORD, unto the door 
of the tent of meeting, even a ram for a 
guilt-offering. 22And the priest shall 
make atonement for him with the ram 
of the guilt-offering before the LORD 
for his sin which he hath sinned; and 


he shall be forgiven for his sin which 
he hath sinned. 

23And when ye shall come into the 
land, and shall have planted all manner 
of trees for food, then ye shall count 
the fruit thereof as forbidden; three 
years shall it be as forbidden unto you; 
it shall not be eaten. 24And in the 
fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be 
holy, for giving praise unto the LORD. 
25But in the fifth year may ye eat of the 
fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you 
more richly the increase thereof: I am 
the LORD your God. 26Ye shall not eat 
with the blood; neither shall ye 
practise divination nor soothsaying. 
27Ye shall not round the corners of 
your heads, neither shalt thou mar the 
corners of thy beard. 28Ye shall not 
make any cuttings in your flesh for the 
dead, nor imprint any marks upon you: 
I am the LORD. 29Profane not thy 
daughter, to make her a harlot, lest the 
land fall into harlotry, and the land 
become full of lewdness. 30Ye shall 
keep My sabbaths, and reverence My 
sanctuary: I am the LORD. 31Turn ye 
not unto the ghosts, nor unto familiar 
spirits; seek them not out, to be defiled 
by them: I am the LORD your God. 
32Thou shalt rise up before the hoary 
head, and honour the face of the old 
man, and thou shalt fear thy God: I am 
the LORD. 33And if a stranger sojourn 
with thee in your land, ye shall not do 
him wrong. 34The stranger that 
sojourneth with you shall be unto you 
as the home-born among you, and thou 
shalt love him as thyself; for ye were 
strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the 
LORD your God. 35Ye shall do no 
unrighteousness in judgment, in 
meteyard, in weight, or in measure. 
36Just balances, just weights, a just 
ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I 
am the LORD your God, who brought 
you out of the land of Egypt. 37And ye 
shall observe all My statutes, and all 
Mine ordinances, and do them: I am 
the LORD. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Moreover, 
thou shalt say to the children of Israel: 

Whosoever he be of the children of 
Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn 
in Israel, that giveth of his seed unto 
Molech; he shall surely be put to 
death; the people of the land shall 
stone him with stones. 3I also will set 
My face against that man, and will cut 
him off from among his people, 
because he hath given of his seed unto 
Molech, to defile My sanctuary, and to 
profane My holy name. 4And if the 
people of the land do at all hide their 
eyes from that man, when he giveth of 
his seed unto Molech, and put him not 
to death; 5then I will set My face 
against that man, and against his 
family, and will cut him off, and all 
that go astray after him, to go astray 
after Molech, from among their 
people. 6And the soul that turneth unto 
the ghosts, and unto the familiar 
spirits, to go astray after them, I will 
even set My face against that soul, and 
will cut him off from among his 
people. 7Sanctify yourselves therefore, 
20 




and be ye holy; for I am the LORD your 
God. 8And keep ye My statutes, and do 
them: I am the LORD who sanctify you. 
9For whatsoever man there be that 
curseth his father or his mother shall 
surely be put to death; he hath cursed 
his father or his mother; his blood shall 
be upon him. 10And the man that 
committeth adultery with another 
man’s wife, even he that committeth 
adultery with his neighbour’s wife, 
both the adulterer and the adulteress 
shall surely be put to death. 11And the 
man that lieth with his father’s wife—
he hath uncovered his father’s 
nakedness—both of them shall surely 
be put to death; their blood shall be 
upon them. 12And if a man lie with his 
daughter-in-law, both of them shall 
surely be put to death; they have 
wrought corruption; their blood shall 
be upon them. 13And if a man lie with 
mankind, as with womankind, both of 
them have committed abomination: 
they shall surely be put to death; their 
blood shall be upon them. 14And if a 
man take with his wife also her 
mother, it is wickedness: they shall be 
burnt with fire, both he and they; that 
there be no wickedness among you. 
15And if a man lie with a beast, he 
shall surely be put to death; and ye 
shall slay the beast. 16And if a woman 
approach unto any beast, and lie down 
thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and 
the beast: they shall surely be put to 
death; their blood shall be upon them. 
17And if a man shall take his sister, his 
father’s daughter, or his mother’s 
daughter, and see her nakedness, and 
she see his nakedness: it is a shameful 
thing; and they shall be cut off in the 
sight of the children of their people: he 
hath uncovered his sister’s nakedness; 
he shall bear his iniquity. 18And if a 
man shall lie with a woman having her 
sickness, and shall uncover her 
nakedness—he hath made naked her 
fountain, and she hath uncovered the 
fountain of her blood—both of them 
shall be cut off from among their 
people. 19And thou shalt not uncover 
the nakedness of thy mother’s sister, 
nor of thy father’s sister; for he hath 
made naked his near kin; they shall 
bear their iniquity. 20And if a man shall 
lie with his uncle’s wife—he hath 
uncovered his uncle’s nakedness—
they shall bear their sin; they shall die 
childless. 21And if a man shall take his 
brother’s wife, it is impurity: he hath 
uncovered his brother’s nakedness; 
they shall be childless. 

22Ye shall therefore keep all My 
statutes, and all Mine ordinances, and 
do them, that the land, whither I bring 
you to dwell therein, vomit you not 
out. 23And ye shall not walk in the 
customs of the nation, which I am 
casting out before you; for they did all 
these things, and therefore I abhorred 
them. 24But I have said unto you: ‘Ye 
shall inherit their land, and I will give 
it unto you to possess it, a land flowing 
with milk and honey.’ I am the LORD 
your God, who have set you apart 
from the peoples. 25Ye shall therefore 
separate between the clean beast and 


the unclean, and between the unclean 
fowl and the clean; and ye shall not 
make your souls detestable by beast, or 
by fowl, or by any thing wherewith the 
ground teemeth, which I have set apart 
for you to hold unclean. 26And ye shall 
be holy unto Me; for I the LORD am 
holy, and have set you apart from the 
peoples, that ye should be Mine. 

27A man also or a woman that 
divineth by a ghost or a familiar spirit, 
shall surely be put to death; they shall 
stone them with stones; their blood 
shall be upon them. 

 

... 

And the LORD said unto 
Moses: Speak unto the priests 
the sons of Aaron, and say unto them: 

There shall none defile himself for 
the dead among his people; 2except for 
his kin, that is near unto him, for his 
mother, and for his father, and for his 
son, and for his daughter, and for his 
brother; 3and for his sister a virgin, that 
is near unto him, that hath had no 
husband, for her may he defile 
himself. 4He shall not defile himself, 
being a chief man among his people, 
to profane himself. 5They shall not 
make baldness upon their head, neither 
shall they shave off the corners of their 
beard, nor make any cuttings in their 
flesh. 6They shall be holy unto their 
God, and not profane the name of their 
God; for the offerings of the LORD 
made by fire, the bread of their God, 
they do offer; therefore they shall be 
holy. 7They shall not take a woman 
that is a harlot, or profaned; neither 
shall they take a woman put away 
from her husband; for he is holy unto 
his God. 8Thou shalt sanctify him 
therefore; for he offereth the bread of 
thy God; he shall be holy unto thee; 
for I the LORD, who sanctify you, am 
holy. 9And the daughter of any priest, 
if she profane herself by playing the 
harlot, she profaneth her father: she 
shall be burnt with fire. 

10And the priest that is highest 
among his brethren, upon whose head 
the anointing oil is poured, and that is 
consecrated to put on the garments, 
shall not let the hair of his head go 
loose, nor rend his clothes; 11neither 
shall he go in to any dead body, nor 
defile himself for his father, or for his 
mother; 12neither shall he go out of the 
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of 
his God; for the consecration of the 
anointing oil of his God is upon him: I 
am the LORD. 13And he shall take a 
wife in her virginity. 14A widow, or 
one divorced, or a profaned woman, or 
a harlot, these shall he not take; but a 
virgin of his own people shall he take 
to wife. 15And he shall not profane his 
seed among his people; for I am the 
LORD who sanctify him. 

16And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 17Speak unto Aaron, saying: 

Whosoever he be of thy seed 
throughout their generations that hath 
a blemish, let him not approach to 
offer the bread of his God. 18For 
whatsoever man he be that hath a 
blemish, he shall not approach: a blind 
21 




man, or a lame, or he that hath any 
thing maimed, or anything too long, 
19or a man that is broken-footed, or 
broken-handed, 20or crook-backed, or a 
dwarf, or that hath his eye overspread, 
or is scabbed, or scurvy, or hath his 
stones crushed; 21no man of the seed of 
Aaron the priest, that hath a blemish, 
shall come nigh to offer the offerings 
of the LORD made by fire; he hath a 
blemish; he shall not come nigh to 
offer the bread of his God. 22He may 
eat the bread of his God, both of the 
most holy, and of the holy. 23Only he 
shall not go in unto the veil, nor come 
nigh unto the altar, because he hath a 
blemish; that he profane not My holy 
places; for I am the LORD who sanctify 
them. 

24So Moses spoke unto Aaron, and 
to his sons, and unto all the children of 
Israel. 

22 



And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
Aaron and to his sons, that they 
separate themselves from the holy 
things of the children of Israel, which 
they hallow unto Me, and that they 
profane not My holy name: I am the 
LORD. 3Say unto them: 

Whosoever he be of all your seed 
throughout your generations, that 
approacheth unto the holy things, 
which the children of Israel hallow 
unto the LORD, having his uncleanness 
upon him, that soul shall be cut off 
from before Me: I am the LORD. 4What 
man soever of the seed of Aaron is a 
leper, or hath an issue, he shall not eat 
of the holy things, until he be clean. 
And whoso toucheth any one that is 
unclean by the dead; or from 
whomsoever the flow of seed goeth 
out; 5or whosoever toucheth any 
swarming thing, whereby he may be 
made unclean, or a man of whom he 
may take uncleanness, whatsoever 
uncleanness he hath; 6the soul that 
toucheth any such shall be unclean 
until the even, and shall not eat of the 
holy things, unless he bathe his flesh 
in water. 7And when the sun is down, 
he shall be clean; and afterward he 
may eat of the holy things, because it 
is his bread. 8That which dieth of 
itself, or is torn of beasts, he shall not 
eat to defile himself therewith: I am 
the LORD. 9They shall therefore keep 
My charge, lest they bear sin for it, 
and die therein, if they profane it: I am 
the LORD who sanctify them. 10There 
shall no acommon man eat of the holy 
thing; a tenant of a priest, or a hired 
servant, shall not eat of the holy thing. 
11But if a priest buy any soul, the 
purchase of his money, he may eat of 
it; and such as are born in his house, 
they may eat of his bread. 12And if a 
priest’s daughter be married unto a 
common man, she shall not eat of that 
which is set apart from the holy things. 
13But if a priest’s daughter be a widow, 
or divorced, and have no child, and is 
returned unto her father’s house, as in 
her youth, she may eat of her father’s 
bread; but there shall no common man 

a That is, one who is not a priest. 


eat thereof. 14And if a man eat of the 
holy thing through error, then he shall 
put the fifth part thereof unto it, and 
shall give unto the priest the holy 
thing. 15And they shall not profane the 
holy things of the children of Israel, 
which they set apart unto the LORD; 
16and so cause them to bear the 
iniquity that bringeth guilt, when they 
eat their holy things; for I am the LORD 
who sanctify them. 

17And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 18Speak unto Aaron, and to his 
sons, and unto all the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: 

Whosoever he be of the house of 
Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that 
bringeth his offering, whether it be any 
of their vows, or any of their free-will-
offerings, which are brought unto the 
LORD for a burnt-offering; 19that ye 
may be accepted, ye shall offer a male 
without blemish, of the beeves, of the 
sheep, or of the goats. 20But 
whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall 
ye not bring; for it shall not be 
acceptable for you. 21And whosoever 
bringeth a sacrifice of peace-offerings 
unto the LORD in fulfilment of a vow 
clearly uttered, or for a freewill-
offering, of the herd or of the flock, it 
shall be perfect to be accepted; there 
shall be no blemish therein. 22Blind, or 
broken, or maimed, or having a wen, 
or scabbed, or scurvy, ye shall not 
offer these unto the LORD, nor make an 
offering by fire of them upon the altar 
unto the LORD. 23Either a bullock or a 
lamb that hath any thing too long or 
too short, that mayest thou offer for a 
freewill-offering; but for a vow it shall 
not be accepted. 24That which hath its 
stones bruised, or crushed, or torn, or 
cut, ye shall not offer unto the LORD; 
neither shall ye do thus in your land. 
25Neither from the hand of a foreigner 
shall ye offer the bread of your God of 
any of these, because their corruption 
is in them, there is a blemish in them; 
they shall not be accepted for you. 

26And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 

27When a bullock, or a sheep, or a 
goat, is brought forth, then it shall be 
seven days under the dam; but from 
the eighth day and thenceforth it may 
be accepted for an offering made by 
fire unto the LORD. 28And whether it be 
cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and its 
young both in one day. 29And when ye 
sacrifice a sacrifice of thanksgiving 
unto the LORD, ye shall sacrifice it that 
ye may be accepted. 30On the same day 
it shall be eaten; ye shall leave none of 
it until the morning: I am the LORD. 
31And ye shall keep My 
commandments, and do them: I am the 
LORD. 32And ye shall not profane My 
holy name; but I will be hallowed 
among the children of Israel: I am the 
LORD who hallow you, 33that brought 
you out of the land of Egypt, to be 
your God: I am the LORD. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
the children of Israel, and say unto 
them: 
23 




The appointed seasons of the LORD, 
which ye shall proclaim to be holy 
convocations, even these are My 
appointed seasons. 3Six days shall 
work be done; but on the seventh day 
is a sabbath of solemn rest, a holy 
convocation; ye shall do no manner of 
work; it is a sabbath unto the LORD in 
all your dwellings. 

4These are the appointed seasons of 
the LORD, even holy convocations, 
which ye shall proclaim in their 
appointed season. 5In the first month, 
on the fourteenth day of the month at 
dusk, is the LORD’S passover. 6And on 
the fifteenth day of the same month is 
the feast of unleavened bread unto the 
LORD; seven days ye shall eat 
unleavened bread. 7In the first day ye 
shall have a holy convocation; ye shall 
do no manner of servile work. 8And ye 
shall bring an offering made by fire 
unto the LORD seven days; in the 
seventh day is a holy convocation; ye 
shall do no manner of servile work. 

9And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
saying: 10Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: 

When ye are come into the land 
which I give unto you, and shall reap 
the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring 
the sheaf of the first-fruits of your 
harvest unto the priest. 11And he shall 
wave the sheaf before the LORD, to be 
accepted for you; on the morrow after 
the sabbath the priest shall wave it. 
12And in the day when ye wave the 
sheaf, ye shall offer a he-lamb without 
blemish of the first year for a burnt-
offering unto the LORD. 13And the 
meal-offering thereof shall be two 
tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour 
mingled with oil, an offering made by 
fire unto the LORD for a sweet savour; 
and the drink-offering thereof shall be 
of wine, the fourth part of a hin. 14And 
ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched 
corn, nor fresh ears, until this selfsame 
day, until ye have brought the offering 
of your God; it is a statute for ever 
throughout your generations in all your 
dwellings. 

15And ye shall count unto you from 
the morrow after the aday of rest, from 
the day that ye brought the sheaf of the 
waving; seven weeks shall there be 
complete; 16even unto the morrow 
after the seventh week shall ye number 
fifty days; and ye shall present a new 
meal-offering unto the LORD. 17Ye 
shall bring out of your dwellings two 
wave-loaves of two tenth parts of an 
ephah; they shall be of fine flour, they 
shall be baked with leaven, for first-
fruits unto the LORD. 18And ye shall 
present with the bread seven lambs 
without blemish of the first year, and 
one young bullock, and two rams; they 
shall be a burnt-offering unto the 
LORD, with their meal-offering, and 
their drink-offerings, even an offering 
made by fire, of a sweet savour unto 
the LORD. 19And ye shall offer one he-
goat for a sin-offering, and two he-
lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of 
peace-offerings. 20And the priest shall 

a Heb. sabbath. 


wave them with the bread of the first-
fruits for a wave-offering before the 
LORD, with the two lambs; they shall 
be holy to the LORD for the priest. 
21And ye shall make proclamation on 
the selfsame day; there shall be a holy 
convocation unto you; ye shall do no 
manner of servile work; it is a statute 
for ever in all your dwellings 
throughout your generations. 

22And when ye reap the harvest of 
your land, thou shalt not wholly reap 
the corner of thy field, neither shalt 
thou gather the gleaning of thy 
harvest; thou shalt leave them for the 
poor, and for the stranger: I am the 
LORD your God. 

23And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 24Speak unto the children of 
Israel, saying: 

In the seventh month, in the first day 
of the month, shall be a solemn rest 
unto you, a memorial proclaimed with 
the blast of horns, a holy convocation. 
25Ye shall do no manner of servile 
work; and ye shall bring an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD. 

26And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 

27Howbeit on the tenth day of this 
seventh month is the day of 
atonement; there shall be a holy 
convocation unto you, and ye shall 
afflict your souls; and ye shall bring an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD. 
28And ye shall do no manner of work 
in that same day; for it is a day of 
atonement, to make atonement for you 
before the LORD your God. 29For 
whatsoever soul it be that shall not be 
afflicted in that same day, he shall be 
cut off from his people. 30And 
whatsoever soul it be that doeth any 
manner of work in that same day, that 
soul will I destroy from among his 
people. 31Ye shall do no manner of 
work; it is a statute for ever throughout 
your generations in all your dwellings. 
32It shall be unto you a sabbath of 
solemn rest, and ye shall afflict your 
souls; in the ninth day of the month at 
even, from even unto even, shall ye 
keep your sabbath. 

33And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 34Speak unto the children of 
Israel, saying: 

On the fifteenth day of this seventh 
month is the feast of tabernacles for 
seven days unto the LORD. 35On the 
first day shall be a holy convocation; 
ye shall do no manner of servile work. 
36Seven days ye shall bring an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD; on the 
eighth day shall be a holy convocation 
unto you; and ye shall bring an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD; it 
is a day of solemn assembly; ye shall 
do no manner of servile work. 

37These are the appointed seasons of 
the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to 
be holy convocations, to bring an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD, a 
burnt-offering, and a meal-offering, a 
sacrifice, and drink-offerings, each on 
its own day; 38beside the sabbaths of 
the LORD, and beside your gifts, and 
beside all your vows, and beside all 


your freewill-offerings, which ye give 
unto the LORD. 

39Howbeit on the fifteenth day of the 
seventh month, when ye have gathered 
in the fruits of the land, ye shall keep 
the feast of the LORD seven days; on 
the first day shall be a solemn rest, and 
on the eighth day shall be a solemn 
rest. 40And ye shall take you on the 
first day the fruit of goodly trees, 
branches of palm-trees, and boughs of 
thick trees, and willows of the brook, 
and ye shall rejoice before the LORD 
your God seven days. 41And ye shall 
keep it a feast unto the LORD seven 
days in the year; it is a statute for ever 
in your generations; ye shall keep it in 
the seventh month. 42Ye shall dwell in 
booths seven days; all that are home-
born in Israel shall dwell in booths; 
43that your generations may know that 
I made the children of Israel to dwell 
in booths, when I brought them out of 
the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your 
God. 

44And Moses declared unto the 
children of Israel the appointed 
seasons of the LORD. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Command 
the children of Israel, that they bring 
unto thee pure olive oil beaten for the 
light, to cause a lamp to burn 
continually. 3Without the veil of the 
testimony, in the tent of meeting, shall 
Aaron order it from evening to 
morning before the LORD continually; 
it shall be a statute for ever throughout 
your generations. 4He shall order the 
lamps upon the pure candlestick before 
the LORD continually. 

5And thou shalt take fine flour, and 
bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth 
parts of an ephah shall be in one cake. 
6And thou shalt set them in two rows, 
six in a row, upon the pure table before 
the LORD. 7And thou shalt put pure 
frankincense with each row, that it 
may be to the bread for a memorial-
part, even an offering made by fire 
unto the LORD. 8Every sabbath day he 
shall set it in order before the LORD 
continually; it is from the children of 
Israel, an everlasting covenant. 9And it 
shall be for Aaron and his sons; and 
they shall eat it in a holy place; for it is 
most holy unto him of the offerings of 
the LORD made by fire, a perpetual 
due.’ 

 

10And the son of an Israelitish 
woman, whose father was an Egyptian, 
went out among the children of Israel; 
and the son of the Israelitish woman 
and a man of Israel strove together in 
the camp. 11And the son of the 
Israelitish woman blasphemed the 
Name, and cursed; and they brought 
him unto Moses. And his mother’s 
name was Shelomith, the daughter of 
Dibri, of the tribe of Dan. 12And they 
put him in ward, that it might be 
declared unto them at the mouth of the 
LORD. 

13And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 14’Bring forth him that hath 
cursed without the camp; and let all 
24 




that heard him lay their hands upon his 
head, and let all the congregation stone 
him. 15And thou shalt speak unto the 
children of Israel, saying: Whosoever 
curseth his God shall bear his sin. 
16And he that blasphemeth the name of 
the LORD, he shall surely be put to 
death; all the congregation shall 
certainly stone him; as well the 
stranger, as the home-born, when he 
blasphemeth the Name, shall be put to 
death. 17And he that smiteth any man 
mortally shall surely be put to death. 
18And he that smiteth a beast mortally 
shall make it good: life for life. 19And 
if a man maim his neighbour; as he 
hath done, so shall it be done to him: 
20breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth 
for tooth; as he hath maimed a man, so 
shall it be rendered unto him. 21And he 
that killeth a beast shall make it good; 
and he that killeth a man shall be put 
to death. 22Ye shall have one manner 
of law, as well for the stranger, as for 
the home-born; for I am the LORD your 
God.’ 23And Moses spoke to the 
children of Israel, and they brought 
forth him that had cursed out of the 
camp, and stoned him with stones. 
And the children of Israel did as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

 

... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses in mount Sinai, saying: 
2Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
say unto them: 

When ye come into the land which I 
give you, then shall the land keep a 
sabbath unto the LORD. 3Six years thou 
shalt sow thy field, and six years thou 
shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in 
the produce thereof. 4But in the 
seventh year shall be a sabbath of 
solemn rest for the land, a sabbath 
unto the LORD; thou shalt neither sow 
thy field, nor prune thy vineyard. 5That 
which groweth of itself of thy harvest 
thou shalt not reap, and the grapes of 
thy undressed vine thou shalt not 
gather; it shall be a year of solemn rest 
for the land. 6And the sabbath-produce 
of the land shall be for food for you: 
for thee, and for thy servant and for 
thy maid, and for thy hired servant and 
for the settler by thy side that sojourn 
with thee; 7and for thy cattle, and for 
the beasts that are in thy land, shall all 
the increase thereof be for food. 

8And thou shalt number seven 
sabbaths of years unto thee, seven 
times seven years; and there shall be 
unto thee the days of seven sabbaths of 
years, even forty and nine years. 9Then 
shalt thou make proclamation with the 
blast of the horn on the tenth day of 
the seventh month; in the day of 
atonement shall ye make proclamation 
with the horn throughout all your land. 
10And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, 
and proclaim liberty throughout the 
land unto all the inhabitants thereof; it 
shall be a jubilee unto you; and ye 
shall return every man unto his 
possession, and ye shall return every 
man unto his family. 11A jubilee shall 
that fiftieth year be unto you; ye shall 
not sow, neither reap that which 
25 




groweth of itself in it, nor gather the 
grapes in it of the undressed vines. 
12For it is a jubilee; it shall be holy 
unto you; ye shall eat the increase 
thereof out of the field. 13In this year 
of jubilee ye shall return every man 
unto his possession. 14And if thou sell 
aught unto thy neighbour, or buy of 
thy neighbour’s hand, ye shall not 
wrong one another. 15According to the 
number of years after the jubilee thou 
shalt buy of thy neighbour, and 
according unto the number of years of 
the crops he shall sell unto thee. 
16According to the multitude of the 
years thou shalt increase the price 
thereof, and according to the fewness 
of the years thou shalt diminish the 
price of it; for the number of crops 
doth he sell unto thee. 17And ye shall 
not wrong one another; but thou shalt 
fear thy God; for I am the LORD your 
God. 18Wherefore ye shall do My 
statutes, and keep Mine ordinances 
and do them; and ye shall dwell in the 
land in safety. 19And the land shall 
yield her fruit, and ye shall eat until ye 
have enough, and dwell therein in 
safety. 20And if ye shall say: ‘What 
shall we eat the seventh year? behold, 
we may not sow, nor gather in our 
increase’; 21then I will command My 
blessing upon you in the sixth year, 
and it shall bring forth produce for the 
three years. 22And ye shall sow the 
eighth year, and eat of the produce, the 
old store; until the ninth year, until her 
produce come in, ye shall eat the old 
store. 23And the land shall not be sold 
in perpetuity; for the land is Mine; for 
ye are strangers and settlers with Me. 
24And in all the land of your 
possession ye shall grant a redemption 
for the land. 

25If thy brother be waxen poor, and 
sell some of his possession, then shall 
his kinsman that is next unto him 
come, and shall redeem that which his 
brother hath sold. 26And if a man have 
no one to redeem it, and he be waxen 
rich and find sufficient means to 
redeem it; 27then let him count the 
years of the sale thereof, and restore 
the overplus unto the man to whom he 
sold it; and he shall return unto his 
possession. 28But if he have not 
sufficient means to get it back for 
himself, then that which he hath sold 
shall remain in the hand of him that 
hath bought it until the year of jubilee; 
and in the jubilee it shall go out, and 
he shall return unto his possession. 

29And if a man sell a dwelling-house 
in a walled city, then he may redeem it 
within a whole year after it is sold; for 
a full year shall he have the right of 
redemption. 30And if it be not 
redeemed within the space of a full 
year, then the house that is in the 
walled city shall be made sure in 
perpetuity to him that bought it, 
throughout his generations; it shall not 
go out in the jubilee. 31But the houses 
of the villages which have no wall 
round about them shall be reckoned 
with the fields of the country; they 
may be redeemed, and they shall go 
out in the jubilee. 32But as for the cities 


of the Levites, the houses of the cities 
of their possession, the Levites shall 
have a perpetual right of redemption. 
33And if a man purchase of the Levites, 
then the house that was sold in the city 
of his possession, shall go out in the 
jubilee; for the houses of the cities of 
the Levites are their possession among 
the children of Israel. 34But the fields 
of the open land about their cities may 
not be sold; for that is their perpetual 
possession. 

35And if thy brother be waxen poor, 
and his means fail with thee; then thou 
shalt uphold him: as a stranger and a 
settler shall he live with thee. 36Take 
thou no interest of him or increase; but 
fear thy God; that thy brother may live 
with thee. 37Thou shalt not give him 
thy money upon interest, nor give him 
thy victuals for increase. 38I am the 
LORD your God, who brought you forth 
out of the land of Egypt, to give you 
the land of Canaan, to be your God. 

39And if thy brother be waxen poor 
with thee, and sell himself unto thee, 
thou shalt not make him to serve as a 
bondservant. 40As a hired servant, and 
as a settler, he shall be with thee; he 
shall serve with thee unto the year of 
jubilee. 41Then shall he go out from 
thee, he and his children with him, and 
shall return unto his own family, and 
unto the possession of his fathers shall 
he return. 42For they are My servants, 
whom I brought forth out of the land 
of Egypt; they shall not be sold as 
bondmen. 43Thou shalt not rule over 
him with rigour; but shalt fear thy 
God. 44And as for thy bondmen, and 
thy bondmaids, whom thou mayest 
have: of the nations that are round 
about you, of them shall ye buy 
bondmen and bondmaids. 45Moreover 
of the children of the strangers that do 
sojourn among you, of them may ye 
buy, and of their families that are with 
you, which they have begotten in your 
land; and they may be your possession. 
46And ye may make them an 
inheritance for your children after you, 
to hold for a possession: of them may 
ye take your bondmen for ever; but 
over your brethren the children of 
Israel ye shall not rule, one over 
another, with rigour. 

47And if a stranger who is a settler 
with thee be waxen rich, and thy 
brother be waxen poor beside him, and 
sell himself unto the stranger who is a 
settler with thee, or to the offshoot of a 
stranger’s family, 48after that he is sold 
he may be redeemed; one of his 
brethren may redeem him; 49or his 
uncle, or his uncle’s son, may redeem 
him, or any that is nigh of kin unto 
him of his family may redeem him; or 
if he be waxen rich, he may redeem 
himself. 50And he shall reckon with 
him that bought him from the year that 
he sold himself to him unto the year of 
jubilee; and the price of his sale shall 
be according unto the number of years; 
according to the time of a hired servant 
shall he be with him. 51If there be yet 
many years, according unto them he 
shall give back the price of his 
redemption out of the money that he 


was bought for. 52And if there remain 
but few years unto the year of jubilee, 
then he shall reckon with him; 
according unto his years shall he give 
back the price of his redemption. 53As 
a servant hired year by year shall he be 
with him; he shall not rule with rigour 
over him in thy sight. 54And if he be 
not redeemed by any of these means, 
then he shall go out in the year of 
jubilee, he, and his children with him. 
55For unto Me the children of Israel are 
servants; they are My servants whom I 
brought forth out of the land of Egypt: 
I am the LORD your God. 

Ye shall make you no idols, 
neither shall ye rear you up a 
graven image, or a pillar, neither shall 
ye place any figured stone in your 
land, to bow down unto it; for I am the 
LORD your God. 2Ye shall keep My 
sabbaths, and reverence My sanctuary: 
I am the LORD. 

 

..... 

3If ye walk in My statutes, and keep 
My commandments, and do them; 
4then I will give your rains in their 
season, and the land shall yield her 
produce, and the trees of the field shall 
yield their fruit. 5And your threshing 
shall reach unto the vintage, and the 
vintage shall reach unto the sowing 
time; and ye shall eat your bread until 
ye have enough, and dwell in your 
land safely. 6And I will give peace in 
the land, and ye shall lie down, and 
none shall make you afraid; and I will 
cause evil beasts to cease out of the 
land, neither shall the sword go 
through your land. 7And ye shall chase 
your enemies, and they shall fall 
before you by the sword. 8And five of 
you shall chase a hundred, and a 
hundred of you shall chase ten 
thousand; and your enemies shall fall 
before you by the sword. 9And I will 
have respect unto you, and make you 
fruitful, and multiply you; and will 
establish My covenant with you. 10And 
ye shall eat old store long kept, and ye 
shall bring forth the old from before 
the new. 11And I will set My 
tabernacle among you, and My soul 
shall not abhor you. 12And I will walk 
among you, and will be your God, and 
ye shall be My people. 13I am the LORD 
your God, who brought you forth out 
of the land of Egypt, that ye should not 
be their bondmen; and I have broken 
the bars of your yoke, and made you 
go upright. 

 

14But if ye will not hearken unto 
Me, and will not do all these 
commandments; 15and if ye shall reject 
My statutes, and if your soul abhor 
Mine ordinances, so that ye will not do 
all My commandments, but break My 
covenant; 16I also will do this unto 
you: I will appoint terror over you, 
even consumption and fever, that shall 
make the eyes to fail, and the soul to 
languish; and ye shall sow your seed in 
vain, for your enemies shall eat it. 
17And I will set My face against you, 
and ye shall be smitten before your 
enemies; they that hate you shall rule 
26 




over you; and ye shall flee when none 
pursueth you. 18And if ye will not yet 
for these things hearken unto Me, then 
I will chastise you seven times more 
for your sins. 19And I will break the 
pride of your power; and I will make 
your heaven as iron, and your earth as 
brass. 20And your strength shall be 
spent in vain; for your land shall not 
yield her produce, neither shall the 
trees of the land yield their fruit. 21And 
if ye walk contrary unto Me, and will 
not hearken unto Me; I will bring 
seven times more plagues upon you 
according to your sins. 22And I will 
send the beast of the field among you, 
which shall rob you of your children, 
and destroy your cattle, and make you 
few in number; and your ways shall 
become desolate. 23And if in spite of 
these things ye will not be corrected 
unto Me, but will walk contrary unto 
Me; 24then will I also walk contrary 
unto you; and I will smite you, even I, 
seven times for your sins. 25And I will 
bring a sword upon you, that shall 
execute the vengeance of the covenant; 
and ye shall be gathered together 
within your cities; and I will send the 
pestilence among you; and ye shall be 
delivered into the hand of the enemy. 
26When I break your staff of bread, ten 
women shall bake your bread in one 
oven, and they shall deliver your bread 
again by weight; and ye shall eat, and 
not be satisfied. 

27And if ye will not for all this 
hearken unto Me, but walk contrary 
unto Me; 28then I will walk contrary 
unto you in fury; and I also will 
chastise you seven times for your sins. 
29And ye shall eat the flesh of your 
sons, and the flesh of your daughters 
shall ye eat. 30And I will destroy your 
high places, and cut down your sun-
pillars, and cast your carcasses upon 
the carcasses of your idols; and My 
soul shall abhor you. 31And I will 
make your cities a waste, and will 
bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, 
and I will not smell the savour of your 
sweet odours. 32And I will bring the 
land into desolation; and your enemies 
that dwell therein shall be astonished 
at it. 33And you will I scatter among 
the nations, and I will draw out the 
sword after you; and your land shall be 
a desolation, and your cities shall be a 
waste. 34Then shall the land be paid 
her sabbaths, as long as it lieth 
desolate, and ye are in your 
enemies’land; even then shall the land 
rest, and repay her sabbaths. 35As long 
as it lieth desolate it shall have rest; 
even the rest which it had not in your 
sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it. 36And 
as for them that are left of you, I will 
send a faintness into their heart in the 
lands of their enemies; and the sound 
of a driven leaf shall chase them; and 
they shall flee, as one fleeth from the 
sword; and they shall fall when none 
pursueth. 37And they shall stumble one 
upon another, as it were before the 
sword, when none pursueth; and ye 
shall have no power to stand before 
your enemies. 38And ye shall perish 
among the nations, and the land of 


your enemies shall eat you up. 39And 
they that are left of you shall pine 
away in their iniquity in your 
enemies’lands; and also in the 
iniquities of their fathers shall they 
pine away with them. 40And they shall 
confess their iniquity, and the iniquity 
of their fathers, in their treachery 
which they committed against Me, and 
also that they have walked contrary 
unto Me. 41I also will walk contrary 
unto them, and bring them into the 
land of their enemies; if then 
perchance their uncircumcised heart be 
humbled, and they then be paid the 
punishment of their iniquity; 42then 
will I remember My covenant with 
Jacob, and also My covenant with 
Isaac, and also My covenant with 
Abraham will I remember; and I will 
remember the land. 43For the land shall 
lie forsaken without them, and shall be 
paid her sabbaths, while she lieth 
desolate without them; and they shall 
be paid the punishment of their 
iniquity; because, even because they 
rejected Mine ordinances, and their 
soul abhorred My statutes. 44And yet 
for all that, when they are in the land 
of their enemies, I will not reject them, 
neither will I abhor them, to destroy 
them utterly, and to break My 
covenant with them; for I am the LORD 
their God. 45But I will for their sakes 
remember the covenant of their 
ancestors, whom I brought forth out of 
the land of Egypt in the sight of the 
nations, that I might be their God: I am 
the LORD. 

46These are the statutes and 
ordinances and laws, which the LORD 
made between Him and the children of 
Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of 
Moses. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
the children of Israel, and say unto 
them: 

When a man shall clearly utter a 
vow of persons unto the LORD, 
according to thy valuation, 3then thy 
valuation shall be for the male from 
twenty years old even unto sixty years 
old, even thy valuation shall be fifty 
shekels of silver, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary. 4And if it be a female, then 
thy valuation shall be thirty shekels. 
5And if it be from five years old even 
unto twenty years old, then thy 
valuation shall be for the male twenty 
shekels, and for the female ten shekels. 
6And if it be from a month old even 
unto five years old, then thy valuation 
shall be for the male five shekels of 
silver, and for the female thy valuation 
shall be three shekels of silver. 7And if 
it be from sixty years old and upward: 
if it be a male, then thy valuation shall 
be fifteen shekels, and for the female 
ten shekels. 8But if he be too poor for 
thy valuation, then he shall be set 
before the priest, and the priest shall 
value him; according to the means of 
him that vowed shall the priest value 
him. 

9And if it be a beast, whereof men 
bring an offering unto the LORD, all 
27 




that any man giveth of such unto the 
LORD shall be holy. 10He shall not alter 
it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a 
bad for a good; and if he shall at all 
change beast for beast, then both it and 
that for which it is changed shall be 
holy. 11And if it be any unclean beast, 
of which they may not bring an 
offering unto the LORD, then he shall 
set the beast before the priest. 12And 
the priest shall value it, whether it be 
good or bad; as thou the priest valuest 
it, so shall it be. 13But if he will indeed 
redeem it, then he shall add the fifth 
part thereof unto thy valuation. 

14And when a man shall sanctify his 
house to be holy unto the LORD, then 
the priest shall value it, whether it be 
good or bad; as the priest shall value it, 
so shall it stand. 15And if he that 
sanctified it will redeem his house, 
then he shall add the fifth part of the 
money of thy valuation unto it, and it 
shall be his. 

16And if a man shall sanctify unto 
the LORD part of the field of his 
possession, then thy valuation shall be 
according to the sowing thereof; the 
sowing of a homer of barley shall be 
valued at fifty shekels of silver. 17If he 
sanctify his field from the year of 
jubilee, according to thy valuation it 
shall stand. 18But if he sanctify his 
field after the jubilee, then the priest 
shall reckon unto him the money 
according to the years that remain unto 
the year of jubilee, and an abatement 
shall be made from thy valuation. 
19And if he that sanctified the field will 
indeed redeem it, then he shall add the 
fifth part of the money of thy valuation 
unto it, and it shall be assured to him. 
20And if he will not redeem the field, 
or if he have sold the field to another 
man, it shall not be redeemed any 
more. 21But the field, when it goeth out 
in the jubilee, shall be holy unto the 
LORD, as a field devoted; the 
possession thereof shall be the priest’s. 
22And if he sanctify unto the LORD a 
field which he hath bought, which is 
not of the field of his possession; 
23then the priest shall reckon unto him 
the worth of thy valuation unto the 
year of jubilee; and he shall give thy 
valuation in that day, as a holy thing 
unto the LORD. 24In the year of jubilee 
the field shall return unto him of 
whom it was bought, even to him to 
whom the possession of the land 
belongeth. 25And all thy valuations 
shall be according to the shekel of the 
sanctuary; twenty gerahs shall be the 
shekel. 

26Howbeit the firstling among 
beasts, which is born as a firstling to 
the LORD, no man shall sanctify it; 
whether it be ox or sheep, it is the 
LORD’S. 27And if it be of an unclean 
beast, then he shall ransom it 
according to thy valuation, and shall 
add unto it the fifth part thereof; or if it 
be not redeemed, then it shall be sold 
according to thy valuation. 

28Notwithstanding, no devoted 
thing, that a man may devote unto the 
LORD of all that he hath, whether of 
man or beast, or of the field of his 


possession, shall be sold or redeemed; 
every devoted thing is most holy unto 
the LORD. 29None devoted, that may be 
devoted of men, shall be ransomed; he 
shall surely be put to death. 

30And all the tithe of the land, 
whether of the seed of the land, or of 
the fruit of the tree, is the LORD’S; it is 
holy unto the LORD. 31And if a man 
will redeem aught of his tithe, he shall 
add unto it the fifth part thereof. 32And 
all the tithe of the herd or the flock, 
whatsoever passeth under the rod, the 
tenth shall be holy unto the LORD. 33He 
shall not inquire whether it be good or 
bad, neither shall he change it; and if 
he change it at all, then both it and that 
for which it is changed shall be holy; it 
shall not be redeemed. 

34These are the commandments, 
which the LORD commanded Moses for 
the children of Israel in mount Sinai. 

 




..... 

NUMBERS 

 

AND THE LORD spoke unto Moses 
in the wilderness of Sinai, in the 
tent of meeting, on the first day of the 
second month, in the second year after 
the were come out of the land of 
Egypt, saying: 2’Take ye the sum of all 
the congregation of the children of 
Israel, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, every male, by their 
polls; 3from twenty years old and 
upward, all that are able to go forth to 
war in Israel: ye shall number them by 
their hosts, even thou and Aaron. 4And 
with you there shall be a man of every 
tribe, every one head of his 
fathers’house. 5And these are the 
names of the men that shall stand with 
you: of Reuben, Elizur the son of 
Shedeur. 6Of Simeon, Shelumiel the 
son of Zurishaddai. 7Of Judah, 
Nahshon the son of Amminadab. 8Of 
Issachar, Nethanel the son of Zuar. 9Of 
Zebulun, Eliab the son of Helon. 10Of 
the children of Joseph: of Ephraim, 
Elishama the son of Ammihud; of 
Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of 
Pedahzur. 11Of Benjamin, Abidan the 
son of Gideoni. 12Of Dan, Ahiezer the 
son of Ammishaddai. 13Of Asher, 
Pagiel the son of Ochran. 14Of Gad, 
Eliasaph the son of Deuel. 15Of 
Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan.’ 
16These were the elect of the 
congregation, the princes of the tribes 
of their fathers; they were the heads of 
the thousands of Israel. 17And Moses 
and Aaron took these men that are 
pointed out by name. 18And they 
assembled all the congregation 
together on the first day of the second 
month, and they declared their 
pedigrees after their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, by their polls. 19As 
the LORD commanded Moses, so did he 
number them in the wilderness of 
Sinai. 

20And the children of Reuben, 
Israel’s first-born, their generations, by 
their families, by their fathers’houses, 
according to the number of names, by 
their polls, every male from twenty 
years old and upward, all that were 
able to go forth to war; 21those that 
were numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Reuben, were forty and six thousand 
and five hundred. 

22Of the children of Simeon, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, those that were 
numbered thereof, according to the 
number of names, by their polls, every 
male from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to go forth 
to war; 23those that were numbered of 
1 




them, of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty 
and nine thousand and three hundred. 

24Of the children of Gad, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 25those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of Gad, 
were forty and five thousand six 
hundred and fifty. 

26Of the children of Judah, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 27those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Judah, were threescore and fourteen 
thousand and six hundred. 

28Of the children of Issachar, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 29those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Issachar, were fifty and four thousand 
and four hundred. 

30Of the children of Zebulun, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 31those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Zebulun, were fifty and seven 
thousand and four hundred. 

32Of the children of Joseph, namely, 
of the children of Ephraim, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 33those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Ephraim, were forty thousand and five 
hundred. 

34Of the children of Manasseh, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 35those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Manasseh, were thirty and two 
thousand and two hundred. 

36Of the children of Benjamin, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 37those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Benjamin, were thirty and five 
thousand and four hundred. 

38Of the children of Dan, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 39those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of Dan, 
were threescore and two thousand and 
seven hundred. 

40Of the children of Asher, their 
generations, by their families, by their 


fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 41those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Asher, were forty and one thousand 
and five hundred. 

42Of the children of Naphtali, their 
generations, by their families, by their 
fathers’houses, according to the 
number of names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 43those that were 
numbered of them, of the tribe of 
Naphtali, were fifty and three thousand 
and four hundred. 

44These are those that were 
numbered, which Moses and Aaron 
numbered, and the princes of Israel, 
being twelve men; they were each one 
for his fathers’house. 45And all those 
that were numbered of the children of 
Israel by their fathers’houses, from 
twenty years old and upward, all that 
were able to go forth to war in Israel; 
46even all those that were numbered 
were six hundred thousand and three 
thousand and five hundred and fifty. 
47But the Levites after the tribe of their 
fathers were not numbered among 
them. 

48And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 49’Howbeit the tribe of Levi 
thou shalt not number, neither shalt 
thou take the sum of them among the 
children of Israel; 50but appoint thou 
the Levites over the tabernacle of the 
testimony, and over all the furniture 
thereof, and over all that belongeth to 
it; they shall bear the tabernacle, and 
all the furniture thereof; and they shall 
minister unto it, and shall encamp 
round about the tabernacle. 51And 
when the tabernacle setteth forward, 
the Levites shall take it down; and 
when the tabernacle is to be pitched, 
the Levites shall set it up; and the 
common man that draweth nigh shall 
be put to death. 52And the children of 
Israel shall pitch their tents, every man 
with his own camp, and every man 
with his own standard, according to 
their hosts. 53But the Levites shall 
pitch round about the tabernacle of the 
testimony, that there be no wrath upon 
the congregation of the children of 
Israel; and the Levites shall keep the 
charge of the tabernacle of the 
testimony.’ 54Thus did the children of 
Israel; according to all that the LORD 
commanded Moses, so did they. 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying: 2’The 
children of Israel shall pitch by their 
fathers’houses; every man with his 
own standard, according to the 
ensigns; a good way off shall they 
pitch round about the tent of meeting. 
3Now those that pitch on the east side 
toward the sunrising shall be they of 
the standard of the camp of Judah, 
according to their hosts; the prince of 
the children of Judah being Nahshon 
the son of Amminadab, 4and his host, 
and those that were numbered of them, 
threescore and fourteen thousand and 
six hundred; 5and those that pitch next 
unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar; 
2 




the prince of the children of Issachar 
being Nethanel the son of Zuar, 6and 
his host, even those that were 
numbered thereof, fifty and four 
thousand and four hundred; 7and the 
tribe of Zebulun; the prince of the 
children of Zebulun being Eliab the 
son of Helon, 8and his host, and those 
that were numbered thereof, fifty and 
seven thousand and four hundred; 9all 
that were numbered of the camp of 
Judah being a hundred thousand and 
fourscore thousand and six thousand 
and four hundred, according to their 
hosts; they shall set forth first. 

10On the south side shall be the 
standard of the camp of Reuben 
according to their hosts; the prince of 
the children of Reuben being Elizur 
the son of Shedeur, 11and his host, and 
those that were numbered thereof, 
forty and six thousand and five 
hundred; 12and those that pitch next 
unto him shall be the tribe of Simeon; 
the prince of the children of Simeon 
being Shelumiel the son of 
Zurishaddai, 13and his host, and those 
that were numbered of them, fifty and 
nine thousand and three hundred; 14and 
the tribe of Gad; the prince of the 
children of Gad being Eliasaph the son 
of Reuel, 15and his host, even those 
that were numbered of them, forty and 
five thousand and six hundred and 
fifty; 16all that were numbered of the 
camp of Reuben being a hundred 
thousand and fifty and one thousand 
and four hundred and fifty, according 
to their hosts; and they shall set forth 
second. 

17Then the tent of meeting, with the 
camp of the Levites, shall set forward 
in the midst of the camps; as they 
encamp, so shall they set forward, 
every man in his place, by their 
standards. 

18On the west side shall be the 
standard of the camp of Ephraim 
according to their hosts; the prince of 
the children of Ephraim being 
Elishama the son of Ammihud, 19and 
his host, and those that were numbered 
of them, forty thousand and five 
hundred; 20and next unto him shall be 
the tribe of Manasseh; the prince of the 
children of Manasseh being Gamaliel 
the son of Pedahzur, 21and his host, 
and those that were numbered of them, 
thirty and two thousand and two 
hundred; 22and the tribe of Benjamin; 
the prince of the children of Benjamin 
being Abidan the son of Gideoni, 23and 
his host, and those that were numbered 
of them, thirty and five thousand and 
four hundred; 24all that were numbered 
of the camp of Ephraim being a 
hundred thousand and eight thousand 
and a hundred, according to their 
hosts; and they shall set forth third. 

25On the north side shall be the 
standard of the camp of Dan according 
to their hosts; the prince of the 
children of Dan being Ahiezer the son 
of Ammishaddai, 26and his host, and 
those that were numbered of them, 
threescore and two thousand and seven 
hundred; 27and those that pitch next 


unto him shall be the tribe of Asher; 
the prince of the children of Asher 
being Pagiel the son of Ochran, 28and 
his host, and those that were numbered 
of them, forty and one thousand and 
five hundred; 29and the tribe of 
Naphtali; the prince of the children of 
Naphtali being Ahira the son of Enan, 
30and his host, and those that were 
numbered of them, fifty and three 
thousand and four hundred; 31all that 
were numbered of the camp of Dan 
being a hundred thousand and fifty and 
seven thousand and six hundred; they 
shall set forth hindmost by their 
standards.’ 

32These are they that were numbered 
of the children of Israel by their 
fathers’houses; all that were numbered 
of the camps according to their hosts 
were six hundred thousand and three 
thousand and five hundred and fifty. 
33But the Levites were not numbered 
among the children of Israel; as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 34Thus did 
the children of Israel: according to all 
that the LORD commanded Moses, so 
they pitched by their standards, and so 
they set forward, each one according 
to its families, and according to its 
fathers’houses. 

Now these are the generations of 
Aaron and Moses in the day that 
the LORD spoke with Moses in mount 
Sinai. 2And these are the names of the 
sons of Aaron: Nadab the first-born, 
and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
3These are the names of the sons of 
Aaron, the priests that were anointed, 
whom he consecrated to minister in 
the priest’s office. 4And Nadab and 
Abihu died before the LORD, when they 
offered strange fire before the LORD, in 
the wilderness of Sinai, and they had 
no children; and Eleazar and Ithamar 
ministered in the priest’s office in the 
presence of Aaron their father. 

5And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 6’Bring the tribe of Levi near, 
and set them before Aaron the priest, 
that they may minister unto him. 7And 
they shall keep his charge, and the 
charge of the whole congregation 
before the tent of meeting, to do the 
service of the tabernacle. 8And they 
shall keep all the furniture of the tent 
of meeting, and the charge of the 
children of Israel, to do the service of 
the tabernacle. 9And thou shalt give 
the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons; 
they are wholly given unto him from 
the children of Israel. 10And thou shalt 
appoint Aaron and his sons, that they 
may keep their priesthood; and the 
common man that draweth nigh shall 
be put to death.’ 

11And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 12’And I, behold, I have taken 
the Levites from among the children of 
Israel instead of every first-born that 
openeth the womb among the children 
of Israel; and the Levites shall be 
Mine; 13for all the first-born are Mine: 
on the day that I smote all the first-
born in the land of Egypt I hallowed 
unto Me all the first-born in Israel, 
both man and beast, Mine they shall 
be: I am the LORD.’ 
3 




14And the LORD spoke unto Moses in 
the wilderness of Sinai, saying: 
15’Number the children of Levi by 
their fathers’houses, by their families; 
every male from a month old and 
upward shalt thou number them.’ 
16And Moses numbered them 
according to the word of the LORD, as 
he was commanded. 17And these were 
the sons of Levi by their names: 
Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari. 
18And these are the names of the sons 
of Gershon by their families: Libni and 
Shimei. 19And the sons of Kohath by 
their families: Amram and Izhar, 
Hebron and Uzziel. 20And the sons of 
Merari by their families: Mahli and 
Mushi. These are the families of the 
Levites according to their 
fathers’houses. 

21Of Gershon was the family of the 
Libnites, and the family of the 
Shimeites; these are the families of the 
Gershonites. 22Those that were 
numbered of them, according to the 
number of all the males, from a month 
old and upward, even those that were 
numbered of them were seven 
thousand and five hundred. 23The 
families of the Gershonites were to 
pitch behind the tabernacle westward; 
24the prince of the fathers’house of the 
Gershonites being Eliasaph the son of 
Lael, 25and the charge of the sons of 
Gershon in the tent of meeting the 
tabernacle, and the Tent, the covering 
thereof, and the screen for the door of 
the tent of meeting, 26and the hangings 
of the court, and the screen for the 
door of the court—which is by the 
tabernacle, and by the altar, round 
about—and the cords of it, even 
whatsoever pertaineth to the service 
thereof. 

27And of Kohath was the family of 
the Amramites, and the family of the 
Izharites, and the family of the 
Hebronites, and the family of the 
Uzzielites; these are the families of the 
Kohathites: 28according to the number 
of all the males, from a month old and 
upward, eight thousand and six 
hundred, keepers of the charge of the 
sanctuary. 29The families of the sons of 
Kohath were to pitch on the side of the 
tabernacle southward; 30the prince of 
the fathers’house of the families of the 
Kohathites being Elizaphan the son of 
Uzziel, 31and their charge the ark, and 
the table, and the candlestick, and the 
altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary 
wherewith the priests minister, and the 
screen, and all that pertaineth to the 
service thereof; 32Eleazar the son of 
Aaron the priest being prince of the 
princes of the Levites, and having the 
oversight of them that keep the charge 
of the sanctuary. 

33Of Merari was the family of the 
Mahlites, and the family of the 
Mushites; these are the families of 
Merari. 34And those that were 
numbered of them, according to the 
number of all the males, from a month 
old and upward, were six thousand and 
two hundred; 35the prince of the 
fathers’house of the families of Merari 
being Zuriel the son of Abihail; they 


were to pitch on the side of the 
tabernacle northward; 36the appointed 
charge of the sons of Merari being the 
boards of the tabernacle, and the bars 
thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the 
sockets thereof, and all the instruments 
thereof, and all that pertaineth to the 
service thereof; 37and the pillars of the 
court round about, and their sockets, 
and their pins, and their cords. 38And 
those that were to pitch before the 
tabernacle eastward, before the tent of 
meeting toward the sunrising, were 
Moses, and Aaron and his sons, 
keeping the charge of the sanctuary, 
even the charge for the children of 
Israel; and the common man that drew 
nigh was to be put to death. 39All that 
were numbered of the Levites, whom 
Moses and Aaron numbered at the 
commandment of the LORD, by their 
families, all the males from a month 
old and upward, were twenty and two 
thousand. 

40And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Number all the first-born males of the 
children of Israel from a month old 
and upward, and take the number of 
their names. 41And thou shalt take the 
Levites for Me, even the LORD, instead 
of all the first-born among the children 
of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites 
instead of all the firstlings among the 
cattle of the children of Israel.’ 42And 
Moses numbered, as the LORD 
commanded him, all the first-born 
among the children of Israel. 43And all 
the first-born males according to the 
number of names, from a month old 
and upward, of those that were 
numbered of them, were twenty and 
two thousand two hundred and 
threescore and thirteen. 

44And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 45’Take the Levites instead of 
all the first-born among the children of 
Israel, and the cattle of the Levites 
instead of their cattle; and the Levites 
shall be Mine, even the LORD’S. 46And 
as for the redemption of the two 
hundred and three score and thirteen of 
the first-born of the children of Israel, 
that are over and above the number of 
the Levites, 47thou shalt take five 
shekels apiece by the poll; after the 
shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take 
them—the shekel is twenty gerahs. 
48And thou shalt give the money 
wherewith they that remain over of 
them are redeemed unto Aaron and to 
his sons.’ 49And Moses took the 
redemption-money from them that 
were over and above them that were 
redeemed by the Levites; 50from the 
first-born of the children of Israel took 
he the money: a thousand three 
hundred and threescore and five 
shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary. 51And Moses gave the 
redemption-money unto Aaron and to 
his sons, according to the word of the 
LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying: 2’Take 
the sum of the sons of Kohath from 
among the sons of Levi, by their 
families, by their fathers’houses, 3from 
4 




thirty years old and upward even until 
fifty years old, all that enter upon the 
service, to do work in the tent of 
meeting. 4This is the service of the 
sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting, 
about the most holy things: 5when the 
camp setteth forward, Aaron shall go 
in, and his sons, and they shall take 
down the veil of the screen, and cover 
the ark of the testimony with it; 6and 
shall put thereon a covering of 
sealskin, and shall spread over it a 
cloth all of blue, and shall set the 
staves thereof. 7And upon the table of 
showbread they shall spread a cloth of 
blue, and put thereon the dishes, and 
the pans, and the bowls, and the jars 
wherewith to pour out; and the 
continual bread shall remain thereon. 
8And they shall spread upon them a 
cloth of scarlet, and cover the same 
with a covering of sealskin, and shall 
set the staves thereof. 9And they shall 
take a cloth of blue, and cover the 
candlestick of the light, and its lamps, 
and its tongs, and its snuffdishes, and 
all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith 
they minister unto it. 10And they shall 
put it and all the vessels thereof within 
a covering of sealskin, and shall put it 
upon a bar. 11And upon the golden 
altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, 
and cover it with a covering of 
sealskin, and shall set the staves 
thereof. 12And they shall take all the 
vessels of ministry, wherewith they 
minister in the sanctuary, and put them 
in a cloth of blue, and cover them with 
a covering of sealskin, and shall put 
them on a bar. 13And they shall take 
away the ashes from the altar, and 
spread a purple cloth thereon. 14And 
they shall put upon it all the vessels 
thereof, wherewith they minister about 
it, the fire-pans, the flesh-hooks, and 
the shovels, and the basins, all the 
vessels of the altar; and they shall 
spread upon it a covering of sealskin, 
and set the staves thereof. 15And when 
Aaron and his sons have made an end 
of covering the holy furniture, and all 
the holy vessels, as the camp is to set 
forward—after that, the sons of 
Kohath shall come to bear them; but 
they shall not touch the holy things, 
lest they die. These things are the 
burden of the sons of Kohath in the 
tent of meeting. 16And the charge of 
Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest 
shall be the oil for the light, and the 
sweet incense, and the continual meal-
offering, and the anointing oil: he shall 
have the charge of all the tabernacle, 
and of all that therein is, whether it be 
the sanctuary, or the furniture thereof.’ 
17And the LORD spoke unto Moses and 
unto Aaron, saying: 18’Cut ye not off 
the tribe of the families of the 
Kohathites from among the Levites; 
19but thus do unto them, that they may 
live, and not die, when they approach 
unto the most holy things: Aaron and 
his sons shall go in, and appoint them 
every one to his service and to his 
burden; 20but they shall not go in to see 
the holy things as they are being 
covered, lest they die.’ 

 


 

 

... 

21And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
saying: 22’Take the sum of the sons of 
Gershon also, by their fathers’houses, 
by their families; 23from thirty years 
old and upward until fifty years old 
shalt thou number them: all that enter 
in to wait upon the service, to do 
service in the tent of meeting. 24This is 
the service of the families of the 
Gershonites, in serving and in bearing 
burdens: 25they shall bear the curtains 
of the tabernacle, and the tent of 
meeting, its covering, and the covering 
of sealskin that is above upon it, and 
the screen for the door of the tent of 
meeting; 26and the hangings of the 
court, and the screen for the door of 
the gate of the court, which is by the 
tabernacle and by the altar round 
about, and their cords, and all the 
instruments of their service, and 
whatsoever there may be to do with 
them, therein shall they serve. 27At the 
commandment of Aaron and his sons 
shall be all the service of the sons of 
the Gershonites, in all their burden, 
and in all their service; and ye shall 
appoint unto them in charge all their 
burden. 28This is the service of the 
families of the sons of the Gershonites 
in the tent of meeting; and their charge 
shall be under the hand of Ithamar the 
son of Aaron the priest. 

29As for the sons of Merari, thou 
shalt number them by their families, 
by their fathers’houses; 30from thirty 
years old and upward even unto fifty 
years old shalt thou number them, 
every one that entereth upon the 
service, to do the work of the tent of 
meeting. 31And this is the charge of 
their burden, according to all their 
service in the tent of meeting: the 
boards of the tabernacle, and the bars 
thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the 
sockets thereof; 32and the pillars of the 
court round about, and their sockets, 
and their pins, and their cords, even all 
their appurtenance, and all that 
pertaineth to their service; and by 
name ye shall appoint the instruments 
of the charge of their burden. 33This is 
the service of the families of the sons 
of Merari, according to all their 
service, in the tent of meeting, under 
the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron 
the priest.’ 

34And Moses and Aaron and the 
princes of the congregation numbered 
the sons of the Kohathites by their 
families, and by their fathers’houses, 
35from thirty years old and upward 
even unto fifty years old, every one 
that entered upon the service, for 
service in the tent of meeting. 36And 
those that were numbered of them by 
their families were two thousand seven 
hundred and fifty. 37These are they that 
were numbered of the families of the 
Kohathites, of all that did serve in the 
tent of meeting, whom Moses and 
Aaron numbered according to the 
commandment of the LORD by the hand 
of Moses. 


38And those that were numbered of 
the sons of Gershon, by their families, 
and by their fathers’houses, 39from 
thirty years old and upward even unto 
fifty years old, every one that entered 
upon the service, for service in the tent 
of meeting, 40even those that were 
numbered of them, by their families, 
by their fathers’houses, were two 
thousand and six hundred and thirty. 
41These are they that were numbered 
of the families of the sons of Gershon, 
of all that did serve in the tent of 
meeting, whom Moses and Aaron 
numbered according to the 
commandment of the LORD. 

42And those that were numbered of 
the families of the sons of Merari, by 
their families, by their fathers’houses, 
43from thirty years old and upward 
even unto fifty years old, every one 
that entered upon the service, for 
service in the tent of meeting, 44even 
those that were numbered of them by 
their families, were three thousand and 
two hundred. 45These are they that 
were numbered of the families of the 
sons of Merari, whom Moses and 
Aaron numbered according to the 
commandment of the LORD by the hand 
of Moses. 

46All those that were numbered of 
the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron 
and the princes of Israel numbered, by 
their families, and by their 
fathers’houses, 47from thirty years old 
and upward even unto fifty years old, 
every one that entered in to do the 
work of service, and the work of 
bearing burdens in the tent of meeting, 
48even those that were numbered of 
them, were eight thousand and five 
hundred and fourscore. 49According to 
the commandment of the LORD they 
were appointed by the hand of Moses, 
every one to his service, and to his 
burden; they were also numbered, as 
the LORD commanded Moses. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 2’Command the children 
of Israel, that they put out of the camp 
every leper, and every one that hath an 
issue, and whosoever is unclean by the 
dead; 3both male and female shall ye 
put out, without the camp shall ye put 
them; that they defile not their camp, 
in the midst whereof I dwell.’ 4And the 
children of Israel did so, and put them 
out without the camp; as the LORD 
spoke unto Moses, so did the children 
of Israel. 

 

5And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 6Speak unto the children of 
Israel: 

When a man or woman shall 
commit any sin that men commit, to 
commit a trespass against the LORD, 
and that soul be guilty; 7then they shall 
confess their sin which they have 
done; and he shall make restitution for 
his guilt in full, and add unto it the 
fifth part thereof, and give it unto him 
in respect of whom he hath been 
guilty. 8But if the man have no 
kinsman to whom restitution may be 
made for the guilt, the restitution for 
5 




guilt which is made shall be the 
LORD’S, even the priest’s; besides the 
ram of the atonement, whereby 
atonement shall be made for him. 9And 
every heave-offering of all the holy 
things of the children of Israel, which 
they present unto the priest, shall be 
his. 10And every man’s hallowed 
things shall be his: whatsoever any 
man giveth the priest, it shall be his. 

 

11And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 12Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: 

If any man’s wife go aside, and act 
unfaithfully against him, 13and a man 
lie with her carnally, and it be hid from 
the eyes of her husband, she being 
defiled secretly, and there be no 
witness against her, neither she be 
taken in the act; 14and the spirit of 
jealousy come upon him, and he be 
jealous of his wife, and she be defiled; 
or if the spirit of jealousy come upon 
him, and he be jealous of his wife, and 
she be not defiled; 15then shall the man 
bring his wife unto the priest, and shall 
bring her offering for her, the tenth 
part of an ephah of barley meal; he 
shall pour no oil upon it, nor put 
frankincense thereon; for it is a meal-
offering of jealousy, a meal-offering of 
memorial, bringing iniquity to 
remembrance. 16And the priest shall 
bring her near, and set her before the 
LORD. 17And the priest shall take holy 
water in an earthen vessel; and of the 
dust that is on the floor of the 
tabernacle the priest shall take, and put 
it into the water. 18And the priest shall 
set the woman before the LORD, and let 
the hair of the woman’s head go loose, 
and put the meal-offering of memorial 
in her hands, which is the meal-
offering of jealousy; and the priest 
shall have in his hand the water of 
bitterness that causeth the curse. 19And 
the priest shall cause her to swear, and 
shall say unto the woman: ‘If no man 
have lain with thee, and if thou hast 
not gone aside to uncleanness, being 
under thy husband, be thou free from 
this water of bitterness that causeth the 
curse; 20but if thou hast gone aside, 
being under thy husband, and if thou 
be defiled, and some man have lain 
with thee besides thy husband— 21then 
the priest shall cause the woman to 
swear with the oath of cursing, and the 
priest shall say unto the woman—the 
LORD make thee a curse and an oath 
among thy people, when the LORD doth 
make thy thigh to fall away, and thy 
belly to swell; 22and this water that 
causeth the curse shall go into thy 
bowels, and make thy belly to swell, 
and thy thigh to fall away’; and the 
woman shall say: ‘Amen, Amen.’ 
23And the priest shall write these 
curses in a scroll, and he shall blot 
them out into the water of bitterness. 
24And he shall make the woman drink 
the water of bitterness that causeth the 
curse; and the water that causeth the 
curse shall enter into her and become 
bitter. 25And the priest shall take the 
meal-offering of jealousy out of the 
woman’s hand, and shall wave the 


meal-offering before the LORD, and 
bring it unto the altar. 26And the priest 
shall take a handful of the meal-
offering, as the memorial-part thereof, 
and make it smoke upon the altar, and 
afterward shall make the woman drink 
the water. 27And when he hath made 
her drink the water, then it shall come 
to pass, if she be defiled, and have 
acted unfaithfully against her husband, 
that the water that causeth the curse 
shall enter into her and become bitter, 
and her belly shall swell, and her thigh 
shall fall away; and the woman shall 
be a curse among her people. 28And if 
the woman be not defiled, but be 
clean; then she shall be cleared, and 
shall conceive seed. 29This is the law 
of jealousy, when a wife, being under 
her husband, goeth aside, and is 
defiled; 30or when the spirit of jealousy 
cometh upon a man, and he be jealous 
over his wife; then shall he set the 
woman before the LORD, and the priest 
shall execute upon her all this law. 
31And the man shall be clear from 
iniquity, and that woman shall bear her 
iniquity. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 2Speak unto the children 
of Israel, and say unto them: 

When either man or woman shall 
clearly utter a vow, the vow of a 
Nazirite, to consecrate himself unto 
the LORD, 3he shall abstain from wine 
and strong drink: he shall drink no 
vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong 
drink, neither shall he drink any liquor 
of grapes, nor eat fresh grapes or dried. 
4All the days of his Naziriteship shall 
he eat nothing that is made of the 
grape-vine, from the pressed grapes 
even to the grapestone. 5All the days of 
his vow of Naziriteship there shall no 
razor come upon his head; until the 
days be fulfilled, in which he 
consecrateth himself unto the LORD, he 
shall be holy, he shall let the locks of 
the hair of his head grow long. 6All the 
days that he consecrateth himself unto 
the LORD he shall not come near to a 
dead body. 7He shall not make himself 
unclean for his father, or for his 
mother, for his brother, or for his 
sister, when they die; because his 
consecration unto God is upon his 
head. 8All the days of his Naziriteship 
he is holy unto the LORD. 9And if any 
man die very suddenly beside him, and 
he defile his consecrated head, then he 
shall shave his head in the day of his 
cleansing, on the seventh day shall he 
shave it. 10And on the eighth day he 
shall bring two turtledoves, or two 
young pigeons, to the priest, to the 
door of the tent of meeting. 11And the 
priest shall prepare one for a sin-
offering, and the other for a burnt-
offering, and make atonement for him, 
for that he sinned by reason of the 
dead; and he shall hallow his head that 
same day. 12And he shall consecrate 
unto the LORD the days of his 
Naziriteship, and shall bring a he-lamb 
of the first year for a guilt-offering; but 
the former days shall be void, because 
his consecration was defiled. 
6 




13And this is the law of the Nazirite, 
when the days of his consecration are 
fulfilled: he shall abring it unto the 
door of the tent of meeting; 14and he 
shall present his offering unto the 
LORD, one he-lamb of the first year 
without blemish for a burnt-offering, 
and one ewe-lamb of the first year 
without blemish for a sin-offering, and 
one ram without blemish for peace-
offerings, 15and a basket of unleavened 
bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with 
oil, and unleavened wafers spread with 
oil, and their meal-offering, and their 
drink-offerings. 16And the priest shall 
bring them before the LORD, and shall 
offer his sin-offering, and his burnt-
offering. 17And he shall offer the ram 
for a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto 
the LORD, with the basket of 
unleavened bread; the priest shall offer 
also the meal-offering thereof, and the 
drink-offering thereof. 18And the 
Nazirite shall shave his consecrated 
head at the door of the tent of meeting, 
and shall take the hair of his 
consecrated head, and put it on the fire 
which is under the sacrifice of peace-
offerings. 19And the priest shall take 
the shoulder of the ram when it is 
sodden, and one unleavened cake out 
of the basket, and one unleavened 
wafer, and shall put them upon the 
hands of the Nazirite, after he hath 
shaven his consecrated head. 20And the 

a That is, bring his consecrated head 
(come with his consecrated hair 
unshaven). 

priest shall wave them for a wave-
offering before the LORD; this is holy 
for the priest, together with the breast 
of waving and the thigh of heaving; 
and after that the Nazirite may drink 
wine. 21This is the law of the Nazirite 
who voweth, and of his offering unto 
the LORD for his Naziriteship, beside 
that for which his means suffice; 
according to his vow which he voweth, 
so he must do after the law of his 
Naziriteship. 

 

22And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 23’Speak unto Aaron and unto 
his sons, saying: On this wise ye shall 
bless the children of Israel; ye shall 
say unto them: 

24The LORD bless thee, and keep 
thee; 

25The LORD make His face to shine 
upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; 

26The LORD lift up His countenance 
upon thee, and give thee peace. 

27So shall they put My name upon 
the children of Israel, and I will bless 
them.’ 

 

And it came to pass on the day 
that Moses had made an end of 
setting up the tabernacle, and had 
anointed it and sanctified it, and all the 
furniture thereof, and the altar and all 
the vessels thereof, and had anointed 
them and sanctified them; 2that the 
princes of Israel, the heads of their 
fathers’houses, offered—these were 
the princes of the tribes, these are they 
that were over them that were 
7 




numbered. 3And they brought their 
offering before the LORD, six covered 
wagons, and twelve oxen: a wagon for 
every two of the princes, and for each 
one an ox; and they presented them 
before the tabernacle. 4And the LORD 
spoke unto Moses, saying: 5’Take it of 
them, that they may be to do the 
service of the tent of meeting; and thou 
shalt give them unto the Levites, to 
every man according to his service.’ 
6And Moses took the wagons and the 
oxen, and gave them unto the Levites. 
7Two wagons and four oxen he gave 
unto the sons of Gershon, according to 
their service. 8And four wagons and 
eight oxen he gave unto the sons of 
Merari, according unto their service, 
under the hand of Ithamar the son of 
Aaron the priest. 9But unto the sons of 
Kohath he gave none, because the 
service of the holy things belonged 
unto them: they bore them upon their 
shoulders. 10And the princes brought 
the dedication-offering of the altar in 
the day that it was anointed, even the 
princes brought their offering before 
the altar. 11And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘They shall present their 
offering each prince on his day, for the 
dedication of the altar.’ 

12And he that presented his offering 
the first day was Nahshon the son of 
Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah; 
13and his offering was one silver dish, 
the weight thereof was a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 14one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 15one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 16one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
17and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Nahshon the 
son of Amminadab. 

18On the second day Nethanel the 
son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did 
offer: 19he presented for his offering 
one silver dish, the weight thereof was 
a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver 
basin of seventy shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary; both of them 
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a 
meal-offering; 20one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 21one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 22one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
23and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Nethanel the 
son of Zuar. 

24On the third day Eliab the son of 
Helon, prince of the children of 
Zebulun: 25his offering was one silver 
dish, the weight thereof was a hundred 
and thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 26one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 27one young 


bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 28one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
29and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Eliab the son 
of Helon. 

30On the fourth day Elizur the son of 
Shedeur, prince of the children of 
Reuben: 31his offering was one silver 
dish, the weight thereof was a hundred 
and thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 32one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 33one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 34one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
35and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Elizur the son 
of Shedeur. 

36On the fifth day Shelumiel the son 
of Zurishaddai, prince of the children 
of Simeon: 37his offering was one 
silver dish, the weight thereof was a 
hundred and thirty shekels, one silver 
basin of seventy shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary; both of them 
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a 
meal-offering; 38one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 39one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 40one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
41and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Shelumiel the 
son of Zurishaddai. 

42On the sixth day Eliasaph the son 
of Deuel, prince of the children of 
Gad: 43his offering was one silver dish, 
the weight thereof was a hundred and 
thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 44one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 45one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 46one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
47and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Eliasaph the 
son of Deuel. 

48On the seventh day Elishama the 
son of Ammihud, prince of the 
children of Ephraim: 49his offering was 
one silver dish, the weight thereof was 
a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver 
basin of seventy shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary; both of them 
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a 
meal-offering; 50one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 51one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 52one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
53and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 


This was the offering of Elishama the 
son of Ammihud. 

54On the eighth day Gamaliel the 
son of Pedahzur, prince of the children 
of Manasseh: 55his offering was one 
silver dish, the weight thereof was a 
hundred and thirty shekels, one silver 
basin of seventy shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary; both of them 
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a 
meal-offering; 56one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 57one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 58one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
59and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lamb of the first year. 
This was the offering of Gamaliel the 
son of Pedahzur. 

60On the ninth day Abidan the son of 
Gideoni, prince of the children of 
Benjamin: 61his offering was one silver 
dish, the weight thereof was a hundred 
and thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 62one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 63one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 64one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
65and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Abidan the 
son of Gideoni. 

66On the tenth day Ahiezer the son 
of Ammishaddai, prince of the 
children of Dan: 67his offering was one 
silver dish, the weight thereof was a 
hundred and thirty shekels, one silver 
basin of seventy shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary; both of them 
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a 
meal-offering; 68one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 69one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 70one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
71and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Ahiezer the 
son of Ammishaddai. 

72On the eleventh day Pagiel the son 
of Ochran, prince of the children of 
Asher: 73his offering was one silver 
dish, the weight thereof was a hundred 
and thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 74one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 75one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 76one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
77and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Pagiel the son 
of Ochran. 

78On the twelfth day Ahira the son 
of Enan, prince of the children of 
Naphtali: 79his offering was one silver 


dish, the weight thereof was a hundred 
and thirty shekels, one silver basin of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meal-
offering; 80one golden pan of ten 
shekels, full of incense; 81one young 
bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the 
first year, for a burnt-offering; 82one 
male of the goats for a sin-offering; 
83and for the sacrifice of peace-
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-
goats, five he-lambs of the first year. 
This was the offering of Ahira the son 
of Enan. 

84This was the dedication-offering 
of the altar, in the day when it was 
anointed, at the hands of the princes of 
Israel: twelve silver dishes, twelve 
silver basins, twelve golden pans; 
85each silver dish weighing a hundred 
and thirty shekels, and each basin 
seventy; all the silver of the vessels 
two thousand and four hundred 
shekels, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary; 86twelve golden pans, full of 
incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary; all 
the gold of the pans a hundred and 
twenty shekels; 87all the oxen for the 
burnt-offering twelve bullocks, the 
rams twelve, the he-lambs of the first 
year twelve, and their meal-offering; 
and the males of the goats for a sin-
offering twelve; 88and all the oxen for 
the sacrifice of peace-offerings twenty 
and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the 
he-goats sixty, the he-lambs of the first 
year sixty. This was the dedication-
offering of the altar, after that it was 
anointed. 89And when Moses went into 
the tent of meeting that He might 
speak with him, then he heard the 
Voice speaking unto him from above 
the ark-cover that was upon the ark of 
the testimony, from between the two 
cherubim; and He spoke unto him. 

 

...... 

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 2’Speak unto Aaron, and 
say unto him: When thou lightest the 
lamps, the seven lamps shall give light 
in front of the candlestick.’ 3And 
Aaron did so: he lighted the lamps 
thereof so as to give light in front of 
the candlestick, as the LORD 
commanded Moses. 4And this was the 
work of the candlestick, beaten work 
of gold; unto the base thereof, and 
unto the flowers thereof, it was beaten 
work; according unto the pattern 
which the LORD had shown Moses, so 
he made the candlestick. 

5And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 6’Take the Levites from among 
the children of Israel, and cleanse 
them. 7And thus shalt thou do unto 
them, to cleanse them: sprinkle the 
water of purification upon them, and 
let them cause a razor to pass over all 
their flesh, and let them wash their 
clothes, and cleanse themselves. 8Then 
let them take a young bullock, and its 
meal-offering, fine flour mingled with 
oil, and another young bullock shalt 
thou take for a sin-offering. 9And thou 
shalt present the Levites before the 
8 




tent of meeting; and thou shalt 
assemble the whole congregation of 
the children of Israel. 10And thou shalt 
present the Levites before the LORD; 
and the children of Israel shall lay their 
hands upon the Levites. 11And Aaron 
shall offer the Levites before the LORD 
for a wave-offering from the children 
of Israel, that they may be to do the 
service of the LORD. 12And the Levites 
shall lay their hands upon the heads of 
the bullocks; and offer thou the one for 
a sin-offering, and the other for a 
burnt-offering, unto the LORD, to make 
atonement for the Levites. 13And thou 
shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and 
before his sons, and offer them for a 
wave-offering unto the LORD. 14Thus 
shalt thou separate the Levites from 
among the children of Israel; and the 
Levites shall be Mine. 15And after that 
shall the Levites go in to do the service 
of the tent of meeting; and thou shalt 
cleanse them, and offer them for a 
wave-offering. 16For they are wholly 
given unto Me from among the 
children of Israel; instead of all that 
openeth the womb, even the first-born 
of all the children of Israel, have I 
taken them unto Me. 17For all the first-
born among the children of Israel are 
Mine, both man and beast; on the day 
that I smote all the first-born in the 
land of Egypt I sanctified them for 
Myself. 18And I have taken the Levites 
instead of all the first-born among the 
children of Israel. 19And I have given 
the Levites— they are given to Aaron 
and to his sons from among the 
children of Israel, to do the service of 
the children of Israel in the tent of 
meeting, and to make atonement for 
the children of Israel, that there be no 
plague among the children of Israel, 
through the children of Israel coming 
nigh unto the sanctuary.’ 20Thus did 
Moses, and Aaron, and all the 
congregation of the children of Israel, 
unto the Levites; according unto all 
that the LORD commanded Moses 
touching the Levites, so did the 
children of Israel unto them. 21And the 
Levites purified themselves, and they 
washed their clothes; and Aaron 
offered them for a sacred gift before 
the LORD; and Aaron made atonement 
for them to cleanse them. 22And after 
that went the Levites in to do their 
service in the tent of meeting before 
Aaron, and before his sons; as the 
LORD had commanded Moses 
concerning the Levites, so did they 
unto them. 

23And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 24’This is that which pertaineth 
unto the Levites: from twenty and five 
years old and upward they shall go in 
to perform the service in the work of 
the tent of meeting; 25and from the age 
of fifty years they shall return from the 
service of the work, and shall serve no 
more; 26but shall minister with their 
brethren in the tent of meeting, to keep 
the charge, but they shall do no 
manner of service. Thus shalt thou do 
unto the Levites touching their 
charges.’ 


And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
in the wilderness of Sinai, in the 
first month of the second year after 
they were come out of the land of 
Egypt, saying: 2’Let the children of 
Israel keep the passover in its 
appointed season. 3In the fourteenth 
day of this month, at dusk, ye shall 
keep it in its appointed season; 
according to all the statutes of it, and 
according to all the ordinances thereof, 
shall ye keep it.’ 4And Moses spoke 
unto the children of Israel, that they 
should keep the passover. 5And they 
kept the passover in the first month, on 
the fourteenth day of the month, at 
dusk, in the wilderness of Sinai; 
according to all that the LORD 
commanded Moses, so did the children 
of Israel. 6But there were certain men, 
who were unclean by the dead body of 
a man, so that they could not keep the 
passover on that day; and they came 
before Moses and before Aaron on that 
day. 7And those men said unto him: 
‘We are unclean by the dead body of a 
man; wherefore are we to be kept 
back, so as not to bring the offering of 
the LORD in its appointed season 
among the children of Israel?’ 8And 
Moses said unto them: ‘Stay ye, that I 
may hear what the LORD will command 
concerning you.’ 

9And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 10’Speak unto the children of 
Israel, saying: If any man of you or of 
your generations shall be unclean by 
reason of a dead body, or be in a 
journey afar off, yet he shall keep the 
passover unto the LORD; 11in the 
second month on the fourteenth day at 
dusk they shall keep it; they shall eat it 
with unleavened bread and bitter 
herbs; 12they shall leave none of it unto 
the morning, nor break a bone thereof; 
according to all the statute of the 
passover they shall keep it. 13But the 
man that is clean, and is not on a 
journey, and forbeareth to keep the 
passover, that soul shall be cut off 
from his people; because he brought 
not the offering of the LORD in its 
appointed season, that man shall bear 
his sin. 14And if a stranger shall 
sojourn among you, and will keep the 
passover unto the LORD: according to 
the statute of the passover, and 
according to the ordinance thereof, so 
shall he do; ye shall have one statute, 
both for the stranger, and for him that 
is born in the land.’ 

 

15And on the day that the tabernacle 
was reared up the cloud covered the 
tabernacle, even the tent of the 
testimony; and at even there was upon 
the tabernacle as it were the 
appearance of fire, until morning. 16So 
it was alway: the cloud covered it, and 
the appearance of fire by night. 17And 
whenever the cloud was taken up from 
over the Tent, then after that the 
children of Israel journeyed; and in the 
place where the cloud abode, there the 
children of Israel encamped. 18At the 
commandment of the LORD the 
children of Israel journeyed, and at the 
commandment of the LORD they 
9 




encamped: as long as the cloud abode 
upon the tabernacle they remained 
encamped. 19And when the cloud 
tarried upon the tabernacle many days, 
then the children of Israel kept the 
charge of the LORD, and journeyed not. 
20And sometimes the cloud was a few 
days upon the tabernacle; according to 
the commandment of the LORD they 
remained encamped, and according to 
the commandment of the LORD they 
journeyed. 21And sometimes the cloud 
was from evening until morning; and 
when the cloud was taken up in the 
morning, they journeyed; or if it 
continued by day and by night, when 
the cloud was taken up, they 
journeyed. 22Whether it were two days, 
or a month, or a year, that the cloud 
tarried upon the tabernacle, abiding 
thereon, the children of Israel 
remained encamped, and journeyed 
not; but when it was taken up, they 
journeyed. 23At the commandment of 
the LORD they encamped, and at the 
commandment of the LORD they 
journeyed; they kept the charge of the 
LORD, at the commandment of the 
LORD by the hand of Moses. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Make thee 
two trumpets of silver; of beaten work 
shalt thou make them; and they shall 
be unto thee for the calling of the 
congregation, and for causing the 
camps to set forward. 3And when they 
shall blow with them, all the 
congregation shall gather themselves 
unto thee at the door of the tent of 
meeting. 4And if they blow but with 
one, then the princes, the heads of the 
thousands of Israel, shall gather 
themselves unto thee. 5And when ye 
blow an alarm, the camps that lie on 
the east side shall take their journey. 
6And when ye blow an alarm the 
second time, the camps that lie on the 
south side shall set forward; they shall 
blow an alarm for their journeys. 7But 
when the assembly is to be gathered 
together, ye shall blow, but ye shall 
not sound an alarm. 8And the sons of 
Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the 
trumpets; and they shall be to you for a 
statute for ever throughout your 
generations. 9And when ye go to war 
in your land against the adversary that 
oppresseth you, then ye shall sound an 
alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall 
be remembered before the LORD your 
God, and ye shall be saved from your 
enemies. 10Also in the day of your 
gladness, and in your appointed 
seasons, and in your new moons, ye 
shall blow with the trumpets over your 
burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifices 
of your peace-offerings; and they shall 
be to you for a memorial before your 
God: I am the LORD your God.’ 

 

11And it came to pass in the second 
year, in the second month, on the 
twentieth day of the month, that the 
cloud was taken up from over the 
tabernacle of the testimony. 12And the 
children of Israel set forward by their 
stages out of the wilderness of Sinai; 
10 




and the cloud abode in the wilderness 
of Paran.—13And they took their first 
journey, according to the 
commandment of the LORD by the hand 
of Moses. 14And in the first place the 
standard of the camp of the children of 
Judah set forward according to their 
hosts; and over his host was Nahshon 
the son of Amminadab. 15And over the 
host of the tribe of the children of 
Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar. 
16And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Zebulun was Eliab the son 
of Helon. 17And the tabernacle was 
taken down; and the sons of Gershon 
and the sons of Merari, who bore the 
tabernacle, set forward. 18And the 
standard of the camp of Reuben set 
forward according to their hosts; and 
over his host was Elizur the son of 
Shedeur. 19And over the host of the 
tribe of the children of Simeon was 
Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. 
20And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Gad was Eliasaph the son 
of Deuel. 21And the Kohathites the 
bearers of the sanctuary set forward, 
that the tabernacle might be set up 
against their coming. 22And the 
standard of the camp of the children of 
Ephraim set forward according to their 
hosts; and over his host was Elishama 
the son of Ammihud. 23And over the 
host of the tribe of the children of 
Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of 
Pedahzur. 24And over the host of the 
tribe of the children of Benjamin was 
Abidan the son of Gideoni. 25And the 
standard of the camp of the children of 
Dan, which was the rearward of all the 
camps, set forward according to their 
hosts; and over his host was Ahiezer 
the son of Ammishaddai. 26And over 
the host of the tribe of the children of 
Asher was Pagiel the son of Ochran. 
27And over the host of the tribe of the 
children of Naphtali was Ahira the son 
of Enan. 28Thus were the journeyings 
of the children of Israel according to 
their hosts.—And they set forward. 

29And Moses said unto Hobab, the 
son of Reuel the Midianite, 
Moses’father-in-law: ‘We are 
journeying unto the place of which the 
LORD said: I will give it you; come 
thou with us, and we will do thee 
good; for the LORD hath spoken good 
concerning Israel.’ 30And he said unto 
him: ‘I will not go; but I will depart to 
mine own land, and to my kindred.’ 
31And he said: ‘Leave us not, I pray 
thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how 
we are to encamp in the wilderness, 
and thou shalt be to us instead of eyes. 
32And it shall be, if thou go with us, 
yea, it shall be, that what good soever 
the LORD shall do unto us, the same 
will we do unto thee.’ 

33And they set forward from the 
mount of the LORD three days’journey; 
and the ark of the covenant of the LORD 
went before them three days’journey, 
to seek out a resting-place for them. 
34And the cloud of the LORD was over 
them by day, when they set forward 
from the camp. 

35And it came to pass, when the ark 
set forward, that Moses said: ‘Rise up, 


O LORD, and let Thine enemies be 
scattered; and let them that hate Thee 
flee before Thee.’ 36And when it 
rested, he said: ‘Return, O LORD, unto 
the ten thousands of the families of 
Israel.’ 

And the people were as 
murmurers, speaking evil in 
the ears of the LORD; and when the 
LORD heard it, His anger was kindled; 
and the fire of the LORD burnt among 
them, and devoured in the uttermost 
part of the camp. 2And the people cried 
unto Moses; and Moses prayed unto 
the LORD, and the fire abated. 3And the 
name of that place was called 
aTaberah, because the fire of the LORD 
burnt among them. 

a That is, Burning. 

4And the mixed multitude that was 
among them fell a lusting; and the 
children of Israel also wept on their 
part, and said: ‘Would that we were 
given flesh to eat! 5We remember the 
fish, which we were wont to eat in 
Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and 
the melons, and the leeks, and the 
onions, and the garlic; 6but now our 
soul is dried away; there is nothing at 
all; we have nought save this manna to 
look to.’—7Now the manna was like 
coriander seed, and the appearance 
thereof as the appearance of bdellium. 
8The people went about, and gathered 
it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in 
mortars, and seethed it in pots, and 
made cakes of it; and the taste of it 
was as the taste of a cake baked with 

oil. 9And when the dew fell upon the 
camp in the night, the manna fell upon 
it.—10And Moses heard the people 
weeping, family by family, every man 
at the door of his tent; and the anger of 
the LORD was kindled greatly; and 
Moses was displeased. 11And Moses 
said unto the LORD: ‘Wherefore hast 
Thou dealt ill with Thy servant? and 
wherefore have I not found favour in 
Thy sight, that Thou layest the burden 
of all this people upon me? 12Have I 
conceived all this people? have I 
brought them forth, that Thou 
shouldest say unto me: Carry them in 
thy bosom, as a nursing-father carrieth 
the sucking child, unto the land which 
Thou didst swear unto their fathers? 
13Whence should I have flesh to give 
unto all this people? for they trouble 
me with their weeping, saying: Give us 
flesh, that we may eat. 14I am not able 
to bear all this people myself alone, 
because it is too heavy for me. 15And if 
Thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray 
Thee, out of hand, if I have found 
favour in Thy sight; and let me not 
look upon my wretchedness.’ 

16And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Gather unto Me seventy men of the 
elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to 
be the elders of the people, and 
officers over them; and bring them 
unto the tent of meeting, that they may 
stand there with thee. 17And I will 
come down and speak with thee there; 
and I will take of the spirit which is 
upon thee, and will put it upon them; 
and they shall bear the burden of the 
11 




people with thee, that thou bear it not 
thyself alone. 18And say thou unto the 
people: Sanctify yourselves against to-
morrow, and ye shall eat flesh; for ye 
have wept in the ears of the LORD, 
saying: Would that we were given 
flesh to eat! for it was well with us in 
Egypt; therefore the LORD will give 
you flesh, and ye shall eat. 19Ye shall 
not eat one day, nor two days, nor five 
days, neither ten days, nor twenty 
days; 20but a whole month, until it 
come out at your nostrils, and it be 
loathsome unto you; because that ye 
have rejected the LORD who is among 
you, and have troubled Him with 
weeping, saying: Why, now, came we 
forth out of Egypt?’ 21And Moses said: 
‘The people, among whom I am, are 
six hundred thousand men on foot; and 
yet Thou hast said: I will give them 
flesh, that they may eat a whole 
month! 22If flocks and herds be slain 
for them, will they suffice them? or if 
all the fish of the sea be gathered 
together for them, will they suffice 
them?’ 23And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Is the LORD’S hand waxed 
short? now shalt thou see whether My 
word shall come to pass unto thee or 
not.’ 

24And Moses went out, and told the 
people the words of the LORD; and he 
gathered seventy men of the elders of 
the people, and set them round about 
the Tent. 25And the LORD came down 
in the cloud, and spoke unto him, and 
took of the spirit that was upon him, 
and put it upon the seventy elders; and 
it came to pass, that, when the spirit 
rested upon them, they prophesied, but 
they did so no more. 26But there 
remained two men in the camp, the 
name of the one was Eldad, and the 
name of the other Medad; and the 
spirit rested upon them; and they were 
of them that were recorded, but had 
not gone out unto the Tent; and they 
prophesied in the camp. 27And there 
ran a young man, and told Moses, and 
said: ‘Eldad and Medad are 
prophesying in the camp.’ 28And 
Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of 
Moses from his youth up, answered 
and said: ‘My lord Moses, shut them 
in.’ 29And Moses said unto him: ‘Art 
thou jealous for my sake? would that 
all the LORD’S people were prophets, 
that the LORD would put His spirit 
upon them! ’ 30And Moses withdrew 
into the camp, he and the elders of 
Israel. 

31And there went forth a wind from 
the LORD, and brought across quails 
from the sea, and let them fall by the 
camp, about a day’s journey on this 
side, and a day’s journey on the other 
side, round about the camp, and about 
two cubits above the face of the earth. 
32And the people rose up all that day, 
and all the night, and all the next day, 
and gathered the quails; he that 
gathered least gathered ten heaps; and 
they spread them all abroad for 
themselves round about the camp. 
33While the flesh was yet between their 
teeth, ere it was chewed, the anger of 
the LORD was kindled against the 


people, and the LORD smote the people 
with a very great plague. 34And the 
name of that place was called Kibroth-
hattaavah, because there they buried 
the people that lusted. 35From 
aKibroth-hattaavah the people 
journeyed unto Hazeroth; and they 
abode at Hazeroth. 

a That is, The graves of lust. 

And Miriam and Aaron spoke 
against Moses because of the 
Cushite woman whom he had married; 
for he had married a Cushite woman. 
2And they said: ‘Hath the LORD indeed 
spoken only with Moses? hath He not 
spoken also with us?’ And the LORD 
heard it.— 3Now the man Moses was 
very meek, above all the men that 
were upon the face of the earth.— 
4And the LORD spoke suddenly unto 
Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto 
Miriam: ‘Come out ye three unto the 
tent of meeting.’ And they three came 
out. 5And the LORD came down in a 
pillar of cloud, and stood at the door of 
the Tent, and called Aaron and 
Miriam; and they both came forth. 
6And He said: ‘Hear now My words: if 
there be a prophet among you, I the 
LORD do make Myself known unto him 
in a vision, I do speak with him in a 
dream. 7My servant Moses is not so; 
he is trusted in all My house; 8with 
him do I speak mouth to mouth, even 
manifestly, and not in dark speeches; 
and the similitude of the LORD doth he 
behold; wherefore then were ye not 
afraid to speak against My servant, 

against Moses?’ 9And the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against them; and 
He departed. 10And when the cloud 
was removed from over the Tent, 
behold, Miriam was leprous, as white 
as snow; and Aaron looked upon 
Miriam; and, behold, she was leprous. 
11And Aaron said unto Moses: ‘Oh my 
lord, lay not, I pray thee, sin upon us, 
for that we have done foolishly, and 
for that we have sinned. 12Let her not, I 
pray, be as one dead, of whom the 
flesh is half consumed when he 
cometh out of his mother’s womb.’ 
13And Moses cried unto the LORD, 
saying: ‘Heal her now, O God, I 
beseech Thee.’ 

14And the LORD said unto Moses: ‘If 
her father had but spit in her face, 
should she not hide in shame seven 
days? let her be shut up without the 
camp seven days, and after that she 
shall be brought in again.’ 15And 
Miriam was shut up without the camp 
seven days; and the people journeyed 
not till Miriam was brought in again. 
16And afterward the people journeyed 
from Hazeroth, and pitched in the 
wilderness of Paran. 

 

... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Send thou 
men, that they may spy out the land of 
Canaan, which I give unto the children 
of Israel; of every tribe of their fathers 
shall ye send a man, every one a prince 
among them.’ 3And Moses sent them 
from the wilderness of Paran 
12 

13 




according to the commandment of the 
LORD; all of them men who were heads 
of the children of Israel. 4And these 
were their names: of the tribe of 
Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur. 
5Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the 
son of Hori. 6Of the tribe of Judah, 
Caleb the son of Jephunneh. 7Of the 
tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of 
Joseph. 8Of the tribe of Ephraim, 
Hoshea the son of Nun. 9Of the tribe of 
Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu. 10Of 
the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son 
of Sodi. 11Of the tribe of Joseph, 
namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, 
Gaddi the son of Susi. 12Of the tribe of 
Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli. 13Of 
the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of 
Michael. 14Of the tribe of Naphtali, 
Nahbi the son of Vophsi. 15Of the tribe 
of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi. 
16These are the names of the men that 
Moses sent to spy out the land. And 
Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun 
Joshua. 17And Moses sent them to spy 
out the land of Canaan, and said unto 
them: ‘Get you up here into the South, 
and go up into the mountains; 18and 
see the land, what it is; and the people 
that dwelleth therein, whether they are 
strong or weak, whether they are few 
or many; 19and what the land is that 
they dwell in, whether it is good or 
bad; and what cities they are that they 
dwell in, whether in camps, or in 
strongholds; 20and what the land is, 
whether it is fat or lean, whether there 
is wood therein, or not. And be ye of 
good courage, and bring of the fruit of 
the land.’—Now the time was the time 
of the first-ripe grapes.— 21So they 
went up, and spied out the land from 
the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob, at 
the entrance to Hamath. 22And they 
went up into the South, and came unto 
Hebron; and Ahiman, Sheshai, and 
Talmai, the children of Anak, were 
there.—Now Hebron was built seven 
years before Zoan in Egypt.— 23And 
they came unto the valley of Eshcol, 
and cut down from thence a branch 
with one cluster of grapes, and they 
bore it upon a pole between two; they 
took also of the pomegranates, and of 
the figs.— 24That place was called the 
valley of aEshcol, because of the 
cluster which the children of Israel cut 
down from thence.— 25And they 
returned from spying out the land at 
the end of forty days. 26And they went 
and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and 
to all the congregation of the children 
of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, 
to Kadesh; and brought back word 
unto them, and unto all the 
congregation, and showed them the 
fruit of the land. 27And they told him, 
and said: ‘We came unto the land 
whither thou sentest us, and surely it 
floweth with milk and honey; and this 
is the fruit of it. 28Howbeit the people 
that dwell in the land are fierce, and 
the cities are fortified, and very great; 
and moreover we saw the children of 
Anak there. 29Amalek dwelleth in the 
land of the South; and the Hittite, and 

a That is, a cluster. 


the Jebusite, and the Amorite, dwell in 
the mountains; and the Canaanite 
dwelleth by the sea, and along by the 
side of the Jordan.’ 30And Caleb stilled 
the people toward Moses, and said: 
‘We should go up at once, and possess 
it; for we are well able to overcome it.’ 
31But the men that went up with him 
said: ‘We are not able to go up against 
the people; for they are stronger than 
we.’ 32And they spread an evil report 
of the land which they had spied out 
unto the children of Israel, saying: 
‘The land, through which we have 
passed to spy it out, is a land that 
eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and 
all the people that we saw in it are men 
of great stature. 33And there we saw 
the Nephilim, the sons of Anak, who 
come of the Nephilim; and we were in 
our own sight as grasshoppers, and so 
we were in their sight.’ 

And all the congregation lifted 
up their voice, and cried; and 
the people wept that night. 2And all the 
children of Israel murmured against 
Moses and against Aaron; and the 
whole congregation said unto them: 
‘Would that we had died in the land of 
Egypt! or would we had died in this 
wilderness! 3And wherefore doth the 
LORD bring us unto this land, to fall by 
the sword? Our wives and our little 
ones will be a prey; were it not better 
for us to return into Egypt?’ 4And they 
said one to another: ‘Let us make a 
captain, and let us return into Egypt.’ 
5Then Moses and Aaron fell on their 
faces before all the assembly of the 
congregation of the children of Israel. 
6And Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb 
the son of Jephunneh, who were of 
them that spied out the land, rent their 
clothes. 7And they spoke unto all the 
congregation of the children of Israel, 
saying: ‘The land, which we passed 
through to spy it out, is an exceeding 
good land. 8If the LORD delight in us, 
then He will bring us into this land, 
and give it unto us—a land which 
floweth with milk and honey. 9Only 
rebel not against the LORD, neither fear 
ye the people of the land; for they are 
bread for us; their defence is removed 
from over them, and the LORD is with 
us; fear them not.’ 10But all the 
congregation bade stone them with 
stones, when the glory of the LORD 
appeared in the tent of meeting unto all 
the children of Israel. 

11And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘How long will this people despise 
Me? and how long will they not 
believe in Me, for all the signs which I 
have wrought among them? 12I will 
smite them with the pestilence, and 
destroy them, and will make of thee a 
nation greater and mightier than they.’ 
13And Moses said unto the LORD: 
‘When the Egyptians shall hear—for 
Thou broughtest up this people in Thy 
might from among them—14they will 
say to the inhabitants of this land, who 
have heard that Thou LORD art in the 
midst of this people; inasmuch as 
Thou LORD art seen face to face, and 
Thy cloud standeth over them, and 
Thou goest before them, in a pillar of 
14 




cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by 
night; 15now if Thou shalt kill this 
people as one man, then the nations 
which have heard the fame of Thee 
will speak, saying: 16Because the LORD 
was not able to bring this people into 
the land which He swore unto them, 
therefore He hath slain them in the 
wilderness. 17And now, I pray Thee, 
let the power of the Lord be great, 
according as Thou hast spoken, 
saying: 18The LORD is slow to anger, 
and plenteous in lovingkindness, 
forgiving iniquity and transgression, 
and that will by no means clear the 
guilty; visiting the iniquity of the 
fathers upon the children, upon the 
third and upon the fourth generation. 
19Pardon, I pray Thee, the iniquity of 
this people according unto the 
greatness of Thy lovingkindness, and 
according as Thou hast forgiven this 
people, from Egypt even until now.’ 
20And the LORD said: ‘I have pardoned 
according to thy word’21But in very 
deed, as I live—and all the earth shall 
be filled with the glory of the LORD— 
22surely all those men that have seen 
My glory, and My signs, which I 
wrought in Egypt and in the 
wilderness, yet have put Me to proof 
these ten times, and have not 
hearkened to My voice; 23surely they 
shall not see the land which I swore 
unto their fathers, neither shall any of 
them that despised Me see it. 24But My 
servant Caleb, because he had another 
spirit with him, and hath followed Me 
fully, him will I bring into the land 
whereinto he went; and his seed shall 
possess it. 25Now the Amalekite and 
the Canaanite dwell in the Vale; 
tomorrow turn ye, and get you into the 
wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.’ 

26And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying: 27’How long 
shall I bear with this evil congregation, 
that keep murmuring against Me? I 
have heard the murmurings of the 
children of Israel, which they keep 
murmuring against Me. 28Say unto 
them: As I live, saith the LORD, surely 
as ye have spoken in Mine ears, so will 
I do to you: 29your carcasses shall fall 
in this wilderness, and all that were 
numbered of you, according to your 
whole number, from twenty years old 
and upward, ye that have murmured 
against Me; 30surely ye shall not come 
into the land, concerning which I lifted 
up My hand that I would make you 
dwell therein, save Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun. 
31But your little ones, that ye said 
would be a prey, them will I bring in, 
and they shall know the land which ye 
have rejected. 32But as for you, your 
carcasses shall fall in this wilderness. 
33And your children shall be wanderers 
in the wilderness forty years, and shall 
bear your strayings, until your 
carcasses be consumed in the 
wilderness. 34After the number of the 
days in which ye spied out the land, 
even forty days, for every day a year, 
shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty 
years, and ye shall know My 
displeasure. 35I the LORD have spoken, 


surely this will I do unto all this evil 
congregation, that are gathered 
together against Me; in this wilderness 
they shall be consumed, and there they 
shall die.’ 36And the men, whom 
Moses sent to spy out the land, and 
who, when they returned, made all the 
congregation to murmur against him, 
by bringing up an evil report against 
the land, 37even those men that did 
bring up an evil report of the land, died 
by the plague before the LORD. 38But 
Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the 
son of Jephunneh, remained alive of 
those men that went to spy out the 
land. 39And Moses told these words 
unto all the children of Israel; and the 
people mourned greatly. 40And they 
rose up early in the morning, and got 
them up to the top of the mountain, 
saying: ‘Lo, we are here, and will go 
up unto the place which the LORD hath 
promised; for we have sinned.’ 41And 
Moses said: ‘Wherefore now do ye 
transgress the commandment of the 
LORD, seeing it shall not prosper? 42Go 
not up, for the LORD is not among you; 
that ye be not smitten down before 
your enemies. 43For there the 
Amalekite and the Canaanite are 
before you, and ye shall fall by the 
sword; forasmuch as ye are turned 
back from following the LORD, and the 
LORD will not be with you.’ 44But they 
presumed to go up to the top of the 
mountain; nevertheless the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, and Moses, 
departed not out of the camp. 45Then 
the Amalekite and the Canaanite, who 
dwelt in that hill-country, came down, 
and smote them and beat them down, 
even unto Hormah. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Speak unto 
the children of Israel, and say unto 
them: 

When ye are come into the land of 
your habitations, which I give unto 
you, 3and will make an offering by fire 
unto the LORD, a burnt-offering, or a 
sacrifice, in fulfilment of a vow clearly 
uttered, or as a freewill-offering, or in 
your appointed seasons, to make a 
sweet savour unto the LORD, of the 
herd, or of the flock; 4then shall he that 
bringeth his offering present unto the 
LORD a meal-offering of a tenth part of 
an ephah of fine flour mingled with the 
fourth part of a hin of oil; 5and wine 
for the drink-offering, the fourth part 
of a hin, shalt thou prepare with the 
burnt-offering or for the sacrifice, for 
each lamb. 6Or for a ram, thou shalt 
prepare for a meal-offering two tenth 
parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled 
with the third part of a hin of oil; 7and 
for the drink-offering thou shalt 
present the third part of a hin of wine, 
of a sweet savour unto the LORD. 8And 
when thou preparest a bullock for a 
burnt-offering, or for a sacrifice, in 
fulfilment of a vow clearly uttered, or 
for peace-offerings unto the LORD; 
9then shall there be presented with the 
bullock a meal-offering of three tenth 
parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled 
with half a hin of oil. 10And thou shalt 
15 




present for the drink-offering half a 
hin of wine, for an offering made by 
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. 
11Thus shall it be done for each 
bullock, or for each ram, or for each of 
the he-lambs, or of the kids. 
12According to the number that ye may 
prepare, so shall ye do for every one 
according to their number. 13All that 
are home-born shall do these things 
after this manner, in presenting an 
offering made by fire, of a sweet 
savour unto the LORD. 14And if a 
stranger sojourn with you, or 
whosoever may be among you, 
throughout your generations, and will 
offer an offering made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto the LORD; as ye do, 
so he shall do. 15As for the 
congregation, there shall be one statute 
both for you, and for the stranger that 
sojourneth with you, a statute for ever 
throughout your generations; as ye are, 
so shall the stranger be before the 
LORD. 16One law and one ordinance 
shall be both for you, and for the 
stranger that sojourneth with you. 

 

17And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 18Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: 

When ye come into the land whither 
I bring you, 19then it shall be, that, 
when ye eat of the bread of the land, 
ye shall set apart a portion for a gift 
unto the LORD. 20Of the first of your 
dough ye shall set apart a cake for a 
gift; as that which is set apart of the 
threshing-floor, so shall ye set it apart. 
21Of the first of your dough ye shall 
give unto the LORD a portion for a gift 
throughout your generations. 

 

22And when ye shall err, and not 
observe all these commandments, 
which the LORD hath spoken unto 
Moses, 23even all that the LORD hath 
commanded you by the hand of 
Moses, from the day that the LORD 
gave commandment, and onward 
throughout your generations; 24then it 
shall be, if it be done in error by the 
congregation, it being hid from their 
eyes, that all the congregation shall 
offer one young bullock for a burnt-
offering, for a sweet savour unto the 
LORD—with the meal-offering thereof, 
and the drink-offering thereof, 
according to the ordinance—and one 
he-goat for a sin-offering. 25And the 
priest shall make atonement for all the 
congregation of the children of Israel, 
and they shall be forgiven; for it was 
an error, and they have brought their 
offering, an offering made by fire unto 
the LORD, and their sin-offering before 
the LORD, for their error. 26And all the 
congregation of the children of Israel 
shall be forgiven, and the stranger that 
sojourneth among them; for in respect 
of all the people it was done in error. 

27And if one person sin through 
error, then he shall offer a she-goat of 
the first year for a sin-offering. 28And 
the priest shall make atonement for the 
soul that erreth, when he sinneth 
through error, before the LORD, to 
make atonement for him; and he shall 


be forgiven, 29both he that is home-
born among the children of Israel, and 
the stranger that sojourneth among 
them: ye shall have one law for him 
that doeth aught in error. 30But the soul 
that doeth aught with a high hand, 
whether he be home-born or a 
stranger, the same blasphemeth the 
LORD; and that soul shall be cut off 
from among his people. 31Because he 
hath despised the word of the LORD, 
and hath broken His commandment; 
that soul shall utterly be cut off, his 
iniquity shall be upon him. 

 

32And while the children of Israel 
were in the wilderness, they found a 
man gathering sticks upon the sabbath 
day. 33And they that found him 
gathering sticks brought him unto 
Moses and Aaron, and unto all the 
congregation. 34And they put him in 
ward, because it had not been declared 
what should be done to him. 35And the 
LORD said unto Moses: ‘The man shall 
surely be put to death; all the 
congregation shall stone him with 
stones without the camp.’ 36And all the 
congregation brought him without the 
camp, and stoned him with stones, and 
he died, as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

37And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 38’Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and bid them that they make 
them throughout their generations 
fringes in the corners of their 
garments, and that they put with the 
fringe of each corner a thread of blue. 
39And it shall be unto you for a fringe, 
that ye may look upon it, and 
remember all the commandments of 
the LORD, and do them; and that ye go 
not about after your own heart and 
your own eyes, after which ye use to 
go astray; 40that ye may remember and 
do all My commandments, and be holy 
unto your God. 41I am the LORD your 
God, who brought you out of the land 
of Egypt, to be your God: I am the 
LORD your God.’ 

... 

Now Korah, the son of Izhar, 
the son of Kohath, the son of 
Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the 
sons of Eliab, and On, the son of 
Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men; 2and 
they rose up in face of Moses, with 
certain of the children of Israel, two 
hundred and fifty men; they were 
princes of the congregation, the elect 
men of the assembly, men of renown; 
3and they assembled themselves 
together against Moses and against 
Aaron, and said unto them: ‘Ye take 
too much upon you, seeing all the 
congregation are holy, every one of 
them, and the LORD is among them; 
wherefore then lift ye up yourselves 
above the assembly of the LORD?’ 
4And when Moses heard it, he fell 
upon his face. 5And he spoke unto 
Korah and unto all his company, 
saying: ‘In the morning the LORD will 
show who are His, and who is holy, 
and will cause him to come near unto 
Him; even him whom He may choose 
will He cause to come near unto Him. 
16 




6This do: take you censors, Korah, and 
all his company; 7and put fire therein, 
and put incense upon them before the 
LORD to-morrow; and it shall be that 
the man whom the LORD doth choose, 
he shall be holy; ye take too much 
upon you, ye sons of Levi.’ 8And 
Moses said unto Korah: ‘Hear now, ye 
sons of Levi: 9is it but a small thing 
unto you, that the God of Israel hath 
separated you from the congregation 
of Israel, to bring you near to Himself, 
to do the service of the tabernacle of 
the LORD, and to stand before the 
congregation to minister unto them; 
10and that He hath brought thee near, 
and all thy brethren the sons of Levi 
with thee? and will ye seek the 
priesthood also? 11Therefore thou and 
all thy company that are gathered 
together against the LORD—; and as to 
Aaron, what is he that ye murmur 
against him?’ 12And Moses sent to call 
Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab; 
and they said: ‘We will not come up; 
13is it a small thing that thou hast 
brought us up out of a land flowing 
with milk and honey, to kill us in the 
wilderness, but thou must needs make 
thyself also a prince over us? 
14Moreover thou hast not brought us 
into a land flowing with milk and 
honey, nor given us inheritance of 
fields and vineyards; wilt thou put out 
the eyes of these men? we will not 
come up.’ 15And Moses was very 
wroth, and said unto the LORD: 
‘Respect not thou their offering; I have 
not taken one ass from them, neither 
have I hurt one of them.’ 16And Moses 
said unto Korah: ‘Be thou and all thy 
congregation before the LORD, thou, 
and they, and Aaron, to-morrow; 17and 
take ye every man his fire-pan, and put 
incense upon them, and bring ye 
before the LORD every man his fire-
pan, two hundred and fifty fire-pans; 
thou also, and Aaron, each his fire-
pan.’ 18And they took every man his 
fire-pan, and put fire in them, and laid 
incense thereon, and stood at the door 
of the tent of meeting with Moses and 
Aaron. 19And Korah assembled all the 
congregation against them unto the 
door of the tent of meeting; and the 
glory of the LORD appeared unto all the 
congregation. 

20And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying: 21’Separate 
yourselves from among this 
congregation, that I may consume 
them in a moment.’ 22And they fell 
upon their faces, and said: ‘O God, the 
God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one 
man sin, and wilt Thou be wroth with 
all the congregation?’ 

23And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 24’Speak unto the 
congregation, saying: Get you up from 
about the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, 
and Abiram.’ 25And Moses rose up and 
went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the 
elders of Israel followed him. 26And he 
spoke unto the congregation, saying: 
‘Depart, I pray you, from the tents of 
these wicked men, and touch nothing 
of theirs, lest ye be swept away in all 
their sins.’ 27So they got them up from 


the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and 
Abiram, on every side; and Dathan and 
Abiram came out, and stood at the 
door of their tents, with their wives, 
and their sons, and their little ones. 
28And Moses said: ‘Hereby ye shall 
know that the LORD hath sent me to do 
all these works, and that I have not 
done them of mine own mind. 29If 
these men die the common death of all 
men, and be visited after the visitation 
of all men, then the LORD hath not sent 
Me. 30But if the LORD make a new 
thing, and the ground open her mouth, 
and swallow them up, with all that 
appertain unto them, and they go down 
alive into the pit, then ye shall 
understand that these men have 
despised the LORD.’ 31And it came to 
pass, as he made an end of speaking all 
these words, that the ground did cleave 
asunder that was under them. 32And 
the earth opened her mouth and 
swallowed them up, and their 
households, and all the men that 
appertained unto Korah, and all their 
goods. 33So they, and all that 
appertained to them, went down alive 
into the pit; and the earth closed upon 
them, and they perished from among 
the assembly. 34And all Israel that 
were round about them fled at the cry 
of them; for they said: ‘Lest the earth 
swallow us up.’ 35And fire came forth 
from the LORD, and devoured the two 
hundred and fifty men that offered the 
incense. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2‘Speak unto 
Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, 
that he take up the fire-pans out of the 
burning, and scatter thou the fire 
yonder; for they are become holy; 
3even the fire-pans of these men who 
have sinned at the cost of their lives, 
and let them be made beaten plates for 
a covering of the altar—for they are 
become holy, because they were 
offered before the LORD—that they 
may be a sign unto the children of 
Israel.’ 4And Eleazar the priest took 
the brazen fire-pans, which they that 
were burnt had offered; and they beat 
them out for a covering of the altar, 5to 
be a memorial unto the children of 
Israel, to the end that no common man, 
that is not of the seed of Aaron, draw 
near to burn incense before the LORD; 
that he fare not as Korah, and as his 
company; as the LORD spoke unto him 
by the hand of Moses. 

6But on the morrow all the 
congregation of the children of Israel 
murmured against Moses and against 
Aaron, saying: ‘Ye have killed the 
people of the LORD.’ 7And it came to 
pass, when the congregation was 
assembled against Moses and against 
Aaron, that they looked toward the tent 
of meeting; and, behold, the cloud 
covered it, and the glory of the LORD 
appeared. 8And Moses and Aaron 
came to the front of the tent of 
meeting. 9And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 10’Get you up from 
among this congregation, that I may 
consume them in a moment.’ And they 
fell upon their faces. 11And Moses said 17 




unto Aaron: ‘Take thy fire-pan, and 
put fire therein from off the altar, and 
lay incense thereon, and carry it 
quickly unto the congregation, and 
make atonement for them; for there is 
wrath gone out from the LORD: the 
plague is begun.’ 12And Aaron took as 
Moses spoke, and ran into the midst of 
the assembly; and, behold, the plague 
was begun among the people; and he 
put on the incense, and made 
atonement for the people. 13And he 
stood between the dead and the living; 
and the plague was stayed. 14Now they 
that died by the plague were fourteen 
thousand and seven hundred, besides 
them that died about the matter of 
Korah. 15And Aaron returned unto 
Moses unto the door of the tent of 
meeting, and the plague was stayed. 

16And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 17‘Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and take of them rods, one for 
each fathers’house, of all their princes 
according to their fathers’houses, 
twelve rods; thou shalt write every 
man’s name upon his rod. 18And thou 
shalt write Aaron’s name upon the rod 
of Levi, for there shall be one rod for 
the head of their fathers’houses. 19And 
thou shalt lay them up in the tent of 
meeting before the testimony, where I 
meet with you. 20And it shall come to 
pass, that the man whom I shall 
choose, his rod shall bud; and I will 
make to cease from Me the 
murmurings of the children of Israel, 
which they murmur against you.’ 
21And Moses spoke unto the children 
of Israel; and all their princes gave him 
rods, for each prince one, according to 
their fathers’houses, even twelve rods; 
and the rod of Aaron was among their 
rods. 22And Moses laid up the rods 
before the LORD in the tent of the 
testimony. 23And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that Moses went into the tent 
of the testimony; and, behold, the rod 
of Aaron for the house of Levi was 
budded, and put forth buds, and 
bloomed blossoms, and bore ripe 
almonds. 24And Moses brought out all 
the rods from before the LORD unto all 
the children of Israel; and they looked, 
and took every man his rod. 

25and the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Put back the rod of Aaron before the 
testimony, to be kept there, for a token 
against the rebellious children; that 
there may be made an end of their 
murmurings against Me, that they die 
not.’ 26Thus did Moses; as the LORD 
commanded him, so did he. 

27And the children of Israel spoke 
unto Moses, saying: ‘Behold, we 
perish, we are undone, we are all 
undone. 28Every one that cometh near, 
that cometh near unto the tabernacle of 
the LORD, is to die; shall we wholly 
perish?’ 

And the LORD said unto Aaron: 
‘Thou and thy sons and thy 
fathers’house with thee shall bear the 
iniquity of the sanctuary; and thou and 
thy sons with thee shall bear the 
iniquity of your priesthood. 2And thy 
brethren also, the tribe of Levi, the 
tribe of thy father, bring thou near with 
18 




thee, that they may be joined unto 
thee, and minister unto thee, thou and 
thy sons with thee being before the 
tent of the testimony. 3And they shall 
keep thy charge, and the charge of all 
the Tent; only they shall not come nigh 
unto the holy furniture and unto the 
altar, that they die not, neither they, 
nor ye. 4And they shall be joined unto 
thee, and keep the charge of the tent of 
meeting, whatsoever the service of the 
Tent may be; but a common man shall 
not draw nigh unto you. 5And ye shall 
keep the charge of the holy things, and 
the charge of the altar, that there be 
wrath no more upon the children of 
Israel. 6And I, behold, I have taken 
your brethren the Levites from among 
the children of Israel; for you they are 
given as a gift unto the LORD, to do the 
service of the tent of meeting. 7And 
thou and thy sons with thee shall keep 
your priesthood in everything that 
pertaineth to the altar, and to that 
within the veil; and ye shall serve; I 
give you the priesthood as a service of 
gift; and the common man that 
draweth nigh shall be put to death.’ 

8And the LORD spoke unto Aaron: 
‘And I, behold, I have given thee the 
charge of My heave-offerings; even of 
all the hallowed things of the children 
of Israel unto thee have I given them 
for a consecrated portion, and to thy 
sons, as a due for ever. 9This shall be 
thine of the most holy things, reserved 
from the fire: every offering of theirs, 
even every meal-offering of theirs, and 
every sin-offering of theirs, and every 
guilt-offering of theirs, which they 
may render unto Me, shall be most 
holy for thee and for thy sons. 10In a 
most holy place shalt thou eat thereof; 
every male may eat thereof; it shall be 
holy unto thee. 11And this is thine: the 
heave-offering of their gift, even all 
the wave-offerings of the children of 
Israel; I have given them unto thee, 
and to thy sons and to thy daughters 
with thee, as a due for ever; every one 
that is clean in thy house may eat 
thereof. 12All the best of the oil, and all 
the best of the wine, and of the corn, 
the first part of them which they give 
unto the LORD, to thee have I given 
them. 13The first-ripe fruits of all that 
is in their land, which they bring unto 
the LORD, shall be thine; every one that 
is clean in thy house may eat thereof. 
14Every thing devoted in Israel shall be 
thine. 15Every thing that openeth the 
womb, of all flesh which they offer 
unto the LORD, both of man and beast, 
shall be thine; howbeit the first-born of 
man shalt thou surely redeem, and the 
firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou 
redeem. 16And their redemption-
money—from a month old shalt thou 
redeem them—shall be, according to 
thy valuation, five shekels of silver, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary—the 
same is twenty gerahs. 17But the 
firstling of an ox, or the firstling of a 
sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou 
shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou 
shalt dash their blood against the altar, 
and shalt make their fat smoke for an 
offering made by fire, for a sweet 


savour unto the LORD. 18And the flesh 
of them shall be thine, as the wave-
breast and as the right thigh, it shall be 
thine. 19All the heave-offerings of the 
holy things, which the children of 
Israel offer unto the LORD, have I given 
thee, and thy sons and thy daughters 
with thee, as a due for ever; it is an 
everlasting covenant of salt before the 
LORD unto thee and to thy seed with 
thee.’ 

20And the LORD said unto Aaron: 
‘Thou shalt have no inheritance in 
their land, neither shalt thou have any 
portion among them; I am thy portion 
and thine inheritance among the 
children of Israel. 21And unto the 
children of Levi, behold, I have given 
all the tithe in Israel for an inheritance, 
in return for their service which they 
serve, even the service of the tent of 
meeting. 22And henceforth the children 
of Israel shall not come nigh the tent 
of meeting, lest they bear sin, and die. 
23But the Levites alone shall do the 
service of the tent of meeting, and they 
shall bear their iniquity; it shall be a 
statute for ever throughout your 
generations, and among the children of 
Israel they shall have no inheritance. 
24For the tithe of the children of Israel, 
which they set apart as a gift unto the 
LORD, I have given to the Levites for 
an inheritance; therefore I have said 
unto them: Among the children of 
Israel they shall have no inheritance.’ 

25And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 26’Moreover thou shalt speak 
unto the Levites, and say unto them: 
When ye take of the children of Israel 
the tithe which I have given you from 
them for your inheritance, then ye 
shall set apart of it a gift for the LORD, 
even a tithe of the tithe. 27And the gift 
which ye set apart shall be reckoned 
unto you, as though it were the corn of 
the threshing-floor, and as the fulness 
of the wine-press. 28Thus ye also shall 
set apart a gift unto the LORD of all 
your tithes, which ye receive of the 
children of Israel; and thereof ye shall 
give the gift which is set apart unto the 
LORD to Aaron the priest. 29Out of all 
that is given you ye shall set apart all 
of that which is due unto the LORD, of 
all the best thereof, even the hallowed 
part thereof out of it. 30Therefore thou 
shalt say unto them: When ye set apart 
the best thereof from it, then it shall be 
counted unto the Levites as the 
increase of the threshing-floor, and as 
the increase of the wine-press. 31And 
ye may eat it in every place, ye and 
your households; for it is your reward 
in return for your service in the tent of 
meeting. 32And ye shall bear no sin by 
reason of it, seeing that ye have set 
apart from it the best thereof; and ye 
shall not profane the holy things of the 
children of Israel, that ye die not.’ 

 

... 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses and unto Aaron, 
saying: 

2This is the statute of the law which 
the LORD hath commanded, saying: 
Speak unto the children of Israel, that 
19 




they bring thee a red heifer, faultless, 
wherein is no blemish, and upon which 
never came yoke. 3And ye shall give 
her unto Eleazar the priest, and she 
shall be brought forth without the 
camp, and she shall be slain before his 
face. 4And Eleazar the priest shall take 
of her blood with his finger, and 
sprinkle of her blood toward the front 
of the tent of meeting seven times. 
5And the heifer shall be burnt in his 
sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her 
blood, with her dung, shall be burnt. 
6And the priest shall take cedar-wood, 
and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into 
the midst of the burning of the heifer. 
7Then the priest shall wash his clothes, 
and he shall bathe his flesh in water, 
and afterward he may come into the 
camp, and the priest shall be unclean 
until the even. 8And he that burneth 
her shall wash his clothes in water, and 
bathe his flesh in water, and shall be 
unclean until the even. 9And a man 
that is clean shall gather up the ashes 
of the heifer, and lay them up without 
the camp in a clean place, and it shall 
be kept for the congregation of the 
children of Israel for a water of 
sprinkling; it is a purification from sin. 
10And he that gathereth the ashes of 
the heifer shall wash his clothes, and 
be unclean until the even; and it shall 
be unto the children of Israel, and unto 
the stranger that sojourneth among 
them, for a statute for ever. 11He that 
toucheth the dead, even any man’s 
dead body, shall be unclean seven 
days; 12the same shall purify himself 
therewith on the third day and on the 
seventh day, and he shall be clean; but 
if he purify not himself the third day 
and the seventh day, he shall not be 
clean. 13Whosoever toucheth the dead, 
even the body of any man that is dead, 
and purifieth not himself—he hath 
defiled the tabernacle of the LORD—
that soul shall be cut off from Israel; 
because the water of sprinkling was 
not dashed against him, he shall be 
unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon 
him. 14This is the law: when a man 
dieth in a tent, every one that cometh 
into the tent, and every thing that is in 
the tent, shall be unclean seven days. 
15And every open vessel, which hath 
no covering close-bound upon it, is 
unclean. 16And whosoever in the open 
field toucheth one that is slain with a 
sword, or one that dieth of himself, or 
a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be 
unclean seven days. 17And for the 
unclean they shall take of the ashes of 
the burning of the purification from 
sin, and running water shall be put 
thereto in a vessel. 18And a clean 
person shall take hyssop, and dip it in 
the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, 
and upon all the vessels, and upon the 
persons that were there, and upon him 
that touched the bone, or the slain, or 
the dead, or the grave. 19And the clean 
person shall sprinkle upon the unclean 
on the third day, and on the seventh 
day; and on the seventh day he shall 
purify him; and he shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe himself in water, 
and shall be clean at even. 20But the 


man that shall be unclean, and shall 
not purify himself, that soul shall be 
cut off from the midst of the assembly, 
because he hath defiled the sanctuary 
of the LORD; the water of sprinkling 
hath not been dashed against him: he is 
unclean. 21And it shall be a perpetual 
statute unto them; and he that 
sprinkleth the water of sprinkling shall 
wash his clothes; and he that toucheth 
the water of sprinkling shall be 
unclean until even. 22And whatsoever 
the unclean person toucheth shall be 
unclean; and the soul that toucheth 
him shall be unclean until even. 

 

20 



And the children of Israel, 
even the whole congregation, 
came into the wilderness of Zin in the 
first month; and the people abode in 
Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and 
was buried there. 2And there was no 
water for the congregation; and they 
assembled themselves together against 
Moses and against Aaron. 3And the 
people strove with Moses, and spoke, 
saying: ‘Would that we had perished 
when our brethren perished before the 
LORD! 4And why have ye brought the 
assembly of the LORD into this 
wilderness, to die there, we and our 
cattle? 5And wherefore have ye made 
us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us 
in unto this evil place? it is no place of 
seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of 
pomegranates; neither is there any 
water to drink.’ 6And Moses and 
Aaron went from the presence of the 
assembly unto the door of the tent of 
meeting, and fell upon their faces; and 
the glory of the LORD appeared unto 
them. 7And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 8’Take the rod, and 
assemble the congregation, thou, and 
Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto 
the rock before their eyes, that it give 
forth its water; and thou shalt bring 
forth to them water out of the rock; so 
thou shalt give the congregation and 
their cattle drink.’ 9And Moses took 
the rod from before the LORD, as He 
commanded him. 10And Moses and 
Aaron gathered the assembly together 
before the rock, and he said unto them: 
‘Hear now, ye rebels; are we to bring 
you forth water out of this rock?’ 
11And Moses lifted up his hand, and 
smote the rock with his rod twice; and 
water came forth abundantly, and the 
congregation drank, and their cattle. 
12And the LORD said unto Moses and 
Aaron: ‘Because ye believed not in 
Me, to sanctify Me in the eyes of the 
children of Israel, therefore ye shall 
not bring this assembly into the land 
which I have given them.’ 13These are 
the waters of aMeribah, where the 
children of Israel strove with the LORD, 
and He was sanctified in them. 

a That is, Strife. 

14And Moses sent messengers from 
Kadesh unto the king of Edom: ‘Thus 
saith thy brother Israel: Thou knowest 
all the travail that hath befallen us; 
15how our fathers went down into 
Egypt, and we dwelt in Egypt a long 
time; and the Egyptians dealt ill with 


us, and our fathers; 16and when we 
cried unto the LORD, He heard our 
voice, and sent an angel, and brought 
us forth out of Egypt; and, behold, we 
are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost 
of thy border. 17Let us pass, I pray 
thee, through thy land; we will not 
pass through field or through vineyard, 
neither will we drink of the water of 
the wells; we will go along the king’s 
highway, we will not turn aside to the 
right hand nor to the left, until we have 
passed thy border.’ 18And Edom said 
unto him: ‘Thou shalt not pass through 
me, lest I come out with the sword 
against thee.’ 19And the children of 
Israel said unto him: ‘We will go up 
by the highway; and if we drink of thy 
water, I and my cattle, then will I give 
the price thereof; let me only pass 
through on my feet; there is no hurt.’ 
20And he said: ‘Thou shalt not pass 
through.’ And Edom came out against 
him with much people, and with a 
strong hand. 21Thus Edom refused to 
give Israel passage through his border; 
wherefore Israel turned away from 
him. 

22And they journeyed from Kadesh; 
and the children of Israel, even the 
whole congregation, came unto mount 
Hor. 23And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
and Aaron in mount Hor, by the border 
of the land of Edom, saying: 24’Aaron 
shall be gathered unto his people; for 
he shall not enter into the land which I 
have given unto the children of Israel, 
because ye rebelled against My word 
at the waters of Meribah. 25Take Aaron 
and Eleazar his son, and bring them up 
unto mount Hor. 26And strip Aaron of 
his garments, and put them upon 
Eleazar his son; and Aaron shall be 
gathered unto his people, and shall die 
there.’ 27And Moses did as the LORD 
commanded; and they went up into 
mount Hor in the sight of all the 
congregation. 28And Moses stripped 
Aaron of his garments, and put them 
upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died 
there in the top of the mount; and 
Moses and Eleazar came down from 
the mount. 29And when all the 
congregation saw that Aaron was 
dead, they wept for Aaron thirty days, 
even all the house of Israel. 

 

21 



And the Canaanite, the king of 
Arad, who dwelt in the South, 
heard tell that Israel came by the way 
of Atharim; and he fought against 
Israel, and took some of them captive. 
2And Israel vowed a vow unto the 
LORD, and said: ‘If Thou wilt indeed 
deliver this people into my hand, then 
I will utterly destroy their cities.’ 3And 
the LORD hearkened to the voice of 
Israel, and delivered up the 
Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed 
them and their cities; and the name of 
the place was called aHormah. 

a That is, Utter destruction. 

4And they journeyed from mount 
Hor by the way to the Red Sea, to 
compass the land of Edom; and the 
soul of the people became impatient 
because of the way. 5And the people 


spoke against God, and against Moses: 
‘Wherefore have ye brought us up out 
of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for 
there is no bread, and there is no 
water; and our soul loatheth this light 
bread.’ 6And the LORD sent fiery 
serpents among the people, and they 
bit the people; and much people of 
Israel died. 7And the people came to 
Moses, and said: ‘We have sinned, 
because we have spoken against the 
LORD, and against thee; pray unto the 
LORD, that He take away the serpents 
from us.’ And Moses prayed for the 
people. 8And the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Make thee a fiery serpent, and 
set it upon a pole; and it shall come to 
pass, that every one that is bitten, 
when he seeth it, shall live.’ 9And 
Moses made a serpent of brass, and set 
it upon the pole; and it came to pass, 
that if a serpent had bitten any man, 
when he looked unto the serpent of 
brass, he lived. 10And the children of 
Israel journeyed, and pitched in Oboth. 
11And they journeyed from Oboth, and 
pitched at Ije-abarim, in the wilderness 
which is in front of Moab, toward the 
sun-rising. 12From thence they 
journeyed, and pitched in the valley of 
Zered. 13From thence they journeyed, 
and pitched on the other side of the 
Arnon, which is in the wilderness, that 
cometh out of the border of the 
Amorites.—For Arnon is the border of 
Moab, between Moab and the 
Amorites; 14wherefore it is said in the 
book of the Wars of the LORD: 

Vaheb in Suphah, 

And the valleys of Arnon, 

15And the slope of the valleys 

That inclineth toward the seat of Ar, 

And leaneth upon the border of 
Moab.— 

16And from thence to aBeer; that is 
the well whereof the LORD said unto 
Moses: ‘Gather the people together, 
and I will give them water.’ 17Then 
sang Israel this song: 

a That is, A well. 

Spring up, O well—sing ye unto 
it— 

18The well, which the princes 
digged, 

Which the nobles of the people 
delved, 

With the sceptre, and with their 
staves. 

And from the wilderness to 
Mattanah; 19and from Mattanah to 
Nahaliel; and from Nahaliel to 
Bamoth; 20and from Bamoth to the 
valley that is in the field of Moab, by 
the top of Pisgah, which looketh down 
upon the desert. 

21And Israel sent messengers unto 
Sihon king of the Amorites, saying: 
22’Let me pass through thy land; we 
will not turn aside into field, or into 
vineyard; we will not drink of the 
water of the wells; we will go by the 
king’s highway, until we have passed 
thy border.’ 23And Sihon would not 
suffer Israel to pass through his 
border; but Sihon gathered all his 
people together, and went out against 
Israel into the wilderness, and came to 


Jahaz; and he fought against Israel. 
24And Israel smote him with the edge 
of the sword, and possessed his land 
from the Arnon unto the Jabbok, even 
unto the children of Ammon; for the 
border of the children of Ammon was 
strong. 25And Israel took all these 
cities; and Israel dwelt in all the cities 
of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all 
the towns thereof. 26For Heshbon was 
the city of Sihon the king of the 
Amorites, who had fought against the 
former king of Moab, and taken all his 
land out of his hand, even unto the 
Arnon. 27Wherefore they that speak in 
parables say: 

Come ye to Heshbon! 

Let the city of Sihon be built and 
established! 

28For a fire is gone out of Heshbon, 

A flame from the city of Sihon; 

It hath devoured Ar of Moab, 

The lords of the high places of 
Arnon. 

29Woe to thee, Moab! 

Thou art undone, O people of 
Chemosh; 

He hath given his sons as fugitives, 

And his daughters into captivity, 

Unto Sihon king of the Amorites. 

30We have shot at them—Heshbon 
is perished—even unto Dibon, 

And we have laid waste even unto 
Nophah, 

Which reacheth unto Medeba. 

31Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the 
Amorites. 32And Moses sent to spy out 
Jazer, and they took the towns thereof, 
and drove out the Amorites that were 
there. 33And they turned and went up 
by the way of Bashan; and Og the king 
of Bashan went out against them, he 
and all his people, to battle at Edrei. 
34And the LORD said unto Moses: ‘Fear 
him not; for I have delivered him into 
thy hand, and all his people, and his 
land; and thou shalt do to him as thou 
didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, 
who dwelt at Heshbon.’ 35So they 
smote him, and his sons, and all his 
people, until there was none left him 
remaining; and they possessed his 
land. 

And the children of Israel 
journeyed, and pitched in the 
plains of Moab beyond the Jordan at 
Jericho. 

... 

2And Balak the son of Zippor saw 
all that Israel had done to the 
Amorites. 3And Moab was sore afraid 
of the people, because they were 
many; and Moab was overcome with 
dread because of the children of Israel. 
4And Moab said unto the elders of 
Midian: ‘Now will this multitude lick 
up all that is round about us, as the ox 
licketh up the grass of the field.’—And 
Balak the son of Zippor was king of 
Moab at that time.— 5And he sent 
messengers unto Balaam the son of 
Beor, to Pethor, which is by the River, 
to the land of the children of his 
people, to call him, saying: ‘Behold, 
there is a people come out from Egypt; 
behold, they cover the face of the 
earth, and they abide over against me. 
6Come now therefore, I pray thee, 
22 




curse me this people; for they are too 
mighty for me; peradventure I shall 
prevail, that we may smite them, and 
that I may drive them out of the land; 
for I know that he whom thou blessest 
is blessed, and he whom thou cursest 
is cursed.’ 7And the elders of Moab 
and the elders of Midian departed with 
the rewards of divination in their hand; 
and they came unto Balaam, and spoke 
unto him the words of Balak. 8And he 
said unto them: ‘Lodge here this night, 
and I will bring you back word, as the 
LORD may speak unto me’; and the 
princes of Moab abode with Balaam. 
9And God came unto Balaam, and 
said: ‘What men are these with thee?’ 
10And Balaam said unto God: ‘Balak 
the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath 
sent unto me [saying]: 11Behold the 
people that is come out of Egypt, it 
covereth the face of the earth; now, 
come curse me them; peradventure I 
shall be able to fight against them, and 
shall drive them out.’ 12And God said 
unto Balaam: ‘Thou shalt not go with 
them; thou shalt not curse the people; 
for they are blessed.’ 13And Balaam 
rose up in the morning, and said unto 
the princes of Balak: ‘Get you into 
your land; for the LORD refuseth to 
give me leave to go with you.’ 14And 
the princes of Moab rose up, and they 
went unto Balak, and said: ‘Balaam 
refuseth to come with us.’ 15And Balak 
sent yet again princes, more, and more 
honourable than they. 16And they came 
to Balaam, and said to him: ‘Thus 
saith Balak the son of Zippor: Let 
nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from 
coming unto me; 17for I will promote 
thee unto very great honour, and 
whatsoever thou sayest unto me I will 
do; come therefore, I pray thee, curse 
me this people.’ 18And Balaam 
answered and said unto the servants of 
Balak: ‘If Balak would give me his 
house full of silver and gold, I cannot 
go beyond the word of the LORD my 
God, to do any thing, small or great. 
19Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye 
also here this night, that I may know 
what the LORD will speak unto me 
more.’ 20And God came unto Balaam 
at night, and said unto him: ‘If the men 
are come to call thee, rise up, go with 
them; but only the word which I speak 
unto thee, that shalt thou do.’ 21And 
Balaam rose up in the morning, and 
saddled his ass, and went with the 
princes of Moab. 22And God’s anger 
was kindled because he went; and the 
angel of the LORD placed himself in the 
way for an adversary against him.—
Now he was riding upon his ass, and 
his two servants were with him.— 
23And the ass saw the angel of the 
LORD standing in the way, with his 
sword drawn in his hand; and the ass 
turned aside out of the way, and went 
into the field; and Balaam smote the 
ass, to turn her into the way. 24Then 
the angel of the LORD stood in a hollow 
way between the vineyards, a fence 
being on this side, and a fence on that 
side. 25And the ass saw the angel of the 
LORD, and she thrust herself unto the 
wall, and crushed Balaam’s foot 


against the wall; and he smote her 
again. 26And the angel of the LORD 
went further, and stood in a narrow 
place, where was no way to turn either 
to the right hand or to the left. 27And 
the ass saw the angel of the LORD, and 
she lay down under Balaam; and 
Balaam’s anger was kindled, and he 
smote the ass with his staff. 28And the 
LORD opened the mouth of the ass, and 
she said unto Balaam: ‘What have I 
done unto thee, that thou hast smitten 
me these three times?’ 29And Balaam 
said unto the ass: ‘Because thou hast 
mocked me; I would there were a 
sword in my hand, for now I had killed 
thee.’ 30And the ass said unto Balaam: 
‘Am not I thine ass, upon which thou 
hast ridden all thy life long unto this 
day? was I ever wont to do so unto 
thee?’ And he said: ‘Nay.’ 31Then the 
LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, and 
he saw the angel of the LORD standing 
in the way, with his sword drawn in 
his hand; and he bowed his head, and 
fell on his face. 32And the angel of the 
LORD said unto him: ‘Wherefore hast 
thou smitten thine ass these three 
times? behold, I am come forth for an 
adversary, because thy way is contrary 
unto me; 33and the ass saw me, and 
turned aside before me these three 
times; unless she had turned aside 
from me, surely now I had even slain 
thee, and saved her alive.’ 34And 
Balaam said unto the angel of the 
LORD: ‘I have sinned; for I knew not 
that thou stoodest in the way against 
me; now therefore, if it displease thee, 
I will get me back.’ 35And the angel of 
the LORD said unto Balaam: ‘Go with 
the men; but only the word that I shall 
speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak.’ 
So Balaam went with the princes of 
Balak. 36And when Balak heard that 
Balaam was come, he went out to meet 
him unto Ir-moab, which is on the 
border of Arnon, which is in the 
utmost part of the border. 37And Balak 
said unto Balaam: ‘Did I not earnestly 
send unto thee to call thee? wherefore 
camest thou not unto me? am I not 
able indeed to promote thee to 
honour?’ 38And Balaam said unto 
Balak: ‘Lo, I am come unto thee; have 
I now any power at all to speak any 
thing? the word that God putteth in my 
mouth, that shall I speak.’ 39And 
Balaam went with Balak, and they 
came unto Kiriath-huzoth. 40And 
Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep, and 
sent to Balaam, and to the princes that 
were with him. 41And it came to pass 
in the morning that Balak took 
Balaam, and brought him up into 
Bamoth-baal, and he saw from thence 
the utmost part of the people. 

And Balaam said unto Balak: 
‘Build me here seven altars, 
and prepare me here seven bullocks 
and seven rams.’ 2And Balak did as 
Balaam had spoken; and Balak and 
Balaam offered on every altar a 
bullock and a ram. 3And Balaam said 
unto Balak: ‘Stand by thy burnt-
offering, and I will go; peradventure 
the LORD will come to meet me; and 
whatsoever He showeth me I will tell 
23 




thee.’ And he went to a bare height. 
4And God met Balaam; and he said 
unto Him: ‘I have prepared the seven 
altars, and I have offered up a bullock 
and a ram on every altar.’ 5And the 
LORD put a word in Balaam’s mouth, 
and said: ‘Return unto Balak, and thus 
thou shalt speak.’ 6And he returned 
unto him, and, lo, he stood by his 
burnt-offering, he, and all the princes 
of Moab. 7And he took up his parable, 
and said: 

From Aram Balak bringeth me, 

The king of Moab from the 
mountains of the East: 

‘Come, curse me Jacob, 

And come, execrate Israel.’ 

8How shall I curse, whom God hath 
not cursed? 

And how shall I execrate, whom the 
LORD hath not execrated? 

9For from the top of the rocks I see 
him, 

And from the hills I behold him: 

Lo, it is a people that shall dwell 
alone, 

And shall not be reckoned among 
the nations. 

10Who hath counted the dust of 
Jacob, 

Or numbered the stock of Israel? 

Let me die the death of the 
righteous, 

And let mine end be like his! 

11And Balak said unto Balaam: ‘What 
hast thou done unto me? I took thee to 
curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou 
hast blessed them altogether.’ 12And he 
answered and said: ‘Must I not take 
heed to speak that which the LORD 
putteth in my mouth?’ 13And Balak 
said unto him: ‘Come, I pray thee, 
with me unto another place, from 
whence thou mayest see them; thou 
shalt see but the utmost part of them, 
and shalt not see them all; and curse 
me them from thence.’ 14And he took 
him into the field of Zophim, to the top 
of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and 
offered up a bullock and a ram on 
every altar. 15And he said unto Balak: 
‘Stand here by thy burnt-offering, 
while I go toward a meeting yonder.’ 
16And the LORD met Balaam, and put a 
word in his mouth, and said: ‘Return 
unto Balak, and thus shalt thou speak.’ 
17And he came to him, and, lo, he 
stood by his burnt-offering, and the 
princes of Moab with him. And Balak 
said unto him: ‘What hath the LORD 
spoken?’ 18And he took up his parable, 
and said: 

Arise, Balak, and hear; 

Give ear unto me, thou son of 
Zippor: 

19God is not a man, that He should 
lie; 

Neither the son of man, that He 
should repent: 

When He hath said, will He not do 
it? 

Or when He hath spoken, will He 
not make it good? 

20Behold, I am bidden to bless; 

And when He hath blessed, I cannot 
call it back. 

21None hath beheld iniquity in 
Jacob, 


Neither hath one seen perverseness 
in Israel; 

The LORD his God is with him, 

And the shouting for the King is 
among them. 

22God who brought them forth out 
of Egypt 

Is for them like the lofty horns of 
the wild-ox. 

23For there is no enchantment with 
Jacob, 

Neither is there any divination with 
Israel; 

Now is it said of Jacob and of Israel: 

‘What hath God wrought! ’ 

24Behold a people that riseth up as a 
lioness, 

And as a lion doth he lift himself up; 

He shall not lie down until he eat of 
the prey, 

And drink the blood of the slain. 

25And Balak said unto Balaam: 
‘Neither curse them at all, nor bless 
them at all.’ 26But Balaam answered 
and said unto Balak: ‘Told not I thee, 
saying: All that the LORD speaketh, that 
I must do?’ 27And Balak said unto 
Balaam: ‘Come now, I will take thee 
unto another place; peradventure it 
will please God that thou mayest curse 
me them from thence.’ 28And Balak 
took Balaam unto the top of Peor, that 
looketh down upon the desert. 29And 
Balaam said unto Balak: ‘Build me 
here seven altars, and prepare me here 
seven bullocks and seven rams.’ 30And 
Balak did as Balaam had said, and 
offered up a bullock and a ram on 
every altar. 

And when Balaam saw that it 
pleased the LORD to bless 
Israel, he went not, as at the other 
times, to meet with enchantments, but 
he set his face toward the wilderness. 
2And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he 
saw Israel dwelling tribe by tribe; and 
the spirit of God came upon him. 3And 
he took up his parable, and said: 

The saying of Balaam the son of 
Beor, 

And the saying of the man whose 
eye is opened; 

4The saying of him who heareth the 
words of God, 

Who seeth the vision of the 
Almighty, Fallen down, yet with 
opened eyes: 

5How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, 

Thy dwellings, O Israel! 

6As valleys stretched out, 

As gardens by the river-side; 

As aloes planted of the LORD, 

As cedars beside the waters; 

7Water shall flow from his branches, 

And his seed shall be in many 
waters; 

And his king shall be higher than 
Agag, 

And his kingdom shall be exalted. 

8God who brought him forth out of 
Egypt 

Is for him like the lofty horns of the 
wild-ox; 

He shall eat up the nations that are 
his adversaries, 

And shall break their bones in 
pieces, 
24 




And pierce them through with his 
arrows. 

9He couched, he lay down as a lion, 

And as a lioness; who shall rouse 
him up? 

Blessed be every one that blesseth 
thee, 

And cursed be every one that 
curseth thee. 

10And Balak’s anger was kindled 
against Balaam, and he smote his 
hands together; and Balak said unto 
Balaam: ‘I called thee to curse mine 
enemies, and, behold, thou hast 
altogether blessed them these three 
times. 11Therefore now flee thou to thy 
place; I thought to promote thee unto 
great honour; but, lo, the LORD hath 
kept thee back from honour.’ 12And 
Balaam said unto Balak: ‘Spoke I not 
also to thy messengers that thou didst 
send unto me, saying: 13If Balak would 
give me his house full of silver and 
gold, I cannot go beyond the word of 
the LORD, to do either good or bad of 
mine own mind; what the LORD 
speaketh, that will I speak? 14And now, 
behold, I go unto my people; come, 
and I will announce to thee what this 
people shall do to thy people in the 
end of days.’ 15And he took up his 
parable, and said: 

The saying of Balaam the son of 
Beor, 

And the saying of the man whose 
eye is opened; 

16The saying of him who heareth the 
words of God, 

And knoweth the knowledge of the 
Most High, 

Who seeth the vision of the 
Almighty, 

Fallen down, yet with opened eyes: 

17I see him, but not now; 

I behold him, but not nigh; 

There shall step forth a star out of 
Jacob, 

And a scepter shall rise out of Israel, 

And shall smite through the corners 
of Moab, 

And break down all the sons of 
Seth. 

18And Edom shall be a possession, 

Seir also, even his enemies, shall be 
a possession; 

While Israel doeth valiantly. 

19And out of Jacob shall one have 
dominion, 

And shall destroy the remnant from 
the city. 

 

20And he looked on Amalek, and 
took up his parable, and said: 

Amalek was the first of the nations; 

But his end shall come to 
destruction. 

 

21And he looked on the Kenite, and 
took up his parable, and said: 

Though firm be thy dwelling-place, 

And though thy nest be set in the 
rock; 

22Nevertheless Kain shall be wasted; 

How long? Asshur shall carry thee 
away captive. 

 


23And he took up his parable, and 
said: 

Alas, who shall live after God hath 
appointed him? 

24But ships shall come from the 
coast of Kittim, 

And they shall afflict Asshur, and 
shall afflict Eber, 

And he also shall come to 
destruction. 

 

25And Balaam rose up, and went and 
returned to his place; and Balak also 
went his way. 

 

And Israel abode in Shittim, 
and the people began to 
commit harlotry with the daughters of 
Moab. 2And they called the people 
unto the sacrifices of their gods; and 
the people did eat, and bowed down to 
their gods. 3And Israel joined himself 
unto the Baal of Peor; and the anger of 
the LORD was kindled against Israel. 
4And the LORD said unto Moses: ‘Take 
all the chiefs of the people, and hang 
them up unto the LORD in face of the 
sun, that the fierce anger of the LORD 
may turn away from Israel.’ 5And 
Moses said unto the judges of Israel: 
‘Slay ye every one his men that have 
joined themselves unto the Baal of 
Peor.’ 6And, behold, one of the 
children of Israel came and brought 
unto his brethren a Midianitish woman 
in the sight of Moses, and in the sight 
of all the congregation of the children 
of Israel, while they were weeping at 
the door of the tent of meeting. 7And 
when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the 
son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose 
up from the midst of the congregation, 
and took a spear in his hand. 8And he 
went after the man of Israel into the 
chamber, and thrust both of them 
through, the man of Israel, and the 
woman through her belly. So the 
plague was stayed from the children of 
Israel. 9And those that died by the 
plague were twenty and four thousand. 

..... 

10And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 11’Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, 
the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned 
My wrath away from the children of 
Israel, in that he was very jealous for 
My sake among them, so that I 
consumed not the children of Israel in 
My jealousy. 12Wherefore say: Behold, 
I give unto him My covenant of peace; 
13and it shall be unto him, and to his 
seed after him, the covenant of an 
everlasting priesthood; because he was 
jealous for his God, and made 
atonement for the children of Israel.’ 
14Now the name of the man of Israel 
that was slain, who was slain with the 
Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the 
son of Salu, a prince of a fathers’house 
among the Simeonites. 15And the name 
of the Midianitish woman that was 
slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; 
he was head of the people of a 
fathers’house in Midian. 

16And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 17’Harass the Midianites, and 
smite them; 18for they harass you, by 
their wiles wherewith they have 
25 




beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and 
in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of 
the prince of Midian, their sister, who 
was slain on the day of the plague in 
the matter of Peor.’ 

19And it came to pass after the 

plague, 1that the LORD spoke 
unto Moses and unto Eleazar 
the son of Aaron the priest, saying: 
2’Take the sum of all the congregation 
of the children of Israel, from twenty 
years old and upward, by their 
fathers’houses, all that are able to go 
forth to war in Israel.’ 3And Moses and 
Eleazar the priest spoke with them in 
the plains of Moab by the Jordan at 
Jericho, saying: 4’[Take the sum of the 
people,] from twenty years old and 
upward, as the LORD commanded 
Moses and the children of Israel, that 
came forth out of the land of Egypt.’ 

5Reuben, the first-born of Israel: the 
sons of Reuben: of Hanoch, the family 
of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the family 
of the Palluites; 6of Hezron, the family 
of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family 
of the Carmites. 7These are the 
families of the Reubenites; and they 
that were numbered of them were forty 
and three thousand and seven hundred 
and thirty. 8And the sons of Pallu: 
Eliab. 9And the sons of Eliab: Nemuel, 
and Dathan, and Abiram. These are 
that Dathan and Abiram, the elect of 
the congregation, who strove against 
Moses and against Aaron in the 
company of Korah, when they strove 
against the LORD; 10and the earth 
opened her mouth, and swallowed 
them up together with Korah, when 
that company died; what time the fire 
devoured two hundred and fifty men, 
and they became a sign. 
11Notwithstanding the sons of Korah 
died not. 

12The sons of Simeon after their 
families: of Nemuel, the family of the 
Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family of the 
Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the 
Jachinites; 13of Zerah, the family of the 
Zerahites; of Shaul, the family of the 
Shaulites. 14These are the families of 
the Simeonites, twenty and two 
thousand and two hundred. 

15The sons of Gad after their 
families: of Zephon, the family of the 
Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the 
Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the 
Shunites; 16of Ozni, the family of the 
Oznites; of Eri, the family of the 
Erites; 17of Arod, the family of the 
Arodites; of Areli, the family of the 
Arelites. 18These are the families of the 
sons of Gad according to those that 
were numbered of them, forty 
thousand and five hundred. 

19The sons of Judah: Er and Onan; 
and Er and Onan died in the land of 
Canaan. 20And the sons of Judah after 
their families were: of Shelah, the 
family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the 
family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the 
family of the Zerahites. 21And the sons 
of Perez were: of Hezron, the family 
of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the 
family of the Hamulites. 22These are 
the families of Judah according to 
those that were numbered of them, 
26 




threescore and sixteen thousand and 
five hundred. 

23The sons of Issachar after their 
families: of Tola, the family of the 
Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of the 
Punites; 24of Jashub, the family of the 
Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of 
the Shimronites. 25These are the 
families of Issachar according to those 
that were numbered of them, 
threescore and four thousand and three 
hundred. 

26The sons of Zebulun after their 
families: of Sered, the family of the 
Seredites; of Elon, the family of the 
Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the 
Jahleelites. 27These are the families of 
the Zebulunites according to those that 
were numbered of them, threescore 
thousand and five hundred. 

28The sons of Joseph after their 
families: Manasseh and Ephraim. 
29The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, 
the family of the Machirites—and 
Machir begot Gilead; of Gilead, the 
family of the Gileadites. 30These are 
the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the family 
of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of 
the Helekites; 31and of Asriel, the 
family of the Asrielites; and of 
Shechem, the family of the 
Shechemites; 32and of Shemida, the 
family of the Shemidaites; and of 
Hepher, the family of the Hepherites. 
33And Zelophehad the son of Hepher 
had no sons, but daughters; and the 
names of the daughters of Zelophehad 
were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, 
Milcah, and Tirzah. 34These are the 
families of Manasseh; and they that 
were numbered of them were fifty and 
two thousand and seven hundred.’ 

35These are the sons of Ephraim 
after their families: of Shuthelah, the 
family of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, 
the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, 
the family of the Tahanites. 36And 
these are the sons of Shuthelah: of 
Eran, the family of the Eranites. 
37These are the families of the sons of 
Ephraim according to those that were 
numbered of them, thirty and two 
thousand and five hundred. These are 
the sons of Joseph after their families. 

38The sons of Benjamin after their 
families: of Bela, the family of the 
Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the 
Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of 
the Ahiramites; 39of Shephupham, the 
family of the Shuphamites; of 
Hupham, the family of the 
Huphamites. 40And the sons of Bela 
were Ard and Naaman; [of Ard,] the 
family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the 
family of the Naamites. 41These are the 
sons of Benjamin after their families; 
and they that were numbered of them 
were forty and five thousand and six 
hundred. 

42These are the sons of Dan after 
their families: of Shuham, the family 
of the Shuhamites. These are the 
families of Dan after their families. 
43All the families of the Shuhamites, 
according to those that were numbered 
of them, were threescore and four 
thousand and four hundred. 


44The sons of Asher after their 
families: of Imnah, the family of the 
Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the 
Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the 
Beriites. 45Of the sons of Beriah: of 
Heber, the family of the Heberites; of 
Malchiel, the family of the 
Malchielites. 46And the name of the 
daughter of Asher was Serah. 47These 
are the families of the sons of Asher 
according to those that were numbered 
of them, fifty and three thousand and 
four hundred. 

48The sons of Naphtali after their 
families: of Jahzeel, the family of the 
Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family of the 
Gunites; 49of Jezer, the family of the 
Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the 
Shillemites. 50These are the families of 
Naphtali according to their families; 
and they that were numbered of them 
were forty and five thousand and four 
hundred. 

51These are they that were numbered 
of the children of Israel, six hundred 
thousand and a thousand and seven 
hundred and thirty. 

52And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 53’Unto these the land shall be 
divided for an inheritance according to 
the number of names. 54To the more 
thou shalt give the more inheritance, 
and to the fewer thou shalt give the 
less inheritance; to each one according 
to those that were numbered of it shall 
its inheritance be given. 
55Notwithstanding the land shall be 
divided by lot; according to the names 
of the tribes of their fathers they shall 
inherit. 56According to the lot shall 
their inheritance be divided between 
the more and the fewer.’ 

57And these are they that were 
numbered of the Levites after their 
families: of Gershon, the family of the 
Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of 
the Kohathites; of Merari, the family 
of the Merarites. 58These are the 
families of Levi: the family of the 
Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, 
the family of the Mahlites, the family 
of the Mushites, the family of the 
Korahites. And Kohath begot Amram. 
59And the name of Amram’s wife was 
Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who 
was born to Levi in Egypt; and she 
bore unto Amram Aaron and Moses, 
and Miriam their sister. 60And unto 
Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, 
Eleazar and Ithamar. 61And Nadab and 
Abihu died, when they offered strange 
fire before the LORD. 62And they that 
were numbered of them were twenty 
and three thousand, every male from a 
month old and upward; for they were 
not numbered among the children of 
Israel, because there was no 
inheritance given them among the 
children of Israel. 

63These are they that were numbered 
by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who 
numbered the children of Israel in the 
plains of Moab by the Jordan at 
Jericho. 64But among these there was 
not a man of them that were numbered 
by Moses and Aaron the priest, who 
numbered the children of Israel in the 
wilderness of Sinai. 65For the LORD had 


said of them: ‘They shall surely die in 
the wilderness.’ And there was not left 
a man of them, save Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun. 

Then drew near the daughters 
of Zelophehad, the son of 
Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of 
Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the 
families of Manasseh the son of 
Joseph; and these are the names of his 
daughters: Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, 
and Milcah, and Tirzah. 2And they 
stood before Moses, and before 
Eleazar the priest, and before the 
princes and all the congregation, at the 
door of the tent of meeting, saying: 
3’Our father died in the wilderness, 
and he was not among the company of 
them that gathered themselves together 
against the LORD in the company of 
Korah, but he died in his own sin; and 
he had no sons. 4Why should the name 
of our father be done away from 
among his family, because he had no 
son? Give unto us a possession among 
the brethren of our father.’ 5And 
Moses brought their cause before the 
LORD. 6And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 7’The daughters of 
Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt 
surely give them a possession of an 
inheritance among their father’s 
brethren; and thou shalt cause the 
inheritance of their father to pass unto 
them. 8And thou shalt speak unto the 
children of Israel, saying: If a man die, 
and have no son, then ye shall cause 
his inheritance to pass unto his 
daughter. 9And if he have no daughter, 
then ye shall give his inheritance unto 
his brethren. 10And if he have no 
brethren, then ye shall give his 
inheritance unto his father’s brethren. 
11And if his father have no brethren, 
then ye shall give his inheritance unto 
his kinsman that is next to him of his 
family, and he shall possess it. And it 
shall be unto the children of Israel a 
statute of judgment, as the LORD 
commanded Moses.’ 

12And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Get thee up into this mountain of 
Abarim, and behold the land which I 
have given unto the children of Israel. 
13And when thou hast seen it, thou also 
shalt be gathered unto thy people, as 
Aaron thy brother was gathered; 
14because ye rebelled against My 
commandment in the wilderness of 
Zin, in the strife of the congregation, 
to sanctify Me at the waters before 
their eyes.’—These are the waters of 
Meribath-kadesh in the wilderness of 
Zin.—15And Moses spoke unto the 
LORD, saying: 16’Let the LORD, the God 
of the spirits of all flesh, set a man 
over the congregation, 17who may go 
out before them, and who may come in 
before them, and who may lead them 
out, and who may bring them in; that 
the congregation of the LORD be not as 
sheep which have no shepherd.’ 18And 
the LORD said unto Moses: ‘Take thee 
Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom 
is spirit, and lay thy hand upon him; 
19and set him before Eleazar the priest, 
and before all the congregation; and 
give him a charge in their sight. 20And 
27 




thou shalt put of thy honour upon him, 
that all the congregation of the 
children of Israel may hearken. 21And 
he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, 
who shall inquire for him by the 
judgment of the Urim before the LORD; 
at his word shall they go out, and at his 
word they shall come in, both he, and 
all the children of Israel with him, 
even all the congregation.’ 22And 
Moses did as the LORD commanded 
him; and he took Joshua, and set him 
before Eleazar the priest, and before 
all the congregation. 23And he laid his 
hands upon him, and gave him a 
charge, as the LORD spoke by the hand 
of Moses. 

 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2Command the 
children of Israel, and say unto them: 

My food which is presented unto 
Me for offerings made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto Me, shall ye 
observe to offer unto Me in its due 
season. 3And thou shalt say unto them: 
This is the offering made by fire which 
ye shall bring unto the LORD: he-lambs 
of the first year without blemish, two 
day by day, for a continual burnt-
offering. 4The one lamb shalt thou 
offer in the morning, and the other 
lamb shalt thou offer at dusk; 5and the 
tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for 
a meal-offering, mingled with the 
fourth part of a hin of beaten oil. 6It is 
a continual burnt-offering, which was 
offered in mount Sinai, for a sweet 
savour, an offering made by fire unto 
the LORD. 7And the drink-offering 
thereof shall be the fourth part of a hin 
for the one lamb; in the holy place 
shalt thou pour out a drink-offering of 
strong drink unto the LORD. 8And the 
other lamb shalt thou present at dusk; 
as the meal-offering of the morning, 
and as the drink-offering thereof, thou 
shalt present it, an offering made by 
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. 

9And on the sabbath day two he-
lambs of the first year without 
blemish, and two tenth parts of an 
ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering, 
mingled with oil, and the drink-
offering thereof. 10This is the burnt-
offering of every sabbath, beside the 
continual burnt-offering, and the 
drink-offering thereof. 

11And in your new moons ye shall 
present a burnt-offering unto the LORD: 
two young bullocks, and one ram, 
seven he-lambs of the first year 
without blemish; 12and three tenth 
parts of an ephah of fine flour for a 
meal-offering, mingled with oil, for 
each bullock; and two tenth parts of 
fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled 
with oil, for the one ram; 13and a 
several tenth part of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a meal-offering unto every 
lamb; for a burnt-offering of a sweet 
savour, an offering made by fire unto 
the LORD. 14And their drink-offerings 
shall be half a hin of wine for a 
bullock, and the third part of a hin for 
the ram, and the fourth part of a hin for 
a lamb. This is the burnt-offering of 
every new moon throughout the 
28 




months of the year. 15And one he-goat 
for a sin-offering unto the LORD; it 
shall be offered beside the continual 
burnt-offering, and the drink-offering 
thereof. 

16And in the first month, on the 
fourteenth day of the month, is the 
LORD’S passover. 17And on the 
fifteenth day of this month shall be a 
feast; seven days shall unleavened 
bread be eaten. 18In the first day shall 
be a holy convocation; ye shall do no 
manner of servile work; 19but ye shall 
present an offering made by fire, a 
burnt-offering unto the LORD: two 
young bullocks, and one ram, and 
seven he-lambs of the first year; they 
shall be unto you without blemish; 
20and their meal-offering, fine flour 
mingled with oil; three tenth parts 
shall ye offer for a bullock, and two 
tenth parts for the ram; 21a several 
tenth part shalt thou offer for every 
lamb of the seven lambs; 22and one he-
goat for a sin-offering, to make 
atonement for you. 23Ye shall offer 
these beside the burnt-offering of the 
morning, which is for a continual 
burnt-offering. 24After this manner ye 
shall offer daily, for seven days, the 
food of the offering made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto the LORD; it shall be 
offered beside the continual burnt-
offering, and the drink-offering 
thereof. 25And on the seventh day ye 
shall have a holy convocation; ye shall 
do no manner of servile work. 

26Also in the day of the first-fruits, 
when ye bring a new meal-offering 
unto the LORD in your feast of weeks, 
ye shall have a holy convocation: ye 
shall do no manner of servile work; 
27but ye shall present a burnt-offering 
for a sweet savour unto the LORD: two 
young bullocks, one ram, seven he-
lambs of the first year; 28and their 
meal-offering, fine flour mingled with 
oil, three tenth parts for each bullock, 
two tenth parts for the one ram, 29a 
several tenth part for every lamb of the 
seven lambs; 30one he-goat, to make 
atonement for you. 31Beside the 
continual burnt-offering, and the meal-
offering thereof, ye shall offer them—
they shall be unto you without 
blemish—and their drink-offerings. 

And in the seventh month, on 
the first day of the month, ye 
shall have a holy convocation: ye shall 
do no manner of servile work; it is a 
day of blowing the horn unto you. 
2And ye shall prepare a burnt-offering 
for a sweet savour unto the LORD: one 
young bullock, one ram, seven he-
lambs of the first year without 
blemish; 3and their meal-offering, fine 
flour mingled with oil, three tenth 
parts for the bullock, two tenth part for 
the ram, 4and one tenth part for every 
lamb of the seven lambs; 5and one he-
goat for a sin-offering, to make 
atonement for you; 6beside the burnt-
offering of the new moon, and the 
meal-offering thereof, and the 
continual burnt-offering and the meal-
offering thereof, and their drink-
offerings, according unto their 
29 




ordinance, for a sweet savour, an 
offering made by fire unto the LORD. 

7And on the tenth day of this 
seventh month ye shall have a holy 
convocation; and ye shall afflict your 
souls; ye shall do no manner of work; 
8but ye shall present a burnt-offering 
unto the LORD for a sweet savour: one 
young bullock, one ram, seven he-
lambs of the first year; they shall be 
unto you without blemish; 9and their 
meal-offering, fine flour mingled with 
oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, 
two tenth parts for the one ram, 10a 
several tenth part for every lamb of the 
seven lambs; 11one he-goat for a sin-
offering; beside the sin-offering of 
atonement, and the continual burnt-
offering, and the meal-offering 
thereof, and their drink-offerings. 

12And on the fifteenth day of the 
seventh month ye shall have a holy 
convocation: ye shall do no manner of 
servile work, and ye shall keep a feast 
unto the LORD seven days; 13and ye 
shall present a burnt-offering, an 
offering made by fire, of a sweet 
savour unto the LORD: thirteen young 
bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs 
of the first year; they shall be without 
blemish; 14and their meal-offering, fine 
flour mingled with oil, three tenth 
parts for every bullock of the thirteen 
bullocks, two tenth parts for each ram 
of the two rams, 15and a several tenth 
part for every lamb of the fourteen 
lambs; 16and one he-goat for a sin-
offering beside the continual burnt-
offering, the meal-offering thereof, 
and the drink-offering thereof. 

17And on the second day ye shall 
present twelve young bullocks, two 
rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first 
year without blemish; 18and their meal-
offering and their drink-offerings for 
the bullocks, for the rams, and for the 
lambs, according to their number, after 
the ordinance; 19and one he-goat for a 
sin-offering; beside the continual 
burnt-offering, and the meal-offering 
thereof, and their drink-offerings. 

20And on the third day eleven 
bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs 
of the first year without blemish; 21and 
their meal-offering and their drink-
offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, according to 
their number, after the ordinance; 
22and one he-goat for a sin-offering; 
beside the continual burnt-offering, 
and the meal-offering thereof, and the 
drink-offering thereof. 

23And on the fourth day ten 
bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs 
of the first year without blemish; 
24their meal-offering and their drink-
offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, according to 
their number, after the ordinance; 
25and one he-goat for a sin-offering; 
beside the continual burnt-offering, the 
meal-offering thereof, and the drink-
offering thereof. 

26And on the fifth day nine bullocks, 
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the 
first year without blemish; 27and their 
meal-offering and their drink-offerings 


for the bullocks, for the rams, and for 
the lambs, according to their number, 
after the ordinance; 28and one he-goat 
for a sin-offering; beside the continual 
burnt-offering, and the meal-offering 
thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. 

29And on the sixth day eight 
bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs 
of the first year without blemish; 30and 
their meal-offering and their drink-
offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, according to 
their number, after the ordinance; 
31and one he-goat for a sin-offering; 
beside the continual burnt-offering, the 
meal-offering thereof, and the drink-
offerings thereof. 

32And on the seventh day seven 
bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs 
of the first year without blemish; 33and 
their meal-offering and their drink-
offerings for the bullocks, for the 
rams, and for the lambs, according to 
their number, after the ordinance; 
34and one he-goat for a sin-offering; 
beside the continual burnt-offering, the 
meal-offering thereof, and the drink-
offering thereof. 

35On the eighth day ye shall have a 
solemn assembly: ye shall do no 
manner of servile work; 36but ye shall 
present a burnt-offering, an offering 
made by fire, of a sweet savour unto 
the LORD: one bullock, one ram, seven 
he-lambs of the first year without 
blemish; 37their meal-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullock, for the 
ram, and for the lambs, shall be 
according to their number, after the 
ordinance; 38and one he-goat for a sin-
offering; beside the continual burnt-
offering, and the meal-offering 
thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. 

39These ye shall offer unto the LORD 
in your appointed seasons, beside your 
vows, and your freewill-offerings, 
whether they be your burnt-offerings, 
or your meal-offerings, or your drink-
offerings, or your peace-offerings. 

And Moses told the children 
of Israel according to all that 
the LORD commanded Moses. 

 

.... 

2And Moses spoke unto the heads of 
the tribes of the children of Israel, 
saying: 

This is the thing which the LORD 
hath commanded. 3When a man 
voweth a vow unto the LORD, or 
sweareth an oath to bind his soul with 
a bond, he shall not break his word; he 
shall do according to all that 
proceedeth out of his mouth. 4Also 
when a woman voweth a vow unto the 
LORD, and bindeth herself by a bond, 
being in her father’s house, in her 
youth, 5and her father heareth her vow, 
or her bond wherewith she hath bound 
her soul, and her father holdeth his 
peace at her, then all her vows shall 
stand, and every bond wherewith she 
hath bound her soul shall stand. 6But if 
her father disallow her in the day that 
he heareth, none of her vows, or of her 
bonds wherewith she hath bound her 
soul, shall stand; and the LORD will 
forgive her, because her father 
30 




disallowed her. 7And if she be married 
to a husband, while her vows are upon 
her, or the clear utterance of her lips, 
wherewith she hath bound her soul; 
8and her husband hear it, whatsoever 
day it be that he heareth it, and hold 
his peace at her; then her vows shall 
stand, and her bonds wherewith she 
hath bound her soul shall stand. 9But if 
her husband disallow her in the day 
that he heareth it, then he shall make 
void her vow which is upon her, and 
the clear utterance of her lips, 
wherewith she hath bound her soul; 
and the LORD will forgive her. 10But 
the vow of a widow, or of her that is 
divorced, even every thing wherewith 
she hath bound her soul, shall stand 
against her. 11 And if a woman vowed 
in her husband’s house, or bound her 
soul by a bond with an oath, 12and her 
husband heard it, and held his peace at 
her, and disallowed her not, then all 
her vows shall stand, and every bond 
wherewith she bound her soul shall 
stand. 13But if her husband make them 
null and void in the day that he heareth 
them, then whatsoever proceeded out 
of her lips, whether it were her vows, 
or the bond of her soul, shall not stand: 
her husband hath made them void; and 
the LORD will forgive her. 14Every 
vow, and every binding oath to afflict 
the soul, her husband may let it stand, 
or her husband may make it void. 
15But if her husband altogether hold 
his peace at her from day to day, then 
he causeth all her vows to stand, or all 
her bonds, which are upon her; he hath 
let them stand, because he held his 
peace at her in the day that he heard 
them. 16But if he shall make them null 
and void after that he hath heard them, 
then he shall bear her iniquity. 17These 
are the statutes, which the LORD 
commanded Moses, between a man 
and his wife, between a father and his 
daughter, being in her youth, in her 
father’s house. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Avenge the 
children of Israel of the Midianites; 
afterward shalt thou be gathered unto 
thy people.’ 3And Moses spoke unto 
the people, saying: ‘Arm ye men from 
among you for the war, that they may 
go against Midian, to execute the 
LORD’S vengeance on Midian. 4Of 
every tribe a thousand, throughout all 
the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the 
war.’ 5So there were delivered, out of 
the thousands of Israel, a thousand of 
every tribe, twelve thousand armed for 
war. 6And Moses sent them, a 
thousand of every tribe, to the war, 
them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar 
the priest, to the war, with the holy 
vessels and the trumpets for the alarm 
in his hand. 7And they warred against 
Midian, as the LORD commanded 
Moses; and they slew every male. 
8And they slew the kings of Midian 
with the rest of their slain: Evi, and 
Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, 
the five kings of Midian; Balaam also 
the son of Beor they slew with the 
sword. 9And the children of Israel took 
captive the women of Midian and their 
31 




little ones; and all their cattle, and all 
their flocks, and all their goods, they 
took for a prey. 10And all their cities in 
the places wherein they dwelt, and all 
their encampments, they burnt with 
fire. 11And they took all the spoil, and 
all the prey, both of man and of beast. 
12And they brought the captives, and 
the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, 
and unto Eleazar the priest, and unto 
the congregation of the children of 
Israel, unto the camp, unto the plains 
of Moab, which are by the Jordan at 
Jericho. 

13And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, 
and all the princes of the congregation, 
went forth to meet them without the 
camp. 14And Moses was wroth with 
the officers of the host, the captains of 
thousands and the captains of 
hundreds, who came from the service 
of the war. 15And Moses said unto 
them: ‘Have ye saved all the women 
alive? 16Behold, these caused the 
children of Israel, through the counsel 
of Balaam, to revolt so as to break 
faith with the LORD in the matter of 
Peor, and so the plague was among the 
congregation of the LORD. 17Now 
therefore kill every male among the 
little ones, and kill every woman that 
hath known man by lying with him. 
18But all the women children, that have 
not known man by lying with him, 
keep alive for yourselves. 19And 
encamp ye without the camp seven 
days; whosoever hath killed any 
person, and whosoever hath touched 
any slain, purify yourselves on the 
third day and on the seventh day, ye 
and your captives. 20And as to every 
garment, and all that is made of skin, 
and all work of goats’hair, and all 
things made of wood, ye shall purify.’ 

21And Eleazar the priest said unto 
the men of war that went to the battle: 
‘This is the statute of the law which 
the LORD hath commanded Moses: 
22Howbeit the gold, and the silver, the 
brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead, 
23every thing that may abide the fire, 
ye shall make to go through the fire, 
and it shall be clean; nevertheless it 
shall be purified with the water of 
sprinkling; and all that abideth not the 
fire ye shall make to go through the 
water. 24And ye shall wash your 
clothes on the seventh day, and ye 
shall be clean, and afterward ye may 
come into the camp.’ 

25And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 26’Take the sum of the prey 
that was taken, both of man and of 
beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and 
the heads of the fathers’houses of the 
congregation; 27and divide the prey 
into two parts: between the men 
skilled in war, that went out to battle, 
and all the congregation; 28and levy a 
tribute unto the LORD of the men of 
war that went out to battle: one soul of 
five hundred, both of the persons, and 
of the beeves, and of the asses, and of 
the flocks; 29take it of their half, and 
give it unto Eleazar the priest, as a 
portion set apart for the LORD. 30And of 
the children of Israel’s half, thou shalt 
take one drawn out of every fifty, of 


the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, 
and of the flocks, even of all the cattle, 
and give them unto the Levites, that 
keep the charge of the tabernacle of 
the LORD.’ 31And Moses and Eleazar 
the priest did as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 32Now the prey, over and 
above the booty which the men of war 
took, was six hundred thousand and 
seventy thousand and five thousand 
sheep, 33and threescore and twelve 
thousand beeves, 34and threescore and 
one thousand asses, 35and thirty and 
two thousand persons in all, of the 
women that had not known man by 
lying with him. 36And the half, which 
was the portion of them that went out 
to war, was in number three hundred 
thousand and thirty thousand and 
seven thousand and five hundred 
sheep. 37And the LORD’S tribute of the 
sheep was six hundred and threescore 
and fifteen. 38And the beeves were 
thirty and six thousand, of which the 
LORD’S tribute was threescore and 
twelve. 39And the asses were thirty 
thousand and five hundred, of which 
the LORD’S tribute was threescore and 
one. 40And the persons were sixteen 
thousand, of whom the LORD’S tribute 
was thirty and two persons. 41And 
Moses gave the tribute, which was set 
apart for the LORD, unto Eleazar the 
priest, as the LORD commanded Moses. 
42And of the children of Israel’s half, 
which Moses divided off from the men 
that warred— 43now the congregation’s 
half was three hundred thousand and 
thirty thousand and seven thousand 
and five hundred sheep, 44and thirty 
and six thousand beeves, 45and thirty 
thousand and five hundred asses, 46and 
sixteen thousand persons— 47even of 
the children of Israel’s half, Moses 
took one drawn out of every fifty, both 
of man and of beast, and gave them 
unto the Levites, that kept the charge 
of the tabernacle of the LORD; as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

48And the officers that were over the 
thousands of the host, the captains of 
thousands, and the captains of 
hundreds, came near unto Moses; 
49and they said unto Moses: ‘Thy 
servants have taken the sum of the 
men of war that are under our charge, 
and there lacketh not one man of us. 
50And we have brought the LORD’S 
offering, what every man hath gotten, 
of jewels of gold, armlets, and 
bracelets, signet-rings, ear-rings, and 
girdles, to make atonement for our 
souls before the LORD.’ 51And Moses 
and Eleazar the priest took the gold of 
them, even all wrought jewels. 52And 
all the gold of the gift that they set 
apart for the LORD, of the captains of 
thousands, and of the captains of 
hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven 
hundred and fifty shekels.— 53For the 
men of war had taken booty, every 
man for himself.— 54And Moses and 
Eleazar the priest took the gold of the 
captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
and brought it into the tent of meeting, 
for a memorial for the children of 
Israel before the LORD. 

 


Now the children of Reuben 
and the children of Gad had a 
very great multitude of cattle; and 
when they saw the land of Jazer, and 
the land of Gilead, that, behold, the 
place was a place for cattle, 2the 
children of Gad and the children of 
Reuben came and spoke unto Moses, 
and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the 
princes of the congregation, saying: 
3’Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and 
Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, 
and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon, 4the 
land which the LORD smote before the 
congregation of Israel, is a land for 
cattle, and thy servants have cattle.’ 
5And they said: ‘If we have found 
favour in thy sight, let this land be 
given unto thy servants for a 
possession; bring us not over the 
Jordan.’ 6And Moses said unto the 
children of Gad and to the children of 
Reuben: ‘Shall your brethren go to the 
war, and shall ye sit here? 7And 
wherefore will ye turn away the heart 
of the children of Israel from going 
over into the land which the LORD hath 
given them? 8Thus did your fathers, 
when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea 
to see the land. 9For when they went 
up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw 
the land, they turned away the heart of 
the children of Israel, that they should 
not go into the land which the LORD 
had given them. 10And the LORD’S 
anger was kindled in that day, and He 
swore, saying: 11Surely none of the 
men that came up out of Egypt, from 
twenty years old and upward, shall see 
the land which I swore unto Abraham, 
unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because 
they have not wholly followed Me; 
12save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the 
Kenizzite, and Joshua the son of Nun; 
because they have wholly followed the 
LORD. 13And the LORD’S anger was 
kindled against Israel, and He made 
them wander to and fro in the 
wilderness forty years, until all the 
generation, that had done evil in the 
sight of the LORD, was consumed. 
14And, behold, ye are risen up in your 
fathers’stead, a brood of sinful men, to 
augment yet the fierce anger of the 
LORD toward Israel. 15For if ye turn 
away from after Him, He will yet 
again leave them in the wilderness; 
and so ye will destroy all this people.’ 

16And they came near unto him, and 
said: ‘We will build sheepfolds here 
for our cattle, and cities for our little 
ones; 17but we ourselves will be ready 
armed to go before the children of 
Israel, until we have brought them 
unto their place; and our little ones 
shall dwell in the fortified cities 
because of the inhabitants of the land. 
18We will not return unto our houses, 
until the children of Israel have 
inherited every man his inheritance. 
19For we will not inherit with them on 
the other side of the Jordan, and 
forward, because our inheritance is 
fallen to us on this side of the Jordan 
eastward.’ 

20And Moses said unto them: ‘If ye 
will do this thing: if ye will arm 
yourselves to go before the LORD to the 
32 




war, 21and every armed man of you 
will pass over the Jordan before the 
LORD, until He hath driven out His 
enemies from before Him, 22and the 
land be subdued before the LORD, and 
ye return afterward; then ye shall be 
clear before the LORD, and before 
Israel, and this land shall be unto you 
for a possession before the LORD. 23But 
if ye will not do so, behold, ye have 
sinned against the LORD; and know ye 
your sin which will find you. 24Build 
you cities for your little ones, and 
folds for your sheep; and do that which 
hath proceeded out of your mouth.’ 

25And the children of Gad and the 
children of Reuben spoke unto Moses, 
saying: ‘Thy servants will do as my 
lord commandeth. 26Our little ones, 
our wives, our flocks, and all our 
cattle, shall be there in the cities of 
Gilead; 27but thy servants will pass 
over, every man that is armed for war, 
before the LORD to battle, as my lord 
saith.’ 

28So Moses gave charge concerning 
them to Eleazar the priest, and to 
Joshua the son of Nun, and to the 
heads of the fathers’houses of the 
tribes of the children of Israel. 29And 
Moses said unto them: ‘If the children 
of Gad and the children of Reuben will 
pass with you over the Jordan, every 
man that is armed to battle, before the 
LORD, and the land shall be subdued 
before you, then ye shall give them the 
land of Gilead for a possession; 30but if 
they will not pass over with you 
armed, they shall have possessions 
among you in the land of Canaan.’ 
31And the children of Gad and the 
children of Reuben answered, saying: 
‘As the LORD hath said unto thy 
servants, so will we do. 32We will pass 
over armed before the LORD into the 
land of Canaan, and the possession of 
our inheritance shall remain with us 
beyond the Jordan.’ 

33And Moses gave unto them, even 
to the children of Gad, and to the 
children of Reuben, and unto the half-
tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, 
the kingdom of Sihon king of the 
Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king 
of Bashan, the land, according to the 
cities thereof with their borders, even 
the cities of the land round about. 
34And the children of Gad built Dibon, 
and Ataroth, and Aroer; 35and Atroth-
shophan, and Jazer, and Jogbehah; 
36and Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran; 
fortified cities, and folds for sheep. 
37And the children of Reuben built 
Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kiriathaim; 
38and Nebo, and Baal-meon—their 
names being changed—and Sibmah; 
and gave their names unto the cities 
which they builded. 39And the children 
of Machir the son of Manasseh went to 
Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed 
the Amorites that were therein. 40And 
Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the 
son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein. 
41And Jair the son of Manasseh went 
and took the villages thereof, and 
called them aHavvoth-jair. 42And 

a That is, The villages of Jair. 


Nobah went and took Kenath, and the 
villages thereof, and called it Nobah, 
after his own name. 

.... 

These are the stages of the 
children of Israel, by which 
they went forth out of the land of 
Egypt by their hosts under the hand of 
Moses and Aaron. 2And Moses wrote 
their goings forth, stage by stage, by 
the commandment of the LORD; and 
these are their stages at their goings 
forth. 3And they journeyed from 
Rameses in the first month, on the 
fifteenth day of the first month; on the 
morrow after the passover the children 
of Israel went out with a high hand in 
the sight of all the Egyptians, 4while 
the Egyptians were burying them that 
the LORD had smitten among them, 
even all their first-born; upon their 
gods also the LORD executed 
judgments. 5And the children of Israel 
journeyed from Rameses, and pitched 
in Succoth. 6And they journeyed from 
Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which 
is in the edge of the wilderness. 7And 
they journeyed from Etham, and 
turned back unto Pihahiroth, which is 
before Baal-zephon; and they pitched 
before Migdol. 8And they journeyed 
from Penehahiroth, and passed through 
the midst of the sea into the 
wilderness; and they went three 
days’journey in the wilderness of 
Etham, and pitched in Marah. 9And 
they journeyed from Marah, and came 
unto Elim; and in Elim were twelve 
springs of water, and threescore and 
ten palm-trees; and they pitched there. 
10And they journeyed from Elim, and 
pitched by the Red Sea. 11And they 
journeyed from the Red Sea, and 
pitched in the wilderness of Sin. 12And 
they journeyed from the wilderness of 
Sin, and pitched in Dophkah. 13And 
they journeyed from Dophkah, and 
pitched in Alush. 14And they journeyed 
from Alush, and pitched in Rephidim, 
where was no water for the people to 
drink. 15And they journeyed from 
Rephidim, and pitched in the 
wilderness of Sinai. 16And they 
journeyed from the wilderness of 
Sinai, and pitched in Kibroth-
hattaavah. 17And they journeyed from 
Kibroth-hattaavah, and pitched in 
Hazeroth. 18And they journeyed from 
Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah. 
19And they journeyed from Rithmah, 
and pitched in Rimmon-perez. 20And 
they journeyed from Rimmon-perez, 
and pitched in Libnah. 21And they 
journeyed from Libnah, and pitched in 
Rissah. 22And they journeyed from 
Rissah, and pitched in Kehelah. 23And 
they journeyed from Kehelah, and 
pitched in mount Shepher. 24And they 
journeyed from mount Shepher, and 
pitched in Haradah. 25And they 
journeyed from Haradah, and pitched 
in Makheloth. 26And they journeyed 
from Makheloth, and pitched in 
Tahath. 27And they journeyed from 
Tahath, and pitched in Terah. 28And 
they journeyed from Terah, and 
pitched in Mithkah. 29And they 
journeyed from Mithkah, and pitched 
33 




in Hashmonah. 30And they journeyed 
from Hashmonah, and pitched in 
Moseroth. 31And they journeyed from 
Moseroth, and pitched in Bene-jaakan. 
32And they journeyed from Bene-
jaakan, and pitched in Hor-haggidgad. 
33And they journeyed from Hor-
haggidgad, and pitched in Jotbah. 
34And they journeyed from Jotbah, and 
pitched in Abronah. 35And they 
journeyed from Abronah, and pitched 
in Ezion-geber. 36And they journeyed 
from Ezion-geber, and pitched in the 
wilderness of Zin—the same is 
Kadesh. 37And they journeyed from 
Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in 
the edge of the land of Edom.— 38And 
Aaron the priest went up into mount 
Hor at the commandment of the LORD, 
and died there, in the fortieth year after 
the children of Israel were come out of 
the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, 
on the first day of the month. 39And 
Aaron was a hundred and twenty and 
three years old when he died in mount 
Hor. 40And the Canaanite, the king of 
Arad, who dwelt in the South in the 
land of Canaan, heard of the coming of 
the children of Israel.— 41And they 
journeyed from mount Hor, and 
pitched in Zalmonah. 42And they 
journeyed from Zalmonah, and pitched 
in Punon. 43And they journeyed from 
Punon, and pitched in Oboth. 44And 
they journeyed from Oboth, and 
pitched in Ije-abarim, in the border of 
Moab. 45And they journeyed from 
Ijim, and pitched in Dibon-gad. 46And 
they journeyed from Dibon-gad, and 
pitched in Almon-diblathaim. 47And 
they journeyed from Almon-
diblathaim, and pitched in the 
mountains of Abarim, in front of 
Nebo. 48And they journeyed from the 
mountains of Abarim, and pitched in 
the plains of Moab by the Jordan at 
Jericho. 49And they pitched by the 
Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth even unto 
Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab. 

50And the LORD spoke unto Moses in 
the plains of Moab by the Jordan at 
Jericho, saying: 51’Speak unto the 
children of Israel, and say unto them: 
When ye pass over the Jordan into the 
land of Canaan, 52then ye shall drive 
out all the inhabitants of the land from 
before you, and destroy all their 
figured stones, and destroy all their 
molten images, and demolish all their 
high places. 53And ye shall drive out 
the inhabitants of the land, and dwell 
therein; for unto you have I given the 
land to possess it. 54And ye shall 
inherit the land by lot according to 
your families—to the more ye shall 
give the more inheritance, and to the 
fewer thou shalt give the less 
inheritance; wheresoever the lot falleth 
to any man, that shall be his; according 
to the tribes of your fathers shall ye 
inherit. 55But if ye will not drive out 
the inhabitants of the land from before 
you, then shall those that ye let remain 
of them be as thorns in your eyes, and 
as pricks in your sides, and they shall 
harass you in the land wherein ye 
dwell. 56And it shall come to pass, that 


as I thought to do unto them, so will I 
do unto you. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses, saying: 2’Command 
the children of Israel, and say unto 
them: When ye come into the land of 
Canaan, this shall be the land that shall 
fall unto you for an inheritance, even 
the land of Canaan according to the 
borders thereof. 3Thus your south side 
shall be from the wilderness of Zin 
close by the side of Edom, and your 
south border shall begin at the end of 
the Salt Sea eastward; 4and your 
border shall turn about southward of 
the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass 
along to Zin; and the goings out 
thereof shall be southward of Kadesh-
barnea; and it shall go forth to Hazar-
addar, and pass along to Azmon; 5and 
the border shall turn about from 
Azmon unto the Brook of Egypt, and 
the goings out thereof shall be at the 
Sea. 6And for the western border, ye 
shall have the Great Sea for a border; 
this shall be your west border. 7And 
this shall be your north border: from 
the Great Sea ye shall mark out your 
line unto mount Hor; 8from mount Hor 
ye shall mark out a line unto the 
entrance to Hamath; and the goings 
out of the border shall be at Zedad; 
9and the border shall go forth to 
Ziphron, and the goings out thereof 
shall be at Hazar-enan; this shall be 
your north border. 10And ye shall mark 
out your line for the east border from 
Hazar-enan to Shepham; 11and the 
border shall go down from Shepham to 
Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the 
border shall go down, and shall strike 
upon the slope of the sea of Chinnereth 
eastward; 12and the border shall go 
down to the Jordan, and the goings out 
thereof shall be at the Salt Sea; this 
shall be your land according to the 
borders thereof round about.’ 

13And Moses commanded the 
children of Israel, saying: ‘This is the 
land wherein ye shall receive 
inheritance by lot, which the LORD hath 
commanded to give unto the nine 
tribes, and to the half-tribe; 14for the 
tribe of the children of Reuben 
according to their fathers’houses, and 
the tribe of the children of Gad 
according to their fathers’houses, have 
received, and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh have received, their 
inheritance; 15the two tribes and the 
half-tribe have received their 
inheritance beyond the Jordan at 
Jericho eastward, toward the sun-
rising.’ 

16And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 17’These are the names of the 
men that shall take possession of the 
land for you: Eleazar the priest, and 
Joshua the son of Nun. 18And ye shall 
take one prince of every tribe, to take 
possession of the land. 19And these are 
the names of the men: of the tribe of 
Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh. 
20And of the tribe of the children of 
Simeon, Shemuel the son of 
Ammihud. 21Of the tribe of Benjamin, 
Elidad the son of Chislon. 22And of the 
tribe of the children of Dan a prince, 
34 




Bukki the son of Jogli. 23Of the 
children of Joseph: of the tribe of the 
children of Manasseh a prince, 
Hanniel the son of Ephod; 24and of the 
tribe of the children of Ephraim a 
prince, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan. 
25And of the tribe of the children of 
Zebulun a prince, Eli-zaphan the son 
of Parnach. 26And of the tribe of the 
children of Issachar a prince, Paltiel 
the son of Azzan. 27And of the tribe of 
the children of Asher a prince, Ahihud 
the son of Shelomi. 28And of the tribe 
of the children of Naphtali a prince, 
Pedahel the son of Ammihud. 29These 
are they whom the LORD commanded 
to divide the inheritance unto the 
children of Israel in the land of 
Canaan.’ 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Moses in the plains of Moab 
by the Jordan at Jericho, saying: 
2’Command the children of Israel, that 
they give unto the Levites of the 
inheritance of their possession cities to 
dwell in; and open land round about 
the cities shall ye give unto the 
Levites. 3And the cities shall they have 
to dwell in; and their open land shall 
be for their cattle, and for their 
substance, and for all their beasts. 
4And the open land about the cities, 
which ye shall give unto the Levites, 
shall be from the wall of the city and 
outward a thousand cubits round 
about. 5And ye shall measure without 
the city for the east side two thousand 
cubits, and for the south side two 
thousand cubits, and for the west side 
two thousand cubits, and for the north 
side two thousand cubits, the city 
being in the midst. This shall be to 
them the open land about the cities. 
6And the cities which ye shall give 
unto the Levites, they shall be the six 
cities of refuge, which ye shall give for 
the manslayer to flee thither; and 
beside them ye shall give forty and 
two cities. 7All the cities which ye 
shall give to the Levites shall be forty 
and eight cities: them shall ye give 
with the open land about them. 8And 
concerning the cities which ye shall 
give of the possession of the children 
of Israel, from the many ye shall take 
many, and from the few ye shall take 
few; each tribe according to its 
inheritance which it inheriteth shall 
give of its cities unto the Levites.’ 

9And the LORD spoke unto Moses, 
saying: 10’Speak unto the children of 
Israel, and say unto them: When ye 
pass over the Jordan into the land of 
Canaan, 11then ye shall appoint you 
cities to be cities of refuge for you, 
that the manslayer that killeth any 
person through error may flee thither. 
12And the cities shall be unto you for 
refuge from the avenger, that the 
manslayer die not, until he stand 
before the congregation for judgment. 
13And as to the cities which ye shall 
give, there shall be for you six cities of 
refuge. 14Ye shall give three cities 
beyond the Jordan, and three cities 
shall ye give in the land of Canaan; 
they shall be cities of refuge. 15For the 
children of Israel, and for the stranger 
35 




and for the settler among them, shall 
these six cities be for refuge, that 
every one that killeth any person 
through error may flee thither. 16But if 
he smote him with an instrument of 
iron, so that he died, he is a murderer; 
the murderer shall surely be put to 
death. 17And if he smote him with a 
stone in the hand, whereby a man may 
die, and he died, he is a murderer; the 
murderer shall surely be put to death. 
18Or if he smote him with a weapon of 
wood in the hand, whereby a man may 
die, and he died, he is a murderer; the 
murderer shall surely be put to death. 
19The avenger of blood shall himself 
put the murderer to death; when he 
meeteth him, he shall put him to death. 
20And if he thrust him of hatred, or 
hurled at him any thing, lying in wait, 
so that he died; 21or in enmity smote 
him with his hand, that he died; he that 
smote him shall surely be put to death: 
he is a murderer; the avenger of blood 
shall put the murderer to death when 
he meeteth him. 22But if he thrust him 
suddenly without enmity, or hurled 
upon him any thing without lying in 
wait, 23or with any stone, whereby a 
man may die, seeing him not, and cast 
it upon him, so that he died, and he 
was not his enemy, neither sought his 
harm; 24then the congregation shall 
judge between the smiter and the 
avenger of blood according to these 
ordinances; 25and the congregation 
shall deliver the manslayer out of the 
hand of the avenger of blood, and the 
congregation shall restore him to his 
city of refuge, whither he was fled; 
and he shall dwell therein until the 
death of the high priest, who was 
anointed with the holy oil. 26But if the 
manslayer shall at any time go beyond 
the border of his city of refuge, 
whither he fleeth; 27and the avenger of 
blood find him without the border of 
his city of refuge, and the avenger of 
blood slay the manslayer; there shall 
be no bloodguiltiness for him; 
28because he must remain in his city of 
refuge until the death of the high 
priest; but after the death of the high 
priest the manslayer may return into 
the land of his possession. 29And these 
things shall be for a statute of 
judgment unto you throughout your 
generations in all your dwellings. 
30Whoso killeth any person, the 
murderer shall be slain at the mouth of 
witnesses; but one witness shall not 
testify against any person that he die. 
31Moreover ye shall take no ransom for 
the life of a murderer, that is guilty of 
death; but he shall surely be put to 
death. 32And ye shall take no ransom 
for him that is fled to his city of 
refuge, that he should come again to 
dwell in the land, until the death of the 
priest. 33So ye shall not pollute the 
land wherein ye are; for blood, it 
polluteth the land; and no expiation 
can be made for the land for the blood 
that is shed therein, but by the blood of 
him that shed it. 34And thou shalt not 
defile the land which ye inhabit, in the 
midst of which I dwell; for I the LORD 


dwell in the midst of the children of 
Israel.’ 

 

36 



And the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the family of 
the children of Gilead, the son of 
Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the 
families of the sons of Joseph, came 
near, and spoke before Moses, and 
before the princes, the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the children of Israel; 
2and they said: ‘The LORD commanded 
my lord to give the land for inheritance 
by lot to the children of Israel; and my 
lord was commanded by the LORD to 
give the inheritance of Zelophehad our 
brother unto his daughters. 3And if 
they be married to any of the sons of 
the other tribes of the children of 
Israel, then will their inheritance be 
taken away from the inheritance of our 
fathers, and will be added to the 
inheritance of the tribe whereunto they 
shall belong; so will it be taken away 
from the lot of our inheritance. 4And 
when the jubilee of the children of 
Israel shall be, then will their 
inheritance be added unto the 
inheritance of the tribe whereunto they 
shall belong; so will their inheritance 
be taken away from the inheritance of 
the tribe of our fathers.’ 5And Moses 
commanded the children of Israel 
according to the word of the LORD, 
saying: ‘The tribe of the sons of 
Joseph speaketh right. 6This is the 
thing which the LORD hath commanded 
concerning the daughters of 
Zelophehad, saying: Let them be 
married to whom they think best; only 
into the family of the tribe of their 
father shall they be married. 7So shall 
no inheritance of the children of Israel 
remove from tribe to tribe; for the 
children of Israel shall cleave every 
one to the inheritance of the tribe of 
his fathers. 8And every daughter, that 
possesseth an inheritance in any tribe 
of the children of Israel, shall be wife 
unto one of the family of the tribe of 
her father, that the children of Israel 
may possess every man the inheritance 
of his fathers. 9So shall no inheritance 
remove from one tribe to another tribe; 
for the tribes of the children of Israel 
shall cleave each one to its own 
inheritance.’ 10Even as the LORD 
commanded Moses, so did the 
daughters of Zelophehad. 11For 
Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and 
Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of 
Zelophehad, were married unto their 
father’s brothers’sons. 12They were 
married into the families of the sons of 
Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their 
inheritance remained in the tribe of the 
family of their father. 

13These are the commandments and 
the ordinances, which the LORD 
commanded by the hand of Moses 
unto the children of Israel in the plains 
of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho. 

 




..... 

DEUTERONOMY 

 

THESE ARE the words which Moses 
spoke unto all Israel beyond the 
Jordan; in the wilderness, in the 
Arabah, over against Suph, between 
Paran and Tophel, and Laban, and 
Hazeroth, and Di-zahab. 2It is eleven 
days journey from Horeb unto Kadesh-
barnea by the way of mount Seir. 3And 
it came to pass in the fortieth year, in 
the eleventh month, on the first day of 
the month, that Moses spoke unto the 
children of Israel, according unto all 
that the LORD had given him in 
commandment unto them; 4after he 
had smitten Sihon the king of the 
Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and 
Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt in 
Ashtaroth, at Edrei; 5beyond the 
Jordan, in the land of Moab, took 
Moses upon him to expound this law, 
saying: 6The LORD our God spoke unto 
us in Horeb, saying: ‘Ye have dwelt 
long enough in this mountain; 7turn 
you, and take your journey, and go to 
the hill-country of the Amorites and 
unto all the places nigh thereunto, in 
the Arabah, in the hill-country, and in 
the Lowland, and in the South, and by 
the sea-shore; the land of the 
Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the 
great river, the river Euphrates. 
8Behold, I have set the land before 
you: go in and possess the land which 
the LORD swore unto your fathers, to 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to 
give unto them and to their seed after 
them.’ 

9And I spoke unto you at that time, 
saying: ‘I am not able to bear you 
myself alone; 10the LORD your God 
hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye 
are this day as the stars of heaven for 
multitude.—11The LORD, the God of 
your fathers, make you a thousand 
times so many more as ye are, and 
bless you, as He hath promised you!—
12How can I myself alone bear your 
cumbrance, and your burden, and your 
strife? 13Get you, from each one of 
your tribes, wise men, and 
understanding, and full of knowledge, 
and I will make them heads over you.’ 
14And ye answered me, and said: ‘The 
thing which thou hast spoken is good 
for us to do.’ 15So I took the heads of 
your tribes, wise men, and full of 
knowledge, and made them heads over 
you, captains of thousands, and 
captains of hundreds, and captains of 
fifties, and captains of tens, and 
officers, tribe by tribe. 16And I charged 
your judges at that time, saying: ‘Hear 
the causes between your brethren, and 
judge righteously between a man and 
his brother, and the stranger that is 
with him. 17Ye shall not respect 
persons in judgment; ye shall hear the 
small and the great alike; ye shall not 
1 




be afraid of the face of any man; for 
the judgment is God’s; and the cause 
that is too hard for you ye shall bring 
unto me, and I will hear it.’ 18And I 
commanded you at that time all the 
things which ye should do. 

19And we journeyed from Horeb, 
and went through all that great and 
dreadful wilderness which ye saw, by 
the way to the hill-country of the 
Amorites, as the LORD our God 
commanded us; and we came to 
Kadesh-barnea. 20And I said unto you: 
‘Ye are come unto the hill-country of 
the Amorites, which the LORD our God 
giveth unto us. 21Behold, the LORD thy 
God hath set the land before thee; go 
up, take possession, as the LORD, the 
God of thy fathers, hath spoken unto 
thee; fear not, neither be dismayed.’ 
22And ye came near unto me every one 
of you, and said: ‘Let us send men 
before us, that they may search the 
land for us, and bring us back word of 
the way by which we must go up, and 
the cities unto which we shall come.’ 
23And the thing pleased me well; and I 
took twelve men of you, one man for 
every tribe; 24and they turned and went 
up into the mountains, and came unto 
the valley of Eshcol, and spied it out. 
25And they took of the fruit of the land 
in their hands, and brought it down 
unto us, and brought us back word, 
and said: ‘Good is the land which the 
LORD our God giveth unto us.’ 26Yet ye 
would not go up, but rebelled against 
the commandment of the LORD your 
God; 27and ye murmured in your tents, 
and said: ‘Because the LORD hated us, 
He hath brought us forth out of the 
land of Egypt, to deliver us into the 
hand of the Amorites, to destroy us. 
28Whither are we going up? our 
brethren have made our heart to melt, 
saying: The people is greater and taller 
than we; the cities are great and 
fortified up to heaven; and moreover 
we have seen the sons of the Anakim 
there.’ 29Then I said unto you: ‘Dread 
not, neither be afraid of them. 30The 
LORD your God who goeth before you, 
He shall fight for you, according to all 
that He did for you in Egypt before 
your eyes; 31and in the wilderness, 
where thou hast seen how that the 
LORD thy God bore thee, as a man doth 
bear his son, in all the way that ye 
went, until ye came unto this place. 
32Yet in this thing ye do not believe the 
LORD your God, 33Who went before 
you in the way, to seek you out a place 
to pitch your tents in: in fire by night, 
to show you by what way ye should 
go, and in the cloud by day.’ 

34And the LORD heard the voice of 
your words, and was wroth, and swore, 
saying: 35’Surely there shall not one of 
these men, even this evil generation, 
see the good land, which I swore to 
give unto your fathers, 36save Caleb 
the son of Jephunneh, he shall see it; 
and to him will I give the land that he 
hath trodden upon, and to his children; 
because he hath wholly followed the 
LORD.’ 37Also the LORD was angry with 
me for your sakes, saying: Thou also 
shalt not go in thither; 38Joshua the son 


of Nun, who standeth before thee, he 
shall go in thither; encourage thou 
him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit 
it. 39Moreover your little ones, that ye 
said should be a prey, and your 
children, that this day have no 
knowledge of good or evil, they shall 
go in thither, and unto them will I give 
it, and they shall possess it. 40But as 
for you, turn you, and take your 
journey into the wilderness by the way 
to the Red Sea.’ 41Then ye answered 
and said unto me: ‘We have sinned 
against the LORD, we will go up and 
fight, according to all that the LORD our 
God commanded us.’ And ye girded 
on every man his weapons of war, and 
deemed it a light thing to go up into 
the hill-country. 42And the LORD said 
unto me: ‘Say unto them: Go not up, 
neither fight; for I am not among you; 
lest ye be smitten before your 
enemies.’ 43So I spoke unto you, and 
ye hearkened not; but ye rebelled 
against the commandment of the LORD, 
and were presumptuous, and went up 
into the hill-country. 44And the 
Amorites, that dwell in that hill-
country, came out against you, and 
chased you, as bees do, and beat you 
down in Seir, even unto Hormah. 
45And ye returned and wept before the 
LORD; but the LORD hearkened not to 
your voice, nor gave ear unto you. 46So 
ye abode in Kadesh many days, 
according unto the days that ye abode 
there. 

Then we turned, and took our 
journey into the wilderness by the 
way to the Red Sea, as the LORD spoke 
unto me; and we compassed mount 
Seir many days. 

2And the LORD spoke unto me, 
saying: 3’Ye have compassed this 
mountain long enough; turn you 
northward. 4And command thou the 
people, saying: Ye are to pass through 
the border of your brethren the 
children of Esau, that dwell in Seir; 
and they will be afraid of you; take ye 
good heed unto yourselves therefore; 
5contend not with them; for I will not 
give you of their land, no, not so much 
as for the sole of the foot to tread on; 
because I have given mount Seir unto 
Esau for a possession. 6Ye shall 
purchase food of them for money, that 
ye may eat; and ye shall also buy 
water of them for money, that ye may 
drink. 7For the LORD thy God hath 
blessed thee in all the work of thy 
hand; He hath known thy walking 
through this great wilderness; these 
forty years the LORD thy God hath been 
with thee; thou hast lacked nothing.’ 
8So we passed by from our brethren 
the children of Esau, that dwell in Seir, 
from the way of the Arabah, from 
Elath and from Ezion-geber. 

And we turned and passed by the 
way of the wilderness of Moab. 9And 
the LORD said unto me: ‘Be not at 
enmity with Moab, neither contend 
with them in battle; for I will not give 
thee of his land for a possession; 
because I have given Ar unto the 
children of Lot for a possession.—
10The Emim dwelt therein aforetime, a 2 




people great, and many, and tall, as the 
Anakim; 11these also are accounted 
Rephaim, as the Anakim; but the 
Moabites call them Emim. 12And in 
Seir dwelt the Horites aforetime, but 
the children of Esau succeeded them; 
and they destroyed them from before 
them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel 
did unto the land of his possession, 
which the LORD gave unto them.—
13Now rise up, and get you over the 
brook Zered.’ And we went over the 
brook Zered. 14And the days in which 
we came from Kadesh-barnea, until 
we were come over the brook Zered, 
were thirty and eight years; until all 
the generation, even the men of war, 
were consumed from the midst of the 
camp, as the LORD swore unto them. 
15Moreover the hand of the LORD was 
against them, to discomfit them from 
the midst of the camp, until they were 
consumed. 

16So it came to pass, when all the 
men of war were consumed and dead 
from among the people, 17that the LORD 
spoke unto me saying: 18’Thou art this 
day to pass over the border of Moab, 
even Ar; 19and when thou comest nigh 
over against the children of Ammon, 
harass them not, nor contend with 
them; for I will not give thee of the 
land of the children of Ammon for a 
possession; because I have given it 
unto the children of Lot for a 
possession.— 20That also is accounted 
a land of Rephaim: Rephaim dwelt 
therein aforetime; but the Ammonites 
call them Zamzummim, 21a people 
great, and many, and tall, as the 
Anakim; but the LORD destroyed them 
before them; and they succeeded them, 
and dwelt in their stead; 22as He did for 
the children of Esau, that dwell in Seir, 
when He destroyed the Horites from 
before them; and they succeeded them, 
and dwelt in their stead even unto this 
day; 23and the Avvim, that dwelt in 
villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, 
that came forth out of Caphtor, 
destroyed them, and dwelt in their 
stead.— 24Rise ye up, take your 
journey, and pass over the valley of 
Arnon; behold, I have given into thy 
hand Sihon the Amorite, king of 
Heshbon, and his land; begin to 
possess it, and contend with him in 
battle. 25This day will I begin to put 
the dread of thee and the fear of thee 
upon the peoples that are under the 
whole heaven, who, when they hear 
the report of thee, shall tremble, and be 
in anguish because of thee.’ 

26And I sent messengers out of the 
wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon 
king of Heshbon with words of peace, 
saying: 27’Let me pass through thy 
land; I will go along by the highway, I 
will neither turn unto the right hand 
nor to the left. 28Thou shalt sell me 
food for money, that I may eat; and 
give me water for money, that I may 
drink; only let me pass through on my 
feet; 29as the children of Esau that 
dwell in Seir, and the Moabites that 
dwell in Ar, did unto me; until I shall 
pass over the Jordan into the land 
which the LORD our God giveth us.’ 


30But Sihon king of Heshbon would 
not let us pass by him; for the LORD thy 
God hardened his spirit, and made his 
heart obstinate, that He might deliver 
him into thy hand, as appeareth this 
day. 

31And the LORD said unto me: 
‘Behold, I have begun to deliver up 
Sihon and his land before thee; begin 
to possess his land.’ 32Then Sihon 
came out against us, he and all his 
people, unto battle at Jahaz. 33And the 
LORD our God delivered him up before 
us; and we smote him, and his sons, 
and all his people. 34And we took all 
his cities at that time, and utterly 
destroyed every city, the men, and the 
women, and the little ones; we left 
none remaining; 35only the cattle we 
took for a prey unto ourselves, with 
the spoil of the cities which we had 
taken. 36From Aroer, which is on the 
edge of the valley of Arnon, and from 
the city that is in the valley, even unto 
Gilead, there was not a city too high 
for us: the LORD our God delivered up 
all before us. 37Only to the land of the 
children of Ammon thou camest not 
near; all the side of the river Jabbok, 
and the cities of the hill-country, and 
wheresoever the LORD our God forbade 
us. 

 

Then we turned, and went up the 
way to Bashan; and Og the king 
of Bashan came out against us, he and 
all his people, unto battle at Edrei. 
2And the LORD said unto me: ‘Fear him 
not; for I have delivered him, and all 
his people, and his land, into thy hand; 
and thou shalt do unto him as thou 
didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, 
who dwelt at Heshbon.’ 3So the LORD 
our God delivered into our hand Og 
also, the king of Bashan, and all his 
people; and we smote him until none 
was left to him remaining. 4And we 
took all his cities at that time; there 
was not a city which we took not from 
them; threescore cities, all the region 
of Argob, the kingdom of Og in 
Bashan. 5All these were fortified cities, 
with high walls, gates, and bars; beside 
the unwalled towns a great many. 
6And we utterly destroyed them, as we 
did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, 
utterly destroying every city, the men, 
and the women, and the little ones. 
7But all the cattle, and the spoil of the 
cities, we took for a prey unto 
ourselves. 

8And we took the land at that time 
out of the hand of the two kings of the 
Amorites that were beyond the Jordan, 
from the valley of Arnon unto mount 
Hermon— 9which Hermon the 
Sidonians call Sirion, and the 
Amorites call it Senir—10all the cities 
of the plain, and all Gilead, and all 
Bashan, unto Salcah and Edrei, cities 
of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.—
11For only Og king of Bashan 
remained of the remnant of the 
Rephaim; behold, his bedstead was a 
bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbah of 
the children of Ammon? nine cubits 
was the length thereof, and four cubits 
the breadth of it, after the cubit of a 
3 




man.—12And this land we took in 
possession at that time; from Aroer, 
which is by the valley of Arnon, and 
half the hill-country of Gilead, and the 
cities thereof, gave I unto the 
Reubenites and to the Gadites; 13and 
the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, the 
kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half-
tribe of Manasseh; all the region of 
Argob—all that Bashan is called the 
land of Rephaim. 14Jair the son of 
Manasseh took all the region of Argob, 
unto the border of the Geshurites and 
the Maacathites, and called them, even 
Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth-
jair, unto this day.—15And I gave 
Gilead unto Machir. 16And unto the 
Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave 
from Gilead even unto the valley of 
Arnon, the middle of the valley for a 
border; even unto the river Jabbok, 
which is the border of the children of 
Ammon; 17the Arabah also, the Jordan 
being the border thereof, from 
Chinnereth even unto the sea of the 
Arabah, the Salt Sea, under the slopes 
of Pisgah eastward. 

18And I commanded you at that 
time, saying: ‘The LORD your God hath 
given you this land to possess it; ye 
shall pass over armed before your 
brethren the children of Israel, all the 
men of valour. 19But your wives, and 
your little ones, and your cattle—I 
know that ye have much cattle—shall 
abide in your cities which I have given 
you; 20until the LORD give rest unto 
your brethren, as unto you, and they 
also possess the land which the LORD 
your God giveth them beyond the 
Jordan; then shall ye return every man 
unto his possession, which I have 
given you. 21And I commanded Joshua 
at that time, saying: ‘Thine eyes have 
seen all that the LORD your God hath 
done unto these two kings; so shall the 
LORD do unto all the kingdoms whither 
thou goest over. 22Ye shall not fear 
them; for the LORD your God, He it is 
that fighteth for you.’ 

 

...... 

23And I besought the LORD at that 
time, saying: 24’O Lord GOD, Thou hast 
begun to show Thy servant Thy 
greatness, and Thy strong hand; for 
what god is there in heaven or on 
earth, that can do according to Thy 
works, and according to Thy mighty 
acts? 25Let me go over, I pray Thee, 
and see the good land that is beyond 
the Jordan, that goodly hill-country, 
and Lebanon.’ 26But the LORD was 
wroth with me for your sakes, and 
hearkened not unto me; and the LORD 
said unto me: ‘Let it suffice thee; 
speak no more unto Me of this matter. 
27Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, 
and lift up thine eyes westward, and 
northward, and southward, and 
eastward, and behold with thine eyes; 
for thou shalt not go over this Jordan. 
28But charge Joshua, and encourage 
him, and strengthen him; for he shall 
go over before this people, and he 
shall cause them to inherit the land 
which thou shalt see.’ 29So we abode 
in the valley over against Beth-peor. 


And now, O Israel, hearken unto 
the statutes and unto the 
ordinances, which I teach you, to do 
them; that ye may live, and go in and 
possess the land which the LORD, the 
God of your fathers, giveth you. 2Ye 
shall not add unto the word which I 
command you, neither shall ye 
diminish from it, that ye may keep the 
commandments of the LORD your God 
which I command you. 3Your eyes 
have seen what the LORD did in Baal-
peor; for all the men that followed the 
Baal of Peor, the LORD thy God hath 
destroyed them from the midst of thee. 
4But ye that did cleave unto the LORD 
your God are alive every one of you 
this day. 5Behold, I have taught you 
statutes and ordinances, even as the 
LORD my God commanded me, that ye 
should do so in the midst of the land 
whither ye go in to possess it. 
6Observe therefore and do them; for 
this is your wisdom and your 
understanding in the sight of the 
peoples, that, when they hear all these 
statutes, shall say: ‘Surely this great 
nation is a wise and understanding 
people.’ 7For what great nation is 
there, that hath God so nigh unto them, 
as the LORD our God is whensoever we 
call upon Him? 8And what great nation 
is there, that hath statutes and 
ordinances so righteous as all this law, 
which I set before you this day? 9Only 
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul 
diligently, lest thou forget the things 
which thine eyes saw, and lest they 
depart from thy heart all the days of 
thy life; but make them known unto 
thy children and thy children’s 
children; 10the day that thou stoodest 
before the LORD thy God in Horeb, 
when the LORD said unto me: 
‘Assemble Me the people, and I will 
make them hear My words that they 
may learn to fear Me all the days that 
they live upon the earth, and that they 
may teach their children.’ 11And ye 
came near and stood under the 
mountain; and the mountain burned 
with fire unto the heart of heaven, with 
darkness, cloud, and thick darkness. 
12And the LORD spoke unto you out of 
the midst of the fire; ye heard the 
voice of words, but ye saw no form; 
only a voice. 13And He declared unto 
you His covenant, which He 
commanded you to perform, even the 
ten words; and He wrote them upon 
two tables of stone. 14And the LORD 
commanded me at that time to teach 
you statutes and ordinances, that ye 
might do them in the land whither ye 
go over to possess it. 15Take ye 
therefore good heed unto yourselves—
for ye saw no manner of form on the 
day that the LORD spoke unto you in 
Horeb out of the midst of the fire—
16lest ye deal corruptly, and make you 
a graven image, even the form of any 
figure, the likeness of male or female, 
17the likeness of any beast that is on 
the earth, the likeness of any winged 
fowl that flieth in the heaven, 18the 
likeness of any thing that creepeth on 
the ground, the likeness of any fish 
that is in the water under the earth; 
4 




19and lest thou lift up thine eyes unto 
heaven, and when thou seest the sun 
and the moon and the stars, even all 
the host of heaven, thou be drawn 
away and worship them, and serve 
them, which the LORD thy God hath 
allotted unto all the peoples under the 
whole heaven. 20But you hath the LORD 
taken and brought forth out of the iron 
furnace, out of Egypt, to be unto Him 
a people of inheritance, as ye are this 
day. 21Now the LORD was angered with 
me for your sakes, and swore that I 
should not go over the Jordan, and that 
I should not go in unto that good land, 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee 
for an inheritance; 22but I must die in 
this land, I must not go over the 
Jordan; but ye are to go over, and 
possess that good land. 23Take heed 
unto yourselves, lest ye forget the 
covenant of the LORD your God, which 
He made with you, and make you a 
graven image, even the likeness of any 
thing which the LORD thy God hath 
forbidden thee. 24For the LORD thy God 
is a devouring fire, a jealous God. 

25When thou shalt beget children, 
and children’s children, and ye shall 
have been long in the land, and shall 
deal corruptly, and make a graven 
image, even the form of any thing, and 
shall do that which is evil in the sight 
of the LORD thy God, to provoke Him; 
26I call heaven and earth to witness 
against you this day, that ye shall soon 
utterly perish from off the land 
whereunto ye go over the Jordan to 
possess it; ye shall not prolong your 
days upon it, but shall utterly be 
destroyed. 27And the LORD shall scatter 
you among the peoples, and ye shall 
be left few in number among the 
nations, whither the LORD shall lead 
you away. 28And there ye shall serve 
gods, the work of men’s hands, wood 
and stone, which neither see, nor hear, 
nor eat, nor smell. 29But from thence 
ye will seek the LORD thy God; and 
thou shalt find Him, if thou search 
after Him with all thy heart and with 
all thy soul. 30In thy distress, when all 
these things are come upon thee, in the 
end of days, thou wilt return to the 
LORD thy God, and hearken unto His 
voice; 31for the LORD thy God is a 
merciful God; He will not fail thee, 
neither destroy thee, nor forget the 
covenant of thy fathers which He 
swore unto them. 32For ask now of the 
days past, which were before thee, 
since the day that God created man 
upon the earth, and from the one end 
of heaven unto the other, whether there 
hath been any such thing as this great 
thing is, or hath been heard like it? 
33Did ever a people hear the voice of 
God speaking out of the midst of the 
fire, as thou hast heard, and live? 34Or 
hath God assayed to go and take Him a 
nation from the midst of another 
nation, by trials, by signs, and by 
wonders, and by war, and by a mighty 
hand, and by an outstretched arm, and 
by great terrors, according to all that 
the LORD your God did for you in 
Egypt before thine eyes? 35Unto thee it 
was shown, that thou mightiest know 


that the LORD, He is God; there is none 
else beside Him. 36Out of heaven He 
made thee to hear His voice, that He 
might instruct thee; and upon earth He 
made thee to see His great fire; and 
thou didst hear His words out of the 
midst of the fire. 37And because He 
loved thy fathers, and chose their seed 
after them, and brought thee out with 
His presence, with His great power, 
out of Egypt, 38to drive out nations 
from before thee greater and mightier 
than thou, to bring thee in, to give thee 
their land for an inheritance, as it is 
this day; 39know this day, and lay it to 
thy heart, that the LORD, He is God in 
heaven above and upon the earth 
beneath; there is none else. 40And thou 
shalt keep His statutes, and His 
commandments, which I command 
thee this day, that it may go well with 
thee, and with thy children after thee, 
and that thou mayest prolong thy days 
upon the land, which the LORD thy God 
giveth thee, for ever. 

 

41Then Moses separated three cities 
beyond the Jordan toward the 
sunrising; 42that the manslayer might 
flee thither, that slayeth his neighbour 
unawares, and hated him not in time 
past; and that fleeing unto one of these 
cities he might live: 43Bezer in the 
wilderness, in the table-land, for the 
Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for 
the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for 
the Manassites. 

 

44And this is the law which Moses 
set before the children of Israel; 45these 
are the testimonies, and the statutes, 
and the ordinances, which Moses 
spoke unto the children of Israel, when 
they came forth out of Egypt; 46beyond 
the Jordan, in the valley over against 
Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of 
the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, 
whom Moses and the children of Israel 
smote, when they came forth out of 
Egypt; 47and they took his land in 
possession, and the land of Og king of 
Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, 
who were beyond the Jordan toward 
the sunrising; 48from Aroer, which is 
on the edge of the valley of Arnon, 
even unto mount Sion—the same is 
Hermon— 49and all the Arabah beyond 
the Jordan eastward, even unto the sea 
of the Arabah, under the slopes of 
Pisgah. 

And Moses called unto all Israel, 
and said unto them: 

Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the 
ordinances which I speak in your ears 
this day, that ye may learn them, and 
observe to do them. 2The LORD our 
God made a covenant with us in 
Horeb. 3The LORD made not this 
covenant with our fathers, but with us, 
even us, who are all of us here alive 
this day. 4The LORD spoke with you 
face to face in the mount out of the 
midst of the fire— 5I stood between the 
LORD and you at that time, to declare 
unto you the word of the LORD; for ye 
were afraid because of the fire, and 
went not up into the mount—saying: 
5 




6I am the LORD thy God, who 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, 
out of the house of bondage. 

7Thou shalt have no other gods 
before Me. 8Thou shalt not make unto 
thee a graven image, even any manner 
of likeness, of any thing that is in 
heaven above, or that is in the earth 
beneath, or that is in the water under 
the earth. 9Thou shalt not bow down 
unto them, nor serve them; for I the 
LORD thy God am a jealous God, 
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon 
the children, and upon the third and 
upon the fourth generation of them 
that hate Me, 10and showing mercy 
unto the thousandth generation of them 
that love Me and keep My 
commandments. 

11Thou shalt not take the name of 
the LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD 
will not hold him guiltless that taketh 
His name in vain. 

12Observe the sabbath day, to keep it 
holy, as the LORD thy God commanded 
thee. 13Six days shalt thou labour, and 
do all thy work; 14but the seventh day 
is a sabbath unto the LORD thy God, in 
it thou shalt not do any manner of 
work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy 
daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy 
maid-servant, nor thine ox, nor thine 
ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy 
stranger that is within thy gates; that 
thy man-servant and thy maid-servant 
may rest as well as thou. 15And thou 
shalt remember that thou was a servant 
in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy 
God brought thee out thence by a 
mighty hand and by an outstretched 
arm; therefore the LORD thy God 
commanded thee to keep the sabbath 
day. 

16Honour thy father and thy mother, 
as the LORD thy God commanded thee; 
that thy days may be long, and that it 
may go well with thee, upon the land 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee. 

17Thou shalt not murder. 

Neither shalt thou commit adultery. 

Neither shalt thou steal. 

Neither shalt thou bear false witness 
against thy neighbour. 

18Neither shalt thou covet thy 
neighbour’s wife; neither shalt thou 
desire thy neighbour’s house, his field, 
or his man-servant, or his maid-
servant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing 
that is thy neighbour’s. 

19These words the LORD spoke unto 
all your assembly in the mount out of 
the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and 
of the thick darkness, with a great 
voice, and it went on no more. And He 
wrote them upon two tables of stone, 
and gave them unto me. 20And it came 
to pass, when ye heard the voice out of 
the midst of the darkness, while the 
mountain did burn with fire, that ye 
came near unto me, even all the heads 
of your tribes, and your elders; 21and 
ye said: ‘Behold, the LORD our God 
hath shown us His glory and His 
greatness, and we have heard His 
voice out of the midst of the fire; we 
have seen this day that God doth speak 
with man, and he liveth. 22Now 
therefore why should we die? for this 


great fire will consume us; if we hear 
the voice of the LORD our God any 
more, then we shall die. 23For who is 
there of all flesh, that hath heard the 
voice of the living God speaking out of 
the midst of the fire, as we have, and 
lived? 24Go thou near, and hear all that 
the LORD our God may say; and thou 
shalt speak unto us all that the LORD 
our God may speak unto thee; and we 
will hear it and do it.’ 25And the LORD 
heard the voice of your words, when 
ye spoke unto me; and the LORD said 
unto me: ‘I have heard the voice of the 
words of this people, which they have 
spoken unto thee; they have well said 
all that they have spoken. 26Oh that 
they had such a heart as this alway, to 
fear Me, and keep all My 
commandments, that it might be well 
with them, and with their children for 
ever! 27Go say to them: Return ye to 
your tents. 28But as for thee, stand thou 
here by Me, and I will speak unto thee 
all the commandment, and the statutes, 
and the ordinances, which thou shalt 
teach them, that they may do them in 
the land which I give them to possess 
it.’ 29Ye shall observe to do therefore 
as the LORD your God hath 
commanded you; ye shall not turn 
aside to the right hand or to the left. 
30Ye shall walk in all the way which 
the LORD your God hath commanded 
you, that ye may live, and that it may 
be well with you, and that ye may 
prolong your days in the land which ye 
shall possess. 

Now this is the commandment, 
the statutes, and the ordinances, 
which the LORD your God commanded 
to teach you, that ye might do them in 
the land whither ye go over to possess 
it— 2that thou mightest fear the LORD 
thy God, to keep all His statutes and 
His commandments, which I command 
thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s 
son, all the days of thy life; and that 
thy days may be prolonged. 3Hear 
therefore, O Israel, and observe to do 
it; that it may be well with thee, and 
that ye may increase mightily, as the 
LORD, the God of thy fathers, hath 
promised unto thee—a land flowing 
with milk and honey. 

4HEAR, O ISRAEL: THE LORD OUR GOD, 
THE LORD IS ONE. 5And thou shalt love 
the LORD thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
might. 6And these words, which I 
command thee this day, shall be upon 
thy heart; 7and thou shalt teach them 
diligently unto thy children, and shalt 
talk of them when thou sittest in thy 
house, and when thou walkest by the 
way, and when thou liest down, and 
when thou risest up. 8And thou shalt 
bind them for a sign upon thy hand, 
and they shall be for frontlets between 
thine eyes. 9And thou shalt write them 
upon the door-posts of thy house, and 
upon thy gates. 

10And it shall be, when the LORD thy 
God shall bring thee into the land 
which He swore unto thy fathers, to 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to 
give thee—great and goodly cities, 
6 




which thou didst not build, 11and 
houses full of all good things, which 
thou didst not fill, and cisterns hewn 
out, which thou the didst not hew, 
vineyards and olive-trees, which thou 
didst not plant, and thou shalt eat and 
be satisfied—12then beware lest thou 
forget the LORD, who brought thee 
forth out of the land of Egypt, out of 
the house of bondage. 13Thou shalt 
fear the LORD thy God; and Him shalt 
thou serve, and by His name shalt thou 
swear. 14Ye shall not go after other 
gods, of the gods of the peoples that 
are round about you; 15for a jealous 
God, even the LORD thy God, is in the 
midst of thee; lest the anger of the 
LORD thy God be kindled against thee, 
and He destroy thee from off the face 
of the earth. 

16Ye shall not try the LORD your 
God, as ye tried Him in Massah. 17Ye 
shall diligently keep the 
commandments of the LORD your God, 
and His testimonies, and His statutes, 
which He hath commanded thee. 
18And thou shalt do that which is right 
and good in the sight of the LORD; that 
it may be well with thee, and that thou 
mayest go in and possess the good 
land which the LORD swore unto thy 
fathers, 19to thrust out all thine 
enemies from before thee, as the LORD 
hath spoken. 

20When thy son asketh thee in time 
to come, saying: ‘What mean the 
testimonies, and the statutes, and the 
ordinances, which the LORD our God 
hath commanded you? 21then thou 
shalt say unto thy son: ‘We were 
Pharaoh’s bondmen in Egypt; and the 
LORD brought us out of Egypt with a 
mighty hand. 22And the LORD showed 
signs and wonders, great and sore, 
upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon 
all his house, before our eyes. 23And 
He brought us out from thence, that He 
might bring us in, to give us the land 
which He swore unto our fathers. 
24And the LORD commanded us to do 
all these statutes, to fear the LORD our 
God, for our good always, that He 
might preserve us alive, as it is at this 
day. 25And it shall be righteousness 
unto us, if we observe to do all this 
commandment before the LORD our 
God, as He hath commanded us.’ 

When the LORD thy God shall 
bring thee into the land whither 
thou goest to possess it, and shall cast 
out many nations before thee, the 
Hittite, and the Girgashite, and the 
Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the 
Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the 
Jebusite, seven nations greater and 
mightier than thou; 2and when the 
LORD thy God shall deliver them up 
before thee, and thou shalt smite them; 
then thou shalt utterly destroy them; 
thou shalt make no covenant with 
them, nor show mercy unto them; 
3neither shalt thou make marriages 
with them: thy daughter thou shalt not 
give unto his son, nor his daughter 
shalt thou take unto thy son. 4For he 
will turn away thy son from following 
Me, that they may serve other gods; so 
will the anger of the LORD be kindled 
7 




against you, and He will destroy thee 
quickly. 5But thus shall ye deal with 
them: ye shall break down their altars, 
and dash in pieces their pillars, and 
hew down their Asherim, and burn 
their graven images with fire. 6For 
thou art a holy people unto the LORD 
thy God: the LORD thy God hath 
chosen thee to be His own treasure, 
out of all peoples that are upon the 
face of the earth. 7The LORD did not set 
His love upon you, nor choose you, 
because ye were more in number than 
any people—for ye were the fewest of 
all peoples— 8but because the LORD 
loved you, and because He would keep 
the oath which He swore unto your 
fathers, hath the LORD brought you out 
with a mighty hand, and redeemed you 
out of the house of bondage, from the 
hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. 9Know 
therefore that the LORD thy God, He is 
God; the faithful God, who keepeth 
covenant and mercy with them that 
love Him and keep His 
commandments to a thousand 
generations; 10and repayeth them that 
hate Him to their face, to destroy 
them; He will not be slack to him that 
hateth Him, He will repay him to his 
face. 11Thou shalt therefore keep the 
commandment, and the statutes, and 
the ordinances, which I command thee 
this day, to do them. 

 

... 

12And it shall come to pass, because 
ye hearken to these ordinances, and 
keep, and do them, that the LORD thy 
God shall keep with thee the covenant 
and the mercy which He swore unto 
thy fathers, 13and He will love thee, 
and bless thee, and multiply thee; He 
will also bless the fruit of thy body and 
the fruit of thy land, thy corn and thy 
wine and thine oil, the increase of thy 
kine and the young of thy flock, in the 
land which He swore unto thy fathers 
to give thee. 14Thou shalt be blessed 
above all peoples; there shall not be 
male or female barren among you, or 
among your cattle. 15And the LORD will 
take away from thee all sickness; and 
He will put none of the evil diseases of 
Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee, 
but will lay them upon all them that 
hate thee. 16And thou shalt consume all 
the peoples that the LORD thy God shall 
deliver unto thee; thine eye shall not 
pity them; neither shalt thou serve 
their gods; for that will be a snare unto 
thee. 

17If thou shalt say in thy heart: 
‘These nations are more than I; how 
can I dispossess them?’ 18thou shalt 
not be afraid of them; thou shalt well 
remember what the LORD thy God did 
unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt: 19the 
great trials which thine eyes saw, and 
the signs, and the wonders, and the 
mighty hand, and the outstretched arm, 
whereby the LORD thy God brought 
thee out; so shall the LORD thy God do 
unto all the peoples of whom thou art 
afraid. 20Moreover the LORD thy God 
will send the hornet among them, until 
they that are left, and they that hide 
themselves, perish from before thee. 


21Thou shalt not be affrighted at them; 
for the LORD thy God is in the midst of 
thee, a God great and awful. 22And the 
LORD thy God will cast out those 
nations before thee by little and little; 
thou mayest not consume them 
quickly, lest the beasts of the field 
increase upon thee. 23But the LORD thy 
God shall deliver them up before thee, 
and shall discomfit them with a great 
discomfiture, until they be destroyed. 
24And He shall deliver their kings into 
thy hand, and thou shalt make their 
name to perish from under heaven; 
there shall no man be able to stand 
against thee, until thou have destroyed 
them. 25The graven images of their 
gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt 
not covet the silver or the gold that is 
on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou 
be snared therein; for it is an 
abomination to the LORD thy God. 
26And thou shalt not bring an 
abomination into thy house, and be 
accursed like unto it; thou shalt utterly 
detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor 
it; for it is a devoted thing. 

All the commandment which I 
command thee this day shall ye 
observe to do, that ye may live, and 
multiply, and go in and possess the 
land which the LORD swore unto your 
fathers. 2And thou shalt remember all 
the way which the LORD thy God hath 
led thee these forty years in the 
wilderness, that He might afflict thee, 
to prove thee, to know what was in thy 
heart, whether thou wouldest keep His 
commandments, or no. 3And He 
afflicted thee, and suffered thee to 
hunger, and fed thee with manna, 
which thou knewest not, neither did 
thy fathers know; that He might make 
thee know that man doth not live by 
bread only, but by every thing that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of the 
LORD doth man live. 4Thy raiment 
waxed not old upon thee, neither did 
thy foot swell, these forty years. 5And 
thou shalt consider in thy heart, that, as 
a man chasteneth his son, so the LORD 
thy God chasteneth thee. 6And thou 
shalt keep the commandments of the 
LORD thy God, to walk in His ways, 
and to fear Him. 7For the LORD thy 
God bringeth thee into a good land, a 
land of brooks of water, of fountains 
and depths, springing forth in valleys 
and hills; 8a land of wheat and barley, 
and vines and fig-trees and 
pomegranates; a land of olive-trees 
and honey; 9a land wherein thou shalt 
eat bread without scarceness, thou 
shalt not lack any thing in it; a land 
whose stones are iron, and out of 
whose hills thou mayest dig brass. 
10And thou shalt eat and be satisfied, 
and bless the LORD thy God for the 
good land which He hath given thee. 
11Beware lest thou forget the LORD thy 
God, in not keeping His 
commandments, and His ordinances, 
and His statutes, which I command 
thee this day; 12lest when thou hast 
eaten and art satisfied, and hast built 
goodly houses, and dwelt therein; 
13and when thy herds and thy flocks 
multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is 
8 




multiplied, and all that thou hast is 
multiplied; 14then thy heart be lifted 
up, and thou forget the LORD thy God, 
who brought thee forth out of the land 
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage; 
15who led thee through the great and 
dreadful wilderness, wherein were 
serpents, fiery serpents, and scorpions, 
and thirsty ground where was no 
water; who brought thee forth water 
out of the rock of flint; 16who fed thee 
in the wilderness with manna, which 
thy fathers knew not, that He might 
afflict thee, and that He might prove 
thee, to do thee good at thy latter end; 
17and thou say in thy heart: ‘My power 
and the might of my hand hath gotten 
me this wealth.’ 18But thou shalt 
remember the LORD thy God, for it is 
He that giveth thee power to get 
wealth, that He may establish His 
covenant which He swore unto thy 
fathers, as it is this day. 

19And it shall be, if thou shalt forget 
the LORD thy God, and walk after other 
gods, and serve them, and worship 
them, I forewarn you this day that ye 
shall surely perish. 20As the nations 
that the LORD maketh to perish before 
you, so shall ye perish; because ye 
would not hearken unto the voice of 
the LORD your God. 

Hear, O Israel: thou art to pass 
over the Jordan this day, to go in 
to dispossess nations greater and 
mightier than thyself, cities great and 
fortified up to heaven, 2a people great 
and tall, the sons of the Anakim, 
whom thou knowest, and of whom 
thou hast heard say: ‘Who can stand 
before the sons of Anak?’ 3Know 
therefore this day, that the LORD thy 
God is He who goeth over before thee 
as a devouring fire; He will destroy 
them, and He will bring them down 
before thee; so shalt thou drive them 
out, and make them to perish quickly, 
as the LORD hath spoken unto thee. 
4Speak not thou in thy heart, after that 
the LORD thy God hath thrust them out 
from before thee, saying: ‘For my 
righteousness the LORD hath brought 
me in to possess this land’; whereas 
for the wickedness of these nations the 
LORD doth drive them out from before 
thee. 5Not for thy righteousness, or for 
the uprightness of thy heart, dost thou 
go in to possess their land; but for the 
wickedness of these nations the LORD 
thy God doth drive them out from 
before thee, and that He may establish 
the word which the LORD swore unto 
thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and 
to Jacob. 6Know therefore that it is not 
for thy righteousness that the LORD thy 
God giveth thee this good land to 
possess it; for thou art a stiffnecked 
people. 

7Remember, forget thou not, how 
thou didst make the LORD thy God 
wroth in the wilderness; from the day 
that thou didst go forth out of the land 
of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, 
ye have been rebellious against the 
LORD. 8Also in Horeb ye made the 
LORD wroth, and the LORD was angered 
with you to have destroyed you. 
9When I was gone up into the mount to 
9 




receive the tables of stone, even the 
tables of the covenant which the LORD 
made with you, then I abode in the 
mount forty days and forty nights; I 
did neither eat bread nor drink water. 
10And the LORD delivered unto me the 
two tables of stone written with the 
finger of God; and on them was 
written according to all the words, 
which the LORD spoke with you in the 
mount out of the midst of the fire in 
the day of the assembly. 11And it came 
to pass at the end of forty days and 
forty nights, that the LORD gave me the 
two tables of stone, even the tables of 
the covenant. 12And the LORD said unto 
me: ‘Arise, get thee down quickly 
from hence; for thy people that thou 
hast brought forth out of Egypt have 
dealt corruptly; they are quickly turned 
aside out of the way which I 
commanded them; they have made 
them a molten image.’ 13Furthermore 
the LORD spoke unto me, saying: ‘I 
have seen this people, and, behold, it is 
a stiffnecked people; 14let Me alone, 
that I may destroy them, and blot out 
their name from under heaven; and I 
will make of thee a nation mightier 
and greater than they.’ 15So I turned 
and came down from the mount, and 
the mount burned with fire; and the 
two tables of the covenant were in my 
two hands. 16And I looked, and, 
behold, ye had sinned against the LORD 
your God; ye had made you a molten 
calf; ye had turned aside quickly out of 
the way which the LORD had 
commanded you. 17And I took hold of 
the two tables, and cast them out of my 
two hands, and broke them before your 
eyes. 18And I fell down before the 
LORD, as at the first, forty days and 
forty nights; I did neither eat bread nor 
drink water; because of all your sin 
which ye sinned, in doing that which 
was evil in the sight of the LORD, to 
provoke Him. 19For I was in dread of 
the anger and hot displeasure, 
wherewith the LORD was wroth against 
you to destroy you. But the LORD 
hearkened unto me that time also. 
20Moreover the LORD was very angry 
with Aaron to have destroyed him; and 
I prayed for Aaron also the same time. 
21And I took your sin, the calf which 
ye had made, and burnt it with fire, 
and beat it in pieces, grinding it very 
small, until it was as fine as dust; and I 
cast the dust thereof into the brook that 
descended out of the mount.— 22And 
at Taberah, and at Massah, and at 
Kibroth-hattaavah, ye made the LORD 
wroth. 23And when the LORD sent you 
from Kadesh-barnea, saying: ‘Go up 
and possess the land which I have 
given you’; then ye rebelled against 
the commandment of the LORD your 
God, and ye believed Him not, nor 
hearkened to His voice. 24Ye have 
been rebellious against the LORD from 
the day that I knew you.— 25So I fell 
down before the LORD the forty days 
and forty nights that I fell down; 
because the LORD had said He would 
destroy you. 26And I prayed unto the 
LORD, and said: ‘O Lord GOD, destroy 
not Thy people and Thine inheritance, 


that Thou hast redeemed through Thy 
greatness, that Thou hast brought forth 
out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 
27Remember Thy servants, Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the 
stubbornness of this people, nor to 
their wickedness, nor to their sin; 28lest 
the land whence Thou broughtest us 
out say: Because the LORD was not 
able to bring them into the land which 
He promised unto them, and because 
He hated them, He hath brought them 
out to slay them in the wilderness. 
29Yet they are Thy people and Thine 
inheritance, that Thou didst bring out 
by Thy great power and by Thy 
outstretched arm.’ 

At that time the LORD said unto 
me: ‘Hew thee two tables of 
stone like unto the first, and come up 
unto Me into the mount; and make 
thee an ark of wood. 2And I will write 
on the tables the words that were on 
the first tables which thou didst break, 
and thou shalt put them in the ark.’ 3So 
I made an ark of acacia-wood, and 
hewed two tables of stone like unto the 
first, and went up into the mount, 
having the two tables in my hand. 
4And He wrote on the tables according 
to the first writing, the ten words, 
which the LORD spoke unto you in the 
mount out of the midst of the fire in 
the day of the assembly; and the LORD 
gave them unto me. 5And I turned and 
came down from the mount, and put 
the tables in the ark which I had made; 
and there they are, as the LORD 
commanded me.— 6And the children 
of Israel journeyed from Beeroth-
benejaakan to Moserah; there Aaron 
died, and there he was buried; and 
Eleazar his son ministered in the 
priest’s office in his stead. 7From 
thence they journeyed unto Gudgod; 
and from Gudgod to Jotbah, a land of 
brooks of water.— 8At that time the 
LORD separated the tribe of Levi, to 
bear the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD, to stand before the LORD to 
minister unto Him, and to bless in His 
name, unto this day. 9Wherefore Levi 
hath no portion nor inheritance with 
his brethren; the LORD is his 
inheritance, according as the LORD thy 
God spoke unto him.—10Now I stayed 
in the mount, as at the first time, forty 
days and forty nights; and the LORD 
hearkened unto me that time also; the 
LORD would not destroy thee. 11And 
the LORD said unto me: ‘Arise, go 
before the people, causing them to set 
forward, that they may go in and 
possess the land, which I swore unto 
their fathers to give unto them.’ 

12And now, Israel, what doth the 
LORD thy God require of thee, but to 
fear the LORD thy God, to walk in all 
His ways, and to love Him, and to 
serve the LORD thy God with all thy 
heart and with all thy soul; 13to keep 
for thy good the commandments of the 
LORD, and His statutes, which I 
command thee this day? 14Behold, 
unto the LORD thy God belongeth the 
heaven, and the heaven of heavens, the 
earth, with all that therein is. 15Only 
the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to 
10 




love them, and He chose their seed 
after them, even you, above all 
peoples, as it is this day. 16Circumcise 
therefore the foreskin of your heart, 
and be no more stiffnecked. 17For the 
LORD your God, He is God of gods, 
and Lord of lords, the great God, the 
mighty, and the awful, who regardeth 
not persons, nor taketh reward. 18He 
doth execute justice for the fatherless 
and widow, and loveth the stranger, in 
giving him food and raiment. 19Love 
ye therefore the stranger; for ye were 
strangers in the land of Egypt. 20Thou 
shalt fear the LORD thy God; Him shalt 
thou serve; and to Him shalt thou 
cleave, and by His name shalt thou 
swear. 21He is thy glory, and He is thy 
God, that hath done for thee these 
great and tremendous things, which 
thine eyes have seen. 22Thy fathers 
went down into Egypt with threescore 
and ten persons; and now the LORD thy 
God hath made thee as the stars of 
heaven for multitude. 

Therefore thou shalt love the 
LORD thy God, and keep His 
charge, and His statutes, and His 
ordinances, and His commandments, 
alway. 2And know ye this day; for I 
speak not with your children that have 
not known, and that have not seen the 
chastisement of the LORD your God, 
His greatness, His mighty hand, and 
His outstretched arm, 3and His signs, 
and His works, which He did in the 
midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king 
of Egypt, and unto all his land; 4and 
what He did unto the army of Egypt, 
unto their horses, and to their chariots; 
how He made the water of the Red Sea 
to overflow them as they pursued after 
you, and how the LORD hath destroyed 
them unto this day; 5and what He did 
unto you in the wilderness, until ye 
came unto this place; 6and what He did 
unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of 
Eliab, the son of Reuben; how the 
earth opened her mouth, and 
swallowed them up, and their 
households, and their tents, and every 
living substance that followed them, in 
the midst of all Israel; 7but your eyes 
have seen all the great work of the 
LORD which He did. 8Therefore shall 
ye keep all the commandment which I 
command thee this day, that ye may be 
strong, and go in and possess the land, 
whither ye go over to possess it; 9and 
that ye may prolong your days upon 
the land, which the LORD swore unto 
your fathers to give unto them and to 
their seed, a land flowing with milk 
and honey. 

10For the land, whither thou goest in 
to possess it, is not as the land of 
Egypt, from whence ye came out, 
where thou didst sow thy seed, and 
didst water it with thy foot, as a garden 
of herbs; 11but the land, whither ye go 
over to possess it, is a land of hills and 
valleys, and drinketh water as the rain 
of heaven cometh down; 12a land 
which the LORD thy God careth for; the 
eyes of the LORD thy God are always 
upon it, from the beginning of the year 
even unto the end of the year. 
11 




13And it shall come to pass, if ye 
shall hearken diligently unto My 
commandments which I command you 
this day, to love the LORD your God, 
and to serve Him with all your heart 
and with all your soul, 14that I will 
give the rain of your land in its season, 
the former rain and the latter rain, that 
thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy 
wine, and thine oil. 15And I will give 
grass in thy fields for thy cattle, and 
thou shalt eat and be satisfied. 16Take 
heed to yourselves, lest your heart be 
deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve 
other gods, and worship them; 17and 
the anger of the LORD be kindled 
against you, and He shut up the 
heaven, so that there shall be no rain, 
and the ground shall not yield her fruit; 
and ye perish quickly from off the 
good land which the LORD giveth you. 
18Therefore shall ye lay up these My 
words in your heart and in your soul; 
and ye shall bind them for a sign upon 
your hand, and they shall be for 
frontlets between your eyes. 19And ye 
shall teach them your children, talking 
of them, when thou sittest in thy 
house, and when thou walkest by the 
way, and when thou liest down, and 
when thou risest up. 20And thou shalt 
write them upon the door-posts of thy 
house, and upon thy gates; 21that your 
days may be multiplied, and the days 
of your children, upon the land which 
the LORD swore unto your fathers to 
give them, as the days of the heavens 
above the earth. 

22For if ye shall diligently keep all 
this commandment which I command 
you, to do it, to love the LORD your 
God, to walk in all His ways, and to 
cleave unto Him, 23then will the LORD 
drive out all these nations from before 
you, and ye shall dispossess nations 
greater and mightier than yourselves. 
24Every place whereon the sole of your 
foot shall tread shall be yours: from 
the wilderness, and Lebanon, from the 
river, the river Euphrates, even unto 
the hinder sea shall be your border. 
25There shall no man be able to stand 
against you: the LORD your God shall 
lay the fear of you and the dread of 
you upon all the land that ye shall 
tread upon, as He hath spoken unto 
you. 

... 

26Behold, I set before you this day a 
blessing and a curse: 27the blessing, if 
ye shall hearken unto the 
commandments of the LORD your God, 
which I command you this day; 28and 
the curse, if ye shall not hearken unto 
the commandments of the LORD your 
God, but turn aside out of the way 
which I command you this day, to go 
after other gods, which ye have not 
known. 

29And it shall come to pass, when 
the LORD thy God shall bring thee into 
the land whither thou goest to possess 
it, that thou shalt set the blessing upon 
mount Gerizim, and the curse upon 
mount Ebal. 30Are they not beyond the 
Jordan, behind the way of the going 
down of the sun, in the land of the 


Canaanites that dwell in the Arabah, 
over against Gilgal, beside the 
terebinths of Moreh? 31For ye are to 
pass over the Jordan to go in to 
possess the land which the LORD your 
God giveth you, and ye shall possess 
it, and dwell therein. 32And ye shall 
observe to do all the statutes and the 
ordinances which I set before you this 
day. 

 

These are the statutes and the 
ordinances, which ye shall 
observe to do in the land which the 
LORD, the God of thy fathers, hath 
given thee to possess it, all the days 
that ye live upon the earth. 2Ye shall 
surely destroy all the places, wherein 
the nations that ye are to dispossess 
served their gods, upon the high 
mountains, and upon the hills, and 
under every leafy tree. 3And ye shall 
break down their altars, and dash in 
pieces their pillars, and burn their 
Asherim with fire; and ye shall hew 
down the graven images of their gods; 
and ye shall destroy their name out of 
that place. 4Ye shall not do so unto the 
LORD your God. 5But unto the place 
which the LORD your God shall choose 
out of all your tribes to put His name 
there, even unto His habitation shall ye 
seek, and thither thou shalt come; 6and 
thither ye shall bring your burnt-
offerings, and your sacrifices, and your 
tithes, and the offering of your hand, 
and your vows, and your freewill-
offerings, and the firstlings of your 
herd and of your flock; 7and there ye 
shall eat before the LORD your God, 
and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put 
your hand unto, ye and your 
households, wherein the LORD thy God 
hath blessed thee. 8Ye shall not do 
after all that we do here this day, every 
man whatsoever is right in his own 
eyes; 9for ye are not as yet come to the 
rest and to the inheritance, which the 
LORD your God giveth thee. 10But 
when ye go over the Jordan, and dwell 
in the land which the LORD your God 
causeth you to inherit, and He giveth 
you rest from all your enemies round 
about, so that ye dwell in safety; 11then 
it shall come to pass that the place 
which the LORD your God shall choose 
to cause His name to dwell there, 
thither shall ye bring all that I 
command you: your burnt-offerings, 
and your sacrifices, your tithes, and 
the offering of your hand, and all your 
choice vows which ye vow unto the 
LORD. 12And ye shall rejoice before the 
LORD your God, ye, and your sons, and 
your daughters, and your men-
servants, and your maid-servants, and 
the Levite that is within your gates, 
forasmuch as he hath no portion nor 
inheritance with you. 13Take heed to 
thyself that thou offer not thy burnt-
offerings in every place that thou 
seest; 14but in the place which the LORD 
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there 
thou shalt offer thy burnt-offerings, 
and there thou shalt do all that I 
command thee. 

15Notwithstanding thou mayest kill 
and eat flesh within all thy gates, after 
12 




all the desire of thy soul, according to 
the blessing of the LORD thy God 
which He hath given thee; the unclean 
and the clean may eat thereof, as of the 
gazelle, and as of the hart. 16Only ye 
shall not eat the blood; thou shalt pour 
it out upon the earth as water. 17Thou 
mayest not eat within thy gates the 
tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of 
thine oil, or the firstlings of thy herd or 
of thy flock, nor any of thy vows 
which thou vowest, nor thy freewill-
offerings, nor the offering of thy hand; 
18but thou shalt eat them before the 
LORD thy God in the place which the 
LORD thy God shall choose, thou, and 
thy son, and thy daughter, and thy 
man-servant, and thy maid-servant, 
and the Levite that is within thy gates; 
and thou shalt rejoice before the LORD 
thy God in all that thou puttest thy 
hand unto. 19Take heed to thyself that 
thou forsake not the Levite as long as 
thou livest upon thy land. 

20When the LORD thy God shall 
enlarge thy border, as He hath 
promised thee, and thou shalt say: ‘I 
will eat flesh’, because thy soul 
desireth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat 
flesh, after all the desire of thy soul. 
21If the place which the LORD thy God 
shall choose to put His name there be 
too far from thee, then thou shalt kill 
of thy herd and of thy flock, which the 
LORD hath given thee, as I have 
commanded thee, and thou shalt eat 
within thy gates, after all the desire of 
thy soul. 22Howbeit as the gazelle and 
as the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat 
thereof; the unclean and the clean may 
eat thereof alike. 23Only be stedfast in 
not eating the blood; for the blood is 
the life; and thou shalt not eat the life 
with the flesh. 24Thou shalt not eat it; 
thou shalt pour it out upon the earth as 
water. 25Thou shalt not eat it; that it 
may go well with thee, and with thy 
children after thee, when thou shalt do 
that which is right in the eyes of the 
LORD. 26Only thy holy things which 
thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt 
take, and go unto the place which the 
LORD shall choose; 27and thou shalt 
offer thy burnt-offerings, the flesh and 
the blood, upon the altar of the LORD 
thy God; and the blood of thy 
sacrifices shall be poured out against 
the altar of the LORD thy God, and thou 
shalt eat the flesh. 28Observe and hear 
all these words which I command thee, 
that it may go well with thee, and with 
thy children after thee for ever, when 
thou doest that which is good and right 
in the eyes of the LORD thy God. 

29When the LORD thy God shall cut 
off the nations from before thee, 
whither thou goest in to dispossess 
them, and thou dispossessest them, and 
dwellest in their land; 30take heed to 
thyself that thou be not ensnared to 
follow them, after that they are 
destroyed from before thee; and that 
thou inquire not after their gods, 
saying: ‘How used these nations to 
serve their gods? even so will I do 
likewise.’ 31Thou shalt not do so unto 
the LORD thy God; for every 
abomination to the LORD, which He 


hateth, have they done unto their gods; 
for even their sons and their daughters 
do they burn in the fire to their gods. 

 

All this word which I 
command you, that shall ye 
observe to do; thou shalt not add 
thereto, nor diminish from it. 

2If there arise in the midst of thee a 
prophet, or a dreamer of dreams—and 
he give thee a sign or a wonder, 3and 
the sign or the wonder come to pass, 
whereof he spoke unto thee—saying: 
‘Let us go after other gods, which thou 
hast not known, and let us serve them’; 
4thou shalt not hearken unto the words 
of that prophet, or unto that dreamer of 
dreams; for the LORD your God putteth 
you to proof, to know whether ye do 
love the LORD your God with all your 
heart and with all your soul. 5After the 
LORD your God shall ye walk, and Him 
shall ye fear, and His commandments 
shall ye keep, and unto His voice shall 
ye hearken, and Him shall ye serve, 
and unto Him shall ye cleave. 6And 
that prophet, or that dreamer of 
dreams, shall be put to death; because 
he hath spoken perversion against the 
LORD your God, who brought you out 
of the land of Egypt, and redeemed 
thee out of the house of bondage, to 
draw thee aside out of the way which 
the LORD thy God commanded thee to 
walk in. So shalt thou put away the 
evil from the midst of thee. 

7If thy brother, the son of thy 
mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or 
the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, 
that is as thine own soul, entice thee 
secretly, saying: ‘Let us go and serve 
other gods, ‘which thou hast not 
known, thou, nor thy fathers; 8of the 
gods of the peoples that are round 
about you, nigh unto thee, or far off 
from thee, from the one end of the 
earth even unto the other end of the 
earth; 9thou shalt not consent unto him, 
nor hearken unto him; neither shall 
thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou 
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him; 
10but thou shalt surely kill him; thy 
hand shall be first upon him to put him 
to death, and afterwards the hand of all 
the people. 11And thou shalt stone him 
with stones, that he die; because he 
hath sought to draw thee away from 
the LORD thy God, who brought thee 
out of the land of Egypt, out of the 
house of bondage. 12And all Israel 
shall hear, and fear, and shall do no 
more any such wickedness as this is in 
the midst of thee. 

13If thou shalt hear tell concerning 
one of thy cities, which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee to dwell there, saying: 
14’Certain base fellows are gone out 
from the midst of thee, and have 
drawn away the inhabitants of their 
city, saying: Let us go and serve other 
gods, which ye have not known’; 
15then shalt thou inquire, and make 
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, 
if it be truth, and the thing certain, that 
such abomination is wrought in the 
midst of thee; 16thou shalt surely smite 
the inhabitants of that city with the 
edge of the sword, destroying it 
13 




utterly, and all that is therein and the 
cattle thereof, with the edge of the 
sword. 17And thou shalt gather all the 
spoil of it into the midst of the broad 
place thereof, and shall burn with fire 
the city, and all the spoil thereof every 
whit, unto the LORD thy God; and it 
shall be a heap for ever; it shall not be 
built again. 18And there shall cleave 
nought of the devoted thing to thy 
hand, that the LORD may turn from the 
fierceness of His anger, and show thee 
mercy, and have compassion upon 
thee, and multiply thee, as He hath 
sworn unto thy fathers; 19 when thou 
shalt hearken to the voice of the LORD 
thy God, to keep all His 
commandments which I command 
thee this day, to do that which is right 
in the eyes of the LORD thy God. 

Ye are the children of the 
LORD your God: ye shall not 
cut yourselves, nor make any baldness 
between your eyes for the dead. 2For 
thou art a holy people unto the LORD 
thy God, and the LORD hath chosen 
thee to be His own treasure out of all 
peoples that are upon the face of the 
earth. 

3Thou shalt not eat any abominable 
thing. 4These are the beasts which ye 
may eat: the ox, the sheep, and the 
goat, 5the hart, and the gazelle, and the 
roebuck, and the wild goat, and the 
pygarg, and the antelope, and the 
mountain-sheep. 6And every beast that 
parteth the hoof, and hath the hoof 
wholly cloven in two, and cheweth the 
cud, among the beasts, that ye may eat. 
7Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of 
them that only chew the cud, or of 
them that only have the hoof cloven: 
the camel, and the hare, and the rock-
badger, because they chew the cud but 
part not the hoof, they are unclean 
unto you; 8and the swine, because he 
parteth the hoof but cheweth not the 
cud, he is unclean unto you; of their 
flesh ye shall not eat, and their 
carcasses ye shall not touch. 

9These ye may eat of all that are in 
the waters: whatsoever hath fins and 
scales may ye eat; 10and whatsoever 
hath not fins and scales ye shall not 
eat; it is unclean unto you. 

11Of all clean birds ye may eat. 12But 
these are they of which ye shall not 
eat: the great vulture, and the bearded 
vulture, and the ospray; 13and the 
glede, and the falcon, and the kite after 
its kinds; 14and every raven after its 
kinds; 15and the ostrich, and the night-
hawk, and the sea-mew, and the hawk 
after its kinds; 16the little owl, and the 
great owl, and the horned owl; 17and 
the pelican, and the carrion-vulture, 
and the cormorant; 18and the stork, and 
the heron after its kinds, and the 
hoopoe, and the bat. 19And all winged 
swarming things are unclean unto you; 
they shall not be eaten. 20Of all clean 
winged things ye may eat. 

21Ye shall not eat of any thing that 
dieth of itself; thou mayest give it unto 
the stranger that is within thy gates, 
that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell 
it unto a foreigner; for thou art a holy 
people unto the LORD thy God. Thou 
14 




shalt not seethe a kid in its mother’s 
milk. 

22Thou shalt surely tithe all the 
increase of thy seed, that which is 
brought forth in the field year by year. 
23And thou shalt eat before the LORD 
thy God, in the place which He shall 
choose to cause His name to dwell 
there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, 
and of thine oil, and the firstlings of 
thy herd and of thy flock; that thou 
mayest learn to fear the LORD thy God 
always. 24And if the way be too long 
for thee, so that thou art not able to 
carry it, because the place is too far 
from thee, which the LORD thy God 
shall choose to set His name there, 
when the LORD thy God shall bless 
thee; 25then shalt thou turn it into 
money, and bind up the money in thy 
hand, and shalt go unto the place 
which the LORD thy God shall choose. 
26And thou shalt bestow the money for 
whatsoever thy soul desireth, for oxen, 
or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong 
drink, or for whatsoever thy soul 
asketh of thee; and thou shalt eat there 
before the LORD thy God, and thou 
shalt rejoice, thou and thy household. 
27And the Levite that is within thy 
gates, thou shalt not forsake him; for 
he hath no portion nor inheritance with 
thee. 

28At the end of every three years, 
even in the same year, thou shalt bring 
forth all the tithe of thine increase, and 
shall lay it up within thy gates. 29And 
the Levite, because he hath no portion 
nor inheritance with thee, and the 
stranger, and the fatherless, and the 
widow, that are within thy gates, shall 
come, and shall eat and be satisfied; 
that the LORD thy God may bless thee 
in all the work of thy hand which thou 
doest. 

At the end of every seven 
years thou shalt make a 
release. 2And this is the manner of the 
release: every creditor shall release 
that which he hath lent unto his 
neighbour; he shall not exact it of his 
neighbour and his brother; because the 
LORD’S release hath been proclaimed. 
3Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it; 
but whatsoever of thine is with thy 
brother thy hand shall release. 
4Howbeit there shall be no needy 
among you—for the LORD will surely 
bless thee in the land which the LORD 
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance 
to possess it— 5if only thou diligently 
hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy 
God, to observe to do all this 
commandment which I command thee 
this day. 6For the LORD thy God will 
bless thee, as He promised thee; and 
thou shalt lend unto many nations, but 
thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt 
rule over many nations, but they shall 
not rule over thee. 

7If there be among you a needy man, 
one of thy brethren, within any of thy 
gates, in thy land which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden 
thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy 
needy brother; 8but thou shalt surely 
open thy hand unto him, and shalt 
surely lend him sufficient for his need 
15 




in that which he wanteth. 9Beware that 
there be not a base thought in thy 
heart, saying: ‘The seventh year, the 
year of release, is at hand’; and thine 
eye be evil against thy needy brother, 
and thou give him nought; and he cry 
unto the LORD against thee, and it be 
sin in thee. 10Thou shalt surely give 
him, and thy heart shall not be grieved 
when thou givest unto him; because 
that for this thing the LORD thy God 
will bless thee in all thy work, and in 
all that thou puttest thy hand unto. 
11For the poor shall never cease out of 
the land; therefore I command thee, 
saying: ‘Thou shalt surely open thy 
hand unto thy poor and needy brother, 
in thy land.’ 

12If thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a 
Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, he 
shall serve thee six years; and in the 
seventh year thou shalt let him go free 
from thee. 13And when thou lettest him 
go free from thee, thou shalt not let 
him go empty; 14thou shalt furnish him 
liberally out of thy flock, and out of 
thy threshing-floor, and out of thy 
winepress; of that wherewith the LORD 
thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt 
give unto him. 15And thou shalt 
remember that thou wast a bondman in 
the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy 
God redeemed thee; therefore I 
command thee this thing to-day. 16And 
it shall be, if he say unto thee: ‘I will 
not go out from thee’; because he 
loveth thee and thy house, because he 
fareth well with thee; 17then thou shalt 
take an awl, and thrust it through his 
ear and into the door, and he shall be 
thy bondman for ever. And also unto 
thy bondwoman thou shalt do 
likewise. 18It shall not seem hard unto 
thee, when thou lettest him go free 
from thee; for to the double of the hire 
of a hireling hath he served thee six 
years; and the LORD thy God will bless 
thee in all that thou doest. 

19All the firstling males that are born 
of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt 
sanctify unto the LORD thy God; thou 
shalt do no work with the firstling of 
thine ox, nor shear the firstling of thy 
flock. 20Thou shalt eat it before the 
LORD thy God year by year in the place 
which the LORD shall choose, thou and 
thy household. 21And if there be any 
blemish therein, lameness, or 
blindness, any ill blemish whatsoever, 
thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the LORD 
thy God. 22Thou shalt eat it within thy 
gates; the unclean and the clean may 
eat it alike, as the gazelle, and as the 
hart. 23Only thou shalt not eat the 
blood thereof; thou shalt pour it out 
upon the ground as water. 

Observe the month of Abib, 
and keep the passover unto the 
LORD thy God; for in the month of 
Abib the LORD thy God brought thee 
forth out of Egypt by night. 2And thou 
shalt sacrifice the passover-offering 
unto the LORD thy God, of the flock 
and the herd, in the place which the 
LORD shall choose to cause His name 
to dwell there. 3Thou shalt eat no 
leavened bread with it; seven days 
shalt thou eat unleavened bread 
16 




therewith, even the bread of affliction; 
for in haste didst thou come forth out 
of the land of Egypt; that thou mayest 
remember the day when thou camest 
forth out of the land of Egypt all the 
days of thy life. 4And there shall be no 
leaven seen with thee in all they 
borders seven days; neither shall any 
of the flesh, which thou sacrificest the 
first day at even, remain all night until 
the morning. 5Thou mayest not 
sacrifice the passover-offering within 
any of thy gates, which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee; 6but at the place 
which the LORD thy God shall choose 
to cause His name to dwell in, there 
thou shalt sacrifice the passover-
offering at even, at the going down of 
the sun, at the season that thou camest 
forth out of Egypt. 7And thou shalt 
roast and eat it in the place which the 
LORD thy God shall choose; and thou 
shalt turn in the morning, and go unto 
thy tents. 8Six days thou shalt eat 
unleavened bread; and on the seventh 
day shall be a solemn assembly to the 
LORD thy God; thou shalt do no work 
therein. 

9Seven weeks shalt thou number 
unto thee; from the time the sickle is 
first put to the standing corn shalt thou 
begin to number seven weeks. 10And 
thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto 
the LORD thy God after the measure of 
the freewill-offering of thy hand, 
which thou shalt give, according as the 
LORD thy God blesseth thee. 11And 
thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy 
God, thou, and thy son, and thy 
daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy 
maid-servant, and the Levite that is 
within they gates, and the stranger, and 
the fatherless, and the widow, that are 
in the midst of thee, in the place which 
the LORD thy God shall choose to cause 
His name to dwell there. 12And thou 
shalt remember that thou wast a 
bondman in Egypt; and thou shalt 
observe and do these statutes. 

13Thou shalt keep the feast of 
tabernacles seven days, after that thou 
hast gathered in from thy threshing-
floor and from thy winepress. 14And 
thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, 
and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy 
man-servant, and thy maid-servant, 
and the Levite, and the stranger, and 
the fatherless, and the widow, that are 
within thy gates. 15Seven days shalt 
thou keep a feast unto the LORD thy 
God in the place which the LORD shall 
choose; because the LORD thy God 
shall bless thee in all thine increase, 
and in all the work of thy hands, and 
thou shalt be altogether joyful. 16Three 
times in a year shall all thy males 
appear before the LORD thy God in the 
place which He shall choose; on the 
feast of unleavened bread, and on the 
feast of weeks, and on the feast of 
tabernacles; and they shall not appear 
before the LORD empty; 17every man 
shall give as he is able, according to 
the blessing of the LORD thy God 
which He hath given thee. 

 

 

 

 


..... 

18Judges and officers shalt thou 
make thee in all thy gates, which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, tribe by 
tribe; and they shall judge the people 
with righteous judgment. 19Thou shalt 
not wrest judgment; thou shalt not 
respect persons; neither shalt thou take 
a gift; for a gift doth blind the eyes of 
the wise, and pervert the words of the 
righteous. 20Justice, justice shalt thou 
follow, that thou mayest live, and 
inherit the land which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee. 

21Thou shalt not plant thee an 
Asherah of any kind of tree beside the 
altar of the LORD thy God, which thou 
shalt make thee. 22Neither shalt thou 
set thee up a pillar, which the LORD thy 
God hateth. 

Thou shalt not sacrifice unto 
the LORD thy God an ox, or a 
sheep, wherein is a blemish, even any 
evil thing; for that is an abomination 
unto the LORD thy God. 

2If there be found in the midst of 
thee, within any of thy gates which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, man or 
woman, that doeth that which is evil in 
the sight of the LORD thy God, in 
transgressing His covenant, 3and hath 
gone and served other gods, and 
worshipped them, or the sun, or the 
moon, or any of the host of heaven, 
which I have commanded not; 4and it 
be told thee, and thou hear it, then 
shalt thou inquire diligently, and, 
behold, if it be true, and the thing 
certain, that such abomination is 
wrought in Israel; 5then shalt thou 
bring forth that man or that woman, 
who have done this evil thing, unto thy 
gates, even the man or the woman; and 
thou shalt stone them with stones, that 
they die. 6At the mouth of two 
witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he 
that is to die be put to death; at the 
mouth of one witness he shall not be 
put to death. 7The hand of the 
witnesses shall be first upon him to put 
him to death, and afterward the hand 
of all the people. So thou shalt put 
away the evil from the midst of thee. 

8If there arise a matter too hard for 
thee in judgment, between blood and 
blood, between plea and plea, and 
between stroke and stroke, even 
matters of controversy within thy 
gates; then shalt thou arise, and get 
thee up unto the place which the LORD 
thy God shall choose. 9And thou shall 
come unto the priests the Levites, and 
unto the judge that shall be in those 
days; and thou shalt inquire; and they 
shall declare unto thee the sentence of 
judgment. 10And thou shalt do 
according to the tenor of the sentence, 
which they shall declare unto thee 
from that place which the LORD shall 
choose; and thou shalt observe to do 
according to all that they shall teach 
thee. 11According to the law which 
they shall teach thee, and according to 
the judgment which they shall tell 
thee, thou shalt do; thou shalt not turn 
aside from the sentence which they 
shall declare unto thee, to the right 
hand, nor to the left. 12And the man 
17 




that doeth presumptuously, in not 
hearkening unto the priest that 
standeth to minister there before the 
LORD thy God, or unto the judge, even 
that man shall die; and thou shalt 
exterminate the evil from Israel. 13And 
all the people shall hear, and fear, and 
do no more presumptuously. 

14When thou art come unto the land 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee, 
and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell 
therein; and shalt say: ‘I will set a king 
over me, like all the nations that are 
round about me’; 15thou shalt in any 
wise set him king over thee, whom the 
LORD thy God shall choose; one from 
among thy brethren shalt thou set king 
over thee; thou mayest not put a 
foreigner over thee, who is not thy 
brother. 16Only he shall not multiply 
horses to himself, nor cause the people 
to return to Egypt, to the end that he 
should multiply horses; forasmuch as 
the LORD hath said unto you: ‘Ye shall 
henceforth return no more that way.’ 
17Neither shall he multiply wives to 
himself, that his heart turn not away; 
neither shall he greatly multiply to 
himself silver and gold. 18And it shall 
be, when he sitteth upon the throne of 
his kingdom, that he shall write him a 
copy of this law in a book, out of that 
which is before the priests the Levites. 
19And it shall be with him, and he shall 
read therein all the days of his life; that 
he may learn to fear the LORD his God, 
to keep all the words of this law and 
these statutes, to do them; 20that his 
heart be not lifted up above his 
brethren, and that he turn not aside 
from the commandment, to the right 
hand, or to the left; to the end that he 
may prolong his days in his kingdom, 
he and his children, in the midst of 
Israel. 

The priests the Levites, even 
all the tribe of Levi, shall have 
no portion nor inheritance with Israel; 
they shall eat the offerings of the LORD 
made by fire, and His inheritance. 
2And they shall have no inheritance 
among their brethren; the LORD is their 
inheritance, as He hath spoken unto 
them. 

3And this shall be the priests’due 
from the people, from them that offer a 
sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep, 
that they shall give unto the priest the 
shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the 
maw. 4The first-fruits of thy corn, of 
thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first 
of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou 
give him. 5For the LORD thy God hath 
chosen him out of all thy tribes, to 
stand to minister in the name of the 
LORD, him and his sons for ever. 

6And if a Levite come from any of 
thy gates out of all Israel, where he 
sojourneth, and come with all the 
desire of his soul unto the place which 
the LORD shall choose; 7then he shall 
minister in the name of the LORD his 
God, as all his brethren the Levites do, 
who stand there before the LORD. 
8They shall have like portions to eat, 
beside that which is his due according 
to the fathers’houses. 
18 




9When thou art come into the land 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee, 
thou shalt not learn to do after the 
abominations of those nations. 10There 
shall not be found among you any one 
that maketh his son or his daughter to 
pass through the fire, one that useth 
divination, a soothsayer, or an 
enchanter, or a sorcerer, 11or a 
charmer, or one that consulteth a ghost 
or a familiar spirit, or a necromancer. 
12For whosoever doeth these things is 
an abomination unto the LORD; and 
because of these abominations the 
LORD thy God is driving them out from 
before thee. 13Thou shalt be whole-
hearted with the LORD thy God. 14For 
these nations, that thou art to 
dispossess, hearken unto soothsayers, 
and unto diviners; but as for thee, the 
LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so 
to do. 15A prophet will the LORD thy 
God raise up unto thee, from the midst 
of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; 
unto him ye shall hearken; 16according 
to all that thou didst desire of the LORD 
thy God in Horeb in the day of the 
assembly, saying: ‘Let me not hear 
again the voice of the LORD my God, 
neither let me see this great fire any 
more, that I die not.’ 17And the LORD 
said unto me: ‘They have well said 
that which they have spoken. 18I will 
raise them up a prophet from among 
their brethren, like unto thee; and I 
will put My words in his mouth, and 
he shall speak unto them all that I shall 
command him. 19And it shall come to 
pass, that whosoever will not hearken 
unto My words which he shall speak in 
My name, I will require it of him. 
20But the prophet, that shall speak a 
word presumptuously in My name, 
which I have not commanded him to 
speak, or that shall speak in the name 
of other gods, that same prophet shall 
die.’ 21And if thou say in thy heart: 
‘How shall we know the word which 
the LORD hath not spoken?’ 22When a 
prophet speaketh in the name of the 
LORD, if the thing follow not, nor come 
to pass, that is the thing which the 
LORD hath not spoken; the prophet hath 
spoken it presumptuously, thou shalt 
not be afraid of him. 

When the LORD thy God shall 
cut off the nations, whose land 
the LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou 
dost succeed them, and dwell in their 
cities, and in their houses; 2thou shalt 
separate three cities for thee in the 
midst of thy land, which the LORD thy 
GOD giveth thee to possess it. 3Thou 
shalt prepare thee the way, and divide 
the borders of thy land, which the 
LORD thy God causeth thee to inherit, 
into three parts, that every manslayer 
may flee thither. 4And this is the case 
of the manslayer, that shall flee thither 
and live: whoso killeth his neighbour 
unawares, and hated him not in time 
past; 5as when a man goeth into the 
forest with his neighbour to hew wood, 
and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the 
axe to cut down the tree, and the head 
slippeth from the helve, and lighteth 
upon his neighbour, that he die; he 
shall flee unto one of these cities and 
19 




live; 6lest the avenger of blood pursue 
the manslayer, while his heart is hot, 
and overtake him, because the way is 
long, and smite him mortally; whereas 
he was not deserving of death, 
inasmuch as he hated him not in time 
past. 7Wherefore I command thee, 
saying: ‘Thou shalt separate three 
cities for thee.’ 8And if the LORD thy 
God enlarge thy border, as He hath 
sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee 
all the land which He promised to give 
unto thy fathers— 9if thou shalt keep 
all this commandment to do it, which I 
command thee this day, to love the 
LORD thy God, and to walk ever in His 
ways—then shalt thou add three cities 
more for thee, beside these three; 10that 
innocent blood be not shed in the 
midst of thy land, which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee for an inheritance, and 
so blood be upon thee. 

11But if any man hate his neighbour, 
and lie in wait for him, and rise up 
against him, and smite him mortally 
that he die; and he flee into one of 
these cities; 12then the elders of his city 
shall send and fetch him thence, and 
deliver him into the hand of the 
avenger of blood, that he may die. 
13Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou 
shalt put away the blood of the 
innocent from Israel, that it may go 
well with thee. 

14Thou shalt not remove thy 
neighbour’s landmark, which they of 
old time have set, in thine inheritance 
which thou shalt inherit, in the land 
that the LORD thy God giveth thee to 
possess it. 

15One witness shall not rise up 
against a man for any iniquity, or for 
any sin, in any sin that he sinneth; at 
the mouth of two witnesses, or at the 
mouth of three witnesses, shall a 
matter be establishment16If an 
unrighteous witness rise up against any 
man to bear perverted witness against 
him; 17then both the men, between 
whom the controversy is, shall stand 
before the LORD, before the priests and 
the judges that shall be in those days. 
18And the judges shall inquire 
diligently; and, behold, if the witness 
be a false witness, and hath testified 
falsely against his brother; 19then shall 
ye do unto him, as he had purposed to 
do unto his brother; so shalt thou put 
away the evil from the midst of thee. 
20And those that remain shall hear, and 
fear, and shall henceforth commit no 
more any such evil in the midst of 
thee. 21And thine eye shall not pity: 
life for life, eye for eye, tooth for 
tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot. 

 

When thou goest forth to 
battle against thine enemies, 
and seest horses, and chariots, and a 
people more than thou, thou shalt not 
be afraid of them; for the LORD thy 
God is with thee, who brought thee up 
out of the land of Egypt. 2And it shall 
be, when ye draw nigh unto the battle, 
that the priest shall approach and 
speak unto the people, 3and shall say 
unto them: ‘Hear, O Israel, ye draw 
20 




nigh this day unto battle against your 
enemies; let not your heart faint; fear 
not, nor be alarmed, neither be ye 
affrighted at them; 4for the LORD your 
God is He that goeth with you, to fight 
for you against your enemies, to save 
you.’ 5And the officers shall speak 
unto the people, saying: ‘What man is 
there that hath built a new house, and 
hath not dedicated it? let him go and 
return to his house, lest he die in the 
battle, and another man dedicate it. 
6And what man is there that hath 
planted a vineyard, and hath not used 
the fruit thereof? let him go and return 
unto his house, lest he die in the battle, 
and another man use the fruit thereof. 
7And what man is there that hath 
betrothed a wife, and hath not taken 
her? let him go and return unto his 
house, lest he die in the battle, and 
another man take her.’ 8And the 
officers shall speak further unto the 
people, and they shall say: ‘What man 
is there that is fearful and faint-
hearted? let him go and return unto his 
house, lest his brethren’s heart melt as 
his heart.’ 9And it shall be, when the 
officers have made an end of speaking 
unto the people, that captains of hosts 
shall be appointed at the head of the 
people. 

10When thou drawest nigh unto a 
city to fight against it, then proclaim 
peace unto it. 11And it shall be, if it 
make thee answer of peace, and open 
unto thee, then it shall be, that all the 
people that are found therein shall 
become tributary unto thee, and shall 
serve thee. 12And if it will make no 
peace with thee, but will make war 
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it. 
13And when the LORD thy God 
delivereth it into thy hand, thou shalt 
smite every male thereof with the edge 
of the sword; 14but the women, and the 
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is 
in the city, even all the spoil thereof, 
shalt thou take for a prey unto thyself; 
and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine 
enemies, which the LORD thy God hath 
given thee. 15Thus shalt thou do unto 
all the cities which are very far off 
from thee, which are not of the cities 
of these nations. 16Howbeit of the 
cities of these peoples, that the LORD 
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, 
thou shalt save alive nothing that 
breatheth, 17but thou shalt utterly 
destroy them: the Hittite, and the 
Amorite, the Canaanite, and the 
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; 
as the LORD thy God hath commanded 
thee; 18that they teach you not to do 
after all their abominations, which 
they have done unto their gods, and so 
ye sin against the LORD your God. 

19When thou shalt besiege a city a 
long time, in making war against it to 
take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees 
thereof by wielding an axe against 
them; for thou mayest eat of them, but 
thou shalt not cut them down; for is 
the tree of the field man, that it should 
be besieged of thee? 20Only the trees 
of which thou knowest that they are 
not trees for food, them thou mayest 
destroy and cut down, that thou mayest 


build bulwarks against the city that 
maketh war with thee, until it fall. 

If one be found slain in the 
land which the LORD thy God 
giveth thee to possess it, lying in the 
field, and it be not known who hath 
smitten him; 2then thy elders and thy 
judges shall come forth, and they shall 
measure unto the cities which are 
round about him that is slain. 3And it 
shall be, that the city which is nearest 
unto the slain man, even the elders of 
that city shall take a heifer of the herd, 
which hath not been wrought with, and 
which hath not drawn in the yoke. 
4And the elders of that city shall bring 
down the heifer unto a rough valley, 
which may neither be plowed nor 
sown, and shall break the heifer’s neck 
there in the valley. 5And the priests the 
sons of Levi shall come near—for 
them the LORD thy God hath chosen to 
minister unto Him, and to bless in the 
name of the LORD; and according to 
their word shall every controversy and 
every stroke be. 6And all the elders of 
that city, who are nearest unto the slain 
man, shall wash their hands over the 
heifer whose neck was broken in the 
valley. 7And they shall speak and say: 
‘Our hands have not shed this blood, 
neither have our eyes seen it. 8Forgive, 
O LORD, Thy people Israel, whom 
Thou hast redeemed, and suffer not 
innocent blood to remain in the midst 
of Thy people Israel.’ And the blood 
shall be forgiven them. 9So shalt thou 
put away the innocent blood from the 
midst of thee, when thou shalt do that 
which is right in the eyes of the LORD. 

 

... .. 

10When thou goest forth to battle 
against thine enemies, and the LORD 
thy God delivereth them into thy 
hands, and thou carriest them away 
captive, 11and seest among the captives 
a woman of goodly form, and thou 
hast a desire unto her, and wouldest 
take her to thee to wife; 12then thou 
shalt bring her home to thy house; and 
she shall shave her head, and pare her 
nails; 13and she shall put the raiment of 
her captivity from off her, and shall 
remain in thy house, and bewail her 
father and her mother a full month; 
and after that thou mayest go in unto 
her, and be her husband, and she shall 
be thy wife. 14And it shall be, if thou 
have no delight in her, then thou shalt 
let her go whither she will; but thou 
shalt not sell her at all for money, thou 
shalt not deal with her as a slave, 
because thou hast humbled her. 

15If a man have two wives, the one 
beloved, and the other hated, and they 
have borne him children, both the 
beloved and the hated; and if the first-
born son be hers that was hated; 16then 
it shall be, in the day that he causeth 
his sons to inherit that which he hath, 
that he may not make the son of the 
beloved the first-born before the son of 
the hated, who is the first-born; 17but 
he shall acknowledge the first-born, 
the son of the hated, by giving him a 
double portion of all that he hath; for 
21 




he is the first-fruits of his strength, the 
right of the first-born is his. 

18If a man have a stubborn and 
rebellious son, that will not hearken to 
the voice of his father, or the voice of 
his mother, and though they chasten 
him, will not hearken unto them; 
19then shall his father and his mother 
lay hold on him, and bring him out 
unto the elders of his city, and unto the 
gate of his place; 20and they shall say 
unto the elders of his city: ‘This our 
son is stubborn and rebellious, he doth 
not hearken to our voice; he is a 
glutton, and a drunkard.’ 21And all the 
men of his city shall stone him with 
stones, that he die; so shalt thou put 
away the evil from the midst of thee; 
and all Israel shall hear, and fear. 

22And if a man have committed a sin 
worthy of death, and he be put to 
death, and thou hang him on a tree; 
23his body shall not remain all night 
upon the tree, but thou shalt surely 
bury him the same day; for he that is 
hanged is a reproach unto God; that 
thou defile not thy land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee for an 
inheritance. 

Thou shalt not see thy 
brother’s ox or his sheep 
driven away, and hide thyself from 
them; thou shalt surely bring them 
back unto thy brother. 2And if thy 
brother be not nigh unto thee, and thou 
know him not, then thou shalt bring it 
home to thy house, and it shall be with 
thee until thy brother require it, and 
thou shalt restore it to him. 3And so 
shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt 
thou do with his garment; and so shalt 
thou do with every lost thing of thy 
brother’s, which he hath lost, and thou 
hast found; thou mayest not hide 
thyself. 

4Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ass 
or his ox fallen down by the way, and 
hide thyself from them; thou shalt 
surely help him to lift them up again. 

5A woman shall not wear that which 
pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a 
man put on a woman’s garment; for 
whosoever doeth these things is an 
abomination unto the LORD thy God. 

6If a bird’s nest chance to be before 
thee in the way, in any tree or on the 
ground, with young ones or eggs, and 
the dam sitting upon the young, or 
upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the 
dam with the young; 7thou shalt in any 
wise let the dam go, but the young 
thou mayest take unto thyself; that it 
may be well with thee, and that thou 
mayest prolong thy days. 

8When thou buildest a new house, 
then thou shalt make a parapet for thy 
roof, that thou bring not blood upon 
thy house, if any man fall from thence. 

9Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard 
with two kinds of seed; lest the fulness 
of the seed which thou hast sown be 
forfeited together with the increase of 
the vineyard. 

10Thou shalt not plow with an ox 
and an ass together. 11Thou shalt not 
wear a mingled stuff, wool and linen 
together. 
22 




12Thou shalt make thee twisted 
cords upon the four corners of thy 
covering, wherewith thou coverest 
thyself. 

13If any man take a wife, and go in 
unto her, and hate her, 14and lay 
wanton charges against her, and bring 
up an evil name upon her, and say: ‘I 
took this woman, and when I came 
nigh to her, I found not in her the 
tokens of virginity’; 15then shall the 
father of the damsel, and her mother, 
take and bring forth the tokens of the 
damsel’s virginity unto the elders of 
the city in the gate. 16And the damsel’s 
father shall say unto the elders: ‘I gave 
my daughter unto this man to wife, 
and he hateth her; 17and, lo, he hath 
laid wanton charges, saying: I found 
not in thy daughter the tokens of 
virginity; and yet these are the tokens 
of my daughter’s virginity.’ And they 
shall spread the garment before the 
elders of the city. 18And the elders of 
that city shall take the man and 
chastise him. 19And they shall fine him 
a hundred shekels of silver, and give 
them unto the father of the damsel, 
because he hath brought up an evil 
name upon a virgin of Israel; and she 
shall be his wife; he may not put her 
away all his days. 

20But if this thing be true, that the 
tokens of virginity were not found in 
the damsel; 21then they shall bring out 
the damsel to the door of her father’s 
house, and the men of her city shall 
stone her with stones that she die; 
because she hath wrought a wanton 
deed in Israel, to play the harlot in her 
father’s house; so shalt thou put away 
the evil from the midst of thee. 

22If a man be found lying with a 
woman married to a husband, then 
they shall both of them die, the man 
that lay with the woman, and the 
woman; so shalt thou put away the evil 
from Israel. 

23If there be a damsel that is a virgin 
betrothed unto a man, and a man find 
her in the city, and lie with her; 24then 
ye shall bring them both out unto the 
gate of that city, and ye shall stone 
them with stones that they die: the 
damsel, because she cried not, being in 
the city; and the man, because he hath 
humbled his neighbour’s wife; so thou 
shalt put away the evil from the midst 
of thee. 

25But if the man find the damsel that 
is betrothed in the field, and the man 
take hold of her, and lie with her; then 
the man only that lay with her shall 
die. 26But unto the damsel thou shalt 
do nothing; there is in the damsel no 
sin worthy of death; for as when a man 
riseth against his neighbour, and 
slayeth him, even so is this matter. 
27For he found her in the field; the 
betrothed damsel cried, and there was 
none to save her. 

28If a man find a damsel that is a 
virgin, that is not betrothed, and lay 
hold on her, and lie with her, and they 
be found; 29then the man that lay with 
her shall give unto the damsel’s father 
fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be 


his wife, because he hath humbled her; 
he may not put her away all his days. 

A man shall not take his 
father’s wife, and shall not 
uncover his father’s skirt. 

2He that is crushed or maimed in his 
privy parts shall not enter into the 
assembly of the LORD. 

3A bastard shall not enter into the 
assembly of the LORD; even to the 
tenth generation shall none of his enter 
into the assembly of the LORD. 

4An Ammonite or a Moabite shall 
not enter into the assembly of the 
LORD; even to the tenth generation 
shall none of them enter into the 
assembly of the LORD for ever; 
5because they met you not with bread 
and with water in the way, when ye 
came forth out of Egypt; and because 
they hired against thee Balaam the son 
of Beor from Pethor of Aram-
naharaim, to curse thee. 6Nevertheless 
the LORD thy God would not hearken 
unto Balaam; but the LORD thy God 
turned the curse into a blessing unto 
thee, because the LORD thy God loved 
thee. 7Thou shalt not seek their peace 
nor their prosperity all thy days for 
ever. 

8Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, 
for he is thy brother; thou shalt not 
abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast 
a stranger in his land. 9The children of 
the third generation that are born unto 
them may enter into the assembly of 
the LORD. 

10When thou goest forth in camp 
against thine enemies, then thou shalt 
keep thee from every evil thing. 11If 
there be among you any man, that is 
not clean by reason of that which 
chanceth him by night, then shall he 
go abroad out of the camp, he shall not 
come within the camp. 12But it shall 
be, when evening cometh on, he shall 
bathe himself in water; and when the 
sun is down, he may come within the 
camp. 13Thou shalt have a place also 
without the camp, whither thou shalt 
go forth abroad. 14And thou shalt have 
a paddle among thy weapons; and it 
shall be, when thou sittest down 
abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and 
shalt turn back and cover that which 
cometh from thee. 15For the LORD thy 
God walketh in the midst of thy camp, 
to deliver thee, and to give up thine 
enemies before thee; therefore shall 
thy camp be holy; that He see no 
unseemly thing in thee, and turn away 
from thee. 

16Thou shalt not deliver unto his 
master a bondman that is escaped from 
his master unto thee; 17he shall dwell 
with thee, in the midst of thee, in the 
place which he shall choose within one 
of thy gates, where it liketh him best; 
thou shalt not wrong him. 

18There shall be no harlot of the 
daughters of Israel, neither shall there 
be a sodomite of the sons of Israel. 
19Thou shalt not bring the hire of a 
harlot, or the price of a dog, into the 
house of the LORD thy God for any 
vow; for even both these are an 
abomination unto the LORD thy God. 
23 




20Thou shalt not lend upon interest 
to thy brother: interest of money, 
interest of victuals, interest of any 
thing that is lent upon interest. 21Unto 
a foreigner thou mayest lend upon 
interest; but unto thy brother thou shalt 
not lend upon interest; that the LORD 
thy God may bless thee in all that thou 
puttest thy hand unto, in the land 
whither thou goest in to possess it. 

22When thou shalt vow a vow unto 
the LORD thy God, thou shalt not be 
slack to pay it; for the LORD thy God 
will surely require it of thee; and it 
will be sin in thee. 23But if thou shalt 
forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in 
thee. 24That which is gone out of thy 
lips thou shalt observe and do; 
according as thou hast vowed freely 
unto the LORD thy God, even that 
which thou hast promised with thy 
mouth. 

25When thou comest into thy 
neighbour’s vineyard, then thou 
mayest eat grapes until thou have 
enough at thine own pleasure; but thou 
shalt not put any in thy vessel. 

26When thou comest into thy 
neighbour’s standing corn, then thou 
mayest pluck ears with thy hand; but 
thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy 
neighbour’s standing corn. 

When a man taketh a wife, and 
marrieth her, then it cometh to 
pass, if she find no favour in his eyes, 
because he hath found some unseemly 
thing in her, that he writeth her a bill 
of divorcement, and giveth it in her 
hand, and sendeth her out of his house, 
2and she departeth out of his house, 
and goeth and becometh another man’s 
wife, 3and the latter husband hateth 
her, and writeth her a bill of 
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, 
and sendeth her out of his house; or if 
the latter husband die, who took her to 
be his wife; 4her former husband, who 
sent her away, may not take her again 
to be his wife, after that she is defiled; 
for that is abomination before the 
LORD; and thou shalt not cause the land 
to sin, which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee for an inheritance. 

5When a man taketh a new wife, he 
shall not go out in the host, neither 
shall he be charged with any business; 
he shall be free for his house one year, 
and shall cheer his wife whom he hath 
taken. 

6No man shall take the mill or the 
upper millstone to pledge; for he 
taketh a man’s life to pledge. 

7If a man be found stealing any of 
his brethren of the children of Israel, 
and he deal with him as a slave, and 
sell him; then that thief shall die; so 
shalt thou put away the evil from the 
midst of thee. 

8Take heed in the plague of leprosy, 
that thou observe diligently, and do 
according to all that the priests the 
Levites shall teach you, as I 
commanded them, so ye shall observe 
to do. 9Remember what the LORD thy 
God did unto Miriam, by the way as ye 
came forth out of Egypt. 

10When thou dost lend thy 
neighbour any manner of loan, thou 
24 




shalt not go into his house to fetch his 
pledge. 11Thou shalt stand without, and 
the man to whom thou dost lend shall 
bring forth the pledge without unto 
thee. 12And if he be a poor man, thou 
shalt not sleep with his pledge; 13thou 
shalt surely restore to him the pledge 
when the sun goeth down, that he may 
sleep in his garment, and bless thee; 
and it shall be righteousness unto thee 
before the LORD thy God. 

14Thou shalt not oppress a hired 
servant that is poor and needy, whether 
he be of thy brethren, or of thy 
strangers that are in thy land within thy 
gates. 15In the same day thou shalt give 
him his hire, neither shall the sun go 
down upon it; for he is poor, and 
setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry 
against thee unto the LORD and it be sin 
in thee. 

16The fathers shall not be put to 
death for the children, neither shall the 
children be put to death for the fathers; 
every man shall be put to death for his 
own sin. 

17Thou shalt not pervert the justice 
due to the stranger, or to the fatherless; 
nor take the widow’s raiment to 
pledge. 18But thou shalt remember that 
thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the 
LORD thy God redeemed thee thence; 
therefore I command thee to do this 
thing. 

19When thou reapest thy harvest in 
thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the 
field, thou shalt not go back to fetch it; 
it shall be for the stranger, for the 
fatherless, and for the widow; that the 
LORD thy God may bless thee in all the 
work of thy hands. 

20When thou beatest thine olive-tree, 
thou shalt not go over the boughs 
again; it shall be for the stranger, for 
the fatherless, and for the widow. 
21When thou gatherest the grapes of 
thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it 
after thee; it shall be for the stranger, 
for the fatherless, and for the widow. 
22And thou shalt remember that thou 
wast a bondman in the land of Egypt; 
therefore I command thee to do this 
thing. 

If there be a controversy 
between men, and they come 
unto judgment, and the judges judge 
them, by justifying the righteous, and 
condemning the wicked, 2then it shall 
be, if the wicked man deserve to be 
beaten, that the judge shall cause him 
to lie down, and to be beaten before 
his face, according to the measure of 
his wickedness, by number. 3Forty 
stripes he may give him, he shall not 
exceed; lest, if he should exceed, and 
beat him above these with many 
stripes, then thy brother should be 
dishonoured before thine eyes. 

4Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when 
he treadeth out the corn. 

5If brethren dwell together, and one 
of them die, and have no child, the 
wife of the dead shall not be married 
abroad unto one not of his kin; her 
husband’s brother shall go in unto her, 
and take her to him to wife, and 
perform the duty of a husband’s 
brother unto her. 6And it shall be, that 
25 




the first-born that she beareth shall 
succeed in the name of his brother that 
is dead, that his name be not blotted 
out of Israel. 7And if the man like not 
to take his brother’s wife, then his 
brother’s wife shall go up to the gate 
unto the elders, and say: ‘My 
husband’s brother refuseth to raise up 
unto his brother a name in Israel; he 
will not perform the duty of a 
husband’s brother unto me.’ 8Then the 
elders of his city shall call him, and 
speak unto him; and if he stand, and 
say: ‘I like not to take her’; 9then shall 
his brother’s wife draw nigh unto him 
in the presence of the elders, and loose 
his shoe from off his foot, and spit in 
his face; and she shall answer and say: 
‘So shall it be done unto the man that 
doth not build up his brother’s house.’ 
10And his name shall be called in Israel 
The house of him that had his shoe 
loosed. 

11When men strive together one with 
another, and the wife of the one 
draweth near to deliver her husband 
out of the hand of him that smiteth 
him, and putteth forth her hand, and 
taketh him by the secrets; 12then thou 
shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall 
have no pity. 

13Thou shalt not have in thy bag 
diverse weights, a great and a small. 
14Thou shalt not have in thy house 
diverse measures, a great and a small. 
15A perfect and just weight shalt thou 
have; a perfect and just measure shalt 
thou have; that thy days may be long 
upon the land which the LORD thy God 
giveth thee. 16For all that do such 
things, even all that do unrighteously, 
are an abomination unto the LORD thy 
God. 

17Remember what Amalek did unto 
thee by the way as ye came forth out 
of Egypt; 18how he met thee by the 
way, and smote the hindmost of thee, 
all that were enfeebled in thy rear, 
when thou wast faint and weary; and 
he feared not God. 19Therefore it shall 
be, when the LORD thy God hath given 
thee rest from all thine enemies round 
about, in the land which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee for an inheritance to 
possess it, that thou shalt blot out the 
remembrance of Amalek from under 
heaven; thou shalt not forget. 

 

.... .. 

And it shall be, when thou art 
come in unto the land which 
the LORD thy God giveth thee for an 
inheritance, and dost possess it, and 
dwell therein; 2that thou shalt take of 
the first of all the fruit of the ground, 
which thou shalt bring in from thy land 
that the LORD thy God giveth thee; and 
thou shalt put it in a basket and shalt 
go unto the place which the LORD thy 
God shall choose to cause His name to 
dwell there. 3And thou shalt come unto 
the priest that shall be in those days, 
and say unto him: ‘I profess this day 
unto the LORD thy God, that I am come 
unto the land which the LORD swore 
unto our fathers to give us.’ 4And the 
priest shall take the basket out of thy 
hand, and set it down before the altar 
26 




of the LORD thy God. 5And thou shalt 
speak and say before the LORD thy 
God: ‘A wandering Aramean was my 
father, and he went down into Egypt, 
and sojourned there, few in number; 
and he became there a nation, great, 
mighty, and populous. 6And the 
Egyptians dealt ill with us, and 
afflicted us, and laid upon us hard 
bondage. 7And we cried unto the LORD, 
the God of our fathers, and the LORD 
heard our voice, and saw our 
affliction, and our toil, and our 
oppression. 8And the LORD brought us 
forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, 
and with an outstretched arm, and with 
great terribleness, and with signs, and 
with wonders. 9And He hath brought 
us into this place, and hath given us 
this land, a land flowing with milk and 
honey. 10And now, behold, I have 
brought the first of the fruit of the 
land, which Thou, O LORD, hast given 
me.’ And thou shalt set it down before 
the LORD thy God, and worship before 
the LORD thy God. 11And thou shalt 
rejoice in all the good which the LORD 
thy God hath given unto thee, and unto 
thy house, thou, and the Levite, and 
the stranger that is in the midst of thee. 

12When thou hast made an end of 
tithing all the tithe of thine increase in 
the third year, which is the year of 
tithing, and hast given it unto the 
Levite, to the stranger, to the 
fatherless, and to the widow, that they 
may eat within thy gates, and be 
satisfied, 13then thou shalt say before 
the LORD thy God: ‘I have put away the 
hallowed things out of my house, and 
also have given them unto the Levite, 
and unto the stranger, to the fatherless, 
and to the widow, according to all Thy 
commandment which Thou hast 
commanded me; I have not 
transgressed any of Thy 
commandments, neither have I 
forgotten them. 14I have not eaten 
thereof in my mourning, neither have I 
put away thereof, being unclean, nor 
given thereof for the dead; I have 
hearkened to the voice of the LORD my 
God, I have done according to all that 
Thou hast commanded me. 15Look 
forth from Thy holy habitation, from 
heaven, and bless Thy people Israel, 
and the land which Thou hast given us, 
as Thou didst swear unto our fathers, a 
land flowing with milk and honey.’ 

16This day the LORD thy God 
commandeth thee to do these statutes 
and ordinances; thou shalt therefore 
observe and do them with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul. 17Thou hast 
avouched the LORD this day to be thy 
God, and that thou wouldest walk in 
His ways, and keep His statutes, and 
His commandments, and His 
ordinances, and hearken unto His 
voice. 18And the LORD hath avouched 
thee this day to be His own treasure, as 
He hath promised thee, and that thou 
shouldest keep all His commandments; 
19and to make thee high above all 
nations that He hath made, in praise, 
and in name, and in glory; and that 
thou mayest be a holy people unto the 
LORD thy God, as He hath spoken. 


 

And Moses and the elders of 
Israel commanded the people, 
saying: ‘Keep all the commandment 
which I command you this day. 2And it 
shall be on the day when ye shall pass 
over the Jordan unto the land which 
the LORD thy God giveth thee, that thou 
shalt set thee up great stones, and 
plaster them with plaster. 3And thou 
shalt write upon them all the words of 
this law, when thou art passed over; 
that thou mayest go in unto the land 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee, a 
land flowing with milk and honey, as 
the LORD, the God of thy fathers, hath 
promised thee. 4And it shall be when 
ye are passed over the Jordan, that ye 
shall set up these stones, which I 
command you this day, in mount Ebal, 
and thou shalt plaster them with 
plaster. 5And there shalt thou build an 
altar unto the LORD thy God, an altar of 
stones; thou shalt lift up no iron tool 
upon them. 6Thou shalt build the altar 
of the LORD thy God of unhewn stones; 
and thou shalt offer burnt-offerings 
thereon unto the LORD thy God. 7And 
thou shalt sacrifice peace-offerings, 
and shalt eat there; and thou shalt 
rejoice before the LORD thy God. 8And 
thou shalt write upon the stones all the 
words of this law very plainly.’ 

9And Moses and the priests the 
Levites spoke unto all Israel, saying: 
‘Keep silence, and hear, O Israel; this 
day thou art become a people unto the 
LORD thy God. 10Thou shalt therefore 
hearken to the voice of the LORD thy 
God, and do His commandments and 
His statutes, which I command thee 
this day.’ 11And Moses charged the 
people the same day, saying: 12’These 
shall stand upon mount Gerizim to 
bless the people, when ye are passed 
over the Jordan: Simeon, and Levi, 
and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, 
and Benjamin; 13and these shall stand 
upon mount Ebal for the curse: 
Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, 
Dan, and Naphtali. 14And the Levites 
shall speak, and say unto all the men 
of Israel with a loud voice: 

15Cursed be the man that maketh a 
graven or molten image, an 
abomination unto the LORD, the work 
of the hands of the craftsman, and 
setteth it up in secret. And all the 
people shall answer and say: Amen. 

16Cursed be he that dishonoureth his 
father or his mother. And all the 
people shall say: Amen. 

17Cursed be he that removeth his 
neighbour’s landmark. And all the 
people shall say: Amen. 

18Cursed be he that maketh the blind 
to go astray in the way. And all the 
people shall say: Amen. 

19Cursed be he that perverteth the 
justice due to the stranger, fatherless, 
and widow. And all the people shall 
say: Amen. 

20Cursed be he that lieth with his 
father’s wife; because he hath 
uncovered his father’s skirt. And all 
the people shall say: Amen. 
27 




21Cursed be he that lieth with any 
manner of beast. And all the people 
shall say: Amen. 

22Cursed be he that lieth with his 
sister, the daughter of his father, or the 
daughter of his mother. And all the 
people shall say: Amen. 

23Cursed be he that lieth with his 
mother-in-law. And all the people 
shall say: Amen. 

24Cursed be he that smiteth his 
neighbour in secret. And all the people 
shall say: Amen. 

25Cursed be he that taketh a bribe to 
slay an innocent person. And all the 
people shall say: Amen. 

26Cursed be he that confirmeth not 
the words of this law to do them. And 
all the people shall say: Amen.’ 

And it shall come to pass, if 
thou shalt hearken diligently 
unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to 
observe to do all His commandments 
which I command thee this day, that 
the LORD thy God will set thee on high 
above all the nations of the earth. 2And 
all these blessings shall come upon 
thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt 
hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy 
God. 3Blessed shalt thou be in the city, 
and blessed shalt thou be in the field. 
4Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, 
and the fruit of thy land, and the fruit 
of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, 
and the young of thy flock. 5Blessed 
shall be thy basket and thy kneading-
trough. 6Blessed shalt thou be when 
thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou 
be when thou goest out. 7The LORD 
will cause thine enemies that rise up 
against thee to be smitten before thee; 
they shall come out against thee one 
way, and shall flee before thee seven 
ways. 8The LORD will command the 
blessing with thee in thy barns, and in 
all that thou puttest thy hand unto; and 
He will bless thee in the land which 
the LORD thy God giveth thee. 9The 
LORD will establish thee for a holy 
people unto Himself, as He hath sworn 
unto thee; if thou shalt keep the 
commandments of the LORD thy God, 
and walk in His ways. 10And all the 
peoples of the earth shall see that the 
name of the LORD is called upon thee; 
and they shall be afraid of thee. 11And 
the LORD will make thee over-abundant 
for good, in the fruit of thy body, and 
in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit 
of thy land, in the land which the LORD 
swore unto thy fathers to give thee. 
12The LORD will open unto thee His 
good treasure the heaven to give the 
rain of thy land in its season, and to 
bless all the work of thy hand; and 
thou shalt lend unto many nations, but 
thou shalt not borrow. 13And the LORD 
will make thee the head, and not the 
tail; and thou shalt be above only, and 
thou shalt not be beneath; if thou shalt 
hearken unto the commandments of 
the LORD thy God, which I command 
thee this day, to observe and to do 
them; 14and shalt not turn aside from 
any of the words which I command 
you this day, to the right hand, or to 
the left, to go after other gods to serve 
them. 
28 




15But it shall come to pass, if thou 
wilt not hearken unto the voice of the 
LORD thy God, to observe to do all His 
commandments and His statutes which 
I command thee this day; that all these 
curses shall come upon thee, and 
overtake thee. 16Cursed shalt thou be 
in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in 
the field. 17Cursed shall be thy basket 
and thy kneading-trough. 18Cursed 
shall be the fruit of thy body, and the 
fruit of thy land, the increase of thy 
kine, and the young of thy flock. 
19Cursed shalt thou be when thou 
comest in, and cursed shalt thou be 
when thou goest out. 20The LORD will 
send upon thee cursing, discomfiture, 
and rebuke, in all that thou puttest thy 
hand unto to do, until thou be 
destroyed, and until thou perish 
quickly; because of the evil of thy 
doings, whereby thou hast forsaken 
Me. 21The LORD will make the 
pestilence cleave unto thee, until He 
have consumed thee from off the land, 
whither thou goest in to possess it. 
22The LORD will smite thee with 
consumption, and with fever, and with 
inflammation, and with fiery heat, and 
with drought, and with blasting, and 
with mildew; and they shall pursue 
thee until thou perish. 23And thy 
heaven that is over thy head shall be 
brass, and the earth that is under thee 
shall be iron. 24The LORD will make the 
rain of thy land powder and dust; from 
heaven shall it come down upon thee, 
until thou be destroyed. 25The LORD 
will cause thee to be smitten before 
thine enemies; thou shalt go out one 
way against them, and shalt flee seven 
ways before them; and thou shalt be a 
horror unto all the kingdoms of the 
earth. 26And thy carcasses shall be 
food unto all fowls of the air, and unto 
the beasts of the earth, and there shall 
be none to frighten them away. 

27The LORD will smite thee with the 
boil of Egypt, and with the emerods, 
and with the scab, and with the itch, 
whereof thou canst not be healed. 
28The LORD will smite thee with 
madness, and with blindness, and with 
astonishment of heart. 29And thou shalt 
grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth 
in darkness, and thou shalt not make 
thy ways prosperous; and thou shalt be 
only oppressed and robbed alway, and 
there shall be none to save thee. 
30Thou shalt betroth a wife, and 
another man shall lie with her; thou 
shalt build a house, and thou shalt not 
dwell therein; thou shalt plant a 
vineyard, and shalt not use the fruit 
thereof. 31Thine ox shall be slain 
before thine eyes, and thou shalt not 
eat thereof; thine ass shall be violently 
taken away from before thy face, and 
shall not be restored to thee; thy sheep 
shall be given unto thine enemies; and 
thou shalt have none to save thee. 
32Thy sons and thy daughters shall be 
given unto another people, and thine 
eyes shall look, and fail with longing 
for them all the day; and there shall be 
nought in the power of thy hand. 33The 
fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, 
shall a nation which thou knowest not 


eat up; and thou shalt be only 
oppressed and crushed away: 34so that 
thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine 
eyes which thou shalt see. 35The LORD 
will smite thee in the knees, and in the 
legs, with a sore boil, whereof thou 
canst not be healed, from the sole of 
thy foot unto the crown of thy head. 
36The LORD will bring thee, and thy 
king whom thou shalt set over thee, 
unto a nation that thou hast not known, 
thou nor thy fathers; and there shalt 
thou serve other gods, wood and stone. 
37And thou shalt become an 
astonishment, a proverb, and a 
byword, among all the peoples whither 
the LORD shall lead thee away. 

38Thou shalt carry much seed out 
into the field, and shalt gather little in; 
for the locust shall consume it. 39Thou 
shalt plant vineyards and dress them, 
but thou shalt neither drink of the 
wine, nor gather the grapes; for the 
worm shall eat them. 40Thou shalt have 
olive-trees throughout all thy borders, 
but thou shalt not anoint thyself with 
the oil; for thine olives shall drop off. 
41Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, 
but they shall not be thine; for they 
shall go into captivity. 42All thy trees 
and the fruit of thy land shall the 
locust possess. 

43The stranger that is in the midst of 
thee shall mount up above thee higher 
and higher; and thou shalt come down 
lower and lower. 44He shall lend to 
thee, and thou shalt not lend to him; he 
shall be the head, and thou shalt be the 
tail. 45And all these curses shall come 
upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and 
overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; 
because thou didst not hearken unto 
the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep 
His commandments and His statutes 
which He commanded thee. 46And 
they shall be upon thee for a sign and 
for a wonder, and upon thy seed for 
ever; 47because thou didst not serve the 
LORD thy God with joyfulness, and 
with gladness of heart, by reason of 
the abundance of all things; 48therefore 
shalt thou serve thine enemy whom the 
LORD shall send against thee, in 
hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, 
and in want of all things; and he shall 
put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until 
he have destroyed thee. 

49The LORD will bring a nation 
against thee from far, from the end of 
the earth, as the vulture swoopeth 
down; a nation whose tongue thou 
shalt not understand; 50a nation of 
fierce countenance, that shall not 
regard the person of the old, nor show 
favour to the young. 51And he shall eat 
the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of 
thy ground, until thou be destroyed; 
that also shall not leave thee corn, 
wine, or oil, the increase of thy kine, 
or the young of thy flock, until he have 
caused thee to perish. 52And he shall 
besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy 
high and fortified walls come down, 
wherein thou didst trust, throughout all 
thy land; and he shall besiege thee in 
all thy gates throughout all thy land, 
which the LORD thy God hath given 
thee. 53And thou shalt eat the fruit of 


thine own body, the flesh of thy sons 
and of thy daughters whom the LORD 
thy God hath given thee; in the siege 
and in the straitness, wherewith thine 
enemies shall straiten thee. 54The man 
that is tender among you, and very 
delicate, his eye shall be evil against 
his brother, and against the wife of his 
bosom, and against the remnant of his 
children whom he hath remaining; 55so 
that he will not give to any of them of 
the flesh of his children whom he shall 
eat, because he hath nothing left him; 
in the siege and in the straitness, 
wherewith thine enemy shall straiten 
thee in all thy gates. 56The tender and 
delicate woman among you, who 
would not adventure to set the sole of 
her foot upon the ground for 
delicateness and tenderness, her eye 
shall be evil against the husband of her 
bosom, and against her son, and 
against her daughter; 57and against her 
afterbirth that cometh out from 
between her feet, and against her 
children whom she shall bear; for she 
shall eat them for want of all things 
secretly; in the siege and in the 
straitness, wherewith thine enemy 
shall straiten thee in thy gates. 

58If thou wilt not observe to do all 
the words of this law that are written 
in this book, that thou mayest fear this 
glorious and awful Name, the LORD thy 
God; 59then the LORD will make thy 
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of 
thy seed, even great plagues, and of 
long continuance, and sore sicknesses, 
and of long continuance. 60And He 
will bring back upon thee all the 
diseases of Egypt, which thou wast in 
dread of; and they shall cleave unto 
thee. 61Also every sickness, and every 
plague, which is not written in the 
book of this law, them will the LORD 
bring upon thee, until thou be 
destroyed. 62And ye shall be left few in 
number, whereas ye were as the stars 
of heaven for multitude; because thou 
didst not hearken unto the voice of the 
LORD thy God. 63And it shall come to 
pass, that as the LORD rejoiced over 
you to do you good, and to multiply 
you; so the LORD will rejoice over you 
to cause you to perish, and to destroy 
you; and ye shall be plucked from off 
the land whither thou goest in to 
possess it. 64And the LORD shall scatter 
thee among all peoples, from the one 
end of the earth even unto the other 
end of the earth; and there thou shalt 
serve other gods, which thou hast not 
known, thou nor thy fathers, even 
wood and stone. 65And among these 
nations shalt thou have no repose, and 
there shall be no rest for the sole of thy 
foot; but the LORD shall give thee there 
a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, 
and languishing of soul. 66And thy life 
shall hang in doubt before thee; and 
thou shalt fear night and day, and shalt 
have no assurance of thy life. 67In the 
morning thou shalt say: ‘Would it 
were even! ’ and at even thou shalt 
say: ‘Would it were morning! ’ for the 
fear of thy heart which thou shalt fear, 
and for the sight of thine eyes which 
thou shalt see. 68And the LORD shall 


bring thee back into Egypt in ships, by 
the way whereof I said unto thee: 
‘Thou shalt see it no more again’; and 
there ye shall sell yourselves unto your 
enemies for bondmen and for 
bondwoman, and no man shall buy 
you. 

69These are the words of the 
covenant which the LORD commanded 
Moses to make with the children of 
Israel in the land of Moab, beside the 
covenant which He made with them in 
Horeb. 

And Moses called unto all 
Israel, and said unto them: 

Ye have seen all that the LORD did 
before your eyes in the land of Egypt 
unto Pharaoh, and unto all his 
servants, and unto all his land; 2the 
great trials which thine eyes saw, the 
signs and those great wonders; 3but the 
LORD hath not given you a heart to 
know, and eyes to see, and ears to 
hear, unto this day. 4And I have led 
you forty years in the wilderness; your 
clothes are not waxen old upon you, 
and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy 
foot. 5Ye have not eaten bread, neither 
have ye drunk wine or strong drink; 
that ye might know that I am the LORD 
your God. 6And when ye came unto 
this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, 
and Og the king of Bashan, came out 
against us unto battle, and we smote 
them. 7And we took their land, and 
gave it for an inheritance unto the 
Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to 
the half-tribe of the Manassites. 
8Observe therefore the words of this 
covenant, and do them, that ye may 
make all that ye do to prosper. 

..... 

9Ye are standing this day all of you 
before the LORD your God: your heads, 
your tribes, your elders, and your 
officers, even all the men of Israel, 
10your little ones, your wives, and thy 
stranger that is in the midst of thy 
camp, from the hewer of thy wood 
unto the drawer of thy water; 11that 
thou shouldest enter into the covenant 
of the LORD thy God—and into His 
oath—which the LORD thy God maketh 
with thee this day; 12that He may 
establish thee this day unto Himself 
for a people, and that He may be unto 
thee a God, as He spoke unto thee, and 
as He swore unto thy fathers, to 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. 
13Neither with you only do I make this 
covenant and this oath; 14but with him 
that standeth here with us this day 
before the LORD our God, and also with 
him that is not here with us this day—
15 for ye know how we dwelt in the 
land of Egypt; and how we came 
through the midst of the nations 
through which ye passed; 16and ye 
have seen their detestable things, and 
their idols, wood and stone, silver and 
gold, which were with them—17lest 
there should be among you man, or 
woman, or family, or tribe, whose 
heart turneth away this day from the 
LORD our God, to go to serve the gods 
of those nations; lest there should be 
among you a root that beareth gall and 
wormwood; 18 and it come to pass, 
29 




when he heareth the words of this 
curse, that he bless himself in his 
heart, saying: ‘I shall have peace, 
though I walk in the stubbornness of 
my heart—that the watered be swept 
away with the dry’; 19the LORD will not 
be willing to pardon him, but then the 
anger of the LORD and His jealousy 
shall be kindled against that man, and 
all the curse that is written in this book 
shall lie upon him, and the LORD shall 
blot out his name from under heaven; 
20and the LORD shall separate him unto 
evil out of all the tribes of Israel, 
according to all the curses of the 
covenant that is written in this book of 
the law. 21And the generation to come, 
your children that shall rise up after 
you, and the foreigner that shall come 
from a far land, shall say, when they 
see the plagues of that land, and the 
sicknesses wherewith the LORD hath 
made it sick; 22and that the whole land 
thereof is brimstone, and salt, and a 
burning, that it is not sown, nor 
beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, 
like the overthrow of Sodom and 
Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, 
which the LORD overthrew in His 
anger, and in His wrath; 23even all the 
nations shall say ‘Wherefore hath the 
LORD done thus unto this land? what 
meaneth the heat of this great anger?’ 
24then men shall say: ‘Because they 
forsook the covenant of the LORD, the 
God of their fathers, which He made 
with them when He brought them forth 
out of the land of Egypt; 25and went 
and served other gods, and worshipped 
them, gods that they knew not, and 
that He had not allotted unto them; 
26therefore the anger of the LORD was 
kindled against this land, to bring upon 
it all the curse that is written in this 
book; 27and the LORD rooted them out 
of their land in anger, and in wrath, 
and in great indignation, and cast them 
into another land, as it is this day’.— 28 
The secret things belong unto the LORD 
our God; but the things that are 
revealed belong unto us and to our 
children for ever, that we may do all 
the words of this law. 

And it shall come to pass, 
when all these things are come 
upon thee, the blessing and the curse, 
which I have set before thee, and thou 
shalt bethink thyself among all the 
nations, whither the LORD thy God hath 
driven thee, 2and shalt return unto the 
LORD thy God, and hearken to His 
voice according to all that I command 
thee this day, thou and thy children, 
with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul; 3that then the LORD thy God will 
turn thy captivity, and have 
compassion upon thee, and will return 
and gather thee from all the peoples, 
whither the LORD thy God hath 
scattered thee. 4If any of thine that are 
dispersed be in the uttermost parts of 
heaven, from thence will the LORD thy 
God gather thee, and from thence will 
He fetch thee. 5And the LORD thy God 
will bring thee into the land which thy 
fathers possessed, and thou shalt 
possess it; and He will do thee good, 
and multiply thee above thy fathers. 
30 




6And the LORD thy God will circumcise 
thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to 
love the LORD thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou 
mayest live. 7And the LORD thy God 
will put all these curses upon thine 
enemies, and on them that hate thee, 
that persecuted thee. 8And thou shalt 
return and hearken to the voice of the 
LORD, and do all His commandments 
which I command thee this day. 9And 
the LORD thy God will make thee over-
abundant in all the work of thy hand, 
in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit 
of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy 
land, for good; for the LORD will again 
rejoice over thee for good, as He 
rejoiced over thy fathers; 10if thou shalt 
hearken to the voice of the LORD thy 
God, to keep His commandments and 
His statutes which are written in this 
book of the law; if thou turn unto the 
LORD thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul. 

11For this commandment which I 
command thee this day, it is not too 
hard for thee, neither is it far off. 12It is 
not in heaven, that thou shouldest say: 
‘Who shall go up for us to heaven, and 
bring it unto us, and make us to hear it, 
that we may do it?’ 13Neither is it 
beyond the sea, that thou shouldest 
say: ‘Who shall go over the sea for us, 
and bring it unto us, and make us to 
hear it, that we may do it?’ 14But the 
word is very nigh unto thee, in thy 
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou 
mayest do it. 

15See, I have set before thee this day 
life and good, and death and evil, 16in 
that I command thee this day to love 
the LORD thy God, to walk in His ways, 
and to keep His commandments and 
His statutes and His ordinances; then 
thou shalt live and multiply, and the 
LORD thy God shall bless thee in the 
land whither thou goest in to possess 
it. 17But if thy heart turn away, and 
thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn 
away, and worship other gods, and 
serve them; 18I declare unto you this 
day, that ye shall surely perish; ye 
shall not prolong your days upon the 
land, whither thou passest over the 
Jordan to go in to possess it. 19I call 
heaven and earth to witness against 
you this day, that I have set before thee 
life and death, the blessing and the 
curse; therefore choose life, that thou 
mayest live, thou and thy seed; 20to 
love the LORD thy God, to hearken to 
His voice, and to cleave unto Him; for 
that is thy life, and the length of thy 
days; that thou mayest dwell in the 
land which the LORD swore unto thy 
fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to 
Jacob, to give them. 

 

.... 

And Moses went and spoke 
these words unto all Israel. 
2And he said unto them: ‘I am a 
hundred and twenty years old this day; 
I can no more go out and come in; and 
the LORD hath said unto me: Thou shalt 
not go over this Jordan. 3The LORD thy 
God, He will go over before thee; He 
31 




will destroy these nations from before 
thee, and thou shalt dispossess them; 
and Joshua, he shall go over before 
thee, as the LORD hath spoken. 4And 
the LORD will do unto them as He did 
to Sihon and to Og, the kings of the 
Amorites, and unto their land; whom 
He destroyed. 5And the LORD will 
deliver them up before you, and ye 
shall do unto them according unto all 
the commandment which I have 
commanded you. 6Be strong and of 
good courage, fear not, nor be 
affrighted at them; for the LORD thy 
God, He it is that doth go with thee; 
He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.’ 

7And Moses called unto Joshua, and 
said unto him in the sight of all Israel: 
‘Be strong and of good courage; for 
thou shalt go with this people into the 
land which the LORD hath sworn unto 
their fathers to give them; and thou 
shalt cause them to inherit it. 8And the 
LORD, He it is that doth go before thee; 
He will be with thee, He will not fail 
thee, neither forsake thee; fear not, 
neither be dismayed.’ 

9And Moses wrote this law, and 
delivered it unto the priests the sons of 
Levi, that bore the ark of the covenant 
of the LORD, and unto all the elders of 
Israel. 10And Moses commanded them, 
saying: ‘At the end of every seven 
years, in the set time of the year of 
release, in the feast of tabernacles, 
11when all Israel is come to appear 
before the LORD thy God in the place 
which He shall choose, thou shalt read 
this law before all Israel in their 
hearing. 12Assemble the people, the 
men and the women and the little ones, 
and thy stranger that is within thy 
gates, that they may hear, and that they 
may learn, and fear the LORD your 
God, and observe to do all the words 
of this law; 13and that their children, 
who have not known, may hear, and 
learn to fear the LORD your God, as 
long as ye live in the land whither ye 
go over the Jordan to possess it.’ 

14And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Behold, thy days approach that thou 
must die; call Joshua, and present 
yourselves in the tent of meeting, that I 
may give him a charge.’ And Moses 
and Joshua went, and presented 
themselves in the tent of meeting. 
15And the LORD appeared in the Tent in 
a pillar of cloud; and the pillar of 
cloud stood over the door of the Tent. 
16And the LORD said unto Moses: 
‘Behold, thou art about to sleep with 
thy fathers; and this people will rise 
up, and go astray after the foreign gods 
of the land, whither they go to be 
among them, and will forsake Me, and 
break My covenant which I have made 
with them. 17Then My anger shall be 
kindled against them in that day, and I 
will forsake them, and I will hide My 
face from them, and they shall be 
devoured, and many evils and troubles 
shall come upon them; so that they 
will say in that day: Are not these evils 
come upon us because our God is not 
among us? 18And I will surely hide My 
face in that day for all the evil which 
they shall have wrought, in that they 


are turned unto other gods. 19Now 
therefore write ye this song for you, 
and teach thou it the children of Israel; 
put it in their mouths, that this song 
may be a witness for Me against the 
children of Israel. 20For when I shall 
have brought them into the land which 
I swore unto their fathers, flowing with 
milk and honey; and they shall have 
eaten their fill, and waxen fat; and 
turned unto other gods, and served 
them, and despised Me, and broken 
My covenant; 21then it shall come to 
pass, when many evils and troubles are 
come upon them, that this song shall 
testify before them as a witness; for it 
shall not be forgotten out of the 
mouths of their seed; for I know their 
imagination how they do even now, 
before I have brought them into the 
land which I swore.’ 22So Moses wrote 
this song the same day, and taught it 
the children of Israel. 23And he gave 
Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and 
said: ‘Be strong and of good courage; 
for thou shalt bring the children of 
Israel into the land which I swore unto 
them; and I will be with thee.’ 

24And it came to pass, when Moses 
had made an end of writing the words 
of this law in a book, until they were 
finished, 25that Moses commanded the 
Levites, that bore the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, saying: 26’Take 
this book of the law, and put it by the 
side of the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD your God, that it may be there 
for a witness against thee. 27For I know 
thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck; 
behold, while I am yet alive with you 
this day, ye have been rebellious 
against the LORD; and how much more 
after my death? 28Assemble unto me 
all the elders of your tribes, and your 
officers, that I may speak these words 
in their ears, and call heaven and earth 
to witness against them. 29For I know 
that after my death ye will in any wise 
deal corruptly, and turn aside from the 
way which I have commanded you; 
and evil will befall you in the end of 
days; because ye will do that which is 
evil in the sight of the LORD, to 
provoke Him through the work of your 
hands.’ 30And Moses spoke in the ears 
of all the assembly of Israel the words 
of this song, until they were finished: 

 

...... 

Give ear, ye heavens, and I 
will speak; 

And let the earth hear the words of 
my mouth. 

2My doctrine shall drop as the rain, 

My speech shall distil as the dew; 

As the small rain upon the tender 
grass, 

And as the showers upon the herb. 

3For I will proclaim the name of the 
LORD; 

Ascribe ye greatness unto our God. 

 

4The Rock, His work is perfect; 

For all His ways are justice; 

A God of faithfulness and without 
iniquity, 

Just and right is He. 
32 




5Is corruption His? No; His 
children’s is the blemish; 

A generation crooked and perverse. 

6Do ye thus requite the LORD, 

O foolish people and unwise? 

Is not He thy father that hath gotten 
thee? 

Hath He not made thee, and 
established thee? 

 

7Remember the days of old, 

Consider the years of many 
generations; 

Ask thy father, and he will declare 
unto thee, 

Thine elders, and they will tell thee. 

8When the Most High gave to the 
nations 

When He separated the children of 
men, 

He set the borders of the peoples 

According to the number of the 
children of Israel. 

9For the portion of the LORD is His 
people, 

Jacob the lot of His inheritance. 

 

10He found him in a desert land, 

And in the waste, a howling 
wilderness; 

He compassed him about, He cared 
for him, 

He kept him as the apple of His eye. 

11As an eagle that stirreth up her 
nest, 

Hovereth over her young, 

Spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh 
them, 

Beareth them on her pinions— 

12The LORD alone did lead him, 

And there was no strange god with 
Him. 

 

13He made him ride on the high 
places of the earth, 

And he did eat the fruitage of the 
field; 

And He made him to suck honey out 
of the crag, 

And oil out of the flinty rock; 

14Curd of kine, and milk of sheep, 

With fat of lambs, 

And rams of the breed of Bashan, 
and he-goats, 

With the kidney-fat of wheat; 

And of the blood of the grape thou 
drankest foaming wine. 

 

15But Jeshurun waxed fat, and 
kicked— 

Thou didst wax fat, thou didst grow 
thick, thou didst become gross— 

And he forsook God who made him, 

And contemned the Rock of his 
salvation. 

16They roused Him to jealousy with 
strange gods, 

With abominations did they provoke 
Him. 

17They sacrificed unto demons, no-
gods, 

Gods that they knew not, 

New gods that came up of late, 

Which your fathers dreaded not. 

18Of the Rock that begot thee thou 
wast unmindful, 

And didst forget God that bore thee. 

 


19And the LORD saw, and spurned, 

Because of the provoking of His 
sons and 

His daughters. 

20And He said: ‘I will hide My face 
from them, 

I will see what their end shall be; 

For they are a very froward 
generation, 

Children in whom is no faithfulness. 

21They have roused Me to jealousy 
with a no-god; 

They have provoked Me with their 
vanities; 

And I will rouse them to jealousy 
with a no-people; 

I will provoke them with a vile 
nation. 22For a fire is kindled in 
My nostril, 

And burneth unto the depths of the 
nether-world, 

And devoureth the earth with her 
produce, 

And setteth ablaze the foundations 
of the mountains. 

 

23I will heap evils upon them; 

I will spend Mine arrows upon 
them; 

24The wasting of hunger, and the 

 devouring of the fiery bolt, 

And bitter destruction; 

And the teeth of beasts will I send 
upon them, 

With the venom of crawling things 
of the dust. 

25Without shall the sword bereave, 

And in the chambers terror; 

Slaying both young man and virgin, 

The suckling with the man of gray 
hairs. 

 

26I thought I would make an end of 
them, 

I would make their memory cease 
from among men; 

27Were it not that I dreaded the 
enemy’s provocation, 

Lest their adversaries should 
misdeem, 

Lest they should say: Our hand is 
exalted, 

And not the LORD hath wrought all 
this.’ 

 

28For they are a nation void of 
counsel, 

And there is no understanding in 
them. 

29If they were wise, they would 
understand this, 

They would discern their latter end. 

30How should one chase a thousand, 

And two put ten thousand to flight, 

Except their Rock had given them 
over 

And the LORD had delivered them 
up? 

31For their rock is not as our Rock, 

Even our enemies themselves being 

 judges. 

32For their vine is of the vine of 
Sodom, 

And of the fields of Gomorrah; 

Their grapes are grapes of gall, 

Their clusters are bitter; 

33Their wine is the venom of 
serpents, 


And the cruel poison of asps. 

 

34’Is not this laid up in store with 
Me, 

Sealed up in My treasuries? 

35Vengeance is Mine, and 
recompense, 

Against the time when their foot 
shall slip; 

For the day of their calamity is at 
hand, 

And the things that are to come 
upon them shall make haste. 

 

36For the LORD will judge His 
people, 

And repent Himself for His 
servants; 

When He seeth that their stay is 
gone, 

And there is none remaining, shut 
up or left at large. 

37And it is said: Where are their 
gods, 

The rock in whom they trusted; 

38Who did eat the fat of their 
sacrifices, 

And drank the wine of their drink- 

 offering? 

Let him rise up and help you, 

Let him be your protection. 

 

39See now that I, even I, am He, 

And there is no god with Me; 

I kill, and I make alive; 

I have wounded, and I heal; 

And there is none that can deliver 
out of My hand. 

40For I lift up My hand to heaven, 

And say: As I live for ever, 

41If I whet My glittering sword, 

And My hand take hold on 
judgment; 

I will render vengeance to Mine 

 adversaries, 

And will recompense them that hate 
Me. 

42I will make Mine arrows drunk 
with blood, 

And My sword shall devour flesh; 

With the blood of the slain and the 
captives, 

From the long-haired heads of the 
enemy.’ 

 

43Sing aloud, O ye nations, of His 
people; 

For He doth avenge the blood of His 
servants, 

And doth render vengeance to His 

 adversaries, 

And doth make expiation for the 
land of His people. 

 

44And Moses came and spoke all the 
words of this song in the ears of the 
people, he, and Hoshea the son of 
Nun. 45And when Moses made an end 
of speaking all these words to all 
Israel, 46he said unto them: ‘Set your 
heart unto all the words wherewith I 
testify against you this day; that ye 
may charge your children therewith to 
observe to do all the words of this law. 
47For it is no vain thing for you; 
because it is your life, and through this 
thing ye shall prolong your days upon 


the land, whither ye go over the Jordan 
to possess it.’ 

48And the LORD spoke unto Moses 
that selfsame day, saying: 49’Get thee 
up into this mountain of Abarim, unto 
mount Nebo, which is in the land of 
Moab, that is over against Jericho; and 
behold the land of Canaan, which I 
give unto the children of Israel for a 
possession; 50and die in the mount 
whither thou goest up, and be gathered 
unto thy people; as Aaron thy brother 
died in mount Hor, and was gathered 
unto his people. 51Because ye 
trespassed against Me in the midst of 
the children of Israel at the waters of 
Meribath-kadesh, in the wilderness of 
Zin; because ye sanctified Me not in 
the midst of the children of Israel. 
52For thou shalt see the land afar off; 
but thou shalt not go thither into the 
land which I give the children of 
Israel.’ 

..... .... 

And this is the blessing 
wherewith Moses the man of 
God blessed the children of Israel 
before his death. 2And he said: 

The LORD came from Sinai, 

And rose from Seir unto them; 

He shined forth from mount Paran, 

And He came from the myriads 
holy, 

At His right hand was a fiery law 
unto them. 

3Yea, He loveth the peoples, 

All His holy ones—they are in Thy 
hand; 

And they sit down at Thy feet, 

Receiving of Thy words. 

4Moses commanded us a law, 

An inheritance of the congregation 
of 

Jacob. 

5And there was a king in Jeshurun, 

When the heads of the people were 
gathered, 

All the tribes of Israel together. 

 

6Let Reuben live, and not die 

In that his men become few. 

 

7And this for Judah, and he said: 

Hear, LORD, the voice of Judah, 

And bring him in unto his people; 

His hands shall contend for him, 

And Thou shalt be a help against his 

 adversaries. 

 

8And of Levi he said: 

Thy Thummim and Thy Urim be 
with Thy holy one, 

Whom Thou didst prove at Massah, 

With whom Thou didst strive at the 
waters of Meribah; 

9Who said of his father, and of his 
mother: ‘I have not seen him’; 

Neither did he acknowledge his 
brethren, 

Nor knew he his own children; 

For they have observed Thy word, 

And keep Thy covenant. 

10They shall teach Jacob Thine 
ordinances, 

And Israel Thy law; 

They shall put incense before Thee, 

And whole burnt-offering upon 
Thine altar. 
33 




11Bless, LORD, his substance, 

And accept the work of his hands; 

Smite through the loins of them that 
rise up against him, 

And of them that hate him, that they 
rise not again. 

 

12Of Benjamin he said: 

The beloved of the LORD shall dwell 
in safety by Him; 

He covereth him all the day, 

And He dwelleth between his 
shoulders. 

 

13And of Joseph he said: 

Blessed of the LORD be his land; 

For the precious things of heaven, 
for the dew, 

And for the deep that coucheth 
beneath, 

14And for the precious things of the 
fruits of the sun, 

And for the precious things of the 
yield of the moons, 

15And for the tops of the ancient 

 mountains, 

And for the precious things of the 
everlasting hills, 

16And for the precious things of the 
earth and the fulness thereof, 

And the good will of Him that dwelt 
in the bush; 

Let the blessing come upon the head 
of 

Joseph, 

And upon the crown of the head of 
him that is prince among his 
brethren. 

17His firstling bullock, majesty is 
his; 

And his horns are the horns of the 
wild-ox; 

With them he shall gore the peoples 
all of them, even the ends of the 
earth; 

And they are the ten thousands of 
Ephraim, 

And they are the thousands of 
Manasseh. 

 

18And of Zebulun he said: 

Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out, 

And, Issachar, in thy tents. 

19They shall call peoples unto the 
mountain; 

There shall they offer sacrifices of 
righteousness; 

For they shall suck the abundance of 
the seas, 

And the hidden treasures of the 
sand. 

 

20And of Gad he said: 

Blessed be He that enlargeth Gad; 

He dwelleth as a lioness, 

And teareth the arm, yea, the crown 
of the head. 

21And he chose a first part for 
himself, 

For there a portion of a ruler was 
reserved; 

And there came the heads of the 
people, 

He executed the righteousness of the 
LORD, 

And His ordinances with Israel. 

 


22And of Dan he said: 

Dan is a lion’s whelp, 

That leapeth forth from Bashan. 

 

23And of Naphtali he said: 

O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, 

And full with the blessing of the 
LORD: 

Possess thou the sea and the south. 

 

24And of Asher he said: 

Blessed be Asher above sons; 

Let him be the favoured of his 
brethren, 

And let him dip his foot in oil. 

25Iron and brass shall be thy bars; 

And as thy days, so shall thy 
strength be. 

 

26There is none like unto God, O 
Jeshurun, 

Who rideth upon the heaven as thy 
help, 

And in His excellency on the skies. 

27The eternal God is a dwelling-
place, 

And underneath are the everlasting 
arms; 

And He thrust out the enemy from 
before thee, 

And said: ‘Destroy.’ 

28And Israel dwelleth in safety, 

The fountain of Jacob alone, 

In a land of corn and wine; 

Yea, his heavens drop down dew. 

29Happy art thou, O Israel, who is 
like unto thee? 

A people saved by the LORD, 

The shield of thy help, 

And that is the sword of thy 
excellency! 

And thine enemies shall dwindle 
away before thee; 

And thou shalt tread upon their high 
places. 

 

And Moses went up from the 
plains of Moab unto mount 
Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over 
against Jericho. And the LORD showed 
him all the land, even Gilead as far as 
Dan; 2and all Naphtali, and the land of 
Ephraim and Manasseh, and all the 
land of Judah as far as the hinder sea; 
3and the South, and the Plain, even the 
valley of Jericho the city of palm-trees, 
as far as Zoar. 4And the LORD said unto 
him: ‘This is the land which I swore 
unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto 
Jacob, saying: I will give it unto thy 
seed; I have caused thee to see it with 
thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over 
thither.’ 5So Moses the servant of the 
LORD died there in the land of Moab, 
according to the word of the LORD. 
6And he was buried in the valley in the 
land of Moab over against Beth-peor; 
and no man knoweth of his sepulchre 
unto this day. 7And Moses was a 
hundred and twenty years old when he 
died: his eye was not dim, nor his 
natural force abated. 8And the children 
of Israel wept for Moses in the plains 
of Moab thirty days; so the days of 
weeping in the mourning for Moses 
were ended. 9And Joshua the son of 
Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; 
for Moses had laid his hands upon 
34 




him; and the children of Israel 
hearkened unto him, and did as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 10And there 
hath not arisen a prophet since in Israel 
like unto Moses, whom the LORD knew 
face to face; 11in all the signs and the 
wonders, which the LORD sent him to 
do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, 
and to all his servants, and to all his 
land; 12and in all the mighty hand, and 
in all the great terror, which Moses 
wrought in the sight of all Israel. 




..... 

JOSHUA 

 

Now it came to pass after the 
death of Moses the servant of the 
LORD, that the LORD spoke unto Joshua 
the son of Nun, Moses’minister, 
saying: 2’Moses My servant is dead; 
now therefore arise, go over this 
Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto 
the land which I do give to them, even 
to the children of Israel. 3Every place 
that the sole of your foot shall tread 
upon, to you have I given it, as I spoke 
unto Moses. 4From the wilderness, and 
this Lebanon, even unto the great 
river, the river Euphrates, all the land 
of the Hittites, and unto the Great Sea 
toward the going down of the sun, 
shall be your border. 5There shall not 
any man be able to stand before thee 
all the days of thy life; as I was with 
Moses, so I will be with thee; I will 
not fail thee, nor forsake thee. 6Be 
strong and of good courage; for thou 
shalt cause this people to inherit the 
land which I swore unto their fathers 
to give them. 7Only be strong and very 
courageous, to observe to do according 
to all the law, which Moses My 
servant commanded thee; turn not 
from it to the right hand or to the left, 
that thou mayest have good success 
whithersoever thou goest. 8This book 
of the law shall not depart out of thy 
mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein 
day and night, that thou mayest 
observe to do according to all that is 
written therein; for then thou shalt 
make thy ways prosperous, and then 
thou shalt have good success. 9Have 
not I commanded thee? Be strong and 
of good courage; be not affrighted, 
neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD 
thy God is with thee whithersoever 
thou goest.’ 

10Then Joshua commanded the 
officers of the people, saying: 11’Pass 
through the midst of the camp, and 
command the people, saying: Prepare 
you victuals; for within three days ye 
are to pass over this Jordan, to go in to 
possess the land, which the LORD your 
God giveth you to possess it.’ 

12And to the Reubenites, and to the 
Gadites, and to the half-tribe of 
Manasseh, spoke Joshua, saying: 
13’Remember the word which Moses 
the servant of the LORD commanded, 
you, saying: The LORD your God 
giveth you rest, and will give you this 
land. 14Your wives, your little ones, 
and your cattle, shall abide in the land 
which Moses gave you beyond the 
Jordan; but ye shall pass over before 
your brethren armed, all the mighty 
men of valour, and shall help them; 
15until the LORD have given your 
brethren rest, as unto you, and they 
also have possessed the land which the 
LORD your God giveth them; then ye 
1 




shall return unto the land of your 
possession, and possess it, which 
Moses the servant of the LORD gave 
you beyond the Jordan toward the 
sunrising.’ 

16And they answered Joshua, saying: 
‘All that thou hast commanded us we 
will do, and whithersoever thou 
sendest us we will go. 17According as 
we hearkened unto Moses in all things, 
so will we hearken unto thee; only the 
LORD thy God be with thee, as He was 
with Moses. 18Whosoever he be that 
shall rebel against thy commandment, 
and shall not hearken unto thy words 
in all that thou commandest him, he 
shall be put to death; only be strong 
and of good courage.’ 

And Joshua the son of Nun sent 
out of Shittim two spies secretly, 
saying: ‘Go view the land, and 
Jericho.’ And they went, and came 
into the house of a harlot whose name 
was Rahab, and lay there. 2And it was 
told the king of Jericho, saying: 
‘Behold, there came men in hither to-
night of the children of Israel to search 
out the land.’ 3And the king of Jericho 
sent unto Rahab, saying: ‘Bring forth 
the men that are come to thee, that are 
entered into thy house; for they are 
come to search out all the land.’ 4And 
the woman took the two men, and hid 
them; and she said: ‘Yea, the men 
came unto me, but I knew not whence 
they were; 5and it came to pass about 
the time of the shutting of the gate, 
when it was dark, that the men went 
out; whither the men went I know not; 
pursue after them quickly; for ye shall 
overtake them.’ 6But she had brought 
them up to the roof, and hid them with 
the stalks of flax, which she had 
spread out upon the roof. 7And the 
men pursued after them the way to the 
Jordan unto the fords; and as soon as 
they that pursued after them were gone 
out, the gate was shut. 8And before 
they were laid down, she came up unto 
them upon the roof; 9and she said unto 
the men: ‘I know that the LORD hath 
given you the land, and that your terror 
is fallen upon us, and that all the 
inhabitants of the land melt away 
before you. 10For we have heard how 
the LORD dried up the water of the Red 
Sea before you, when ye came out of 
Egypt; and what ye did unto the two 
kings of the Amorites, that were 
beyond the Jordan, unto Sihon and to 
Og, whom ye utterly destroyed. 11And 
as soon as we had heard it, our hearts 
did melt, neither did there remain any 
more spirit in any man, because of 
you; for the LORD your God, He is God 
in heaven above, and on earth beneath. 
12Now therefore, I pray you, swear 
unto me by the LORD, since I have 
dealt kindly with you, that ye also will 
deal kindly with my father’s house—
and give me a true token—13and save 
alive my father, and my mother, and 
my brethren, and my sisters, and all 
that they have, and deliver our lives 
from death.’ 14And the men said unto 
her: ‘Our life for yours, if ye tell not 
this our business; and it shall be, when 
the LORD giveth us the land, that we 
2 




will deal kindly and truly with thee.’ 
15Then she let them down by a cord 
through the window; for her house was 
upon the side of the wall, and she 
dwelt upon the wall. 16And she said 
unto them: ‘Get you to the mountain, 
lest the pursuers light upon you; and 
hide yourselves there three days, until 
the pursuers be returned; and afterward 
may ye go your way.’ 17And the men 
said unto her: ‘We will be guiltless of 
this thine oath which thou hast made 
us to swear. 18Behold, when we come 
into the land, thou shalt bind this line 
of scarlet thread in the window which 
thou didst let us down by; and thou 
shalt gather unto thee into the house 
thy father, and thy mother, and thy 
brethren, and all thy father’s 
household. 19And it shall be, that 
whosoever shall go out of the doors of 
thy house into the street, his blood 
shall be upon his head, and we will be 
guiltless; and whosoever shall be with 
thee in the house, his blood shall be on 
our head, if any hand be upon him. 
20But if thou utter this our business, 
then we will be guiltless of thine oath 
which thou hast made us to swear.’ 
21And she said: ‘According unto your 
words, so be it.’ And she sent them 
away, and they departed; and she 
bound the scarlet line in the window. 
22And they went, and came unto the 
mountain, and abode there three days, 
until the pursuers were returned; and 
the pursuers sought them throughout 
all the way, but found them not. 
23Then the two men returned, and 
descended from the mountain, and 
passed over, and came to Joshua the 
son of Nun; and they told him all that 
had befallen them. 24And they said 
unto Joshua: ‘Truly the LORD hath 
delivered into our hands all the land; 
and moreover all the inhabitants of the 
land do melt away before us.’ 

And Joshua rose up early in the 
morning, and they removed from 
Shittim, and came to the Jordan, he 
and all the children of Israel; and they 
lodged there before they passed over. 
2And it came to pass after three days, 
that the officers went through the 
midst of the camp; 3and they 
commanded the people, saying: ‘When 
ye see the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD your God, and the priests the 
Levites bearing it, then ye shall 
remove from your place, and go after 
it. 4Yet there shall be a space between 
you and it, about two thousand cubits 
by measure; come not near unto it, that 
ye may know the way by which ye 
must go; for ye have not passed this 
way heretofore.’ 

5And Joshua said unto the people: 
‘Sanctify yourselves; for to-morrow 
the LORD will do wonders among you.’ 
6And Joshua spoke unto the priests, 
saying: ‘Take up the ark of the 
covenant, and pass on before the 
people.’ And they took up the ark of 
the covenant, and went before the 
people. 

7And the LORD said unto Joshua: 
‘This day will I begin to magnify thee 
in the sight of all Israel, that they may 
3 




know that, as I was with Moses, so I 
will be with thee. 8And thou shalt 
command the priests that bear the ark 
of the covenant, saying: When ye are 
come to the brink of the waters of the 
Jordan, ye shall stand still in the 
Jordan.’ 

9And Joshua said unto the children 
of Israel: ‘Come hither, and hear the 
words of the LORD your God.’ 10And 
Joshua said: ‘Hereby ye shall know 
that the living God is among you, and 
that He will without fail drive out from 
before you the Canaanite, and the 
Hittite, and the Hivite, and the 
Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the 
Amorite, and the Jebusite. 11Behold, 
the ark of the covenant of the Lord of 
all the earth passeth on before you 
over the Jordan. 12Now therefore take 
you twelve men out of the tribes of 
Israel, for every tribe a man. 13And it 
shall come to pass, when the soles of 
the feet of the priests that bear the ark 
of the LORD, the Lord of all the earth, 
shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, 
that the waters of the Jordan shall be 
cut off, even the waters that come 
down from above; and they shall stand 
in one heap.’ 14And it came to pass, 
when the people removed from their 
tents, to pass over the Jordan, the 
priests that bore the ark of the 
covenant being before the people; 
15and when they that bore the ark were 
come unto the Jordan, and the feet of 
the priests that bore the ark were 
dipped in the brink of the water—for 
the Jordan overfloweth all its banks all 
the time of harvest—16that the waters 
which came down from above stood, 
and rose up in one heap, a great way 
off from Adam, the city that is beside 
Zarethan; and those that went down 
toward the sea of the Arabah, even the 
Salt Sea, were wholly cut off; and the 
people passed over right against 
Jericho. 17And the priests that bore the 
ark of the covenant of the LORD stood 
firm on dry ground in the midst of the 
Jordan, while all Israel passed over on 
dry ground, until all the nation were 
passed clean over the Jordan. 

And it came to pass, when all the 
nation were clean passed over the 
Jordan, that the LORD spoke unto 
Joshua, saying: 2’Take you twelve men 
out of the people, out of every tribe a 
man, 3and command ye them, saying: 
Take you hence out of the midst of the 
Jordan, out of the place where the 
priests’feet stood, twelve stones made 
ready, and carry them over with you, 
and lay them down in the lodging-
place, where ye shall lodge this night.’ 

4Then Joshua called the twelve men, 
whom he had prepared of the children 
of Israel, out of every tribe a man; 5and 
Joshua said unto them: ‘Pass on before 
the ark of the LORD your God into the 
midst of the Jordan, and take you up 
every man of you a stone upon his 
shoulder, according unto the number 
of the tribes of the children of Israel; 
6that this may be a sign among you, 
that when your children ask in time to 
come, saying: What mean ye by these 
stones? 7then ye shall say unto them: 
4 




Because the waters of the Jordan were 
cut off before the ark of the covenant 
of the LORD; when it passed over the 
Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were 
cut off; and these stones shall be for a 
memorial unto the children of Israel 
for ever.’ 8And the children of Israel 
did so as Joshua commanded, and took 
up twelve stones out of the midst of 
the Jordan, as the LORD spoke unto 
Joshua, according to the number of the 
tribes of the children of Israel; and 
they carried them over with them unto 
the place where they lodged, and laid 
them down there. 9Joshua also set up 
twelve stones in the midst of the 
Jordan, in the place where the feet of 
the priests that bore the ark of the 
covenant stood; and they are there 
unto this day. 10And the priests that 
bore the ark stood in the midst of the 
Jordan, until every thing was finished 
that the LORD commanded Joshua to 
speak unto the people, according to all 
that Moses commanded Joshua; and 
the people hastened and passed over. 
11And it came to pass, when all the 
people were clean passed over, that the 
ark of the LORD passed on, and the 
priests, before the people. 12And the 
children of Reuben, and the children of 
Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, 
passed on armed before the children of 
Israel, as Moses spoke unto them; 
13about forty thousand ready armed for 
war passed on in the presence of the 
LORD unto battle, to the plains of 
Jericho. 

14On that day the LORD magnified 
Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and 
they feared him, as they feared Moses, 
all the days of his life. 

15And the LORD spoke unto Joshua, 
saying: 16’Command the priests that 
bear the ark of the testimony, that they 
come up out of the Jordan.’ 17Joshua 
therefore commanded the priests, 
saying: ‘Come ye up out of the 
Jordan.’ 18And it came to pass, as the 
priests that bore the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD came up out of 
the midst of the Jordan, as soon as the 
soles of the priests’feet were drawn up 
unto the dry ground, that the waters of 
the Jordan returned unto their place, 
and went over all its banks, as 
aforetime. 19And the people came up 
out of the Jordan on the tenth day of 
the first month, and encamped in 
Gilgal, on the east border of Jericho. 
20And those twelve stones, which they 
took out of the Jordan, did Joshua set 
up in Gilgal. 21And he spoke unto the 
children of Israel, saying: ‘When your 
children shall ask their fathers in time 
to come, saying: What mean these 
stones? 22then ye shall let your 
children know, saying: Israel came 
over this Jordan on dry land. 23For the 
LORD your God dried up the waters of 
Jordan from before you, until ye were 
passed over, as the LORD your God did 
to the Red Sea, which He dried up 
from before us, until we were passed 
over, 24that all the peoples of the earth 
may know the hand of the LORD, that it 


is mighty; that ye may fear the LORD 
your God for ever.’ 

5 



And it came to pass, when all the 
kings of the Amorites, that were 
beyond the Jordan westward, and all 
the kings of the Canaanites, that were 
by the sea, heard how that the LORD 
had dried up the waters of the Jordan 
from before the children of Israel, until 
they were passed over, that their heart 
melted, neither was there spirit in them 
any more, because of the children of 
Israel. 

2At that time the LORD said unto 
Joshua: ‘Make thee knives of flint, and 
circumcise again the children of Israel 
the second time.’ 3And Joshua made 
him knives of flint, and circumcised 
the children of Israel at aGibeath-ha-
araloth. 4And this is the cause why 
Joshua did circumcise: all the people 
that came forth out of Egypt, that were 
males, even all the men of war, died in 
the wilderness by the way, after they 
came forth out of Egypt. 5For all the 
people that came out were 
circumcised; but all the people that 
were born in the wilderness by the way 
as they came forth out of Egypt, had 
not been circumcised. 6For the children 
of Israel walked forty years in the 
wilderness, till all the nation, even the 
men of war that came forth out of 
Egypt, were consumed, because they 
hearkened not unto the voice of the 
LORD; unto whom the LORD swore that 
He would not let them see the land 

a That is, The hill of the foreskins. 

which the LORD swore unto their 
fathers that He would give us, a land 
flowing with milk and honey. 7And He 
raised up their children in their stead; 
them did Joshua circumcise; for they 
were uncircumcised, because they had 
not been circumcised by the way. 8And 
it came to pass, when all the nation 
were circumcised, every one of them, 
that they abode in their places in the 
camp, till they were whole. 

9And the LORD said unto Joshua: 
‘This day have I rolled away the 
reproach of Egypt from off you.’ 
Wherefore the name of that place was 
called bGilgal, unto this day. 

b That is, Rolling. 

10And the children of Israel 
encamped in Gilgal; and they kept the 
passover on the fourteenth day of the 
month at even in the plains of Jericho. 
11And they did eat of the produce of 
the land on the morrow after the 
passover, unleavened cakes and 
parched corn, in the selfsame day. 
12And the manna ceased on the 
morrow, after they had eaten of the 
produce of the land; neither had the 
children of Israel manna any more; but 
they did eat of the fruit of the land of 
Canaan that year. 

13And it came to pass, when Joshua 
was by Jericho, that he lifted up his 
eyes and looked, and, behold, there 
stood a man over against him with his 
sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua 
went unto him, and said unto him: ‘Art 
thou for us, or for our adversaries?’ 


14And he said: ‘Nay, but I am captain 
of the host of the LORD; I am now 
come.’ And Joshua fell on his face to 
the earth, and bowed down, and said 
unto him: ‘What saith my lord unto his 
servant?’ 15And the captain of the 
LORD’S host said unto Joshua: ‘Put off 
thy shoe from off thy foot; for the 
place whereon thou standest is holy.’ 
And Joshua did so. 

Now Jericho was straitly shut up 
because of the children of Israel: 
none went out, and none came in.— 
2And the LORD said unto Joshua: ‘See, 
I have given into thy hand Jericho, and 
the king thereof, even the mighty men 
of valour. 3And ye shall compass the 
city, all the men of war, going about 
the city once. Thus shalt thou do six 
days. 4And seven priests shall bear 
seven rams’horns before the ark; and 
the seventh day ye shall compass the 
city seven times, and the priests shall 
blow with the horns. 5And it shall be, 
that when they make a long blast with 
the ram’s horn, and when ye hear the 
sound of the horn, all the people shall 
shout with a great shout; and the wall 
of the city shall fall down flat, and the 
people shall go up every man straight 
before him.’ 6And Joshua the son of 
Nun called the priests, and said unto 
them: ‘Take up the ark of the 
covenant, and let seven priests bear 
seven rams’horns before the ark of the 
LORD.’ 7And he said unto the people: 
‘Pass on, and compass the city, and let 
the armed body pass on before the ark 
of the LORD.’ 8And it was so, that when 
Joshua had spoken unto the people, the 
seven priests bearing the seven 
rams’horns before the LORD passed on, 
and blew with the horns; and the ark of 
the covenant of the LORD followed 
them. 9And the armed men went 
before the priests that blew the horns, 
and the rearward went after the ark, 
[the priests] blowing with the horns 
continually. 10And Joshua commanded 
the people, saying: ‘Ye shall not shout, 
nor let your voice be heard, neither 
shall any word proceed out of your 
mouth, until the day I bid you shout; 
then shall ye shout.’ 11So he caused the 
ark of the LORD to compass the city, 
going about it once; and they came 
into the camp, and lodged in the camp. 
12And Joshua rose early in the 
morning, and the priests took up the 
ark of the LORD. 13And the seven 
priests bearing the seven rams’horns 
before the ark of the LORD went on 
continually, and blew with the horns; 
and the armed men went before them; 
and the rearward came after the ark of 
the LORD, [the priests] blowing with 
the horns continually. 14And the 
second day they compassed the city 
once, and returned into the camp; so 
they did six days. 15And it came to 
pass on the seventh day, that they rose 
early at the dawning of the day, and 
compassed the city after the same 
manner seven times; only on that day 
they compassed the city seven times. 
16And it came to pass at the seventh 
time, when the priests blew with the 
horns, that Joshua said unto the 
6 




people: ‘Shout; for the LORD hath 
given you the city. 17And the city shall 
be devoted, even it and all that is 
therein, to the LORD; only Rahab the 
harlot shall live, she and all that are 
with her in the house, because she hid 
the messengers that we sent. 18And ye, 
in any wise keep yourselves from the 
devoted thing, lest ye make yourselves 
accursed by taking of the devoted 
thing, so should ye make the camp of 
Israel accursed, and trouble it. 19But all 
the silver, and gold, and vessels of 
brass and iron, are holy unto the LORD; 
they shall come into the treasury of the 
LORD.’ 20So the people shouted, and 
[the priests] blew with the horns. And 
it came to pass, when the people heard 
the sound of the horn, that the people 
shouted with a great shout, and the 
wall fell down flat, so that the people 
went up into the city, every man 
straight before him, and they took the 
city. 21And they utterly destroyed all 
that was in the city, both man and 
woman, both young and old, and ox, 
and sheep, and ass, with the edge of 
the sword. 22And Joshua said unto the 
two men that had spied out the land: 
‘Go into the harlot’s house, and bring 
out thence the woman, and all that she 
hath, as ye swore unto her.’ 23And the 
young men the spies went in, and 
brought out Rahab, and her father, and 
her mother, and her brethren, and all 
that she had, all her kindred also they 
brought out; and they set them without 
the camp of Israel. 24And they burnt 
the city with fire, and all that was 
therein; only the silver, and the gold, 
and the vessels of brass and of iron, 
they put into the treasury of the house 
of the LORD. 25But Rahab the harlot, 
and her father’s household, and all that 
she had, did Joshua save alive; and she 
dwelt in the midst of Israel, unto this 
day; because she hid the messengers, 
whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho. 

26And Joshua charged the people 
with an oath at that time, saying: 
‘Cursed be the man before the LORD, 
that riseth up and buildeth this city, 
even Jericho; with the loss of his first-
born shall he lay the foundation 
thereof, and with the loss of his 
youngest son shall he set up the gates 
of it.’ 

27So the LORD was with Joshua; and 
his fame was in all the land. 

But the children of Israel 
committed a trespass concerning 
the devoted thing; for Achan, the son 
of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of 
Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of 
the devoted thing; and the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against the children 
of Israel. 

2And Joshua sent men from Jericho 
to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on 
the east side of Beth-el, and spoke 
unto them, saying: ‘Go up and spy out 
the land.’ And the men went up and 
spied out Ai. 3And they returned to 
Joshua, and said unto him: ‘Let not all 
the people go up; but let about two or 
three thousand men go up and smite 
Ai; make not all the people to toil 
thither; for they are but few.’ 4So there 
7 




went up thither of the people about 
three thousand men; and they fled 
before the men of Ai. 5And the men of 
Ai smote of them about thirty and six 
men; and they chased them from 
before the gate even unto Shebarim, 
and smote them at the descent; and the 
hearts of the people melted, and 
became as water. 6And Joshua rent his 
clothes, and fell to the earth upon his 
face before the ark of the LORD until 
the evening, he and the elders of 
Israel; and they put dust upon their 
heads. 7And Joshua said: ‘Alas, O 
Lord GOD, wherefore hast Thou at all 
brought this people over the Jordan, to 
deliver us into the hand of the 
Amorites, to cause us to perish? would 
that we had been content and dwelt 
beyond the Jordan! 8Oh, Lord, what 
shall I say, after that Israel hath turned 
their backs before their enemies! 9For 
when the Canaanites and all the 
inhabitants of the land hear of it, they 
will compass us round, and cut off our 
name from the earth; and what wilt 
Thou do for Thy great name?’ 

10And the LORD said unto Joshua: 
‘Get thee up; wherefore, now, art thou 
fallen upon thy face? 11Israel hath 
sinned; yea, they have even 
transgressed My covenant which I 
commanded them; yea, they have even 
taken of the devoted thing; and have 
also stolen, and dissembled also, and 
they have even put it among their own 
stuff. 12Therefore the children of Israel 
cannot stand before their enemies, they 
turn their backs before their enemies, 
because they are become accursed; I 
will not be with you any more, except 
ye destroy the accursed from among 
you. 13Up, sanctify the people, and 
say: Sanctify yourselves against 
tomorrow; for thus saith the LORD, the 
God of Israel: There is a curse in the 
midst of thee, O Israel; thou canst not 
stand before thine enemies, until ye 
take away the accursed thing from 
among you. 14In the morning therefore 
ye shall draw near by your tribes; and 
it shall be, that the tribe which the 
LORD taketh shall come near by 
families; and the family which the 
LORD shall take shall come near by 
households; and the household which 
the LORD shall take shall come near 
man by man. 15And it shall be that he 
that is taken with the devoted thing 
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that 
he hath; because he hath transgressed 
the covenant of the LORD, and because 
he hath wrought a wanton deed in 
Israel.’ 

16So Joshua rose up early in the 
morning, and brought Israel near by 
their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was 
taken. 17And he brought near the 
family of Judah; and he took the 
family of the Zerahites. And he 
brought near the family of the 
Zerahites man by man; and Zabdi was 
taken. 18And he brought near his 
household man by man; and Achan, 
the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the 
son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was 
taken. 19And Joshua said unto Achan: 
‘My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the 


LORD, the God of Israel, and make 
confession unto Him; and tell me now 
what thou hast done; hide nothing 
from me.’ 20And Achan answered 
Joshua, and said: ‘Of a truth I have 
sinned against the LORD, the God of 
Israel, and thus and thus have I done. 
21When I saw among the spoil a 
goodly Shinar mantle, and two 
hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge 
of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I 
coveted them, and took them; and, 
behold, they are hid in the earth in the 
midst of my tent, and the silver under 
it.’ 22So Joshua sent messengers, and 
they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it 
was hid in his tent, and the silver under 
it. 23And they took them from the 
midst of the tent, and brought them 
unto Joshua, and unto all the children 
of Israel; and they laid them down 
before the LORD. 24And Joshua, and all 
Israel with him, took Achan the son of 
Zerah, and the silver, and the mantle, 
and the wedge of gold, and his sons, 
and his daughters, and his oxen, and 
his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, 
and all that he had; and they brought 
them up unto the valley of Achor. 
25And Joshua said: ‘Why hast thou 
troubled us? the LORD shall trouble 
thee this day.’ And all Israel stoned 
him with stones; and they burned them 
with fire, and stoned them with stones. 
26And they raised over him a great 
heap of stones, unto this day; and the 
LORD turned from the fierceness of His 
anger. Wherefore the name of that 
place was called The valley of aAchor, 
unto this day. 

a That is, Troubling. 

8 



And the LORD said unto Joshua: 
‘Fear not, neither be thou 
dismayed; take all the people of war 
with thee, and arise, go up to Ai; see, I 
have given into thy hand the king of 
Ai, and his people, and his city, and 
his land. 2And thou shalt do to Ai and 
her king as thou didst unto Jericho and 
her king; only the spoil thereof, and 
the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a 
prey unto yourselves; set thee an 
ambush for the city behind it.’ 3So 
Joshua arose, and all the people of 
war, to go up to Ai; and Joshua chose 
out thirty thousand men, the mighty 
men of valour, and sent them forth by 
night. 4And he commanded them, 
saying: ‘Behold, ye shall lie in ambush 
against the city, behind the city; go not 
very far from the city, but be ye all 
ready. 5And I, and all the people that 
are with me, will approach unto the 
city; and it shall come to pass, when 
they come out against us, as at the 
first, that we will flee before them. 
6And they will come out after us, till 
we have drawn them away from the 
city; for they will say: They flee before 
us, as at the first; so we will flee 
before them. 7And ye shall rise up 
from the ambush, and take possession 
of the city; for the LORD your God will 
deliver it into your hand. 8And it shall 
be, when ye have seized upon the city, 
that ye shall set the city on fire; 


according to the word of the LORD 
shall ye do; see, I have commanded 
you.’ 9And Joshua sent them forth; and 
they went to the ambushment, and 
abode between Beth-el and Ai, on the 
west side of Ai; but Joshua lodged that 
night among the people. 

10And Joshua rose up early in the 
morning, and numbered the people, 
and went up, he and the elders of 
Israel, before the people to Ai. 11And 
all the people, even the men of war 
that were with him, went up, and drew 
nigh, and came before the city, and 
pitched on the north side of Ai—now 
there was a valley between him and 
Ai. 12And he took about five thousand 
men, and set them in ambush between 
Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai. 
13So the people set themselves in 
array, even all the host that was on the 
north of the city, their rear lying in 
wait on the west of the city; and 
Joshua went that night into the midst 
of the vale. 14And it came to pass, 
when the king of Ai saw it, that the 
men of the city hastened and rose up 
early and went out against Israel to 
battle, he and all his people, at the time 
appointed, in front of the Arabah; but 
he knew not that there was an ambush 
against him behind the city. 15And 
Joshua and all Israel made as if they 
were beaten before them, and fled by 
the way of the wilderness. 16And all 
the people that were in Ai were called 
together to pursue after them; and they 
pursued after Joshua, and were drawn 
away from the city. 17And there was 
not a man left in Ai or Beth-el, that 
went not out after Israel; and they left 
the city open, and pursued after Israel. 

18And the LORD said unto Joshua: 
‘Stretch out the javelin that is in thy 
hand toward Ai; for I will give it into 
thy hand.’ And Joshua stretched out 
the javelin that was in his hand toward 
the city. 19And the ambush arose 
quickly out of their place, and they ran 
as soon as he had stretched out his 
hand, and entered into the city, and 
took it; and they hastened and set the 
city on fire. 20And when the men of Ai 
looked behind them, they saw, and, 
behold, the smoke of the city ascended 
up to heaven, and they had no power 
to flee this way or that way; and the 
people that fled to the wilderness 
turned back upon the pursuers. 21And 
when Joshua and all Israel saw that the 
ambush had taken the city, and that the 
smoke of the city ascended, then they 
turned back, and slew the men of Ai. 
22And the other came forth out of the 
city against them; so they were in the 
midst of Israel, some on this side, and 
some on that side; and they smote 
them, so that they let none of them 
remain or escape. 23And the king of Ai 
they took alive, and brought him to 
Joshua. 

24And it came to pass, when Israel 
had made an end of slaying all the 
inhabitants of Ai in the field, even in 
the wilderness wherein they pursued 
them, and they were all fallen by the 
edge of the sword, until they were 
consumed, that all Israel returned unto 


Ai, and smote it with the edge of the 
sword. 25And all that fell that day, both 
of men and women, were twelve 
thousand, even all the men of Ai. 26For 
Joshua drew not back his hand, 
wherewith he stretched out the javelin, 
until he had utterly destroyed all the 
inhabitants of Ai. 27Only the cattle and 
the spoil of that city Israel took for a 
prey unto themselves, according unto 
the word of the LORD which He 
commanded Joshua. 28So Joshua burnt 
Ai, and made it a heap for ever, even a 
desolation, unto this day. 29And the 
king of Ai he hanged on a tree until the 
eventide; and at the going down of the 
sun Joshua commanded, and they took 
his carcass down from the tree, and 
cast it at the entrance of the gate of the 
city, and raised thereon a great heap of 
stones, unto this day. 

30Then Joshua built an altar unto the 
LORD, the God of Israel, in mount Ebal, 
31as Moses the servant of the LORD 
commanded the children of Israel, as it 
is written in the book of the law of 
Moses, an altar of unhewn stones, 
upon which no man had lifted up any 
iron; and they offered thereon burnt-
offerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed 
peace-offerings. 32And he wrote there 
upon the stones a copy of the law of 
Moses, which he wrote before the 
children of Israel. 33And all Israel, and 
their elders and officers, and their 
judges, stood on this side the ark and 
on that side before the priests the 
Levites, that bore the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, as well the 
stranger as the home-born; half of 
them in front of mount Gerizim and 
half of them in front of mount Ebal; as 
Moses the servant of the LORD had 
commanded at the first, that they 
should bless the people of Israel. 
34And afterward he read all the words 
of the law, the blessing and the curse, 
according to all that is written in the 
book of the law. 35There was not a 
word of all that Moses commanded, 
which Joshua read not before all the 
assembly of Israel, and the women, 
and the little ones, and the strangers 
that walked among them. 

And it came to pass, when all the 
kings that were beyond the 
Jordan, in the hill-country, and in the 
Lowland, and on all the shore of the 
Great Sea in front of Lebanon, the 
Hittite, and the Amorite, the 
Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, 
and the Jebusite, heard thereof, 2that 
they gathered themselves together, to 
fight with Joshua and with Israel, with 
one accord. 

3But when the inhabitants of Gibeon 
heard what Joshua had done unto 
Jericho and to Ai, 4they also did work 
wilily, and went and made as if they 
had been ambassadors, and took old 
sacks upon their asses, and wine skins, 
worn and rent and patched up; 5and 
worn shoes and clouted upon their 
feet, and worn garments upon them; 
and all the bread of their provision was 
dry and was become crumbs. 6And 
they went to Joshua unto the camp at 
Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the 
9 




men of Israel: ‘We are come from a far 
country; now therefore make ye a 
covenant with us.’ 7And the men of 
Israel said unto the Hivites: 
‘Peradventure ye dwell among us; and 
how shall we make a covenant with 
you?’ 8And they said unto Joshua: ‘We 
are thy servants.’ And Joshua said unto 
them: ‘Who are ye? and from whence 
come ye?’ 9And they said unto him: 
‘From a very far country thy servants 
are come because of the name of the 
LORD thy God; for we have heard the 
fame of Him, and all that He did in 
Egypt, 10and all that He did to the two 
kings of the Amorites, that were 
beyond the Jordan, to Sihon king of 
Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, 
who was at Ashtaroth. 11And our 
elders and all the inhabitants of our 
country spoke to us, saying: Take 
provision in your hand for the journey, 
and go to meet them, and say unto 
them: We are your servants; and now 
make ye a covenant with us. 12This our 
bread we took hot for our provision 
out of our houses on the day we came 
forth to go unto you; but now, behold, 
it is dry, and is become crumbs. 13And 
these wine-skins, which we filled, 
were new; and, behold, they are rent. 
And these our garments and our shoes 
are worn by reason of the very long 
journey.’ 14And the men took of their 
provision, and asked not counsel at the 
mouth of the LORD. 15And Joshua made 
peace with them, and made a covenant 
with them, to let them live; and the 
princes of the congregation swore unto 
them. 

16And it came to pass at the end of 
three days after they had made a 
covenant with them, that they heard 
that they were their neighbours, and 
that they dwelt among them. 17And the 
children of Israel journeyed, and came 
unto their cities on the third day. Now 
their cities were Gibeon, and 
Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kiriath-
jearim. 18And the children of Israel 
smote them not, because the princes of 
the congregation had sworn unto them 
by the LORD, the God of Israel. And all 
the congregation murmured against the 
princes. 19But all the princes said unto 
all the congregation: ‘We have sworn 
unto them by the LORD, the God of 
Israel; now therefore we may not 
touch them. 20This we will do to them, 
and let them live; lest wrath be upon 
us, because of the oath which we 
swore unto them.’ 21And the princes 
said concerning them: ‘Let them live’; 
so they became hewers of wood and 
drawers of water unto all the 
congregation, as the princes had 
spoken concerning them. 22And Joshua 
called for them, and he spoke unto 
them, saying: ‘Wherefore have ye 
beguiled us, saying: We are very far 
from you, when ye dwell among us? 
23Now therefore ye are cursed, and 
there shall never fail to be of you 
bondmen, both hewers of wood and 
drawers of water for the house of my 
God.’ 24And they answered Joshua, 
and said: ‘Because it was certainly told 


thy servants, how that the LORD thy 
God commanded His servant Moses to 
give you all the land, and to destroy all 
the inhabitants of the land from before 
you; therefore we were sore afraid for 
our lives because of you, and have 
done this thing. 25And now, behold, we 
are in thy hand: as it seemeth good and 
right unto thee to do unto us, do.’ 
26And so did he unto them, and 
delivered them out of the hand of the 
children of Israel, that they slew them 
not. 27And Joshua made them that day 
hewers of wood and drawers of water 
for the congregation, and for the altar 
of the LORD, unto this day, in the place 
which He should choose. 

Now it came to pass, when 
Adoni-zedek king of 
Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken 
Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he 
had done to Jericho and her king, so he 
had done to Ai and her king; and how 
the inhabitants of Gibeon had made 
peace with Israel, and were among 
them; 2that they feared greatly, 
because Gibeon was a great city, as 
one of the royal cities, and because it 
was greater than Ai, and all the men 
thereof were mighty. 3Wherefore 
Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent 
unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto 
Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto 
Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir 
king of Eglon, saying: 4’Come up unto 
me, and help me, and let us smite 
Gibeon; for it hath made peace with 
Joshua and with the children of Israel.’ 
5Therefore the five kings of the 
Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the 
king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, 
the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, 
gathered themselves together, and 
went up, they and all their hosts, and 
encamped against Gibeon, and made 
war against it. 6And the men of Gibeon 
sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, 
saying: ‘Slack not thy hands from thy 
servants; come up to us quickly, and 
save us, and help us; for all the kings 
of the Amorites that dwell in the hill-
country are gathered together against 
us.’ 7So Joshua went up from Gilgal, 
he, and all the people of war with him, 
and all the mighty men of valour. 

8And the LORD said unto Joshua: 
‘Fear them not; for I have delivered 
them into thy hand; there shall not a 
man of them stand against thee.’ 
9Joshua therefore came upon them 
suddenly; for he went up from Gilgal 
all the night. 10And the LORD 
discomfited them before Israel, and 
slew them with a great slaughter at 
Gibeon; and they chased them by the 
way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and 
smote them to Azekah, and unto 
Makkedah. 11And it came to pass, as 
they fled from before Israel, while they 
were at the descent of Beth-horon, that 
the LORD cast down great stones from 
heaven upon them unto Azekah, and 
they died; they were more who died 
with the hailstones than they whom the 
children of Israel slew with the sword. 

12Then spoke Joshua to the LORD in 
the day when the LORD delivered up 
the Amorites before the children of 
10 




Israel; and he said in the sight of 
Israel: 

‘Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; 

And thou, Moon, in the valley of 
Aijalon.’ 

13And the sun stood still, and the 
moon stayed, 

Until the nation had avenged 
themselves of their enemies. 

Is not this written in the book of 
Jashar? And the sun stayed in the 
midst of heaven, and hasted not to go 
down about a whole day. 14And there 
was no day like that before it or after 
it, that the LORD hearkened unto the 
voice of a man; for the LORD fought for 
Israel. 

15And Joshua returned, and all Israel 
with him, unto the camp to Gilgal. 

16And these five kings fled, and hid 
themselves in the cave at Makkedah. 
17And it was told Joshua, saying: ‘The 
five kings are found, hidden in the 
cave at Makkedah.’ 18And Joshua said: 
‘Roll great stones unto the mouth of 
the cave, and set men by it to keep 
them; 19but stay not ye; pursue after 
your enemies, and smite the hindmost 
of them; suffer them not to enter into 
their cities; for the LORD your God hath 
delivered them into your hand.’ 20And 
it came to pass, when Joshua and the 
children of Israel had made an end of 
slaying them with a very great 
slaughter, till they were consumed, and 
the remnant which remained of them 
had entered into the fortified cities, 
21that all the people returned to the 
camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace; 
none whetted his tongue against any of 
the children of Israel. 22Then said 
Joshua: ‘Open the mouth of the cave, 
and bring forth those five kings unto 
me out of the cave.’ 23And they did so, 
and brought forth those five kings unto 
him out of the cave, the king of 
Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the 
king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, 
the king of Eglon. 24And it came to 
pass, when they brought forth those 
kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called 
for all the men of Israel, and said unto 
the chiefs of the men of war that went 
with him: ‘Come near, put your feet 
upon the necks of these kings.’ And 
they came near, and put their feet upon 
the necks of them. 25And Joshua said 
unto them: ‘Fear not, nor be dismayed; 
be strong and of good courage; for 
thus shall the LORD do to all your 
enemies against whom ye fight.’ 26And 
afterward Joshua smote them, and put 
them to death, and hanged them on 
five trees; and they were hanging upon 
the trees until the evening. 27And it 
came to pass at the time of the going 
down of the sun, that Joshua 
commanded, and they took them down 
off the trees, and cast them into the 
cave wherein they had hidden 
themselves, and laid great stones on 
the mouth of the cave, unto this very 
day. 

28And Joshua took Makkedah on 
that day, and smote it with the edge of 
the sword, and the king thereof; he 
utterly destroyed them and all the 
souls that were therein, he left none 


remaining; and he did to the king of 
Makkedah as he had done unto the 
king of Jericho. 

29And Joshua passed from 
Makkedah, and all Israel with him, 
unto Libnah, and fought against 
Libnah. 30And the LORD delivered it 
also, and the king thereof, into the 
hand of Israel; and he smote it with the 
edge of the sword, and all the souls 
that were therein; he left none 
remaining in it; and he did unto the 
king thereof as he had done unto the 
king of Jericho. 

31And Joshua passed from Libnah, 
and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, 
and encamped against it, and fought 
against it. 32And the LORD delivered 
Lachish into the hand of Israel, and he 
took it on the second day, and smote it 
with the edge of the sword, and all the 
souls that were therein, according to 
all that he had done to Libnah. 

33Then Horam king of Gezer came 
up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote 
him and his people, until he had left 
him none remaining. 

34And Joshua passed from Lachish, 
and all Israel with him, unto Eglon; 
and they encamped against it, and 
fought against it. 35And they took it on 
that day, and smote it with the edge of 
the sword, and all the souls that were 
therein he utterly destroyed that day, 
according to all that he had done to 
Lachish. 

36And Joshua went up from Eglon, 
and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; 
and they fought against it. 37And they 
took it, and smote it with the edge of 
the sword, and the king thereof, and all 
the cities thereof, and all the souls that 
were therein; he left none remaining, 
according to all that he had done to 
Eglon; but he utterly destroyed it, and 
all the souls that were therein. 

38And Joshua turned back, and all 
Israel with him, to Debir; and fought 
against it. 39And he took it, and the 
king thereof, and all the cities thereof; 
and they smote them with the edge of 
the sword, and utterly destroyed all the 
souls that were therein; he left none 
remaining; as he had done to Hebron, 
so he did to Debir, and to the king 
thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, 
and to the king thereof. 

40So Joshua smote all the land, the 
hill-country, and the South, and the 
Lowland, and the slopes, and all their 
kings; he left none remaining; but he 
utterly destroyed all that breathed, as 
the LORD, the God of Israel, 
commanded. 41And Joshua smote them 
from Kadesh-barnea even unto Gaza, 
and all the country of Goshen, even 
unto Gibeon. 42And all these kings and 
their land did Joshua take at one time, 
because the LORD, the God of Israel, 
fought for Israel. 43And Joshua 
returned, and all Israel with him, unto 
the camp to Gilgal. 

And it came to pass, when 
Jabin king of Hazor heard 
thereof, that he sent to Jobab king of 
Madon, and to the king of Shimron, 
and to the king of Achshaph, 2and to 
the kings that were on the north, in the 
11 




hill-country and in the Arabah south of 
Chinneroth, and in the Lowland, and 
in the regions of Dor on the west, 3to 
the Canaanite on the east and on the 
west, and the Amorite, and the Hittite, 
and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in 
the hill-country, and the Hivite under 
Hermon in the land of Mizpah. 4And 
they went out, they and all their hosts 
with them, much people, even as the 
sand that is upon the sea-shore in 
multitude, with horses and chariots 
very many. 5And all these kings met 
together, and they came and pitched 
together at the waters of Merom, to 
fight with Israel. 

6And the LORD said unto Joshua: ‘Be 
not afraid because of them; for to-
morrow at this time will I deliver them 
up all slain before Israel; thou shalt 
hough their horses, and burn their 
chariots with fire.’ 7So Joshua came, 
and all the people of war with him, 
against them by the waters of Merom 
suddenly, and fell upon them. 8And the 
LORD delivered them into the hand of 
Israel, and they smote them, and 
chased them unto great Zidon, and 
unto Misrephoth-maim, and unto the 
valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they 
smote them, until they left them none 
remaining. 9And Joshua did unto them 
as the LORD bade him; he houghed 
their horses, and burnt their chariots 
with fire. 

10And Joshua turned back at that 
time, and took Hazor, and smote the 
king thereof with the sword: for Hazor 
beforetime was the head of all those 
kingdoms. 11And they smote all the 
souls that were therein with the edge 
of the sword, utterly destroying them; 
there was none left that breathed; and 
he burnt Hazor with fire. 12And all the 
cities of those kings, and all the kings 
of them, did Joshua take, and he smote 
them with the edge of the sword, and 
utterly destroyed them; as Moses the 
servant of the LORD commanded. 13But 
as for the cities that stood on their 
mounds, Israel burned none of them, 
save Hazor only—that did Joshua 
burn. 14And all the spoil of these cities, 
and the cattle, the children of Israel 
took for a prey unto themselves; but 
every man they smote with the edge of 
the sword, until they had destroyed 
them, neither left they any that 
breathed. 15As the LORD commanded 
Moses His servant, so did Moses 
command Joshua; and so did Joshua; 
he left nothing undone of all that the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

16So Joshua took all that land, the 
hill-country, and all the South, and all 
the land of Goshen, and the Lowland, 
and the Arabah, and the hill-country of 
Israel, and the Lowland of the same; 
17from the bare mountain, that goeth 
up to Seir, even unto Baal-gad in the 
valley of Lebanon under mount 
Hermon; and all their kings he took, 
and smote them, and put them to 
death. 18Joshua made war a long time 
with all those kings. 19There was not a 
city that made peace with the children 
of Israel, save the Hivites the 
inhabitants of Gibeon; they took all in 


battle. 20For it was of the LORD to 
harden their hearts, to come against 
Israel in battle, that they might be 
utterly destroyed, that they might have 
no favour, but that they might be 
destroyed, as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

21And Joshua came at that time, and 
cut off the Anakim from the hill-
country, from Hebron, from Debir, 
from Anab, and from all the hill-
country of Judah, and from all the hill-
country of Israel; Joshua utterly 
destroyed them with their cities. 
22There was none of the Anakim left in 
the land of the children of Israel; only 
in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, did 
some remain. 23So Joshua took the 
whole land, according to all that the 
LORD spoke unto Moses; and Joshua 
gave it for an inheritance unto Israel 
according to their divisions by their 
tribes. And the land had rest from war. 

Now these are the kings of the 
land, whom the children of 
Israel smote, and possessed their land 
beyond the Jordan toward the 
sunrising, from the valley of Arnon 
unto mount Hermon, and all the 
Arabah eastward: 2Sihon king of the 
Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and 
ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge 
of the valley of Arnon, and the middle 
of the valley, and half Gilead, even 
unto the river Jabbok, the border of the 
children of Ammon; 3and the Arabah 
unto the sea of Chinneroth, eastward, 
and unto the sea of the Arabah, even 
the Salt Sea, eastward, the way to 
Beth-jeshimoth; and on the south, 
under the slopes of Pisgah; 4and the 
border of Og king of Bashan, of the 
remnant of the Rephaim, who dwelt at 
Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 5and ruled in 
mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in 
all Bashan, unto the border of the 
Geshurites and the Maacathites, and 
half Gilead, even unto the border of 
Sihon king of Heshbon. 6Moses the 
servant of the LORD and the children of 
Israel smote them; and Moses the 
servant of the LORD gave it for a 
possession unto the Reubenites, and 
the Gadites, and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh. 

7And these are the kings of the land 
whom Joshua and the children of 
Israel smote beyond the Jordan 
westward, from Baal-gad in the valley 
of Lebanon even unto the bare 
mountain, that goeth up to Seir; and 
Joshua gave it unto the tribes of Israel 
for a possession according to their 
divisions; 8in the hill-country, and in 
the Lowland, and in the Arabah, and in 
the slopes, and in the wilderness, and 
in the South; the Hittite, the Amorite, 
and the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the 
Hivite, and the Jebusite: 

9the king of Jericho, one; 

the king of Ai, which is beside Beth-
el, one; 

10the king of Jerusalem, one; 

the king of Hebron, one; 

11the king of Jarmuth, one; 

the king of Lachish, one; 

12the king of Eglon, one; 

the king of Gezer, one; 
12 




13the king of Debir, one; 

the king of Geder, one; 

14the king of Hormah, one; 

the king of Arad, one; 

15the king of Libnah, one; 

the king of Adullam, one; 

16the king of Makkedah, one; 

the king of Beth-el, one; 

17the king of Tappuah, one; 

the king of Hepher, one; 

18the king of Aphek, one; 

the king of the Sharon, one; 

19the king of Madon, one; 

the king of Hazor, one; 

20the king of Shimron-meron, one; 

the king of Achshaph, one; 

21the king of Taanach, one; 

the king of Megiddo, one; 

22the king of Kedesh, one; 

the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one; 

23the king of Dor in the region of 
Dor, one; 

the king of Goiim in the Gilgal, one; 

24the king of Tirzah, one. 

All the kings thirty and one. 

Now Joshua was old and well 
stricken in years; and the LORD 
said unto him: ‘Thou art old and well 
stricken in years, and there remaineth 
yet very much land to be possessed. 
2This is the land that yet remaineth: all 
the regions of the Philistines, and all 
the Geshurites; 3from the Shihor, 
which is before Egypt, even unto the 
border of Ekron northward—which is 
counted to the Canaanites; the five 
lords of the Philistines: the Gazite, and 
the Ashdodite, the Ashkelonite, the 
Gittite, and the Ekronite; also the 
Avvim 4on the south; all the land of the 
Canaanites, and Mearah that belongeth 
to the Zidonians, unto Aphek, to the 
border of the Amorites; 5and the land 
of the Gebalites, and all Lebanon, 
toward the sunrising, from Baal-gad 
under mount Hermon unto the 
entrance of Hamath; 6all the 
inhabitants of the hill-country from 
Lebanon unto Misrephoth-maim, even 
all the Zidonians; them will I drive out 
from before the children of Israel; only 
allot thou it unto Israel for an 
inheritance, as I have commanded 
thee. 7Now therefore divide this land 
for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh.’ 8With 
him the Reubenites and the Gadites 
received their inheritance, which 
Moses gave them, beyond the Jordan 
eastward, even as Moses the servant of 
the LORD gave them; 9from Aroer, that 
is on the edge of the valley of Arnon, 
and the city that is in the middle of the 
valley, and all the table-land from 
Medeba unto Dibon; 10and all the cities 
of Sihon king of the Amorites, who 
reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of 
the children of Ammon; 11and Gilead, 
and the border of the Geshurites and 
Maacathites, and all mount Hermon, 
and all Bashan unto Salcah; 12all the 
kingdom of Og in Bashan, who 
reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei—the 
same was left of the remnant of the 
Rephaim— for these did Moses smite, 
and drove them out. 13Nevertheless the 
children of Israel drove not out the 
Geshurites, nor the Maacathites; but 
13 




Geshur and Maacath dwelt in the 
midst of Israel unto this day. 14Only 
unto the tribe of Levi he gave no 
inheritance; the offerings of the LORD, 
the God of Israel, made by fire are his 
inheritance, as He spoke unto him. 

15And Moses gave unto the tribe of 
the children of Reuben according to 
their families. 16And their border was 
from Aroer, that is on the edge of the 
valley of Arnon, and the city that is in 
the middle of the valley, and all the 
table-land by Medeba; 17Heshbon, and 
all her cities that are in the table-land; 
Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-
baal-meon; 18and Jahaz, and 
Kedemoth, and Mephaath; 19and 
Kiriathaim, and Sibmah, and 
Zerethshahar in the mount of the 
valley; 20and Beth-peor, and the slopes 
of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth; 21and 
all the cities of the table-land, and all 
the kingdom of Sihon king of the 
Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, 
whom Moses smote with the chiefs of 
Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and 
Hur, and Reba, the princes of Sihon, 
that dwelt in the land. 22Balaam also 
the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the 
children of Israel slay with the sword 
among the rest of their slain. 23And as 
for the border of the children of 
Reuben, the Jordan was their border. 
This was the inheritance of the 
children of Reuben according to their 
families, the cities and the villages 
thereof. 

24And Moses gave unto the tribe of 
Gad, unto the children of Gad, 
according to their families. 25And their 
border was Jazer, and all the cities of 
Gilead, and half the land of the 
children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is 
before Rabbah; 26and from Heshbon 
unto Ramath-mizpeh, and Betonim; 
and from Mahanaim unto the border of 
Lidbir; 27and in the valley, Beth-
haram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, 
and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of 
Sihon king of Heshbon, the Jordan 
being the border thereof, unto the 
uttermost part of the sea of Chinnereth 
beyond the Jordan eastward. 28This is 
the inheritance of the children of Gad 
according to their families, the cities 
and the villages thereof. 

29And Moses gave inheritance unto 
the half-tribe of Manasseh; and it was 
for the half-tribe of the children of 
Manasseh according to their families. 
30And their border was from 
Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the 
kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all 
the villages of Jair, which are in 
Bashan, threescore cities; 31and half 
Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, the 
cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, 
were for the children of Machir the son 
of Manasseh, even for the half of the 
children of Machir according to their 
families. 

32These are the inheritances which 
Moses distributed in the plains of 
Moab, beyond the Jordan at Jericho, 
eastward. 33But unto the tribe of Levi 
Moses gave no inheritance; the LORD, 
the God of Israel, is their inheritance, 
as He spoke unto them. 


14 

15 



And these are the inheritances 
which the children of Israel 
took in the land of Canaan, which 
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son 
of Nun, and the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the tribes of the 
children of Israel, distributed unto 
them, 2by the lot of their inheritance, 
as the LORD commanded by the hand 
of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for 
the half-tribe.— 3For Moses had given 
the inheritance of the two tribes and 
the half-tribe beyond the Jordan; but 
unto the Levites he gave no 
inheritance among them. 4For the 
children of Joseph were two tribes, 
Manasseh and Ephraim; and they gave 
no portion unto the Levites in the land, 
save cities to dwell in, with the open 
land about them for their cattle and for 
their substance.— 5As the LORD 
commanded Moses, so the children of 
Israel did, and they divided the land. 

6Then the children of Judah drew 
nigh unto Joshua in Gilgal; and Caleb 
the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite 
said unto him: ‘Thou knowest the 
thing that the LORD spoke unto Moses 
the man of God concerning me and 
concerning thee in Kadesh-barnea. 
7Forty years old was I when Moses the 
servant of the LORD sent me from 
Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land; and 
I brought him back word as it was in 
my heart. 8Nevertheless my brethren 
that went up with me made the heart of 
the people melt; but I wholly followed 
the LORD my God. 9And Moses swore 
on that day, saying: Surely the land 
whereon thy foot hath trodden shall be 
an inheritance to thee and to thy 
children for ever, because thou hast 
wholly followed the LORD my God. 
10And now, behold, the LORD hath kept 
me alive, as He spoke, these forty and 
five years, from the time that the LORD 
spoke this word unto Moses, while 
Israel walked in the wilderness; and 
now, lo, I am this day fourscore and 
five years old. 11As yet I am as strong 
this day as I was in the day that Moses 
sent me; as my strength was then, even 
so is my strength now, for war, and to 
go out and to come in. 12Now therefore 
give me this mountain, whereof the 
LORD spoke in that day; for thou 
heardest in that day how the Anakim 
were there, and cities great and 
fortified; it may be that the LORD will 
be with me, and I shall drive them out, 
as the LORD spoke.’ 13And Joshua 
blessed him; and he gave Hebron unto 
Caleb the son of Jephunneh for an 
inheritance. 14Therefore Hebron 
became the inheritance of Caleb the 
son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, unto 
this day; because that he wholly 
followed the LORD, the God of Israel. 
15Now the name of Hebron beforetime 
was aKiriath-arba, which Arba was the 
greatest man among the Anakim. And 
the land had rest from war. 

a That is, The city of Arba. 

And the lot for the tribe of the 
children of Judah according to 
their families was unto the border of 
Edom, even to the wilderness of Zin 


southward, at the uttermost part of the 
south. 2And their south border was 
from the uttermost part of the Salt Sea, 
from the bay that looked southward. 
3And it went out southward of the 
ascent of Akrabbim, and passed along 
to Zin, and went up by the south of 
Kadesh-barnea, and passed along by 
Hezron, and went up to Addar, and 
turned about to Karka. 4And it passed 
along to Azmon, and went out at the 
Brook of Egypt; and the goings out of 
the border were at the sea; this shall be 
your south border. 5And the east 
border was the Salt Sea, even unto the 
end of the Jordan. And the border of 
the north side was from the bay of the 
sea at the end of the Jordan. 6And the 
border went up to Beth-hoglah, and 
passed along by the north of Beth-
arabah; and the border went up to the 
Stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. 
7And the border went up to Debir from 
the valley of Achor, and so northward, 
looking toward Gilgal, that is over 
against the ascent of Adummim, which 
is on the south side of the brook; and 
the border passed along to the waters 
of En-shemesh, and the goings out 
thereof were at En-rogel. 8And the 
border went up by the Valley of the 
son of Hinnom unto the side of the 
Jebusite southward—the same is 
Jerusalem—and the border went up to 
the top of the mountain that lieth 
before the Valley of Hinnom 
westward, which is at the uttermost 
part of the vale of Rephaim northward. 
9And the border was drawn from the 
top of the mountain unto the fountain 
of the waters of Nephtoah, and went 
out to the cities of mount Ephron; and 
the border was drawn to Baalah—the 
same is Kiriath-jearim. 10And the 
border turned about from Baalah 
westward unto mount Seir, and passed 
along unto the side of mount Jearim on 
the north—the same is Chesalon—and 
went down to Beth-shemesh, and 
passed along by Timnah. 11And the 
border went out unto the side of Ekron 
northward; and the border was drawn 
to Shikkeron, and passed along to 
mount Baalah, and went out at 
Jabneel; and the goings out of the 
border were at the sea. 12And as for the 
west border, the Great Sea was the 
border thereof. This is the border of 
the children of Judah round about 
according to their families. 

13And unto Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh he gave a portion among 
the children of Judah, according to the 
commandment of the LORD to Joshua, 
even Kiriath-arba, which Arba was the 
father of Anak—the same is Hebron. 
14And Caleb drove out thence the three 
sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, 
and Talmai, the children of Anak. 
15And he went up thence against the 
inhabitants of Debir—now the name of 
Debir beforetime was Kiriath-sepher. 
16And Caleb said: ‘He that smiteth 
Kiriath-sepher, and taketh it, to him 
will I give Achsah my daughter to 
wife.’ 17And Othniel the son of Kenaz, 
the brother of Caleb, took it; and he 
gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. 


18And it came to pass, when she came 
unto him, that she persuaded him to 
ask of her father a field; and she 
alighted from off her ass; and Caleb 
said unto her: ‘What wouldest thou?’ 
19And she said: ‘Give me a blessing; 
for that thou hast set me in the 
aSouthland, give me therefore springs 
of water.’ And he gave her the Upper 
Springs and the Nether Springs. 

a Heb. Land of Negeb, that is, a dry 
land. 

20This is the inheritance of the tribe 
of the children of Judah according to 
their families. 

21And the cities at the uttermost part 
of the tribe of the children of Judah 
toward the border of Edom in the 
South were Kabzeel, and Eder, and 
Jagur; 22and Kinah, and Dimonah, and 
Adadah; 23and Kedesh, and Hazor, and 
Ithnan; 24Ziph, and Telem, and 
Bealoth; 25and Hazor, and Hadattah, 
and Kerioth, and Hezron—the same is 
Hazor; 26Amam, and Shema, and 
Moladah; 27and Hazar-gaddah, and 
Heshmon, and Beth-pelet; 28and 
Hazar-shual, and Beer-sheba, and 
Biziothiah; 29Baalah, and Iim, and 
Ezem; 30and Eltolad, and Chesil, and 
Hormah; 31and Ziklag, and 
Madmannah, and Sansannah; 32and 
Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and 
Rimmon; all the cities are twenty and 
nine, with their villages. 

33In the Lowland: Eshtaol, and 
Zorah, and Ashnah; 34and Zanoah, and 
En-gannim, Tappuah, and Enam; 

35Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and 
Azekah; 36and Shaaraim, and 
Adithaim, and Gederah, with 
Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their 
villages. 

37Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-
gad; 38and Dilan, and Mizpeh, and 
Joktheel; 39Lachish, and Bozkath, and 
Eglon; 40and Cabbon, and Lahmas, and 
Chithlish; 41and Gederoth, Beth-dagon, 
and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen 
cities with their villages. 

42Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan; 
43and Iphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib; 
44and Keilah, and Achzib, and 
Mareshah; nine cities with their 
villages. 

45Ekron, with its towns and its 
villages; 46from Ekron even unto the 
sea, all that were by the side of 
Ashdod, with their villages. 

47Ashdod, its towns and its villages; 
Gaza, its towns and its villages; unto 
the Brook of Egypt, the Great Sea 
being the border thereof. 

48And in the hill-country: Shamir, 
and Jattir, and Socoh; 49and Dannah, 
and Kiriath-sannah—the same is 
Debir; 50and Anab, and Eshtemoh, and 
Anim; 51and Goshen, and Holon, and 
Giloh; eleven cities with their villages. 

52Arab, and Rumah, and Eshan; 
53and Janum, and Beth-tappuah, and 
Aphekah; 54and Humtah, and Kiriath-
arba—the same is Hebron, and Zior; 
nine cities with their villages. 

55Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and 
Juttah; 56and Jezreel, and Jokdeam, 


and Zanoah; 57Kain, Gibeah, and 
Timnah; ten cities with their villages. 

58Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor; 59and 
Maarath, and Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; 
six cities with their villages. 

60Kiriath-baal—the same is Kiriath-
jearim, and Rabbah; two cities with 
their villages. 

61In the wilderness: Beth-arabah, 
Middin, and Secacah; 62and Nibshan, 
and the City of Salt, and En-gedi; six 
cities with their villages. 

63And as for the Jebusites, the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children 
of Judah could not drive them out; but 
the Jebusites dwelt with the children of 
Judah at Jerusalem, unto this day. 

And the lot for the children of 
Joseph went out from the 
Jordan at Jericho, at the waters of 
Jericho on the east, going up from 
Jericho through the hill-country to the 
wilderness, even to Beth-el. 2And it 
went out from Beth-el-luz, and passed 
along unto the border of the Archites 
to Ataroth. 3And it went down 
westward to the border of the 
Japhletites, unto the border of Beth-
horon the nether, even unto Gezer; and 
the goings out thereof were at the sea. 
4And the children of Joseph, Manasseh 
and Ephraim, took their inheritance. 
5And the border of the children of 
Ephraim according to their families 
was thus; even the border of their 
inheritance eastward was Atroth-
addar, unto Beth-horon the upper. 
6And the border went out westward, 
Mich-methath being on the north; and 
the border turned about eastward unto 
Taanath-shiloh, and passed along it on 
the east of Janoah. 7And it went down 
from Janoah to Ataroth, and to Naarah, 
and reached unto Jericho, and went out 
at the Jordan. 8From Tappuah the 
border went along westward to the 
brook of Kanah; and the goings out 
thereof were at the sea. This is the 
inheritance of the tribe of the children 
of Ephraim according to their families; 
9together with the cities which were 
separated for the children of Ephraim 
in the midst of the inheritance of the 
children of Manasseh, all the cities 
with their villages. 10And they drove 
not out the Canaanites that dwelt in 
Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in the 
midst of Ephraim, unto this day, and 
became servants to do taskwork. 

 

And this was the lot for the 
tribe of Manasseh; for he was 
the first-born of Joseph. As for Machir 
the first-born of Manasseh, the father 
of Gilead, because he was a man of 
war, therefore he had Gilead and 
Bashan. 2And the lot was for the rest 
of the children of Manasseh according 
to their families; for the children of 
Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, 
and for the children of Asriel, and for 
the children of Shechem, and for the 
children of Hepher, and for the 
children of Shemida; these were the 
male children of Manasseh the son of 
Joseph according to their families. 
3But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, 
the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, 
16 

17 




the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but 
daughters; and these are the names of 
his daughters: Mahlah, and Noah, 
Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 4And they 
came near before Eleazar the priest, 
and before Joshua the son of Nun, and 
before the princes, saying: ‘The LORD 
commanded Moses to give us an 
inheritance among our brethren’; 
therefore according to the 
commandment of the LORD he gave 
them an inheritance among the 
brethren of their father. 5And there fell 
ten parts to Manasseh, beside the land 
of Gilead and Bashan, which is beyond 
the Jordan; 6because the daughters of 
Manasseh had an inheritance among 
his sons; and the land of Gilead 
belonged unto the rest of the sons of 
Manasseh. 

7And the border of Manasseh was, 
beginning from Asher, Michmethath, 
which is before Shechem; and the 
border went along to the right hand, 
unto the inhabitants of En-tappuah.— 
8The land of Tappuah belonged to 
Manasseh; but Tappuah on the border 
of Manasseh belonged to the children 
of Ephraim.— 9And the border went 
down unto the brook of Kanah, 
southward of the brook, by cities 
which belonged to Ephraim among the 
cities of Manasseh; but the border of 
Manasseh was on the north side of the 
brook; and the goings out thereof were 
at the sea: 10southward it was 
Ephraim’s, and northward it was 
Manasseh’s, and the sea was his 
border; and they reached to Asher on 
the north, and to Issachar on the east. 

11And Manasseh had in Issachar and 
in Asher Beth-shean and its towns, and 
Ibleam and its towns, and the 
inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and 
the inhabitants of En-dor and its 
towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach 
and its towns, and the inhabitants of 
Megiddo and its towns, even the three 
regions. 12Yet the children of 
Manasseh could not drive out the 
inhabitants of those cities; but the 
Canaanites were resolved to dwell in 
that land. 13And it came to pass, when 
the children of Israel were waxen 
strong, that they put the Canaanites to 
taskwork, but did not utterly drive 
them out. 

14And the children of Joseph spoke 
unto Joshua, saying: ‘Why hast thou 
given me but one lot and one part for 
an inheritance, seeing I am a great 
people, forasmuch as the LORD hath 
blessed me thus?’ 15And Joshua said 
unto them: ‘If thou be a great people, 
get thee up to the forest, and cut down 
for thyself there in the land of the 
Perizzites and of the Rephaim; since 
the hill-country of Ephraim is too 
narrow for thee.’ 16And the children of 
Joseph said: ‘The hill-country will not 
be enough for us; and all the 
Canaanites that dwell in the land of the 
valley have chariots of iron, both they 
who are in Beth-shean and its towns, 
and they who are in the valley of 
Jezreel.’ 17And Joshua spoke unto the 
house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and 


to Manasseh, saying: ‘Thou art a great 
people, and hast great power; thou 
shalt not have one lot only; 18but the 
hill-country shall be thine; for though 
it is a forest, thou shalt cut it down, 
and the goings out thereof shall be 
thine; for thou shalt drive out the 
Canaanites, though they have chariots 
of iron, and though they be strong.’ 

And the whole congregation of 
the children of Israel 
assembled themselves together at 
Shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting 
there; and the land was subdued before 
them. 2And there remained among the 
children of Israel seven tribes, which 
had not yet received their inheritance. 
3And Joshua said unto the children of 
Israel: ‘How long are ye slack to go in 
to possess the land, which the LORD, 
the God of your fathers, hath given 
you? 4Appoint for you three men for 
each tribe; and I will send them, and 
they shall arise, and walk through the 
land, and describe it according to their 
inheritance; and they shall come unto 
me. 5And they shall divide it into 
seven portions: Judah shall abide in his 
border on the south, and the house of 
Joseph shall abide in their border on 
the north. 6And ye shall describe the 
land into seven portions, and bring the 
description hither to me; and I will cast 
lots for you here before the LORD our 
God. 7For the Levites have no portion 
among you, for the priesthood of the 
LORD is their inheritance; and Gad and 
Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh 
have received their inheritance beyond 
the Jordan eastward, which Moses the 
servant of the LORD gave them.’ 

8And the men arose, and went; and 
Joshua charged them that went to 
describe the land, saying: ‘Go and 
walk through the land, and describe it, 
and come back to me, and I will cast 
lots for you here before the LORD in 
Shiloh.’ 9And the men went and 
passed through the land, and described 
it by cities into seven portions in a 
book, and they came to Joshua unto 
the camp at Shiloh. 10And Joshua cast 
lots for them in Shiloh before the 
LORD; and there Joshua divided the 
land unto the children of Israel 
according to their divisions. 

11And the lot of the tribe of the 
children of Benjamin came up 
according to their families; and the 
border of their lot went out between 
the children of Judah and the children 
of Joseph. 12And their border on the 
north side was from the Jordan; and 
the border went up to the side of 
Jericho on the north, and went up 
through the hill-country westward; and 
the goings out thereof were at the 
wilderness of Beth-aven. 13And the 
border passed along from thence to 
Luz, to the side of Luz—the same is 
Beth-el—southward; and the border 
went down to Atroth-addar, by the 
mountain that lieth on the south of 
Beth-horon the nether. 14And the 
border was drawn and turned about on 
the west side southward, from the 
mountain that lieth before Beth-horon 
southward; and the goings out thereof 
18 




were at Kiriath-baal—the same is 
Kiriath-jearim—a city of the children 
of Judah; this was the west side. 15And 
the south side was from the uttermost 
part of Kiriath-jearim, and the border 
went out westward, and went out to 
the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah. 
16And the border went down to the 
uttermost part of the mountain that 
lieth before the Valley of the son of 
Hinnom, which is in the vale of 
Rephaim northward; and it went down 
to the Valley of Hinnom, to the side of 
the Jebusite southward, and went 
down to En-rogel. 17And it was drawn 
on the north, and went out at En-
shemesh, and went out to Geliloth, 
which is over against the ascent of 
Adummim; and it went down to the 
Stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. 
18And it passed along to the side over 
against the Arabah northward, and 
went down unto the Arabah. 19And the 
border passed along to the side of 
Beth-hoglah northward; and the goings 
out of the border were at the north bay 
of the Salt Sea, at the south end of the 
Jordan; this was the south border. 
20And the Jordan was to be the border 
of it on the east side. This was the 
inheritance of the children of 
Benjamin, by the borders thereof 
round about, according to their 
families. 

21Now the cities of the tribe of the 
children of Benjamin according to 
their families were Jericho, and Beth-
hoglah, and Emek-keziz; 22and Beth-
arabah, and Zemaraim, and Beth-el; 
23and Avvim, and Parah, and Ophrah; 
24and Chephar-ammonah, and Ophni, 
and Geba; twelve cities with their 
villages: 25Gibeon, and Ramah, and 
Beeroth; 26and Mizpeh, and Chephirah, 
and Mozah; 27and Rekem, and Irpeel, 
and Taralah; 28and Zela, Eleph, and the 
Jebusite—the same is Jerusalem, 
Gibeath, and Kiriath; fourteen cities 
with their villages. This is the 
inheritance of the children of 
Benjamin according to their families. 

 

And the second lot came out 
for Simeon, even for the tribe 
of the children of Simeon according to 
their families; and their inheritance 
was in the midst of the inheritance of 
the children of Judah. 2And they had 
for their inheritance Beer-sheba with 
Sheba, and Moladah; 3and Hazarshual, 
and Balah, and Ezem; 4and Eltolad, 
and Bethul, and Hormah; 5and Ziklag, 
and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah; 
6and Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; 
thirteen cities with their villages: 7Ain, 
Rimmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four 
cities with their villages; 8and all the 
villages that were round about these 
cities to Baalath-beer, as far as Ramah 
of the South. This is the inheritance of 
the tribe of the children of Simeon 
according to their families. 9Out of the 
allotment of the children of Judah was 
the inheritance of the children of 
Simeon, for the portion of the children 
of Judah was too much for them; 
therefore the children of Simeon had 
19 




inheritance in the midst of their 
inheritance. 

10And the third lot came up for the 
children of Zebulun according to their 
families; and the border of their 
inheritance was unto Sarid. 11And their 
border went up westward, even to 
Maralah, and reached to Dabbesheth; 
and it reached to the brook that is 
before Jokneam. 12And it turned from 
Sarid eastward toward the sunrising 
unto the border of Chisloth-tabor; and 
it went out to Dobrath, and went up to 
Japhia. 13And from thence it passed 
along eastward to Gath-hepher, to 
Ethkazin; and it went out at Rimmon-
methoar unto Neah. 14And the border 
turned about it on the north to 
Hannathon; and the goings out thereof 
were at the valley of Iphtahel; 15and 
Kattath, and Nahalal, and Shimron, 
and Idalah, and Beth-lehem; twelve 
cities with their villages. 16This is the 
inheritance of the children of Zebulun 
according to their families, these cities 
with their villages. 

17The fourth lot came out for 
Issachar, even for the children of 
Issachar according to their families. 
18And their border was Jezreel, and 
Chesulloth, and Shunem; 19and 
Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath; 
20and Rabbith, and Kishion, and Ebez; 
21and Remeth, and En-gannim, and 
En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez; 22and the 
border reached to Tabor, and 
Shahazim, and Beth-shemesh; and the 
goings out of their border were at the 
Jordan; sixteen cities with their 
villages. 23This is the inheritance of the 
tribe of the children of Issachar 
according to their families, the cities 
with their villages. 

24And the fifth lot came out for the 
tribe of the children of Asher 
according to their families. 25And their 
border was Helkath, and Hali, and 
Beten, and Achshaph; 26and Allam-
melech, and Amad, and Mishal; and it 
reached to Carmel westward, and to 
Shihor-libnath. 27And it turned toward 
the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and 
reached to Zebulun and to the valley of 
Iphtahel northward at Beth-emek and 
Neiel; and it went out to Cabul on the 
left hand, 28and Ebron, and Rehob, and 
Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great 
Zidon. 29And the border turned to 
Ramah, and to the fortified city of 
Tyre; and the border turned to Hosah; 
and the goings out thereof were at the 
sea from Hebel to Achzib; 30Ummah 
also, and Aphek, and Rehob; twenty 
and two cities with their villages. 
31This is the inheritance of the tribe of 
the children of Asher according to 
their families, these cities with their 
villages. 

32The sixth lot came out for the 
children of Naphtali, even for the 
children of Naphtali according to their 
families. 33And their border was from 
Heleph, from Elon-beza-anannim, and 
Adami-nekeb, and Jabneel, unto 
Lakkum; and the goings out thereof 
were at the Jordan. 34And the border 
turned westward to Aznoth-tabor, and 
went out from thence to Hukok; and it 


reached to Zebulun on the south, and 
reached to Asher on the west, and to 
Judah at the Jordan toward the 
sunrising. 35And the fortified cities 
were Ziddim-zer, and Hammath, and 
Rakkath, and Chinnereth; 36and 
Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor; 37and 
Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor; 
38and Iron, and Migdal-el, and Horem, 
and Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; 
nineteen cities with their villages. 
39This is the inheritance of the tribe of 
the children of Naphtali according to 
their families, the cities with their 
villages. 

40The seventh lot came out for the 
tribe of the children of Dan according 
to their families. 41And the border of 
their inheritance was Zorah, and 
Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh; 42and 
Shaalabbin, and Aijalon, and Ithlah; 
43and Elon, and Timnah, and Ekron; 
44and Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and 
Baalath; 45and Jehud, and Bene-berak, 
and Gath-rimmon; 46and Me-jarkon, 
and Rakkon, with the border over 
against Joppa. 47And the border of the 
children of Dan was too strait for 
them; so the children of Dan went up 
and fought against Leshem, and took 
it, and smote it with the edge of the 
sword, and possessed it, and dwelt 
therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after 
the name of Dan their father. 48This is 
the inheritance of the tribe of the 
children of Dan according to their 
families, these cities with their 
villages. 

49When they had made an end of 
distributing the land for inheritance by 
the borders thereof, the children of 
Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua 
the son of Nun in the midst of them; 
50according to the commandment of 
the LORD they gave him the city which 
he asked, even Timnath-serah in the 
hill-country of Ephraim; and he built 
the city, and dwelt therein. 

51These are the inheritances, which 
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son 
of Nun, and the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the tribes of the 
children of Israel, distributed for 
inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the 
LORD, at the door of the tent of 
meeting. So they made an end of 
dividing the land. 

And the LORD spoke unto 
Joshua, saying: 2’Speak to the 
children of Israel, saying: Assign you 
the cities of refuge, whereof I spoke 
unto you by the hand of Moses; 3that 
the manslayer that killeth any person 
through error and unawares may flee 
thither; and they shall be unto you for 
a refuge from the avenger of blood. 
4And he shall flee unto one of those 
cities, and shall stand at the entrance 
of the gate of the city, and declare his 
cause in the ears of the elders of that 
city; and they shall take him into the 
city unto them, and give him a place, 
that he may dwell among them. 5And 
if the avenger of blood pursue after 
him, then they shall not deliver up the 
manslayer into his hand; because he 
smote his neighbour unawares, and 
20 




hated him not beforetime. 6And he 
shall dwell in that city, until he stand 
before the congregation for judgment, 
until the death of the high priest that 
shall be in those days; then may the 
manslayer return, and come unto his 
own city, and unto his own house, unto 
the city from whence he fled.’ 

7And they set apart Kedesh in 
Galilee in the hill-country of Naphtali, 
and Shechem in the hill-country of 
Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba—the same 
is Hebron—in the hill-country of 
Judah. 8And beyond the Jordan at 
Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer 
in the wilderness in the table-land out 
of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in 
Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and 
Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of 
Manasseh. 9These were the appointed 
cities for all the children of Israel, and 
for the stranger that sojourneth among 
them, that whosoever killeth any 
person through error might flee thither, 
and not die by the hand of the avenger 
of blood, until he stood before the 
congregation. 

Then came near the heads of 
fathers’houses of the Levites 
unto Eleazar the priest, and unto 
Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the 
heads of fathers’houses of the tribes of 
the children of Israel; 2and they spoke 
unto them at Shiloh in the land of 
Canaan, saying: ‘The LORD 
commanded by the hand of Moses to 
give us cities to dwell in, with the open 
land thereabout for our cattle.’ 3And 
the children of Israel gave unto the 
Levites out of their inheritance, 
according to the commandment of the 
LORD, these cities with the open land 
about them. 

4And the lot came out for the 
families of the Kohathites; and the 
children of Aaron the priest, who were 
of the Levites, had by lot out of the 
tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of 
the Simeonites, and out of the tribe of 
Benjamin, thirteen cities. 

5And the rest of the children of 
Kohath had by lot out of the families 
of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the 
tribe of Dan, and out of the half-tribe 
of Manasseh, ten cities. 

6And the children of Gershon had by 
lot out of the families of the tribe of 
Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, 
and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and 
out of the half-tribe of Manasseh in 
Bashan, thirteen cities. 

7The children of Merari according to 
their families had out of the tribe of 
Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, 
and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve 
cities. 

8And the children of Israel gave by 
lot unto the Levites these cities with 
the open land about them, as the LORD 
commanded by the hand of Moses. 

9And they gave out of the tribe of 
the children of Judah, and out of the 
tribe of the children of Simeon, these 
cities which are here mentioned by 
name. 10And they were for the children 
of Aaron, of the families of the 
Kohathites, who were of the children 
of Levi; for theirs was the first lot. 
21 




11And they gave them Kiriath-arba, 
which Arba was the father of aAnak—
the same is Hebron—in the hill-
country of Judah, with the open land 
round about it. 12But the fields of the 
city, and the villages thereof, gave 
they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for 
his possession. 

a Heb. Anok. 

13And unto the children of Aaron the 
priest they gave Hebron with the open 
land about it, the city of refuge for the 
manslayer, and Libnah with the open 
land about it; 14and Jattir with the open 
land about it, and Eshtemoa with the 
open land about it; 15and Holon with 
the open land about it, and Debir with 
the open land about it; 16and Ain with 
the open land about it, and Juttah with 
the open land about it, and Beth-
shemesh with the open land about it; 
nine cities out of those two tribes. 
17And out of the tribe of Benjamin, 
Gibeon with the open land about it, 
Geba with the open land about it; 
18Anathoth with the open land about it, 
and Almon with the open land about it; 
four cities. 19All the cities of the 
children of Aaron, the priests, were 
thirteen cities with the open land about 
them. 

20And the families of the children of 
Kohath, the Levites, even the rest of 
the children of Kohath, they had the 
cities of their lot out of the tribe of 
Ephraim. 21And they gave them 
Shechem with the open land about it in 
the hill-country of Ephraim, the city of 

refuge for the manslayer, and Gezer 
with the open land about it; 22and 
Kibzaim with the open land about it, 
and Beth-horon with the open land 
about it; four cities. 23And out of the 
tribe of Dan, Elteke with the open land 
about it, Gibbethon with the open land 
about it; 24Aijalon with the open land 
about it, Gath-rimmon with the open 
land about it; four cities. 25And out of 
the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach 
with the open land about it, and Gath-
rimmon with the open land about it; 
two cities. 26All the cities of the 
families of the rest of the children of 
Kohath were ten with the open land 
about them. 

27And unto the children of Gershon, 
of the families of the Levites, out of 
the half-tribe of Manasseh they gave 
Golan in Bashan with the open land 
about it, the city of refuge for the 
manslayer; and Beeshterah with the 
open land about it; two cities. 28And 
out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishion 
with the open land about it, Dobrath 
with the open land about it; 29Jarmuth 
with the open land about it, En-gannim 
with the open land about it; four cities. 
30And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal 
with the open land about it, Abdon 
with the open land about it; 31Helkath 
with the open land about it, and Rehob 
with the open land about it; four cities. 
32And out of the tribe of Naphtali, 
Kedesh in Galilee with the open land 
about it, the city of refuge for the 
manslayer, and Hammoth-dor with the 
open land about it, and Kartan with the 


open land about it; three cities. 33All 
the cities of the Gershonites according 
to their families were thirteen cities 
with the open land about them. 

34And unto the families of the 
children of Merari, the rest of the 
Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, 
Jokneam with the open land about it, 
and Kartah with the open land about it; 
35Dimnah with the open land about it, 
Nahalal with the open land about it; 
four cities. [a36And out of the tribe of 
Reuben, Bezer with the open land 
about it, and Jahaz with the open land 
about it; 37Kedemoth with the open 
land about it, and Mephaath with the 
open land about it; four cities.] 38And 
out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in 
Gilead with the open land about it, the 
city of refuge for the manslayer, and 
Mahanaim with the open land about it; 
39Heshbon with the open land about it, 
Jazer with the open land about it; four 
cities in all. 40All these were the cities 
of the children of Merari according to 
their families, even the rest of the 
families of the Levites; and their lot 
was twelve cities. 

a These two verses, taken from I 
Chron. Vi 63-64, are excluded from 
the text in authorative codicies and 
placed in the margin. 

41All the cities of the Levites—forty 
and eight cities with the open land 
about them—shall be in the midst of 
the possession of the children of Israel, 
42even these cities, every one with the 

open land round about it; thus it shall 
be with all these cities. 

43So the LORD gave unto Israel all 
the land which He swore to give unto 
their fathers; and they possessed it, and 
dwelt therein. 44And the LORD gave 
them rest round about, according to all 
that He swore unto their fathers; and 
there stood not a man of all their 
enemies against them; the LORD 
delivered all their enemies into their 
hand. 45There failed not aught of any 
good thing which the LORD had spoken 
unto the house of Israel; all came to 
pass. 

Then Joshua called the 
Reubenites, and the Gadites, 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh, 2and 
said unto them: ‘Ye have kept all that 
Moses the servant of the LORD 
commanded you, and have hearkened 
unto my voice in all that I commanded 
you; 3ye have not left your brethren 
these many days unto this day, but 
have kept the charge of the 
commandment of the LORD your God. 
4And now the LORD your God hath 
given rest unto your brethren, as He 
spoke unto them; therefore now turn 
ye, and get you unto your tents, unto 
the land of your possession, which 
Moses the servant of the LORD gave 
you beyond the Jordan. 5Only take 
diligent heed to do the commandment 
and the law, which Moses the servant 
of the LORD commanded you, to love 
the LORD your God, and to walk in all 
His ways, and to keep His 
commandments, and to cleave unto 
22 




Him, and to serve Him with all your 
heart and with all your soul.’ 6So 
Joshua blessed them, and sent them 
away; and they went unto their tents. 

7Now to the one half-tribe of 
Manasseh Moses had given 
inheritance in Bashan; but unto the 
other half gave Joshua among their 
brethren beyond the Jordan westward. 
Moreover when Joshua sent them 
away unto their tents, he blessed them, 
8and spoke unto them, saying: ‘Return 
with much wealth unto your tents, and 
with very much cattle, with silver, and 
with gold, and with brass, and with 
iron, and with very much raiment; 
divide the spoil of your enemies with 
your brethren.’ 

9And the children of Reuben and the 
children of Gad and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh returned, and departed from 
the children of Israel out of Shiloh, 
which is in the land of Canaan, to go 
unto the land of Gilead, to the land of 
their possession, whereof they were 
possessed, according to the 
commandment of the LORD by the hand 
of Moses. 10And when they came unto 
the region about the Jordan, that is in 
the land of Canaan, the children of 
Reuben and the children of Gad and 
the half-tribe of Manasseh built there 
an altar by the Jordan, a great altar to 
look upon. 11And the children of Israel 
heard say: ‘Behold, the children of 
Reuben and the children of Gad and 
the half-tribe of Manasseh have built 
an altar in the forefront of the land of 
Canaan, in the region about the Jordan, 
on the side that pertaineth to the 
children of Israel.’ 12And when the 
children of Israel heard of it, the whole 
congregation of the children of Israel 
gathered themselves together at 
Shiloh, to go up against them to war. 

13And the children of Israel sent 
unto the children of Reuben, and to the 
children of Gad, and to the half-tribe 
of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, 
Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest; 
14and with him ten princes, one prince 
of a fathers’house for each of the tribes 
of Israel; and they were every one of 
them head of their fathers’houses 
among the thousands of Israel. 15And 
they came unto the children of 
Reuben, and to the children of Gad, 
and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, unto 
the land of Gilead, and they spoke 
with them, saying: 16’Thus saith the 
whole congregation of the LORD: What 
treachery is this that ye have 
committed against the God of Israel, to 
turn away this day from following the 
LORD, in that ye have builded you an 
altar, to rebel this day against the 
LORD? 17Is the iniquity of Peor too little 
for us, from which we have not 
cleansed ourselves unto this day, 
although there came a plague upon the 
congregation of the LORD, 18that ye 
must turn away this day from 
following the LORD? and it will be, 
seeing ye rebel to-day against the 
LORD, that to-morrow He will be wroth 
with the whole congregation of Israel. 
19Howbeit, if the land of your 
possession be unclean, then pass ye 


over unto the land of the possession of 
the LORD, wherein the LORD’S 
tabernacle dwelleth, and take 
possession among us; but rebel not 
against the LORD, nor rebel against us, 
in building you an altar besides the 
altar of the LORD our God. 20Did not 
Achan the son of Zerah commit a 
trespass concerning the devoted thing, 
and wrath fell upon all the 
congregation of Israel? and that man 
perished not alone in his iniquity.’ 

21Then the children of Reuben and 
the children of Gad and the half-tribe 
of Manasseh answered, and spoke unto 
the heads of the thousands of Israel: 
22’God, God, the LORD, God, God, the 
LORD, He knoweth, and Israel he shall 
know; if it be in rebellion, or if in 
treachery against the LORD—save Thou 
us not this day— 23that we have built 
us an altar to turn away from following 
the LORD; or if to offer thereon burnt-
offering or meal-offering, or if to offer 
sacrifices of peace-offerings thereon, 
let the LORD Himself require it; 24and if 
we have not rather out of anxiety about 
a matter done this, saying: In time to 
come your children might speak unto 
our children, saying: What have ye to 
do with the LORD, the God of Israel? 
25for the LORD hath made the Jordan a 
border between us and you, ye 
children of Reuben and children of 
Gad; ye have no portion in the LORD; 
so might your children make our 
children cease from fearing the LORD. 
26Therefore we said: Let us now 
prepare to build us an altar, not for 
burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice; 27but 
it shall be a witness between us and 
you, and between our generations after 
us, that we may do the service of the 
LORD before Him with our burnt-
offerings, and with our sacrifices, and 
with our peace-offerings; that your 
children may not say to our children in 
time to come: Ye have no portion in 
the LORD. 28Therefore said we: It shall 
be, when they so say to us or to our 
generations in time to come, that we 
shall say: Behold the pattern of the 
altar of the LORD, which our fathers 
made, not for burnt-offering, nor for 
sacrifice; but it is a witness between us 
and you. 29Far be it from us that we 
should rebel against the LORD, and turn 
away this day from following the 
LORD, to build an altar for burnt-
offering, for meal-offering, or for 
sacrifice, besides the altar of the LORD 
our God that is before His tabernacle.’ 

30And when Phinehas the priest, and 
the princes of the congregation, even 
the heads of the thousands of Israel 
that were with him, heard the words 
that the children of Reuben and the 
children of Gad and the children of 
Manasseh spoke, it pleased them well. 
31And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the 
priest said unto the children of 
Reuben, and to the children of Gad, 
and to the children of Manasseh: ‘This 
day we know that the LORD is in the 
midst of us, because ye have not 
committed this treachery against the 
LORD; now have ye delivered the 
children of Israel out of the hand of the 


LORD.’ 32And Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar the priest, and the princes, 
returned from the children of Reuben, 
and from the children of Gad, out of 
the land of Gilead, unto the land of 
Canaan, to the children of Israel, and 
brought them back word. 33And the 
thing pleased the children of Israel; 
and the children of Israel blessed God, 
and spoke no more of going up against 
them to war, to destroy the land 
wherein the children of Reuben and 
the children of Gad dwelt. 34And the 
children of Reuben and the children of 
Gad called the altar—: ‘for it is a 
witness between us that the LORD is 
God.’ 

And it came to pass after many 
days, when the LORD had given 
rest unto Israel from all their enemies 
round about, and Joshua was old and 
well stricken in years; 2that Joshua 
called for all Israel, for their elders and 
for their heads, and for their judges 
and for their officers, and said unto 
them: ‘I am old and well stricken in 
years. 3And ye have seen all that the 
LORD your God hath done unto all 
these nations because of you; for the 
LORD your God, He it is that hath 
fought for you. 4Behold, I have allotted 
unto you for an inheritance, according 
to your tribes, these nations that 
remain, from the Jordan, with all the 
nations that I have cut off, even unto 
the Great Sea toward the going down 
of the sun. 5And the LORD your God, 
He shall thrust them out from before 
you, and drive them from out of your 
sight; and ye shall possess their land, 
as the LORD your God spoke unto you. 
6Therefore be ye very courageous to 
keep and to do all that is written in the 
book of the law of Moses, that ye turn 
not aside therefrom to the right hand or 
to the left; 7that ye come not among 
these nations, these that remain among 
you; neither make mention of the 
name of their gods, nor cause to swear 
by them, neither serve them, nor 
worship them; 8but cleave unto the 
LORD your God, as ye have done unto 
this day; 9wherefore the LORD hath 
driven out from before you great 
nations and mighty; but as for you, no 
man hath stood against you unto this 
day. 10One man of you hath chased a 
thousand; for the LORD your God, He it 
is that fought for you, as He spoke 
unto you. 11Take good heed therefore 
unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD 
your God. 12Else if ye do in any wise 
go back, and cleave unto the remnant 
of these nations, even these that 
remain among you, and make 
marriages with them, and go in unto 
them, and they to you; 13know for a 
certainty that the LORD your God will 
no more drive these nations from out 
of your sight; but they shall be a snare 
and a trap unto you, and a scourge in 
your sides, and pricks in your eyes, 
until ye perish from off this good land 
which the LORD your God hath given 
you. 14And, behold, this day I am 
going the way of all the earth; consider 
ye therefore in all your heart and in all 
your soul, that not one thing hath 
23 




failed of all the good things which the 
LORD your God spoke concerning you; 
all are come to pass unto you, not one 
thing hath failed thereof. 15And it shall 
come to pass, that as all the good 
things are come upon you of which the 
LORD your God spoke unto you, so 
shall the LORD bring upon you all the 
evil things, until He have destroyed 
you from off this good land which the 
LORD your God hath given you. 
16When ye transgress the covenant of 
the LORD your God, which He 
commanded you, and go and serve 
other gods, and worship them; then 
shall the anger of the LORD be kindled 
against you, and ye shall perish 
quickly from off the good land which 
He hath given unto you.’ 

And Joshua gathered all the 
tribes of Israel to Shechem, 
and called for the elders of Israel, and 
for their heads, and for their judges, 
and for their officers; and they 
presented themselves before God. 
2And Joshua said unto all the people: 
‘Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel: Your fathers dwelt of old time 
beyond the River, even Terah, the 
father of Abraham, and the father of 
Nahor; and they served other gods. 
3And I took your father Abraham from 
beyond the River, and led him 
throughout all the land of Canaan, and 
multiplied his seed, and gave him 
Isaac. 4And I gave unto Isaac Jacob 
and Esau; and I gave unto Esau mount 
Seir, to possess it; and Jacob and his 
children went down into Egypt. 5And I 
sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued 
Egypt, according to that which I did in 
the midst thereof; and afterward I 
brought you out. 6And I brought your 
fathers out of Egypt; and ye came unto 
the sea; and the Egyptians pursued 
after your fathers with chariots and 
with horsemen unto the Red Sea. 7And 
when they cried out unto the LORD, He 
put darkness between you and the 
Egyptians, and brought the sea upon 
them, and covered them; and your eyes 
saw what I did in Egypt; and ye dwelt 
in the wilderness many days. 8And I 
brought you into the land of the 
Amorites, that dwelt beyond the 
Jordan; and they fought with you; and 
I gave them into your hand, and ye 
possessed their land; and I destroyed 
them from before you. 9Then Balak the 
son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and 
fought against Israel; and he sent and 
called Balaam the son of Beor to curse 
you. 10But I would not hearken unto 
Balaam; therefore he even blessed 
you; so I delivered you out of his hand. 
11And ye went over the Jordan, and 
came unto Jericho; and the men of 
Jericho fought against you, the 
Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the 
Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the 
Girgashite, the Hivite, and the 
Jebusite; and I delivered them into 
your hand. 12And I sent the hornet 
before you, which drove them out 
from before you, even the two kings of 
the Amorites; not with thy sword, nor 
with thy bow. 13And I gave you a land 
whereon thou hadst not laboured, and 
24 




cities which ye built not, and ye dwell 
therein; of vineyards and olive-yards 
which ye planted not do ye eat. 14Now 
therefore fear the LORD, and serve Him 
in sincerity and in truth; and put away 
the gods which your fathers served 
beyond the River, and in Egypt; and 
serve ye the LORD. 15And if it seem evil 
unto you to serve the LORD, choose you 
this day whom ye will serve; whether 
the gods which your fathers served 
that were beyond the River, or the 
gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye 
dwell; but as for me and my house, we 
will serve the LORD.’ 

16And the people answered and said: 
‘Far be it from us that we should 
forsake the LORD, to serve other gods; 
17for the LORD our God, He it is that 
brought us and our fathers up out of 
the land of Egypt, from the house of 
bondage, and that did those great signs 
in our sight, and preserved us in all the 
way wherein we went, and among all 
the peoples through the midst of whom 
we passed; 18and the LORD drove out 
from before us all the peoples, even 
the Amorites that dwelt in the land; 
therefore we also will serve the LORD; 
for He is our God.’ 

19And Joshua said unto the people: 
‘Ye cannot serve the LORD; for He is a 
holy God; He is a jealous God; He will 
not forgive your transgression nor your 
sins. 20If ye forsake the LORD, and 
serve strange gods, then He will turn 
and do you evil, and consume you, 
after that He hath done you good.’ 

21And the people said unto Joshua: 
‘Nay; but we will serve the LORD.’ 
22And Joshua said unto the people: ‘Ye 
are witnesses against yourselves that 
ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve 
Him.—And they said: ‘We are 
witnesses.’— 23Now therefore put 
away the strange gods which are 
among you, and incline your heart 
unto the LORD, the God of Israel.’ 
24And the people said unto Joshua: 
‘The LORD our God will we serve, and 
unto His voice will we hearken.’ 

25So Joshua made a covenant with 
the people that day, and set them a 
statute and an ordinance in Shechem. 
26And Joshua wrote these words in the 
book of the law of God; and he took a 
great stone, and set it up there under 
the oak that was by the sanctuary of 
the LORD. 27And Joshua said unto all 
the people: ‘Behold, this stone shall be 
a witness against us; for it hath heard 
all the words of the LORD which He 
spoke unto us; it shall be therefore a 
witness against you, lest ye deny your 
God.’ 28So Joshua sent the people 
away, every man unto his inheritance. 

29And it came to pass after these 
things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the 
servant of the LORD, died, being a 
hundred and ten years old. 30And they 
buried him in the border of his 
inheritance in Timnath-serah, which is 
in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the 
north of the mountain of Gaash. 31And 
Israel served the LORD all the days of 
Joshua, and all the days of the elders 
that outlived Joshua, and had known 


all the work of the LORD, that He had 
wrought for Israel. 32And the bones of 
Joseph, which the children of Israel 
brought up out of Egypt, buried they in 
Shechem, in the parcel of ground 
which Jacob bought of the sons of 
Hamor the father of Shechem for a 
hundred pieces of money; and they 
became the inheritance of the children 
of Joseph. 33And Eleazar the son of 
Aaron died; and they buried him in the 
Hill of Phinehas his son, which was 
given him in mount Ephraim. 




..... 

JUDGES 

 

AND IT came to pass after the 
death of Joshua, that the children 
of Israel asked the LORD, saying: ‘Who 
shall go up for us first against the 
Canaanites, to fight against them?’ 
2And LORD said: ‘Judah shall go up; 
behold, I have delivered the land into 
his hand.’ 3And Judah said unto 
Simeon his brother: ‘Come up with me 
into my lot, that we may fight against 
the Canaanites; and I likewise will go 
with thee into thy lot.’ So Simeon 
went with him. 4And Judah went up; 
and the LORD delivered the Canaanites 
and the Perizzites into their hand; and 
they smote of them in Bezek ten 
thousand men. 5And they found 
Adoni-bezek in Bezek; and they 
fought against him, and they smote the 
Canaanites and the Perizzites. 6But 
Adoni-bezek fled; and they pursued 
after him, and caught him, and cut off 
his thumbs and his great toes. 7And 
Adoni-bezek said: ‘Threescore and ten 
kings, having their thumbs and their 
great toes cut off, gathered food under 
my table; as I have done, so God hath 
requited me.’ And they brought him to 
Jerusalem, and he died there. 

8And the children of Judah fought 
Jerusalem, and took it, and smote it 
with the edge of the sword, and set the 
city on fire. 9And afterward the 
children of Judah went down to fight 
against the Canaanites that dwelt in the 
hill-country, and in the South, and in 
the Lowland. 10And Judah went 
against the Canaanites that dwelt in 
Hebron—now the name of Hebron 
beforetime was Kiriath-arba—and they 
smote Sheshai, and Ahiman, and 
Talmai. 11And from thence he went 
against the inhabitants of Debir—now 
the name of Debir beforetime was 
Kiriath-sepher. 12And Caleb said: ‘He 
that smiteth Kiriath-sepher, and taketh 
it, to him will I give Achsah my 
daughter to wife.’ 13And Othniel the 
son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger 
brother, took it; and he gave him 
Achsah his daughter to wife. 14And it 
came to pass, when she came unto 
him, that she moved him to ask of her 
father a field; and she alighted from 
off her ass; and Caleb said unto her: 
‘What wouldest thou?’ 15And she said 
unto him: ‘Give me a blessing; for that 
thou hast set me in the Southland, give 
me therefore springs of water.’ And 
Caleb gave her the Upper Springs and 
the Nether Springs. 

16And the children of the Kenite, 
Moses’father-in-law, went up out of 
the city of palm-trees with the children 
of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, 
which is in the south of Arad; and they 
went and dwelt with the people. 17And 
Judah went with Simeon his brother, 
1 




and they smote the Canaanites that 
inhabited Zephath, and utterly 
destroyed it. And the name of the city 
was called Hormah. 18Also Judah took 
Gaza with the border thereof, and 
Ashkelon with the border thereof, and 
Ekron with the border thereof. 19And 
the LORD was with Judah; and he drove 
out the inhabitants of the hill-country; 
for he could not drive out the 
inhabitants of the valley, because they 
had chariots of iron. 20And they gave 
Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses had 
spoken; and he drove out thence the 
three sons of Anak. 21And the children 
of Benjamin did not drive out the 
Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but 
the Jebusites dwelt with the children of 
Benjamin in Jerusalem, unto this day. 

22And the house of Joseph, they also 
went up against Beth-el; and the LORD 
was with them. 23And the house of 
Joseph sent to spy out Beth-el—now 
the name of the city beforetime was 
Luz. 24And the watchers saw a man 
come forth out of the city, and they 
said unto him: ‘Show us, we pray thee, 
the entrance into the city, and we will 
deal kindly with thee.’ 25And he 
showed them the entrance into the city, 
and they smote the city with the edge 
of the sword; but they let the man go 
and all his family. 26And the man went 
into the land of the Hittites, and built a 
city, and called the name thereof Luz, 
which is the name thereof unto this 
day. 

27And Manasseh did not drive out 
the inhabitants of Beth-shean and its 
towns, nor of Taanach and its towns, 
nor the inhabitants of Dor and its 
towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam 
and its towns, nor the inhabitants of 
Megiddo and its towns; but the 
Canaanites were resolved to dwell in 
that land. 28And it came to pass, when 
Israel was waxen strong, that they put 
the Canaanites to task-work, but did in 
no wise drive them out. 

29And Ephraim drove not out the 
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the 
Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among 
them. 

30Zebulun drove not out the 
inhabitants of Kitron, nor the: 
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the 
Canaanites dwelt among them, and 
became tributary. 

31Asher drove not out the inhabitants 
of Acco, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, 
nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of 
Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob; 
32but the Asherites dwelt among the 
Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; 
for they did not drive them out. 

33Naphtali drove not out the 
inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the 
inhabitants of Beth-anath; but he dwelt 
among the Canaanites, the inhabitants 
of the land; nevertheless the 
inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of 
Beth-anath became tributary unto 
them. 

34And the Amorites forced the 
children of Dan into the hill-country; 
for they would not suffer them to come 
down to the valley. 35But the Amorites 
were resolved to dwell in Harheres, in 


Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; yet the hand 
of the house of Joseph prevailed, so 
that they became tributary. 36And the 
border of the Amorites was from the 
ascent of Akrabbim, from Sela, and 
upward. 

And the angel of the LORD came 
up from Gilgal to Bochim. And 
he said: ‘. . . I made you to go up out 
of Egypt, and have brought you unto 
the land which I swore unto your 
fathers; and I said: I will never break 
My covenant with you; 2and ye shall 
make no covenant with the inhabitants 
of this land; ye shall break down their 
altars; but ye have not hearkened unto 
My voice; what is this ye have done? 
3Wherefore I also said: I will not drive 
them out from before you; but they 
shall be unto you as snares, and their 
gods shall be a trap unto you.’ 4And it 
came to pass, when the angel of the 
LORD spoke these words unto all the 
children of Israel, that the people lifted 
up their voice, and wept. 5And they 
called the name of that place aBochim; 
and they sacrificed there unto the 
LORD. 

a That is, Weepers. 

6Now when Joshua had sent the 
people away, the children of Israel 
went every man unto his inheritance to 
possess the land. 7And the people 
served the LORD all the days of Joshua, 
and all the days of the elders that 
outlived Joshua, who had seen all the 
great work of the LORD, that He had 
wrought for Israel. 8And Joshua the 

son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, 
died, being a hundred and ten years 
old. 9And they buried him in the 
border of his inheritance in Timnath-
heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim, 
on the north of the mountain of Gaash. 
10And also all that generation were 
gathered unto their fathers; and there 
arose another generation after them, 
that knew not the LORD, nor yet the 
work which He had wrought for Israel. 

11And the children of Israel did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, and served the Baalim. 12And 
they forsook the LORD, the God of their 
fathers, who brought them out of the 
land of Egypt, and followed other 
gods, of the gods of the peoples that 
were round about them, and 
worshipped them; and they provoked 
the LORD. 13And they forsook the LORD, 
and served Baal and the Ashtaroth. 
14And the anger of the LORD was 
kindled against Israel, and He 
delivered them into the hands of 
spoilers that spoiled them, and He 
gave them over into the hands of their 
enemies round about, so that they 
could not any longer stand before their 
enemies. 15Whithersoever they went 
out, the hand of the LORD was against 
them for evil, as the LORD had spoken, 
and as the LORD had sworn unto them; 
and they were sore distressed. 16And 
the LORD raised up judges, who saved 
them out of the hand of those that 
spoiled them. 17And yet they 
hearkened not unto their judges, for 
they went astray after other gods, and 
2 




worshipped them; they turned aside 
quickly out of the way wherein their 
fathers walked, obeying the 
commandments of the LORD; they did 
not so. 18And when the LORD raised 
them up judges, then the LORD was 
with the judge, and saved them out of 
the hand of their enemies all the days 
of the judge; for it repented the LORD 
because of their groaning by reason of 
them that oppressed them and crushed 
them. 19But it came to pass, when the 
judge was dead, that they turned back, 
and dealt more corruptly than their 
fathers, in following other gods to 
serve them, and to worship them; they 
left nothing undone of their practices, 
nor of their stubborn way. 20And the 
anger of the LORD was kindled against 
Israel; and He said: ‘Because this 
nation have transgressed My covenant 
which I commanded their fathers, and 
have not hearkened unto My voice; 21I 
also will not henceforth drive out any 
from before them of the nations that 
Joshua left when he died; 22that by 
them I may prove Israel, whether they 
will keep the way of the LORD to walk 
therein, as their fathers did keep it, or 
not.’ 23So the LORD left those nations, 
without driving them out hastily; 
neither delivered He them into the 
hand of Joshua. 

Now these are the nations which 
the LORD left, to prove Israel by 
them, even as many as had not known 
all the wars of Canaan; 2only that the 
generations of the children of Israel 
might know, to teach them war, at the 
least such as beforetime knew nothing 
thereof; 3namely, the five lords of the 
Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and 
the Zidonians, and the Hivites that 
dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount 
Baal-hermon unto the entrance of 
Hamath. 4And they were there, to 
prove Israel by them, to know whether 
they would hearken unto the 
commandments of the LORD, which He 
commanded their fathers by the hand 
of Moses. 5And the children of Israel 
dwelt among the Canaanites, the 
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the 
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the 
Jebusites; 6and they took their 
daughters to be their wives, and gave 
their own daughters to their sons, and 
served their gods. 

7And the children of Israel did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, and forgot the LORD their God, 
and served the Baalim and the 
Asheroth. 8Therefore the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against Israel, and 
He gave them over into the hand of 
Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram-
naharaim; and the children of Israel 
served Cushan-rishathaim eight years. 
9And when the children of Israel cried 
unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a 
saviour to the children of Israel, who 
saved them, even Othniel the son of 
Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother. 10And 
the spirit of the LORD came upon him, 
and he judged Israel; and he went out 
to war, and the LORD delivered 
Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram into 
his hand; and his hand prevailed 
3 




against Cushan-rishathaim. 11And the 
land had rest forty years. And Othniel 
the son of Kenaz died. 

12And the children of Israel again 
did that which was evil in the sight of 
the LORD; and the LORD strengthened 
Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, 
because they had done that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD. 13And he 
gathered unto him the children of 
Ammon and Amalek; and he went and 
smote Israel, and they possessed the 
city of palm-trees. 14And the children 
of Israel served Eglon the king of 
Moab eighteen years. 15But when the 
children of Israel cried unto the LORD, 
the LORD raised them up a saviour, 
Ehud the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a 
man left-handed; and the children of 
Israel sent a present by him unto Eglon 
the king of Moab. 16And Ehud made 
him a sword which had two edges, of a 
cubit length; and he girded it under his 
raiment upon his right thigh. 17And he 
offered the present unto Eglon king of 
Moab—now Eglon was a very fat 
man. 18And when he had made an end 
of offering the present, he sent away 
the people that bore the present. 19But 
he himself turned back from the 
quarries that were by Gilgal, and said: 
‘I have a secret errand unto thee, O 
king.’ And he said: ‘Keep silence.’ 
And all that stood by him went out 
from him. 20And Ehud came unto him; 
and he was sitting by himself alone in 
his cool upper chamber. And Ehud 
said: ‘I have a message from God unto 
thee.’ And he arose out of his seat. 
21And Ehud put forth his left hand, and 
took the sword from his right thigh, 
and thrust it into his belly. 22And the 
haft also went in after the blade; and 
the fat closed upon the blade, for he 
drew not the sword out of his belly; 
and it came out behind. 23Then Ehud 
went forth into the porch, and shut the 
doors of the upper chamber upon him, 
and locked them. 24Now when he was 
gone out, his servants came; and they 
saw, and, behold, the doors of the 
upper chamber were locked; and they, 
said: ‘Surely he is covering his feet in 
the cabinet of the cool chamber.’ 
25And they tarried till they were 
ashamed; and, behold, he opened not 
the doors of the upper chamber; 
therefore they took the key, and 
opened them; and, behold, their lord 
was fallen down dead on the earth. 
26And Ehud escaped while they 
lingered, having passed beyond the 
quarries, and escaped unto Seirah. 
27And it came to pass, when he was 
come, that he blew a horn in the hill-
country of Ephraim, and the children 
of Israel went down with him from the 
hill-country, and he before them. 
28And he said unto them: ‘Follow after 
me; for the LORD hath delivered your 
enemies the Moabites into your hand.’ 
And they went down after him, and 
took the fords of the Jordan against the 
Moabites, and suffered not a man to 
pass over. 29And they smote of Moab 
at that time about ten thousand men, 
every lusty man, and every man of 
valour; and there escaped not a man. 


30So Moab was subdued that day under 
the hand of Israel. And the land had 
rest fourscore years. 

31And after him was Shamgar the 
son of Anath, who smote of the 
Philistines six hundred men with an 
ox-goad; and he also saved Israel. 

And the children of Israel again 
did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, when Ehud was 
dead. 2And the LORD gave them over 
into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, 
that reigned in Hazor; the captain of 
whose host was Sisera, who dwelt in 
Harosheth-goiim. 3And the children of 
Israel cried unto the LORD; for he had 
nine hundred chariots of iron; and 
twenty years he mightily oppressed the 
children of Israel. 

4Now Deborah, a prophetess, the 
wife of Lappidoth, she judged Israel at 
that time. 5And she sat under the palm-
tree of Deborah between Ramah and 
Beth-el in the hill-country of Ephraim; 
and the children of Israel came up to 
her for judgment. 6And she sent and 
called Barak the son of Abinoam out 
of Kedesh-naphtali, and said unto him: 
‘Hath not the LORD, the God of Israel, 
commanded, saying: Go and draw 
toward mount Tabor, and take with 
thee ten thousand men of the children 
of Naphtali and of the children of 
Zebulun? 7And I will draw unto thee to 
the brook Kishon Sisera, the captain of 
Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his 
multitude; and I will deliver him into 
thy hand. 8And Barak said unto her: ‘If 
thou wilt go with me, then I will go; 
but if thou wilt not go with me, I will 
not go.’ 9And she said: ‘I will surely 
go with thee; notwithstanding the 
journey that thou takest shall not be for 
thy honour; for the LORD will give 
Sisera over into the hand of a woman.’ 
And Deborah arose, and went with 
Barak to Kedesh. 10And Barak called 
Zebulun and Naphtali together to 
Kedesh; and there went up ten 
thousand men at his feet; and Deborah 
went up with him. 

11Now Heber the Kenite had severed 
himself from the Kenites, even from 
the children of Hobab the father-in-law 
of Moses, and had pitched his tent as 
far as Elon-bezaanannim, which is by 
Kedesh. 

12And they told Sisera that Barak the 
son of Abinoam was gone up to mount 
Tabor. 13And Sisera gathered together 
all his chariots, even nine hundred 
chariots of iron, and all the people that 
were with him, from Harosheth-goiim, 
unto the brook Kishon. 14And Deborah 
said unto Barak: ‘Up; for this is the 
day in which the LORD hath delivered 
Sisera into thy hand; is not the LORD 
gone out before thee?’ So Barak went 
down from mount Tabor, and ten 
thousand men after him. 15And the 
LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his 
chariots, and all his host, with the edge 
of the sword before Barak; and Sisera 
alighted from his chariot, and fled 
away on his feet. 16But Barak pursued 
after the chariots, and after the host, 
unto Harosheth-goiim; and all the host 
4 




of Sisera fell by the edge of the sword; 
there was not a man left. 

17Howbeit Sisera fled away on his 
feet to the tent of Jael the wife of 
Heber the Kenite; for there was peace 
between Jabin the king of Hazor and 
the house of Heber the Kenite. 18And 
Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said 
unto him: ‘Turn in, my lord, turn in to 
me; fear not.’ And he turned in unto 
her into the tent, and she covered him 
with a rug. 19And he said unto her: 
‘Give me, I pray thee, a little water to 
drink; for I am thirsty.’ And she 
opened a bottle of milk, and gave him 
drink, and covered him. 20And he said 
unto her: ‘Stand in the door of the tent, 
and it shall be, when any man doth 
come and inquire of thee, and say: Is 
there any man here? that thou shalt 
say: No.’ 21Then Jael Heber’s wife 
took a tent-pin, and took a hammer in 
her hand, and went softly unto him, 
and smote the pin into his temples, and 
it pierced through into the ground; for 
he was in a deep sleep; so he swooned 
and died. 22And, behold, as Barak 
pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet 
him, and said unto him: ‘Come, and I 
will show thee the man whom thou 
seekest.’ And he came unto her; and, 
behold, Sisera lay dead, and the tent-
pin was in his temples. 23So God 
subdued on that day Jabin the king of 
Canaan before the children of Israel. 
24And the hand of the children of Israel 
prevailed more and more against Jabin 
the king of Canaan, until they had 
destroyed Jabin king of Canaan. 

 

Then sang Deborah and Barak the 
son of Abinoam on that day, 
saying: 

2When men let grow their hair in 
Israel, 

When the people offer themselves 
willingly, 

Bless ye the LORD. 

3Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye 
princes; 

I, unto the LORD will I sing; 

I will sing praise to the LORD, the 
God of Israel. 

 

4LORD, when Thou didst go forth out 
of 

Seir, 

When Thou didst march out of the 
field of Edom, 

The earth trembled, the heavens also 
dropped, 

Yea, the clouds dropped water. 

5The mountains quaked at the 
presence of the LORD, 

Even yon Sinai at the presence of 
the LORD, the God of Israel. 

 

6In the days of Shamgar the son of 
Anath, 

In the days of Jael, the highways 
ceased, 

And the travellers walked through 
byways. 

7The rulers ceased in Israel, they 
ceased, 

Until that thou didst arise, Deborah, 

That thou didst arise a mother in 
Israel. 
5 




8They chose new gods; 

Then was war in the gates; 

Was there a shield or spear seen 

Among forty thousand in Israel? 

 

9My heart is toward the governors of 

Israel, 

That offered themselves willingly 
among the people. 

Bless ye the LORD. 

10Ye that ride on white asses, 

Ye that sit on rich cloths, 

And ye that walk by the way, tell of 
it; 

11Louder than the voice of archers, 
by the watering-troughs! 

There shall they rehearse the 
righteous acts of the LORD, 

Even the righteous acts of His rulers 
in Israel. 

Then the people of the LORD went 
down to the gates. 

 

12Awake, awake, Deborah; 

Awake, awake, utter a song; 

Arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity 

 captive, thou son of Abinoam. 

13Then made He a remnant to have 

 dominion over the nobles and the 
people; 

The LORD made me have dominion 
over the mighty. 

14Out of Ephraim came they whose 
root is in Amalek; 

After thee, Benjamin, among thy 
peoples; 

Out of Machir came down 
governors, 

And out of Zebulun they that handle 
the marshal’s staff. 

15And the princes of Issachar were 
with 

Deborah; 

As was Issachar, so was Barak; 

Into the valley they rushed forth at 
his feet. 

Among the divisions of Reuben 

There were great resolves of heart. 

16Why sattest thou among the sheep-
folds, 

To hear the pipings for the flocks? 

At the divisions of Reuben 

There were great searchings of 
heart. 

17Gilead abode beyond the Jordan; 

And Dan, why doth he sojourn by 
the ships? 

Asher dwelt at the shore of the sea, 

And abideth by its bays. 

18Zebulun is a people that jeoparded 
their lives unto the death, 

And Naphtali, upon the high places 
of the field. 

 

19The kings came, they fought; 

Then fought the kings of Canaan, 

In Taanach by the waters of 
Megiddo; 

They took no gain of money. 

20They fought from heaven, 

The stars in their courses fought 
against Sisera. 

21The brook Kishon swept them 
away, 

That ancient brook, the brook 
Kishon. 


O my soul, tread them down with 
strength. 

22Then did the horsehoofs stamp 

By reason of the prancings, the 
prancings of their mighty ones. 

23’Curse ye Meroz’, said the angel 
of the LORD, 

‘Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants 
thereof, 

Because they came not to the help 
of the LORD, 

To the help of the LORD against the 
mighty.’ 

24Blessed above women shall Jael 
be, 

The wife of Heber the Kenite, 

Above women in the tent shall she 
be blessed. 

25Water he asked, milk she gave 
him; 

In a lordly bowl she brought him 
curd. 

26Her hand she put to the tent-pin, 

And her right hand to the 
workmen’s hammer; 

And with the hammer she smote 
Sisera, she smote through his 
head, 

Yea, she pierced and struck through 
his temples. 

27At her feet he sunk, he fell, he lay; 

At her feet he sunk, he fell; 

Where he sunk, there he fell down 
dead. 

 

28Through the window she looked 
forth, and peered, 

The mother of Sisera, through the 
lattice: 

‘Why is his chariot so long in 
coming? 

Why tarry the wheels of his 
chariots? 

29The wisest of her princesses 
answer her, 

Yea, she returneth answer to herself: 

30’Are they not finding, are they not 

 dividing the spoil? 

A damsel, two damsels to every 
man; 

To Sisera a spoil of dyed garments, 

A spoil of dyed garments of 
embroidery, 

Two dyed garments of broidery for 
the neck of every spoiler?’ 

 

31So perish all Thine enemies, O 
LORD; 

But they that love Him be as the sun 
when he goeth forth in his might. 

And the land had rest forty years. 

And the children of Israel did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD; and the LORD delivered them 
into the hand of Midian seven years. 
2And the hand of Midian prevailed 
against Israel; and because of Midian 
the children of Israel made them the 
dens which are in the mountains, and 
the caves, and the strongholds. 3And so 
it was, when Israel had sown, that the 
Midianites came up, and the 
Amalekites, and the children of the 
east; they came up against them; 4and 
they encamped against them, and 
destroyed the produce of the earth, till 
thou come unto Gaza, and left no 
sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor 
6 




ox, nor ass. 5For they came up with 
their cattle and their tents, and they 
came in as locusts for multitude; both 
they and their camels were without 
number; and they came into the land to 
destroy it. 6And Israel was brought 
very low because of Midian; and the 
children of Israel cried unto the LORD. 

7And it came to pass, when the 
children of Israel cried unto the LORD 
because of Midian, 8that the LORD sent 
a prophet unto the children of Israel; 
and he said unto them: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel: I brought you 
up from Egypt, and brought you forth 
out of the house of bondage; 9and I 
delivered you out of the hand of the 
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all 
that oppressed you, and drove them 
out from before you, and gave you 
their land. 10And I said unto you: I am 
the LORD your God; ye shall not fear 
the gods of the Amorites, in whose 
land ye dwell; but ye have not 
hearkened unto My voice.’ 

11And the angel of the LORD came, 
and sat under the terebinth which was 
in Ophrah, that belonged unto Joash 
the Abiezrite; and his son Gideon was 
beating out wheat in the winepress, to 
hide it from the Midianites. 12And the 
angel of the LORD appeared unto him, 
and said unto him: ‘The LORD is with 
thee, thou mighty man of valour.’ 
13And Gideon said unto him: ‘Oh, my 
lord, if the LORD be with us, why then 
is all this befallen us? and where are 
all His wondrous works which our 
fathers told us of, saying: Did not the 
LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now 
the LORD hath cast us off, and 
delivered us into the hand of Midian.’ 
14And the LORD turned towards him, 
and said: ‘Go in this thy might, and 
save Israel from the hand of Midian; 
have not I sent thee?’ 15And he said 
unto him: ‘Oh, my lord, wherewith 
shall I save Israel? behold, my family 
is the poorest in Manasseh, and I am 
the least in my father’s house.’ 16And 
the LORD said unto him: ‘Surely I will 
be with thee, and thou shalt smite the 
Midianites as one man.’ 17And he said 
unto him: ‘If now I have found favour 
in thy sight, then show me a sign that 
it is thou that talkest with me. 18Depart 
not hence, I pray thee, until I come 
unto thee, and bring forth my present, 
and lay it before thee.’ And he said: ‘I 
will tarry until thou come back.’ 19And 
Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, 
and unleavened cakes of an ephah of 
meal; the flesh he put in a basket, and 
he put the broth in a pot, and brought it 
out unto him under the terebinth, and 
presented it. 20And the angel of God 
said unto him: ‘Take the flesh and the 
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon 
this rock, and pour out the broth.’ And 
he did so. 21Then the angel of the LORD 
put forth the end of the staff that was 
in his hand, and touched the flesh and 
the unleavened cakes; and there went 
up fire out of the rock, and consumed 
the flesh and the unleavened cakes; 
and the angel of the LORD departed out 
of his sight. 22And Gideon saw that he 
was the angel of the LORD; and Gideon 


said: ‘Alas, O Lord GOD! forasmuch as 
I have seen the angel of the LORD face 
to face.’ 23And the LORD said unto him: 
‘Peace be unto thee; fear not; thou 
shalt not die.’ 24Then Gideon built an 
altar there unto the LORD, and called it 
a‘Adonai-shalom’; unto this day it is 
yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 

a That is, The LORD is peace. 

25And it came to pass the same 
night, that the LORD said unto him: 
‘Take thy father’s bullock, and the 
second bullock of seven years old, and 
throw down the altar of Baal that thy 
father hath, and cut down the Asherah 
that is by it; 26and build an altar unto 
the LORD thy God upon the top of this 
stronghold, in the ordered place, and 
take the second bullock, and offer a 
burnt-offering with the wood of the 
Asherah which thou shalt cut down.’ 
27Then Gideon took ten men of his 
servants, and did as the LORD had 
spoken unto him; and it came to pass, 
because he feared his father’s 
household and the men of the city, so 
that he could not do it by day, that he 
did it by night. 28And when the men of 
the city arose early in the morning, 
behold, the altar of Baal was broken 
down, and the Asherah was cut down 
that was by it, and the second bullock 
was offered upon the altar that was 
built. 29And they said one to another: 
‘Who hath done this thing?’ And when 
they inquired and asked, they said: 
‘Gideon the son of Joash hath done 
this thing.’ 30Then the men of the city 

said unto Joash: ‘Bring out thy son, 
that he may die; because he hath 
broken down the altar of Baal, and 
because he hath cut down the Asherah 
that was by it.’ 31And Joash said unto 
all that stood against him: ‘Will ye 
contend for Baal? or will ye save him? 
he that will contend for him, shall be 
put to death before morning; if he be a 
god, let him contend for himself, 
because one hath broken down his 
altar.’ 32Therefore on that day he was 
called bJerubbaal, saying: ‘Let Baal 
contend against him, because he hath 
broken down his altar.’ 

b That is, Let Baal contend. 

33Now all the Midianites and the 
Amalekites and the children of the east 
assembled themselves together; and 
they passed over, and pitched in the 
valley of Jezreel. 34But the spirit of the 
LORD clothed Gideon; and he blew a 
horn; and Abiezer was gathered 
together after him. 35And he sent 
messengers throughout all Manasseh; 
and they also were gathered together 
after him; and he sent messengers unto 
Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto 
Naphtali; and they came up to meet 
them. 36And Gideon said unto God: ‘If 
Thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as 
Thou hast spoken, 37behold, I will put 
a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; 
if there be dew on the fleece only, and 
it be dry upon all the ground, then 
shall I know that Thou wilt save Israel 
by my hand, as Thou hast spoken.’ 
38And it was so; for he rose up early on 


the morrow, and pressed the fleece 
together, and wrung dew out of the 
fleece, a bowlful of water. 39And 
Gideon said unto God: ‘Let not Thine 
anger be kindled against me, and I will 
speak but this once: let me make trial, 
I pray Thee, but this once with the 
fleece; let it now be dry only upon the 
fleece, and upon all the ground let 
there be dew.’ 40And God did so that 
night; for it was dry upon the fleece 
only, and there was dew on all the 
ground. 

Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, 
and all the people that were with 
him, rose up early, and pitched beside 
En-harod; and the camp of Midian was 
on the north side of them, by Gibeath-
moreh, in the valley. 

2And the LORD said unto Gideon: 
‘The people that are with thee are too 
many for Me to give the Midianites 
into their hand, lest Israel vaunt 
themselves against Me, saying: mine 
own hand hath saved me. 3Now 
therefore make proclamation in the 
ears of the people, saying: Whosoever 
is fearful and trembling, let him return 
and depart early from mount Gilead.’ 
And there returned of the people 
twenty and two thousand; and there 
remained ten thousand. 

4And the LORD said unto Gideon: 
‘The people are yet too many; bring 
them down unto the water, and I will 
try them for thee there; and it shall be, 
that of whom I say to thee: This shall 
go with thee, the same shall go with 
thee; and of whomsoever I say unto 
thee: This shall not go with thee, the 
same shall not go.’ 5So he brought 
down the people unto the water; and 
the LORD said unto Gideon: ‘Everyone 
that lappeth of the water with his 
tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt 
thou set by himself; likewise every one 
that boweth down upon his knees to 
drink.’ 6And the number of them that 
lapped, putting their hand to their 
mouth, was three hundred men; but all 
the rest of the people bowed down 
upon their knees to drink water. 7And 
the LORD said unto Gideon: ‘By the 
three hundred men that lapped will I 
save you, and deliver the Midianites 
into thy hand; and let all the people go 
every man unto his place.’ 8So they 
took the victuals of the people in their 
hand, and their horns; and he sent all 
the men of Israel every man unto his 
tent, but retained the three hundred 
men; and the camp of Midian was 
beneath him in the valley. 

9And it came to pass the same night, 
that the LORD said unto him: ‘Arise, get 
thee down upon the camp; for I have 
delivered it into thy hand. 10But if thou 
fear to go down, go thou with Purah 
thy servant down to the camp. 11And 
thou shalt hear what they say; and 
afterward shall thy hands be 
strengthened to go down upon the 
camp.’ Then went he down with Purah 
his servant unto the outermost part of 
the armed men that were in the camp. 
12Now the Midianites and the 
Amalekites and all the children of the 
east lay along in the valley like locusts 
7 




for multitude; and their camels were 
without number, as the sand which is 
upon the sea-shore for multitude. 
13And when Gideon was come, behold, 
there was a man telling a dream unto 
his follow, and saying: ‘Behold, I 
dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of 
barley bread tumbled into the camp of 
Midian, and came unto the tent, and 
smote it that it fell, and turned it 
upside down, that the tent lay flat.’ 
14And his fellow answered and said: 
‘This is nothing else save the sword of 
Gideon the son of Joash, a man of 
Israel: into his hand God hath 
delivered Midian, and all the host.’ 

15And it was so, when Gideon heard 
the telling of the dream, and the 
interpretation thereof, that he 
worshipped; and he returned into the 
camp of Israel, and said: ‘Arise; for 
the LORD hath delivered into your hand 
the host of Midian.’ 16And he divided 
the three hundred men into three 
companies, and he put into the hands 
of all of them horns, and empty 
pitchers, with torches within the 
pitchers. 17And he said unto them: 
‘Look on me, and do likewise; and, 
behold, when I come to the outermost 
part of the camp, it shall be that, as I 
do, so shall ye do. 18When I blow the 
horn, I and all that are with me, then 
blow ye the horns also on every side of 
all the camp, and say: For the LORD 
and for Gideon! ’ 

19So Gideon, and the hundred men 
that were with him, came unto the 
outermost part of the camp in the 
beginning of the middle watch, when 
they had but newly set the watch; and 
they blew the horns, and broke in 
pieces the pitchers that were in their 
hands. 20And the three companies blew 
the horns, and broke the pitchers, and 
held the torches in their left hands, and 
the horns in their right hands 
wherewith to blow; and they cried: 
‘The sword for the LORD and for 
Gideon! ’ 21And they stood every man 
in his place round about the camp; and 
all the host ran; and they shouted, and 
fled. 22And they blew the three 
hundred horns, and the LORD set every 
man’s sword a against his fellow, even 
throughout all the host; and the host 
fled as far as Beth-shittah toward 
Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-
meholah, by Tabbath. 23And the men 
of Israel were gathered together out of 
Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of 
all Manasseh, and pursued after 
Midian. 24And Gideon sent messengers 
throughout all the hill-country of 
Ephraim, saying: ‘Come down against 
Midian, and take before them the 
waters, as far as Beth-barah, and also 
the Jordan.’ So all the men of Ephraim 
were gathered together, and took the 
waters as far as Beth-barah, and also 
the Jordan. 25And they took the two 
princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and 
they slew Oreb at the Rock of Oreb, 
and Zeeb they slew at the Winepress 
of Zeeb, and pursued Midian; and they 
brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to 
Gideon beyond the Jordan. 


And the men of Ephraim said 
unto him: ‘Why hast thou served 
us thus, that thou didst not call us 
when thou wentest to fight with 
Midian?’ And they did chide with him 
sharply. 2And he said unto them: 
‘What have I now done in comparison 
with you? Is not the gleaning of 
Ephraim better than the vintage of 
Abiezer? 3God hath delivered into 
your hand the princes of Midian, Oreb 
and Zeeb; and what was I able to do in 
comparison with you?’ Then their 
anger was abated toward him, when he 
had said that. 

4And Gideon came to the Jordan, 
and passed over, he, and the three 
hundred men that were with him, faint, 
yet pursuing. 5And he said unto the 
men of Succoth: ‘Give, I pray you, 
loaves of bread unto the people that 
follow me; for they are faint, and I am 
pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, 
the kings of Midian.’ 6And the princes 
of Succoth said: ‘Are the hands of 
Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy 
power, that we should give bread unto 
thine army?’ 7And Gideon said: 
‘Therefore when the LORD hath 
delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into 
my hand, then I will tear your flesh 
with the thorns of the wilderness and 
with briers.’ 8And he went up thence to 
Penuel, and spoke unto them in like 
manner; and the men of Penuel 
answered him as the men of Succoth 
had answered. 9And he spoke also unto 
the men of Penuel, saying: ‘When I 
come back in peace, I will break down 
this tower.’ 

10Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in 
Karkor, and their hosts with them, 
about fifteen thousand men, all that 
were left of all the host of the children 
of the east; for there fell a hundred and 
twenty thousand men that drew sword. 
11And Gideon went up by the way of 
them that dwelt in tents on the east of 
Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the 
host; for the host was secure. 12And 
Zebah and Zalmunna fled; and he 
pursued after them; and he took the 
two kings of Midian, Zebah and 
Zalmunna, and discomfited all the 
host. 13And Gideon the son of Joash 
returned from the battle from the 
ascent of Heres. 14And he caught a 
young man of the men of Succoth, and 
inquired of him; and he wrote down 
for him the princes of Succoth, and the 
elders thereof, seventy and seven men. 
15And he came unto the men of 
Succoth, and said: ‘Behold Zebah and 
Zalmunna, concerning whom ye did 
taunt me, saying: Are the hands of 
Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy 
power, that we should give bread unto 
thy men that are weary?’ 16And he 
took the elders of the city, and thorns 
of the wilderness and briers, and with 
them he taught the men of Succoth. 
17And he broke down the tower of 
Penuel, and slew the men of the city. 
18Then said he unto Zebah and 
Zalmunna: ‘Where are the men whom 
ye slew at Tabor?’ And they answered: 
‘As thou art, so were they; of one form 
8 




with the children of a king.’ 19And he 
said: ‘They were my brethren, the sons 
of my mother; as the LORD liveth, if ye 
had saved them alive, I would not slay 
you.’ 20And he said unto Jether his 
first-born: ‘Up, and slay them.’ But the 
youth drew not his sword; for he 
feared, because he was yet a youth. 
21Then Zebah and Zalmunna said: 
‘Rise thou, and fall upon us; for as the 
man is, so is his strength.’ And Gideon 
arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, 
and took the crescents that were on 
their camels’necks. 

22Then the men of Israel said unto 
Gideon: ‘Rule thou over us, both thou, 
and thy son, and thy son’s son also; for 
thou hast saved us out of the hand of 
Midian.’ 23And Gideon said unto them: 
‘I will not rule over you, neither shall 
my son rule over you; the LORD shall 
rule over you.’ 24And Gideon said unto 
them: ‘I would make a request of you, 
that ye would give me every man the 
ear-rings of his spoil.’—For they had 
golden ear-rings, because they were 
Ishmaelites. 25And they answered: ‘We 
will willingly give them.’ And they 
spread a garment, and did cast therein 
every man the ear-rings of his spoil. 
26And the weight of the golden ear-
rings that he requested was a thousand 
and seven hundred shekels of gold; 
beside the crescents, and the pendants, 
and the purple raiment that was on the 
kings of Midian, and beside the chains 
that were about their camels’necks. 
27And Gideon made an ephod thereof, 
and put it in his city, even in Ophrah; 
and all Israel went astray after it there; 
and it became a snare unto Gideon, 
and to his house. 28So Midian was 
subdued before the children of Israel, 
and they lifted up their heads no more. 
And the land had rest forty years in the 
days of Gideon. 

29And Jerubbaal the son of Joash 
went and dwelt in his own house. 
30And Gideon had threescore and ten 
sons of his body begotten; for he had 
many wives. 31And his concubine that 
was in Shechem, she also bore him a 
son, and he called his name 
Abimelech. 32And Gideon the son of 
Joash died in a good old age, and was 
buried in the sepulchre of Joash his 
father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 

33And it came to pass, as soon as 
Gideon was dead, that the children of 
Israel again went astray after the 
Baalim, and made Baal-berith their 
god. 34And the children of Israel 
remembered not the LORD their God, 
who had delivered them out of the 
hand of all their enemies on every 
side; 35neither showed they kindness to 
the house of Jerubbaal, namely 
Gideon, according to all the goodness 
which he had shown unto Israel. 

And Abimelech the son of 
Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto 
his mother’s brethren, and spoke with 
them, and with all the family of the 
house of his mother’s father, saying: 
2’Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all 
the men of Shechem: Which is better 
for you, that all the sons of Jerubbaal, 
who are threescore and ten persons, 
9 




rule over you, or that one rule over 
you? remember also that I am your 
bone and your flesh.’ 3And his 
mother’s brethren spoke of him in the 
ears of all the men of Shechem all 
these words; and their hearts inclined 
to follow Abimelech; for they said: 
‘He is our brother.’ 4And they gave 
him threescore and ten pieces of silver 
out of the house of Baal-berith, 
wherewith Abimelech hired vain and 
light fellows, who followed him. 5And 
he went unto his father’s house at 
Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons 
of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten 
persons, upon one stone; but Jotham 
the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; 
for he hid himself. 

6And all the men of Shechem 
assembled themselves together, and all 
Beth-millo, and went and made 
Abimelech king, by the terebinth of 
the pillar that was in Shechem. 7And 
when they told it to Jotham, he went 
and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, 
and lifted up his voice, and cried, and 
said unto them: ‘Hearken unto me, ye 
men of Shechem, that God may 
hearken unto you. 8The trees went 
forth on a time to anoint a king over 
them; and they said unto the olive-tree: 
Reign thou over us. 9But the olive-tree 
said unto them: Should I leave my 
fatness, seeing that by me they honour 
God and man, and go to hold sway 
over the trees? 10And the trees said to 
the fig-tree: Come thou, and reign over 
us. 11But the fig-tree said unto them: 
Should I leave my sweetness, and my 
good fruitage, and go to hold sway 
over the trees? 12And the trees said 
unto the vine: Come thou, and reign 
over us. 13And the vine said unto them: 
Should I leave my wine, which 
cheereth God and man, and go to hold 
sway over the trees? 14Then said all the 
trees unto the bramble: Come thou, 
and reign over us. 15And the bramble 
said unto the trees: If in truth ye anoint 
me king over you, then come and take 
refuge in my shadow; and if not, let 
fire come out of the bramble, and 
devour the cedars of Lebanon. 16Now 
therefore, if ye have dealt truly and 
uprightly, in that ye have made 
Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt 
well with Jerubbaal and his house, and 
have done unto him according to the 
deserving of his hands—17for my 
father fought for you, and adventured 
his life, and delivered you out of the 
hand of Midian; 18and ye are risen up 
against my father’s house this day, and 
have slain his sons, threescore and ten 
persons, upon one stone, and have 
made Abimelech, the son of his maid-
servant, king over the men of 
Shechem, because he is your brother—
19if ye then have dealt truly and 
uprightly with Jerubbaal and with his 
house this day, then rejoice ye in 
Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in 
you. 20But if not, let fire come out 
from Abimelech, and devour the men 
of Shechem, and Beth-millo; and let 
fire come out from the men of 
Shechem, and from Beth-millo, and 
devour Abimelech.’ 21And Jotham ran 


away, and fled, and went to Beer, and 
dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his 
brother. 

22And Abimelech was prince over 
Israel three years. 23And God sent an 
evil spirit between Abimelech and the 
men of Shechem; and the men of 
Shechem dealt treacherously with 
Abimelech; 24that the violence done to 
the threescore and ten sons of 
Jerubbaal might come, and that their 
blood might be laid upon Abimelech 
their brother, who slew them, and 
upon the men of Shechem, who 
strengthened his hands to slay his 
brethren. 25And the men of Shechem 
set liers-in-wait for him on the tops of 
the mountains, and they robbed all that 
came along that way by them; and it 
was told Abimelech. 

26And Gaal the son of Ebed came 
with his brethren, and went on to 
Shechem; and the men of Shechem put 
their trust in him. 27And they went out 
into the field, and gathered their 
vineyards, and trod the grapes, and 
held festival, and went into the house 
of their god, and did eat and drink, and 
cursed Abimelech. 28And Gaal the son 
of Ebed said: ‘Who is Abimelech, and 
who is Shechem, that we should serve 
him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? 
and Zebul his officer? serve ye the 
men of Hamor the father of Shechem; 
but why should we serve him? 29And 
would that this people were under my 
hand! then would I remove 
Abimelech.’ And he said to 
Abimelech: ‘Increase thine army, and 
come out.’ 30And when Zebul the ruler 
of the city heard the words of Gaal the 
son of Ebed, his anger was kindled. 
31And he sent messengers unto 
Abimelech in Tormah, saying: 
‘Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his 
brethren are come to Shechem; and, 
behold, they will incite the city against 
thee. 32Now therefore, up by night, 
thou and the people that are with thee, 
and lie in wait in the field. 33And it 
shall be, that in the morning, as soon 
as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, 
and set upon the city; and, behold, 
when he and the people that are with 
him come out against thee, then 
mayest thou do to them as thou shalt 
be able.’ 

34And Abimelech rose up, and all 
the people that were with him, by 
night, and they lay in wait against 
Shechem in four companies. 35And 
Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and 
stood in the entrance of the gate of the 
city; and Abimelech rose up, and the 
people that were with him, from the 
ambushment. 36And when Gaal saw 
the people, he said to Zebul: ‘Behold, 
there come people down from the tops 
of the mountains.’ And Zebul said 
unto him: ‘Thou seest the shadow of 
the mountains as if they were men.’ 
37And Gaal spoke again and said: ‘See, 
there come people down by the middle 
of the land, and one company cometh 
by the way of Elon-meonenim.’ 38Then 
said Zebul unto him: ‘Where is now 
thy mouth, that thou saidst: Who is 
Abimelech, that we should serve him? 


is not this the people that thou hast 
despised? go out now, I pray, and fight 
with them.’ 39And Gaal went out 
before the men of Shechem, and 
fought with Abimelech. 40And 
Abimelech chased him, and he fled 
before him, and there fell many 
wounded, even unto the entrance of 
the gate. 41And Abimelech dwelt at 
Arumah; and Zebul drove out Gaal 
and his brethren, that they should not 
dwell in Shechem. 

42And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that the people went out into 
the field; and it was told Abimelech. 
43And he took the people, and divided 
them into three companies, and lay in 
wait in the field; and he looked, and, 
behold, the people were coming forth 
out of the city; and he rose up against 
them, and smote them. 44And 
Abimelech, and the companies that 
were with him, rushed forward, and 
stood in the entrance of the gate of the 
city; and the two companies rushed 
upon all that were in the field, and 
smote them. 45And Abimelech fought 
against the city all that day; and he 
took the city, and slew the people that 
were therein; and he beat down the 
city, and sowed it with salt. 

46And when all the men of the tower 
of Shechem heard thereof, they 
entered into the hold of the house of 
El-berith. 47And it was told Abimelech 
that all the men of the tower of 
Shechem were gathered together. 
48And Abimelech got him up to mount 
Zalmon, he and all the people that 
were with him; and Abimelech took an 
axe in his hand, and cut down a bough 
from the trees, and took it up, and laid 
it on his shoulder; and he said unto the 
people that were with him: ‘What ye 
have seen me do, make haste, and do 
as I have done.’ 49And all the people 
likewise cut down every man his 
bough, and followed Abimelech, and 
put them to the hold, and set the hold 
on fire upon them; so that all the men 
of the tower of Shechem died also, 
about a thousand men and women. 

50Then went Abimelech to Thebez, 
and encamped against Thebez, and 
took it. 51But there was a strong tower 
within the city, and thither fled all the 
men and women, even all they of the 
city, and shut themselves in, and got 
them up to the roof of the tower. 52And 
Abimelech came unto the tower, and 
fought against it, and went close unto 
the door of the tower to burn it with 
fire. 53And a certain woman cast an 
upper millstone upon Abimelech’s 
head, and broke his skull. 54Then he 
called hastily unto the young man his 
armour-bearer, and said unto him: 
‘Draw thy sword, and kill me, that 
men say not of me: A woman slew 
him.’ And his young man thrust him 
through, and he died. 55And when the 
men of Israel saw that Abimelech was 
dead, they departed every man unto his 
place. 56Thus God requited the 
wickedness of Abimelech, which he 
did unto his father, in slaying his 
seventy brethren; 57and all the 
wickedness of the men of Shechem did 


God requite upon their heads; and 
upon them came the curse of Jotham 
the son of Jerubbaal. 

And after Abimelech there 
arose to save Israel Tola the 
son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of 
Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in the 
hill-country of Ephraim. 2And he 
judged Israel twenty and three years, 
and died, and was buried in Shamir. 

3And after him arose Jair, the 
Gileadite; and he judged Israel twenty 
and two years. 4And he had thirty sons 
that rode on thirty ass colts, and they 
had thirty cities, which are called 
aHavvoth-jair unto this day, which are 
in the land of Gilead. 5And Jair died, 
and was buried in Kamon. 

a That is, The villages of Jair. 

6And the children of Israel again did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, and served the Baalim, and the 
Ashtaroth, and the gods of Aram, and 
the gods of Zidon, and the gods of 
Moab, and the gods of the children of 
Ammon, and the gods of the 
Philistines; and they forsook the LORD, 
and served Him not. 7And the anger of 
the LORD was kindled against Israel, 
and He gave them over into the hand 
of the Philistines, and into the hand of 
the children of Ammon. 8And they 
oppressed and crushed the children of 
Israel that year; eighteen years 
[oppressed they] all the children of 
Israel that were beyond the Jordan in 
the land of the Amorites, which is in 
Gilead. 9And the children of Ammon 

passed over the Jordan to fight also 
against Judah, and against Benjamin, 
and against the house of Ephraim, so 
that Israel was sore distressed. 10And 
the children of Israel cried unto the 
LORD, saying: ‘We have sinned against 
Thee, in that we have forsaken our 
God, and have served the Baalim.’ 
11And the LORD said unto the children 
of Israel: ‘Did not I save you from the 
Egyptians, and from the Amorites, 
from the children of Ammon, and from 
the Philistines? 12The Zidonians also, 
and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, 
did oppress you; and ye cried unto Me, 
and I saved you out of their hand. 
13Yet ye have forsaken Me, and served 
other gods; wherefore I will save you 
no more. 14Go and cry unto the gods 
which ye have chosen; let them save 
you in the time of your distress.’ 15And 
the children of Israel said unto the 
LORD: ‘We have sinned; do Thou unto 
us whatsoever seemeth good unto 
Thee; only deliver us, we pray Thee, 
this day.’ 16And they put away the 
strange gods from among them, and 
served the LORD; and His soul was 
grieved for the misery of Israel. 

17Then the children of Ammon were 
gathered together, and encamped in 
Gilead. And the children of Israel 
assembled themselves together, and 
encamped in Mizpah. 18And the 
people, the princes of Gilead, said one 
to another: ‘What man is he that will 
begin to fight against the children of 
Ammon? he shall be head over all the 
inhabitants of Gilead.’ 
10 




Now Jephthah the Gileadite 
was a mighty man of valour, 
and he was the son of a harlot; and 
Gilead begot Jephthah. 2And Gilead’s 
wife bore him sons; and when his 
wife’s sons grew up, they drove out 
Jephthah, and said unto him: ‘Thou 
shalt not inherit in our father’s house; 
for thou art the son of another 
woman.’ 3Then Jephthah fled from his 
brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; 
and there were gathered vain fellows 
to Jephthah, and they went out with 
him. 

4And it came to pass after a while, 
that the children of Ammon made war 
against Israel. 5And it was so, that 
when the children of Ammon made 
war against Israel, the elders of Gilead 
went to fetch Jephthah out of the land 
of Tob. 6And they said unto Jephthah: 
‘Come and be our chief, that we may 
fight with the children of Ammon.’ 
7And Jephthah said unto the elders of 
Gilead: ‘Did not ye hate me, and drive 
me out of my father’s house? and why 
are ye come unto me now when ye are 
in distress?’ 8And the elders of Gilead 
said unto Jephthah: ‘Therefore are we 
returned to thee now, that thou mayest 
go with us, and fight with the children 
of Ammon, and thou shalt be our head 
over all the inhabitants of Gilead.’ 
9And Jephthah said unto the elders of 
Gilead: ‘If ye bring me back home to 
fight with the children of Ammon, and 
the LORD deliver them before me, I will 
be your head.’ 10And the elders of 
Gilead said unto Jephthah: ‘The LORD 
shall be witness between us; surely 
according to thy word so will we do.’ 
11Then Jephthah went with the elders 
of Gilead, and the people made him 
head and chief over them; and 
Jephthah spoke all his words before 
the LORD in Mizpah. 

12And Jephthah sent messengers 
unto the king of the children of 
Ammon, saying: ‘What hast thou to do 
with me, that thou art come unto me to 
fight against my land?’ 13And the king 
of the children of Ammon answered 
unto the messengers of Jephthah: 
‘Because Israel took away my land, 
when he came up out of Egypt, from 
the Arnon even unto the Jabbok, and 
unto the Jordan; now therefore restore 
those cities peaceably.’ 14And 
Jephthah sent messengers again unto 
the king of the children of Ammon; 
15and he said unto him: ‘Thus saith 
Jephthah: Israel took not away the land 
of Moab, nor the land of the children 
of Ammon. 16But when they came up 
from Egypt, and Israel walked through 
the wilderness unto the Red Sea, and 
came to Kadesh; 17then Israel sent 
messengers unto the king of Edom, 
saying: Let me, I pray thee, pass 
through thy land; but the king of Edom 
hearkened not. And in like manner he 
sent unto the king of Moab; but he 
would not; and Israel abode in Kadesh. 
18Then he walked through the 
wilderness, and compassed the land of 
Edom, and the land of Moab, and 
came by the east side of the land of 
Moab, and they pitched on the other 
11 




side of the Arnon; but they came not 
within the border of Moab, for the 
Arnon was the border of Moab. 19And 
Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king 
of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; 
and Israel said unto him: Let us pass, 
we pray thee, through thy land unto 
my place. 20But Sihon trusted not 
Israel to pass through his border; but 
Sihon gathered all his people together, 
and pitched in Jahaz, and fought 
against Israel. 21And the LORD, the God 
of Israel, delivered Sihon and all his 
people into the hand of Israel, and they 
smote them; so Israel possessed all the 
land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of 
that country. 22And they possessed all 
the border of the Amorites, from the 
Arnon even unto the Jabbok, and from 
the wilderness even unto the Jordan. 
23So now the LORD, the God of Israel, 
hath dispossessed the Amorites from 
before His people Israel, and shouldest 
thou possess them? 24Wilt not thou 
possess that which Chemosh thy god 
giveth thee to possess? So 
whomsoever the LORD our God hath 
dispossessed from before us, them will 
we possess. 25And now art thou any 
thing better than Balak the son of 
Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever 
strive against Israel, or did he ever 
fight against them? 26While Israel 
dwelt in Heshbon and its towns, and in 
Aroer and its towns, and in all the 
cities that are along by the side of the 
Arnon, three hundred years; wherefore 
did ye not recover them within that 
time? 27I therefore have not sinned 
against thee, but thou doest me wrong 
to war against me; the LORD, the Judge, 
be judge this day between the children 
of Israel and the children of Ammon.’ 
28Howbeit the king of the children of 
Ammon hearkened not unto the words 
of Jephthah which he sent him. 

29Then the spirit of the LORD came 
upon Jephthah, and he passed over 
Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over 
Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of 
Gilead he passed over unto the 
children of Ammon. 30And Jephthah 
vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said: 
‘If Thou wilt indeed deliver the 
children of Ammon into my hand, 
31then it shall be, that whatsoever 
cometh forth of the doors of my house 
to meet me, when I return in peace 
from the children of Ammon, it shall 
be the LORD’S, and I will offer it up for 
a burnt-offering.’ 32So Jephthah passed 
over unto the children of Ammon to 
fight against them; and the LORD 
delivered them into his hand. 33And he 
smote them from Aroer until thou 
come to Minnith, even twenty cities, 
and unto Abel-cheramim, with a very 
great slaughter. So the children of 
Ammon were subdued before the 
children of Israel. 

34And Jephthah came to Mizpah 
unto his house, and, behold, his 
daughter came out to meet him with 
timbrels and with dances; and she was 
his only child; beside her he had 
neither son nor daughter. 35And it 
came to pass, when he saw her, that he 
rent his clothes, and said: ‘Alas, my 


daughter! thou hast brought me very 
low, and thou art become my troubler; 
for I have opened my mouth unto the 
LORD, and I cannot go back.’ 36And she 
said unto him: ‘My father, thou hast 
opened thy mouth unto the LORD; do 
unto me according to that which hath 
proceeded out of thy mouth; 
forasmuch as the LORD hath taken 
vengeance for thee of thine enemies, 
even of the children of Ammon.’ 
37And she said unto her father: ‘Let 
this thing be done for me: let me alone 
two months, that I may depart and go 
down upon the mountains, and bewail 
my virginity, I and my companions.’ 
38And he said: ‘Go.’ And he sent her 
away for two months; and she 
departed, she and her companions, and 
bewailed her virginity upon the 
mountains. 39And it came to pass at the 
end of two months, that she returned 
unto her father, who did with her 
according to his vow which he had 
vowed; and she had not known man. 
And it was a custom in Israel, 40that 
the daughters of Israel went yearly to 
lament the daughter of Jephthah the 
Gileadite four days in a year. 

And the men of Ephraim were 
gathered together, and passed 
to Zaphon; and they said unto 
Jephthah: ‘Wherefore didst thou pass 
over to fight against the children of 
Ammon, and didst not call us to go 
with thee? we will burn thy house 
upon thee with fire.’ 2And Jephthah 
said unto them: ‘I and my people were 
at great strife with the children of 
Ammon; and when I called you, ye 
saved me not out of their hand. 3And 
when I saw that ye saved me not, I put 
my life in my hand, and passed over 
against the children of Ammon, and 
the LORD delivered them into my hand; 
wherefore then are ye come up unto 
me this day, to fight against me?’ 
4Then Jephthah gathered together all 
the men of Gilead, and fought with 
Ephraim; and the men of Gilead smote 
Ephraim, because they said: ‘Ye are 
fugitives of Ephraim, ye Gileadites, in 
the midst of Ephraim, and in the midst 
of Manasseh.’ 5And the Gileadites 
took the fords of the Jordan against the 
Ephraimites; and it was so, that when 
any of the fugitives of Ephraim said: 
‘Let me go over, ‘the men of Gilead 
said unto him: ‘Art thou an 
Ephraimite?’ If he said: ‘Nay’; 6then 
said they unto him: ‘Say now 
Shibboleth’; and he said ‘Sibboleth’; 
for he could not frame to pronounce it 
right; then they laid hold on him, and 
slew him at the fords of the Jordan; 
and there fell at that time of Ephraim 
forty and two thousand. 

7And Jephthah judged Israel six 
years. Then died Jephthah the 
Gileadite, and was buried in one of the 
cities of Gilead. 

8And after him Ibzan of Beth-lehem 
judged Israel. 9And he had thirty sons, 
and thirty daughters he sent abroad, 
and thirty daughters he brought in 
from abroad for his sons. And he 
judged Israel seven years. 10and Ibzan 
died, and was buried at Beth-lehem. 
12 




11And after him Elon the Zebulunite 
judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten 
years. 12And Elon the Zebulunite died, 
and was buried in Aijalon in the land 
of Zebulun. 

13And after him Abdon the son of 
Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel. 
14And he had forty sons and thirty 
sons’sons, that rode on threescore and 
ten ass colts; and he judged Israel eight 
years. 15And Abdon the son of Hillel 
the Pirathonite died, and was buried in 
Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the 
hill-country of the Amalekites. 

And the children of Israel 
again did that which was evil 
in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD 
delivered them into the hand of the 
Philistines forty years. 

2And there was a certain man of 
Zorah, of the family of the Danites, 
whose name was Manoah; and his 
wife was barren, and bore not. 3And 
the angel of the LORD appeared unto 
the woman, and said unto her: ‘Behold 
now, thou art barren, and hast not 
borne; but thou shalt conceive, and 
bear a son. 4Now therefore beware, I 
pray thee, and drink no wine nor 
strong drink, and eat not any unclean 
thing. 5For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and 
bear a son; and no razor shall come 
upon his head; for the child shall be a 
Nazirite unto God from the womb; and 
he shall begin to save Israel out of the 
hand of the Philistines.’ 6Then the 
woman came and told her husband, 
saying: ‘A man of God came unto me, 
and his countenance was like the 
countenance of the angel of God, very 
terrible; and I asked him not whence 
he was, neither told he me his name; 
7but he said unto me: Behold, thou 
shalt conceive, and bear a son; and 
now drink no wine nor strong drink, 
and eat not any unclean thing; for the 
child shall be a Nazirite unto God from 
the womb to the day of his death.’ 

8Then Manoah entreated the LORD, 
and said: ‘Oh, LORD, I pray Thee, let 
the man of God whom Thou didst send 
come again unto us, and teach us what 
we shall do unto the child that shall be 
born.’ 9And God hearkened to the 
voice of Manoah; and the angel of God 
came again unto the woman as she sat 
in the field; but Manoah her husband 
was not with her. 10And the woman 
made haste, and ran, and told her 
husband, and said unto him: ‘Behold, 
the man hath appeared unto me, that 
came unto me that day.’ 11And 
Manoah arose, and went after his wife, 
and came to the man, and said unto 
him: ‘Art thou the man that spokest 
unto the woman?’ And he said: ‘I am.’ 
12And Manoah said: ‘Now when thy 
word cometh to pass, what shall be the 
rule for the child, and what shall be 
done with him?’ 13And the angel of the 
LORD said unto Manoah: ‘Of all that I 
said unto the woman let her beware. 
14She may not eat of any thing that 
cometh of the grapevine, neither let 
her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat 
any unclean thing; all that I 
commanded her let her observe.’ 
15And Manoah said unto the angel of 
13 




the LORD: ‘I pray thee, let us detain 
thee, that we may make ready a kid for 
thee.’ 16And the angel of the LORD said 
unto Manoah: ‘Though thou detain 
me, I will not eat of thy bread; and if 
thou wilt make ready a burnt-offering, 
thou must offer it unto the LORD.’ For 
Manoah knew not that he was the 
angel of the LORD. 17And Manoah said 
unto the angel of the LORD: ‘What is 
thy name, that when thy words come 
to pass we may do thee honour?’ 
18And the angel of the LORD said unto 
him: ‘Wherefore askest thou after my 
name, seeing it is hidden?’ 19So 
Manoah took the kid with the meal-
offering, and offered it upon the rock 
unto the LORD; and [the angel] did 
wondrously, and Manoah and his wife 
looked on. 20For it came to pass, when 
the flame went up toward heaven from 
off the altar, that the angel of the LORD 
ascended in the flame of the altar; and 
Manoah and his wife looked on; and 
they fell on their faces to the ground. 
21But the angel of the LORD did no 
more appear to Manoah or to his wife. 
Then Manoah knew that he was the 
angel of the LORD. 22And Manoah said 
unto his wife: ‘We shall surely die, 
because we have seen God.’ 23But his 
wife said unto him: ‘If the LORD were 
pleased to kill us, He would not have 
received a burnt-offering and a meal-
offering at our hand, neither would He 
have shown us all these things, nor 
would at this time have told such 
things as these.’ 

24And the woman bore a son, and 
called his name Samson; and the child 
grew, and the LORD blessed him. 25And 
the spirit of the LORD began to move 
him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah 
and Eshtaol. 

And Samson went down to 
Timnah, and saw a woman in 
Timnah of the daughters of the 
Philistines. 2And he came up, and told 
his father and his mother, and said: ‘I 
have seen a woman in Timnah of the 
daughters of the Philistines; now 
therefore get her for me to wife.’ 
3Then his father and his mother said 
unto him: ‘Is there never a woman 
among the daughters of thy brethren, 
or among all my people, that thou 
goest to take a wife of the 
uncircumcised Philistines?’ And 
Samson said unto his father: ‘Get her 
for me; for she pleaseth me well.’ 4But 
his father and his mother knew not that 
it was of the LORD; for he sought an 
occasion against the Philistines. Now 
at that time the Philistines had rule 
over Israel. 

5Then went Samson down, and his 
father and his mother, to Timnah, and 
came to the vineyards of Timnah; and, 
behold, a young lion roared against 
him. 6And the spirit of the LORD came 
mightily upon him, and he rent him as 
one would have rent a kid, and he had 
nothing in his hand; but he told not his 
father or his mother what he had done. 
7And he went down, and talked with 
the woman; and she pleased Samson 
well. 8And after a while he returned to 
14 




take her, and he turned aside to see the 
carcass of the lion; and, behold, there 
was a swarm of bees in the body of the 
lion, and honey. 9And he scraped it out 
into his hands, and went on, eating as 
he went, and he came to his father and 
mother, and gave unto them, and they 
did eat; but he told them not that he 
had scraped the honey out of the body 
of the lion. 10And his father went down 
unto the woman; and Samson made 
there a feast; for so used the young 
men to do. 11And it came to pass, when 
they saw him, that they brought thirty 
companions to be with him. 12And 
Samson said unto them: ‘Let me now 
put forth a riddle unto you; if ye can 
declare it me within the seven days of 
the feast, and find it out, then I will 
give you thirty linen garments and 
thirty changes of raiment; 13but if ye 
cannot declare it me, then shall ye give 
me thirty linen garments and thirty 
changes of raiment.’ And they said 
unto him: ‘Put forth thy riddle, that we 
may hear it.’ 14And he said unto them: 

Out of the eater came forth food, 

And out of the strong came forth 
sweetness. 

And they could not in three days 
declare the riddle. 15And it came to 
pass on the seventh day, that they said 
unto Samson’s wife: ‘Entice thy 
husband, that he may declare unto us 
the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy 
father’s house with fire; have ye called 
us hither to impoverish us?’ 16And 
Samson’s wife wept before him, and 
said: ‘Thou dost but hate me, and 
lovest me not; thou hast put forth a 
riddle unto the children of my people, 
and wilt thou not tell it me?’ And he 
said unto her: ‘Behold, I have not told 
it my father nor my mother, and shall I 
tell thee?’ 17And she wept before him 
the seven days, while their feast lasted; 
and it came to pass on the seventh day, 
that he told her, because she pressed 
him sore; and she told the riddle to the 
children of her people. 18And the men 
of the city said unto him on the 
seventh day before the sun went down: 

What is sweeter than honey? 

And what is stronger than a lion? 

And he said unto them: 

If ye had not plowed with my heifer, 

Ye had not found out my riddle. 

19And the spirit of the LORD came 
mightily upon him, and he went down 
to Ashkelon, and smote thirty men of 
them, and took their spoil, and gave 
the changes of raiment unto them that 
declared the riddle. And his anger was 
kindled, and he went up to his father’s 
house. 20But Samson’s wife was given 
to his companion, whom he had had 
for his friend. 

But it came to pass after a 
while, in the time of wheat 
harvest, that Samson visited his wife 
with a kid; and he said: ‘I will go in to 
my wife into the chamber.’ But her 
father would not suffer him to go in. 
2And her father said: ‘I verily thought 
that thou hadst utterly hated her; 
therefore I gave her to thy companion; 
is not her younger sister fairer than 
she? take her, I pray thee, instead of 
15 




her.’ 3And Samson said unto them: 
‘This time shall I be quits with the 
Philistines, when I do them a 
mischief.’ 4And Samson went and 
caught three hundred foxes, and took 
torches, and turned tail to tail, and put 
a torch in the midst between every two 
tails. 5And when he had set the torches 
on fire, he let them go into the 
standing corn of the Philistines, and 
burnt up both the shocks and the 
standing corn, and also the oliveyards. 
6Then the Philistines said: ‘Who hath 
done this?’ And they said: ‘Samson, 
the son-in-law of the Timnite, because 
he hath taken his wife, and given her 
to his companion.’ And the Philistines 
came up, and burnt her and her father 
with fire. 7And Samson said unto 
them: ‘If ye do after this manner, 
surely I will be avenged of you, and 
after that I will cease.’ 8And he smote 
them hip and thigh with a great 
slaughter; and he went down and dwelt 
in the cleft of the rock of Etam. 

9Then the Philistines went up, and 
pitched in Judah, and spread 
themselves against Lehi. 10And the 
men of Judah said: ‘Why are ye come 
up against us?’ And they said: ‘To 
bind Samson are we come up, to do to 
him as he hath done to us.’ 11Then 
three thousand men of Judah went 
down to the cleft of the rock of Etam, 
and said to Samson: ‘Knowest thou 
not that the Philistines are rulers over 
us? what then is this that thou hast 
done unto us?’ And he said unto them: 
‘As they did unto me, so have I done 
unto them.’ 12And they said unto him: 
‘We are come down to bind thee, that 
we may deliver thee into the hand of 
the Philistines.’ And Samson said unto 
them: ‘Swear unto me, that ye will not 
fall upon me yourselves.’ 13And they 
spoke unto him, saying: ‘No; but we 
will bind thee fast, and deliver thee 
into their hand; but surely we will not 
kill thee.’ And they bound him with 
two new ropes, and brought him up 
from the rock. 14When he came unto 
Lehi, the Philistines shouted as they 
met him; and the spirit of the LORD 
came mightily upon him, and the ropes 
that were upon his arms became as 
flax that was burnt with fire, and his 
bands dropped from off his hands. 
15And he found a new jawbone of an 
ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, 
and smote a thousand men therewith. 
16And Samson said: 

With the jawbone of an ass, heaps 
upon heaps, 

With the jawbone of an ass have I 
smitten a thousand men. 

17And it came to pass, when he had 
made an end of speaking, that he cast 
away the jawbone out of his hand; and 
that place was called aRamath-lehi. 
18And he was sore athirst, and called 
on the LORD, and said: ‘Thou hast 
given this great deliverance by the 
hand of Thy servant; and now shall I 
die for thirst, and fall into the hand of 
the uncircumcised?’ 19But God cleaved 
the hollow place that is in Lehi, and 

a That is, The hill of the jawbone. 


there came water thereout; and when 
he had drunk, his spirit came back, and 
he revived; wherefore the name 
thereof was called aEn-hakkore, which 
is in Lehi unto this day. 20And he 
judged Israel in the days of the 
Philistines twenty years. 

a That is, The spring of him that 
called. 

And Samson went to Gaza, 
and saw there a harlot, and 
went in unto her. 2[And it was told] the 
Gazites, saying: ‘Samson is come 
hither.’ And they compassed him in, 
and lay in wait for him all night in the 
gate of the city, and were quiet all the 
night, saying: ‘Let be till morning 
light, then we will kill him.’ 3And 
Samson lay till midnight, and arose at 
midnight, and laid hold of the doors of 
the gate of the city, and the two posts, 
and plucked them up, bar and all, and 
put them upon his shoulders, and 
carried them up to the top of the 
mountain that is before Hebron. 

4And it came to pass afterward, that 
he loved a woman in the valley of 
Sorek, whose name was Delilah. 5And 
the lords of the Philistines came up 
unto her, and said unto her: ‘Entice 
him, and see wherein his great strength 
lieth, and by what means we may 
prevail against him, that we may bind 
him to afflict him; and we will give 
thee every one of us eleven hundred 
pieces of silver.’ 6And Delilah said to 
Samson: ‘Tell me, I pray thee, wherein 
thy great strength lieth, and wherewith 

thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.’ 
7And Samson said unto her: ‘If they 
bind me with seven fresh bowstrings 
that were never dried, then shall I 
become weak, and be as any other 
man.’ 8Then the lords of the Philistines 
brought up to her seven fresh 
bowstrings which had not been dried, 
and she bound him with them. 9Now 
she had liers-in-wait abiding in the 
inner chamber. And she said unto him: 
‘The Philistines are upon thee, 
Samson.’ And he broke the bowstrings 
as a string of tow is broken when it 
toucheth the fire. So his strength was 
not known. 10And Delilah said unto 
Samson: ‘Behold, thou hast mocked 
me, and told me lies; now tell me, I 
pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be 
bound.’ 11And he said unto her: ‘If 
they only bind me with new ropes 
wherewith no work, hath been done, 
then shall I become weak, and be as 
any other man.’ 12So Delilah took new 
ropes, and bound him therewith, and 
said unto him: ‘The Philistines are 
upon thee, Samson.’ And the liers-in-
wait were abiding in the inner 
chamber. And he broke them from off 
his arms like a thread. 13And Delilah 
said unto Samson: ‘Hitherto thou hast 
mocked me, and told me lies; tell me 
wherewith thou mightest be bound.’ 
And he said unto her: ‘If thou weavest 
the seven locks of my head with the 
web.’ 14And she fastened it with the 
pin, and said unto him: ‘The 
Philistines are upon thee, Samson.’ 
And he awoke out of his sleep, and 
16 




plucked away the pin of the beam, and 
the web. 15And she said unto him: 
‘How canst thou say: I love thee, when 
thy heart is not with me? thou hast 
mocked me these three times, and hast 
not told me wherein thy great strength 
lieth.’ 16And it came to pass, when she 
pressed him daily with her words, and 
urged him, that his soul was vexed 
unto death. 17And he told her all his 
heart, and said unto her: ‘There hath 
not come a razor upon my head; for I 
have been a Nazirite unto God from 
my mother’s womb; if I be shaven, 
then my strength will go from me, and 
I shall become weak, and be like any 
other man.’ 18And when Delilah saw 
that he had told her all his heart, she 
sent and called for the lords of the 
Philistines, saying: ‘Come up this 
once, for he hath told me all his heart.’ 
Then the lords of the Philistines came 
up unto her, and brought the money in 
their hand. 19And she made him sleep 
upon her knees; and she called for a 
man, and had the seven locks of his 
head shaven off; and she began to 
afflict him, and his strength went from 
him. 20And she said: ‘The Philistines 
are upon thee, Samson.’ And he awoke 
out of his sleep, and said: ‘I will go out 
as at other times, and shake myself.’ 
But he knew not that the LORD was 
departed from him. 21And the 
Philistines laid hold on him, and put 
out his eyes; and they brought him 
down to Gaza, and bound him with 
fetters of brass; and he did grind in the 
prison-house. 22Howbeit the hair of his 
head began to grow again after he was 
shaven. 

23And the lords of the Philistines 
gathered them together to offer a great 
sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to 
rejoice; for they said: ‘Our god hath 
delivered Samson our enemy into our 
hand.’ 24And when the people saw 
him, they praised their god; for they 
said: ‘Our god hath delivered into our 
hand our enemy, and the destroyer of 
our country, who hath slain many of 
us.’ 25And it came to pass, when their 
hearts were merry, that they said: ‘Call 
for Samson, that he may make us 
sport.’ And they called for Samson out 
of the prison-house; and he made sport 
before them; and they set him between 
the pillars. 26And Samson said unto the 
lad that held him by the hand: ‘Suffer 
me that I may feel the pillars 
whereupon the house resteth, that I 
may lean upon them.’ 27Now the house 
was full of men and women; and all 
the lords of the Philistines were there; 
and there were upon the roof about 
three thousand men and women, that 
beheld while Samson made sport. 
28And Samson called unto the LORD, 
and said: ‘O Lord GOD, remember me, 
I pray Thee, and strengthen me, I pray 
Thee, only this once, O God, that I 
may be this once avenged of the 
Philistines for my two eyes.’ 29And 
Samson took fast hold of the two 
middle pillars upon which the house 
rested, and leaned upon them, the one 
with his right hand, and the other with 
his left. 30And Samson said: ‘Let me 


die with the Philistines.’ And he bent 
with all his might; and the house fell 
upon the lords, and upon all the people 
that were therein. So the dead that he 
slew at his death were more than they 
that he slew in his life. 31Then his 
brethren and all the house of his father 
came down, and took him, and brought 
him up, and buried him between Zorah 
and Eshtaol in the burying-place of 
Manoah his father. And he judged 
Israel twenty years. 

Now there was a man of the 
hill-country of Ephraim, 
whose name was Micah. 2And he said 
unto his mother: ‘The eleven hundred 
pieces of silver that were taken from 
thee, about which thou didst utter a 
curse, and didst also speak it in mine 
ears, behold, the silver is with me; I 
took it.’ And his mother said: ‘Blessed 
be my son of the LORD.’ 3And he 
restored the eleven hundred pieces of 
silver to his mother, and his mother 
said: ‘I verily dedicate the silver unto 
the LORD from my hand for my son, to 
make a graven image and a molten 
image; now therefore I will restore it 
unto thee.’ 4And when he restored the 
money unto his mother, his mother 
took two hundred pieces of silver, and 
gave them to the founder, who made 
thereof a graven image and a molten 
image; and it was in the house of 
Micah. 5And the man Micah had a 
house of God, and he made an ephod, 
and teraphim, and consecrated one of 
his sons, who became his priest. 6In 
those days there was no king in Israel; 
every man did that which was right in 
his own eyes. 7And there was a young 
man out of Beth-lehem in Judah—in 
the family of Judah—who was a 
Levite, and he sojourned there. 8And 
the man departed out of the city, out of 
Beth-lehem in Judah, to sojourn where 
he could find a place; and he came to 
the hill-country of Ephraim to the 
house of Micah, as he journeyed. 9And 
Micah said unto him: ‘Whence comest 
thou?’ And he said unto him: ‘I am a 
Levite of Beth-lehem in Judah, and I 
go to sojourn where I may find a 
place.’ 10And Micah said unto him: 
‘Dwell with me, and be unto me a 
father and a priest, and I will give thee 
ten pieces of silver by the year, and a 
suit of apparel, and thy victuals.’ So 
the Levite went in. 11And the Levite 
was content to dwell with the man; and 
the young man was unto him as one of 
his sons. 12And Micah consecrated the 
Levite, and the young man became his 
priest, and was in the house of Micah. 
13Then said Micah: ‘Now know I that 
the LORD will do me good, seeing I 
have a Levite as my priest.’ 

In those days there was no 
king in Israel; and in those 
days the tribe of the Danites sought 
them an inheritance to dwell in; for 
unto that day there had nothing been 
allotted unto them among the tribes of 
Israel for an inheritance. 2And the 
children of Dan sent of their family 
five men from their whole number, 
men of valour, from Zorah, and from 
Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to 
17 

18 




search it; and they said unto them: 
‘Go, search the land’; and they came 
to the hill-country of Ephraim, unto 
the house of Micah, and lodged there. 
3When they were by the house of 
Micah, they knew the voice of the 
young man the Levite; and they turned 
aside thither, and said unto him: ‘Who 
brought thee hither? and what doest 
thou in this place? and what hast thou 
here?’ 4And he said unto them: ‘Thus 
and thus hath Micah dealt with me, 
and he hath hired me, and I am 
become his priest.’ 5And they said 
unto him: ‘Ask counsel, we pray thee, 
of God, that we may know whether 
our way which we are going shall be 
prosperous.’ 6And the priest said unto 
them: ‘Go in peace; before the LORD is 
your way wherein ye go.’ 

7Then the five men departed, and 
came to Laish, and saw the people that 
were therein, how they dwelt in 
security, after the manner of the 
Zidonians, quiet and secure; for there 
was none in the land, possessing 
authority, that might put them to 
shame in any thing, and they were far 
from the Zidonians, and had no 
dealings with any man. 8And they 
came unto their brethren to Zorah and 
Eshtaol; and their brethren said unto 
them: ‘What say ye?’ 9And they said: 
‘Arise, and let us go up against them; 
for we have seen the land, and, behold, 
it is very good; and are ye still? be not 
slothful to go and to enter in to possess 
the land. 10When ye go, ye shall come 
unto a people secure, and the land is 
large; for God hath given it into your 
hand; a place where there is no want; it 
hath every thing that is in the earth.’ 

11And there set forth from thence of 
the family of the Danites, out of Zorah 
and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men 
girt with weapons of war. 12And they 
went up, and encamped in Kiriath-
jearim, in Judah; wherefore that place 
was called Mahaneh-dan unto this day; 
behold, it is behind Kiriath-jearim. 
13And they passed thence unto the hill-
country of Ephraim, and came unto the 
house of Micah. 14Then answered the 
five men that went to spy out the 
country of Laish, and said unto their 
brethren: ‘Do ye know that there is in 
these houses an ephod, and teraphim, 
and a graven image, and a molten 
image? now therefore consider what 
ye have to do.’ 15And they turned aside 
thither, and came to the house of the 
young man the Levite, even unto the 
house of Micah, and asked him of his 
welfare. 16And the six hundred men 
girt with their weapons of war, who 
were of the children of Dan, stood by 
the entrance of the gate. 17And the five 
men that went to spy out the land went 
up, and came in thither, and took the 
graven image, and the ephod, and the 
teraphim, and the molten image; and 
the priest stood by the entrance of the 
gate with the six hundred men girt 
with weapons of war. 18And when 
these went into Micah’s house, and 
fetched the graven image of the ephod, 
and the teraphim, and the molten 
image, the priest said unto them: 


‘What do ye?’ 19And they said unto 
him: ‘Hold thy peace, lay thy hand 
upon thy mouth, and go with us, and 
be to us a father and a priest; is it 
better for thee to be priest unto the 
house of one man, or to be priest unto 
a tribe and a family in Israel?’ 20And 
the priest’s heart was glad, and he took 
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the 
graven image, and went in the midst of 
the people. 21So they turned and 
departed, and put the little ones and 
the cattle and the goods before them. 
22When they were a good way from 
the house of Micah, the men that were 
in the houses near to Micah’s house 
were gathered together, and overtook 
the children of Dan. 23And they cried 
unto the children of Dan. And they 
turned their faces, and said unto 
Micah: ‘What aileth thee, that thou 
comest with such a company?’ 24And 
he said: ‘Ye have taken away my god 
which I made, and the priest, and are 
gone away, and what have I more? and 
how then say ye unto me: What aileth 
thee?’ 25And the children of Dan said 
unto him: ‘Let not thy voice be heard 
among us, lest angry fellows fall upon 
you, and thou lose thy life, with the 
lives of thy household.’ 26And the 
children of Dan went their way; and 
when Micah saw that they were too 
strong for him, he turned and went 
back unto his house. 27And they took 
that which Micah had made, and the 
priest whom he had, and came unto 
Laish, unto a people quiet and secure, 
and smote them with the edge of the 
sword; and they burnt the city with 
fire. 28And there was no deliverer, 
because it was far from Zidon, and 
they had no dealings with any man; 
and it was in the valley that lieth by 
Beth-rehob. And they built the city, 
and dwelt therein. 29And they called 
the name of the city Dan, after the 
name of Dan their father, who was 
born unto Israel; howbeit the name of 
the city was Laish at the first. 30And 
the children of Dan set up for 
themselves the graven image; and 
Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son 
of aManasseh, he and his sons were 
priests to the tribe of the Danites until 
the day of the captivity of the land. 
31So they set them up Micah’s graven 
image which he made, all the time that 
the house of God was in Shiloh. 

a Heb. .... With . suspended, 
indicating an earlier reading, Moses. 

 

19 



And it came to pass in those 
days, when there was no king 
in Israel, that there was a certain 
Levite sojourning on the farther side of 
the hill-country of Ephraim, who took 
to him a concubine out of Beth-lehem 
in Judah. 2And his concubine played 
the harlot against him, and went away 
from him unto her father’s house to 
Beth-lehem in Judah, and was there 
the space of four months. 3And her 
husband arose, and went after her, to 
speak kindly unto her, to bring her 
back, having his servant with him, and 


a couple of asses; and she brought him 
into her father’s house; and when the 
father of the damsel saw him, he 
rejoiced to meet him. 4And his father-
in-law, the damsel’s father, retained 
him; and he abode with him three 
days; so they did eat and drink, and 
lodged there. 5And it came to pass on 
the fourth day, that they arose early in 
the morning, and he rose up to depart; 
and the damsel’s father said unto his 
son-in-law: ‘Stay thy heart with a 
morsel of bread, and afterward ye shall 
go your way.’ 6So they sat down, and 
did eat and drink, both of them 
together; and the damsel’s father said 
unto the man: ‘Be content, I pray thee, 
and tarry all night, and let thy heart be 
merry.’ 7And the man rose up to 
depart; but his father-in-law urged 
him, and he lodged there again. 8And 
he arose early in the morning on the 
fifth day to depart; and the damsel’s 
father said: ‘Stay thy heart, I pray thee, 
and tarry ye until the day declineth’; 
and they did eat, both of them. 9And 
when the man rose up to depart, he, 
and his concubine, and his servant, his 
father-in-law, the damsel’s father, said 
unto him: ‘Behold, now the day 
draweth toward evening; tarry, I pray 
you, all night; behold, the day groweth 
to an end; lodge here, that thy heart 
may be merry; and to-morrow get you 
early on your way, that thou mayest go 
home.’ 10But the man would not tarry 
that night, but he rose up and departed, 
and came over against Jebus—the 
same is Jerusalem; and there were with 
him a couple of asses saddled; his 
concubine also was with him. 11When 
they were by Jebus—the day was far 
spent—the servant said unto his 
master: ‘Come, I pray thee, and let us 
turn aside into this city of the 
Jebusites, and lodge in it.’ 12And his 
master said unto him: ‘We will not 
turn aside into the city of a foreigner, 
that is not of the children of Israel; but 
we will pass over to Gibeah.’ 13And he 
said unto his servant: ‘Come and let us 
draw near to one of these places; and 
we will lodge in Gibeah, or in Ramah.’ 
14So they passed on and went their 
way; and the sun went down upon 
them near to Gibeah, which belongeth 
to Benjamin. 15And they turned aside 
thither, to go in to lodge in Gibeah; 
and he went in, and sat him down in 
the broad place of the city; for there 
was no man that took them into his 
house to lodge. 16And, behold, there 
came an old man from his work out of 
the field at even; now the man was of 
the hill-country of Ephraim, and he 
sojourned in Gibeah; but the men of 
the place were Benjamites. 17And he 
lifted up his eyes, and saw the 
wayfaring man in the broad place of 
the city; and the old man said: 
‘Whither goest thou? and whence 
comest thou?’ 18And he said unto him: 
‘We are passing from Beth-lehem in 
Judah unto the farther side of the hill-
country of Ephraim; from thence am I, 
and I went to Beth-lehem in Judah, 
and I am now going to the house of the 
LORD; and there is no man that taketh 


me into his house. 19Yet there is both 
straw and provender for our asses; and 
there is bread and wine also for me, 
and for thy handmaid, and for the 
young man that is with thy servants; 
there is no want of any thing.’ 20And 
the old man said: ‘Peace be unto thee; 
howsoever let all thy wants lie upon 
me; only lodge not in the broad place.’ 
21So he brought him into his house, 
and gave the asses fodder; and they 
washed their feet, and did eat and 
drink. 22As they were making their 
hearts merry, behold, the men of the 
city, certain base fellows, beset the 
house round about, beating at the door; 
and they spoke to the master of the 
house, the old man, saying: ‘Bring 
forth the man that came into thy house, 
that we may know him.’ 23And the 
man, the master of the house, went out 
unto them, and said unto them: ‘Nay, 
my brethren, I pray you, do not so 
wickedly; seeing that this man is come 
into my house, do not this wanton 
deed. 24Behold, here is my daughter a 
virgin, and his concubine; I will bring 
them out now, and humble ye them, 
and do with them what seemeth good 
unto you; but unto this man do not so 
wanton a thing.’ 25But the men would 
not hearken to him; so the man laid 
hold on his concubine, and brought her 
forth unto them; and they knew her, 
and abused her all the night until the 
morning; and when the day began to 
spring, they let her go. 26Then came 
the woman in the dawning of the day, 
and fell down at the door of the man’s 
house where her lord was, till it was 
light. 27And her lord rose up in the 
morning, and opened the doors of the 
house, and went out to go his way; 
and, behold, the woman his concubine 
was fallen down at the door of the 
house, with her hands upon the 
threshold. 28And he said unto her.’ Up, 
and let us be going’; but none 
answered; then he took her up upon 
the ass; and the man rose up, and got 
him unto his place. 29And when he was 
come into his house, he took a knife, 
and laid hold on his concubine, and 
divided her, limb by limb, into twelve 
pieces, and sent her throughout all the 
borders of Israel. 30And it was so, that 
all that saw it said: ‘Such a thing hath 
not happened nor been seen from the 
day that the children of Israel came up 
out of the land of Egypt unto this day; 
consider it, take counsel, and speak.’ 

Then all the children of Israel 
went out, and the congregation 
was assembled as one man, from Dan 
even to Beer-sheba, with the land of 
Gilead, unto the LORD at Mizpah. 2And 
the chiefs of all the people, even of all 
the tribes of Israel, presented 
themselves in the assembly of the 
people of God, four hundred thousand 
footmen that drew sword.— 3Now the 
children of Benjamin heard that the 
children of Israel were gone up to 
Mizpah.—And the children of Israel 
said: ‘Tell us, how was this 
wickedness brought to pass?’ 4And the 
Levite, the husband of the woman that 
was murdered, answered and said: ‘I 
20 




came into Gibeah that belongeth to 
Benjamin, I and my concubine, to 
lodge. 5And the men of Gibeah rose 
against me, and beset the house round 
about upon me by night; me they 
thought to have slain, and my 
concubine they forced, and she is 
dead. 6And I took my concubine, and 
cut her in pieces, and sent her 
throughout all the country of the 
inheritance of Israel; for they have 
committed lewdness and wantonness 
in Israel 7Behold, ye are all here, 
children of Israel, give here your 
advice and council.’ 8And all the 
people arose as one man, saying: ‘We 
will not any of us go to his tent, 
neither will we any of us turn unto his 
house. 9But now this is the thing which 
we will do to Gibeah: we will go up 
against it by lot; 10and we will take ten 
men of a hundred throughout all the 
tribes of Israel, and a hundred of a 
thousand, and a thousand out of ten 
thousand, to fetch victuals for the 
people, that they may do, when they 
come to aGibeah of Benjamin, 
according to all the wantonness that 
they have wrought in Israel.’ 11So all 
the men of Israel were gathered 
against the city, knit together as one 
man. 

a Heb. Geba. 

12And the tribes of Israel sent men 
through all the tribe of Benjamin, 
saying: ‘What wickedness is this that 
is come to pass among you? 13Now 
therefore deliver up the men, the base 

fellows that are in Gibeah, that we 
may put them to death, and put away 
evil from Israel.’ But the children of 
Benjamin would not hearken to the 
voice of their brethren the children of 
Israel. 14And the children of Benjamin 
gathered themselves together out of 
their cities unto Gibeah, to go out to 
battle against the children of Israel. 
15And the children of Benjamin 
numbered on that day out of the cities 
twenty and six thousand men that drew 
sword, besides the inhabitants of 
Gibeah, who numbered seven hundred 
chosen men. 16All this people, even 
seven hundred chosen men, were left-
handed; every one could sling stones 
at a hair-breadth, and not miss. 

17And the men of Israel, beside 
Benjamin, numbered four hundred 
thousand men that drew sword; all 
these were men of war. 18And the 
children of Israel arose, and went up to 
Beth-el, and asked counsel of God; 
and they said: ‘Who shall go up for us 
first to battle against the children of 
Benjamin?’ And the LORD said: ‘Judah 
first.’ 19And the children of Israel rose 
up in the morning, and encamped 
against Gibeah. 20And the men of 
Israel went out to battle against 
Benjamin; and the men of Israel set the 
battle in array against them at Gibeah. 
21And the children of Benjamin came 
forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed 
down to the ground of the Israelites on 
that day twenty and two thousand men. 
22And the people, the men of Israel, 
encouraged themselves, and set the 


battle again in array in the place where 
they set themselves in array the first 
day. 23And the children of Israel went 
up and wept before the LORD until 
even; and they asked of the LORD, 
saying: ‘Shall I again draw nigh to 
battle against the children of Benjamin 
my brother?’ And the LORD said: ‘Go 
up against him.’ 

24And the children of Israel came 
near against the children of Benjamin 
the second day. 25And Benjamin went 
forth against them out of Gibeah the 
second day, and destroyed down to the 
ground of the children of Israel again 
eighteen thousand men; all these drew 
the sword. 26Then all the children of 
Israel, and all the people, went up, and 
came unto Beth-el, and wept, and sat 
there before the LORD, and fasted that 
day until even; and they offered burnt-
offerings and peace-offerings before 
the LORD. 27And the children of Israel 
asked of the LORD—for the ark of the 
covenant of God was there in those 
days, 28and Phinehas, the son of 
Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before 
it in those days—saying: ‘Shall I yet 
again go out to battle against the 
children of Benjamin my brother, or 
shall I cease?’ And the LORD said: ‘Go 
up; for to-morrow I will deliver him 
into thy hand.’ 29And Israel set liers-
in-wait against Gibeah round about. 

30And the children of Israel went up 
against the children of Benjamin on 
the third day, and set themselves in 
array against Gibeah, as at other times. 
31And the children of Benjamin went 
out against the people, and were drawn 
away from the city; and they began to 
smite and kill of the people, as at other 
times, in the field, in the highways, of 
which one goeth up to Beth-el, and the 
other to Gibeah, about thirty men of 
Israel. 32And the children of Benjamin 
said: ‘They are smitten down before 
us, as at the first.’ But the children of 
Israel said: ‘Let us flee, and draw them 
away from the city unto the highways.’ 
33And all the men of Israel rose up out 
of their place, and set themselves in 
array at Baal-tamar; and the liers-in-
wait of Israel broke forth out of their 
place, even out of Maareh-geba. 34And 
there came over against Gibeah ten 
thousand chosen men out of all Israel, 
and the battle was sore; but they knew 
not that evil was close upon them. 
35And the LORD smote Benjamin before 
Israel; and the children of Israel 
destroyed of Benjamin that day twenty 
and five thousand and a hundred men; 
all these drew the sword. 

36So the children of Benjamin saw 
that they were smitten. And the men of 
Israel gave place to Benjamin, because 
they trusted unto the liers-in-wait 
whom they had set against Gibeah.— 
37And the liers-in-wait hastened, and 
rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers-in-
wait drew forth, and smote all the city 
with the edge of the sword. 38Now 
there was an appointed sign between 
the men of Israel and the liers-in-wait, 
that they should make a great beacon 
of smoke rise up out of the city.— 
39And the men of Israel turned in the 


battle, and Benjamin began to smite 
and kill of the men of Israel about 
thirty persons; for they said: ‘Surely 
they are smitten down before us, as in 
the first battle.’ 40But when the beacon 
began to arise up out of the city in a 
pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked 
behind them, and, behold, the whole of 
the city went up in smoke to heaven. 
41And the men of Israel turned, and the 
men of Benjamin were amazed; for 
they saw that evil was come upon 
them. 42Therefore they turned their 
backs before the men of Israel unto the 
way of the wilderness; but the battle 
followed hard after them; and they that 
came out of the city destroyed them in 
the midst of the men of Israel. 43They 
inclosed the Benjamites round about, 
and chased them, and overtook them at 
their resting-place, as far as over 
against Gibeah toward the sunrising. 
44And there fell of Benjamin eighteen 
thousand men; all these were men of 
valour. 45And they turned and fled 
toward the wilderness unto the rock of 
Rimmon; and they gleaned of them in 
the highways five thousand men; and 
followed hard after them unto Gidom, 
and smote of them two thousand men. 
46So that all who fell that day of 
Benjamin were twenty and five 
thousand men that drew the sword; all 
these were men of valour. 47But six 
hundred men turned and fled toward 
the wilderness unto the rock of 
Rimmon, and abode in the rock of 
Rimmon four months. 48And the men 
of Israel turned back upon the children 
of Benjamin, and smote them with the 
edge of the sword, both the entire city, 
and the cattle, and all that they found; 
moreover all the cities which they 
found they set on fire. 

Now the men of Israel had 
sworn in Mizpah, saying: 
‘There shall not any of us give his 
daughter unto Benjamin to wife.’ 2And 
the people came to Beth-el, and sat 
there till even before God, and lifted 
up their voices, and wept sore. 3And 
they said: ‘O LORD, the God of Israel, 
why is this come to pass in Israel, that 
there should be to-day one tribe 
lacking in Israel?’ 4And it came to pass 
on the morrow that the people rose 
early, and built there an altar, and 
offered burnt-offerings and peace-
offerings. 5And the children of Israel 
said: ‘Who is there among all the 
tribes of Israel that came not up in the 
assembly unto the LORD?’ For they had 
made a great oath concerning him that 
came not up unto the LORD to Mizpah, 
saying: ‘He shall surely be put to 
death.’ 6And the children of Israel 
repented them for Benjamin their 
brother, and said: ‘There is one tribe 
cut off from Israel this day. 7How shall 
we do for wives for them that remain, 
seeing we have sworn by the LORD that 
we will not give them of our daughters 
to wives?’ 8And they said: ‘What one 
is there of the tribes of Israel that came 
not up unto the LORD to Mizpah?’ And, 
behold, there came none to the camp 
from Jabesh-gilead to the assembly. 
9For when the people were numbered, 
21 




behold, there were none of the 
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there. 
10And the congregation sent thither 
twelve thousand men of the valiantest, 
and commanded them, saying: ‘Go 
and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-
gilead with the edge of the sword, with 
the women and the little ones. 11And 
this is the thing that ye shall do: ye 
shall utterly destroy every male, and 
every woman that hath lain by man.’ 
12And they found among the 
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four 
hundred young virgins, that had not 
known man by lying with him; and 
they brought them unto the camp to 
Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan. 

13And the whole congregation sent 
and spoke to the children of Benjamin 
that were in the rock of Rimmon, and 
proclaimed peace unto them. 14And 
Benjamin returned at that time; and 
they gave them the women whom they 
had saved alive of the women of 
Jabesh-gilead; and yet so they sufficed 
them not. 15And the people repented 
them for Benjamin, because that the 
LORD had made a breach in the tribes 
of Israel. 

16Then the elders of the 
congregation said: ‘How shall we do 
for wives for them that remain, seeing 
the women are destroyed out of 
Benjamin?’ 17And they said: ‘They 
that are escaped must be as an 
inheritance for Benjamin, that a tribe 
be not blotted out from Israel. 
18Howbeit we may not give them 
wives of our daughters.’ For the 
children of Israel had sworn, saying: 
‘Cursed be he that giveth a wife to 
Benjamin.’ 19And they said: ‘Behold, 
there is the feast of the LORD from year 
to year in Shiloh, which is on the north 
of Beth-el, on the east side of the 
highway that goeth up from Beth-el to 
Shechem, and on the south of 
Lebonah.’ 20And they commanded the 
children of Benjamin, saying: ‘Go and 
lie in wait in the vineyards; 21and see, 
and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh 
come out to dance in the dances, then 
come ye out of the vineyards, and 
catch you every man his wife of the 
daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land 
of Benjamin. 22And it shall be, when 
their fathers or their brethren come to 
strive with us, that we will say unto 
them: Grant them graciously unto us; 
because we took not for each man of 
them his wife in battle; neither did ye 
give them unto them, that ye should 
now be guilty.’ 23And the children of 
Benjamin did so, and took them wives, 
according to their number, of them that 
danced, whom they carried off; and 
they went and returned unto their 
inheritance, and built the cities, and 
dwelt in them. 24And the children of 
Israel departed thence at that time, 
every man to his tribe and to his 
family, and they went out from thence 
every man to his inheritance. 25In those 
days there was no king in Israel; every 
man did that which was right in his 
own eyes. 




. ..... 

FIRST SAMUEL 

 

Now there was a certain man of 
Ramathaim-zophim, of the hill-
country of Ephraim, and his name was 
Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son 
of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of 
Zuph, an Ephraimite. 2And he had two 
wives: the name of the one was 
Hannah, and the name of the other 
Peninnah; and Peninnah had children, 
but Hannah had no children. 3And this 
man went up out of his city from year 
to year to worship and to sacrifice unto 
the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the 
two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, 
were there priests unto the LORD. 4And 
it came to pass upon a day, when 
Elkanah sacrificed, that he gave to 
Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons 
and her daughters, portions; 5but unto 
Hannah he gave a double portion; for 
he loved Hannah, but the LORD had 
shut up her womb. 6And her rival 
vexed her sore, to make her fret, 
because the LORD had shut up her 
womb. 7And as he did so year by year, 
when she went up to the house of the 
LORD, so she vexed her; therefore she 
wept, and would not eat. 8And Elkanah 
her husband said unto her: ‘Hannah, 
why weepest thou? and why eatest 
thou not? and why is thy heart 
grieved? am not I better to thee than 
ten sons?’ 9So Hannah rose up after 
they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they 
had drunk—now Eli the priest sat 
upon his seat by the door-post of the 
temple of the LORD; 10and she was in 
bitterness of soul—and prayed unto 
the LORD, and wept sore. 11And she 
vowed a vow, and said: ‘O LORD of 
hosts, if Thou wilt indeed look on the 
affliction of Thy handmaid, and 
remember me, and not forget Thy 
handmaid, but wilt give unto Thy 
handmaid a man-child, then I will give 
him unto the LORD all the days of his 
life, and there shall no razor come 
upon his head.’ 12And it came to pass, 
as she prayed long before the LORD, 
that Eli watched her mouth. 13Now 
Hannah, she spoke in her heart; only 
her lips moved, but her voice could not 
be heard; therefore, Eli thought she 
had been drunken. 14And Eli said unto 
her: ‘How long wilt thou be drunken? 
put away thy wine from thee.’ 15And 
Hannah answered and said: ‘No, my 
lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful 
spirit; I have drunk neither wine nor 
strong drink, but I poured out my soul 
before the LORD. 16Count not thy 
handmaid for a wicked woman: for out 
of the abundance of my complaint and 
my vexation have I spoken hitherto.’ 
17Then Eli answered and said: ‘Go in 
peace, and the God of Israel grant thy 
petition that thou hast asked of Him.’ 
18And she said: ‘Let thy servant find 
1 




favour in thy sight.’ So the woman 
went her way, and did eat, and her 
countenance was no more sad. 19And 
they rose up in the morning early, and 
worshipped before the LORD, and 
returned, and came to their house to 
Ramah; and Elkanah knew Hannah his 
wife; and the LORD remembered her. 
20And it came to pass, when the time 
was come about, that Hannah 
conceived, and bore a son; and she 
called his name Samuel: ‘because I 
have asked him of the LORD.’ 

21And the man Elkanah, and all his 
house, went up to offer unto the LORD 
the yearly sacrifice, and his vow. 22But 
Hannah went not up; for she said unto 
her husband: ‘Until the child be 
weaned, when I will bring him, that he 
may appear before the LORD, and there 
abide for ever.’ 23And Elkanah her 
husband said unto her: ‘Do what 
seemeth thee good; tarry until thou 
have weaned him; only the LORD 
establish His word.’ So the woman 
tarried and gave her son suck, until she 
weaned him. 24And when she had 
weaned him, she took him up with her, 
with three bullocks, and one ephah of 
meal, and a bottle of wine, and brought 
him unto the house of the LORD in 
Shiloh; and the child was young. 
25And when the bullock was slain, the 
child was brought to Eli. 26And she 
said: ‘Oh, my lord, as thy soul liveth, 
my lord, I am the woman that stood by 
thee here, praying unto the LORD. 27For 
this child I prayed; and the LORD hath 
granted me my petition which I asked 
of Him; 28therefore I also have lent 
him to the LORD; as long as he liveth 
he is lent to the LORD.’ And he 
worshipped the LORD there. 

 

And Hannah prayed, and said: 

My heart exulteth in the LORD, 

My horn is exalted in the LORD; 

My mouth is enlarged over mine 
enemies; 

Because I rejoice in Thy salvation. 

2There is none holy as the LORD, 

For there is none beside Thee; 

Neither is there any rock like our 
God. 

3Multiply not exceeding proud talk; 

Let not arrogancy come out of your 

 mouth; 

For the LORD is a God of knowledge, 

And by Him actions are weighed. 

4The bows of the mighty men are 
broken, 

And they that stumbled are girded 
with strength. 

5They that were full have hired out 
themselves for bread; 

And they that were hungry have 
ceased; 

While the barren hath borne seven, 

She that had many children hath 

 languished. 

 

6The LORD killeth, and maketh alive; 

He bringeth down to the grave, and 

bringeth up. 

7The LORD maketh poor, and maketh 
rich; 

He bringeth low, He also lifteth up. 
2 




8He raiseth up the poor out of the 
dust, 

He lifteth up the needy from the 
dung-hill, 

To make them sit with princes, 

And inherit the throne of glory; 

For the pillars of the earth are the 
LORD’S, 

And He hath set the world upon 
them. 

 

9He will keep the feet of His holy 
ones, 

But the wicked shall be put to 
silence in darkness; 

For not by strength shall man 
prevail. 

10They that strive with the LORD 
shall be broken to pieces; 

Against them will He thunder in 
heaven; 

The LORD will judge the ends of the 
earth; 

And He will give strength unto His 
king, 

And exalt the horn of His anointed. 

 

11And Elkanah went to Ramah to his 
house. And the child did minister unto 
the LORD before Eli the priest. 

12Now the sons of Eli were base 
men; they knew not the LORD. 13And 
the custom of the priests with the 
people was, that, when any man 
offered sacrifice, the priest’s servant 
came, while the flesh was in seething, 
with a flesh-hook of three teeth in his 
band; 14and he struck it into the pan, or 
kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the 
flesh-hook brought up the priest took 
therewith. So they did unto all the 
Israelites that came thither in Shiloh. 
15Yea, before the fat was made to 
smoke, the priest’s servant came, and 
said to the man that sacrificed: ‘Give 
flesh to roast for the priest; for he will 
not have sodden flesh of thee, but 
raw.’ 16And if the man said unto him: 
‘Let the fat be made to smoke first of 
all, and then take as much as thy soul 
desireth’; then he would say: ‘Nay, but 
thou shalt give it me now; and if not, I 
will take it by force.’ 17And the sin of 
the young men was very great before 
the LORD; for the men dealt 
contemptuously with the offering of 
the LORD. 

18But Samuel ministered before the 
LORD, being a child, girded with a 
linen ephod. 19Moreover his mother 
made him a little robe, and brought it 
to him from year to year, when she 
came up with her husband to offer the 
yearly sacrifice. 20And Eli would bless 
Elkanah and his wife, and say: ‘The 
LORD give thee seed of this woman for 
the loan which was lent to the LORD.’ 
And they would go unto their own 
home. 21So the LORD remembered 
Hannah, and she conceived, and bore 
three sons and two daughters. And the 
child Samuel grew before the LORD. 

22Now Eli was very old; and he 
heard all that his sons did unto all 
Israel, and how that they lay with the 
women that did service at the door of 
the tent of meeting. 23And he said unto 
them: ‘Why do ye such things? for I 


hear evil reports concerning you from 
all this people. 24Nay, my sons; for it is 
no good report which I hear the 
LORD’S people do spread abroad. 25If 
one man sin against another, God shall 
judge him; but if a man sin against the 
LORD, who shall entreat for him?’ But 
they hearkened not unto the voice of 
their father, because the LORD would 
slay them. 26And the child Samuel 
grew on, and increased in favour both 
with the LORD, and also with men. 

27And there came a man of God unto 
Eli, and said unto him: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD: Did I reveal Myself unto the 
house of thy father, when they were in 
Egypt in bondage to Pharaoh’s house? 
28And did I choose him out of all the 
tribes of Israel to be My priest, to go 
up unto Mine altar, to burn incense, to 
wear an ephod before Me? and did I 
give unto the house of thy father all 
the offerings of the children of Israel 
made by fire? 29Wherefore kick ye at 
My sacrifice and at Mine offering, 
which I have commanded in My 
habitation; and honourest thy sons 
above Me, to make yourselves fat with 
the chiefest of all the offerings of 
Israel My people? 30Therefore the 
LORD, the God of Israel, saith: I said 
indeed that thy house, and the house of 
thy father, should walk before Me for 
ever; but now the LORD saith: Be it far 
from Me: for them that honour Me I 
will honour, and they that despise Me 
shall be lightly esteemed. 31Behold, the 
days come, that I will cut off thine 
arm, and the arm of thy father’s house, 
that there shall not be an old man in 
thy house. 32And thou shalt behold a 
rival in My habitation, in all the good 
which shall be done to Israel; and there 
shall not be an old man in thy house 
for ever. 33Yet will I not cut off every 
man of thine from Mine altar, to make 
thine eyes to fail, and thy heart to 
languish; and all the increase of thy 
house shall die young men. 34And this 
shall be the sign unto thee, that which 
shall come upon thy two sons, on 
Hophni and Phinehas: in one day they 
shall die both of them. 35And I will 
raise Me up a faithful priest, that shall 
do according to that which is in My 
heart and in My mind; and I will build 
him a sure house; and he shall walk 
before Mine anointed for ever. 36And it 
shall come to pass, that every one that 
is left in thy house shall come and bow 
down to him for a piece of silver and a 
loaf of bread, and shall say: Put me, I 
pray thee, into one of the 
priests’offices, that I may eat a morsel 
of bread.’ 

And the child Samuel ministered 
unto the LORD before Eli. And the 
word of the LORD was precious in 
those days; there was no frequent 
vision. 2And it came to pass at that 
time, when Eli was laid down in his 
place—now his eyes had begun to wax 
dim, that he could not see— 3and the 
lamp of God was not yet gone out, and 
Samuel was laid down to sleep in the 
temple of the LORD, where the ark of 
God was, 4that the LORD called 
Samuel; and he said: ‘Here am I.’ 
3 




5And he ran unto Eli, and said: ‘Here 
am I; for thou didst call me.’ And he 
said: ‘I called not; lie down again.’ 
And he went and lay down. 6And the 
LORD called yet again Samuel. And 
Samuel arose and went to Eli, and 
said: ‘Here am I; for thou didst call 
me.’ And he answered: ‘I called not, 
my son; lie down again.’ 7Now Samuel 
did not yet know the LORD, neither was 
the word of the LORD yet revealed unto 
him. 8And the LORD called Samuel 
again the third time. And he arose and 
went to Eli, and said: ‘Here am I; for 
thou didst call me.’ And Eli perceived 
that the LORD was calling the child. 
9Therefore Eli said unto Samuel: ‘Go, 
lie down; and it shall be, if thou be 
called, that thou shalt say: Speak, 
LORD; for Thy servant heareth.’ So 
Samuel went and lay down in his 
place. 10And the LORD came, and stood, 
and called as at other times: ‘Samuel, 
Samuel.’ Then Samuel said: ‘Speak; 
for Thy servant heareth.’ 11And the 
LORD said to Samuel: ‘Behold, I will 
do a thing in Israel, at which both the 
ears of every one that heareth it shall 
tingle. 12In that day I will perform 
against Eli all that I have spoken 
concerning his house, from the 
beginning even unto the end. 13For I 
have told him that I will judge his 
house for ever, for the iniquity, in that 
he knew that his sons did bring a curse 
upon themselves, and he rebuked them 
not. 14And therefore I have sworn unto 
the house of Eli, that the iniquity of 
Eli’s house shall not be expiated with 
sacrifice nor offering for ever.’ 15And 
Samuel lay until the morning, and 
opened the doors of the house of the 
LORD. And Samuel feared to tell Eli the 
vision. 16Then Eli called Samuel, and 
said: ‘Samuel, my son.’ And he said: 
‘Here am I.’ 17And he said: ‘What is 
the thing that He hath spoken unto 
thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me, 
God do so to thee, and more also, if 
thou hide any thing from me of all the 
things that He spoke unto thee.’ 18And 
Samuel told him all the words, and hid 
nothing from him. And he said: ‘It is 
the LORD; let Him do what seemeth 
Him good.’ 

19And Samuel grew, and the LORD 
was with him, and did let none of his 
words fall to the ground. 20And all 
Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba 
knew that Samuel was established to 
be a prophet of the LORD. 21And the 
LORD appeared again in Shiloh; for the 
LORD revealed Himself to Samuel in 
Shiloh by the word of the LORD. 

And the word of Samuel came to 
all Israel. 

Now Israel went out against the 
Philistines to battle, and pitched beside 
Eben-ezer; and the Philistines pitched 
in Aphek. 2And the Philistines put 
themselves in array against Israel; and 
when the battle was spread, Israel was 
smitten before the Philistines; and they 
slew of the army in the field about four 
thousand men. 3And when the people 
were come into the camp, the elders of 
Israel said: ‘Wherefore hath the LORD 
smitten us to-day before the 
4 




Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD out of Shiloh 
unto us, that He may come among us, 
and save us out of the hand of our 
enemies.’ 4So the people sent to 
Shiloh, and they brought from thence 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD of 
hosts, who sitteth upon the cherubim; 
and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and 
Phinehas, were there with the ark of 
the covenant of God. 5And when the 
ark of the covenant of the LORD came 
into the camp, all Israel shouted with a 
great shout, so that the earth rang. 
6And when the Philistines heard the 
noise of the shout, they said: ‘What 
meaneth the noise of this great shout in 
the camp of the Hebrews?’ And they 
knew that the ark of the LORD was 
come into the camp. 7And the 
Philistines were afraid, for they said: 
‘God is come into the camp.’ And they 
said: ‘Woe unto us! for there was not 
such a thing yesterday and the day 
before. 8Woe unto us! who shall 
deliver us out of the hand of these 
mighty gods? these are the gods that 
smote the Egyptians with all manner 
of plagues and in the wilderness. 9Be 
strong, and quit yourselves like men, 
O ye Philistines, that ye be not 
servants unto the Hebrews, as they 
have been to you; quit yourselves like 
men, and fight.’ 10And the Philistines 
fought, and Israel was smitten, and 
they fled every man to his tent; and 
there was a very great slaughter; for 
there fell of Israel thirty thousand 
footmen. 11And the ark of God was 
taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni 
and Phinehas, were slain. 

12And there ran a man of Benjamin 
out of the army, and came to Shiloh 
the same day with his clothes rent, and 
with earth upon his head. 13And when 
he came, lo, Eli sat upon his seat by 
the wayside watching; for his heart 
trembled for the ark of God. And when 
the man came into the city, and told it, 
all the city cried out. 14And when Eli 
heard the noise of the crying, he said: 
‘What meaneth the noise of this 
tumult?’ And the man made haste, and 
came and told Eli. 15Now Eli was 
ninety and eight years old; and his 
eyes were set, that he could not see. 
16And the man said unto Eli: ‘I am he 
that came out of the army, and I fled 
to-day out of the army.’ And he said: 
‘How went the matter, my son?’ 17And 
he that brought the tidings answered 
and said: ‘Israel is fled before the 
Philistines, and there hath been also a 
great slaughter among the people, and 
thy two sons also, Hophni and 
Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God 
is taken.’ 18And it came to pass, when 
he made mention of the ark of God, 
that he fell from off his seat backward 
by the side of the gate, and his neck 
broke, and he died; for he was an old 
man, and heavy. And he had judged 
Israel forty years. 

19And his daughter-in-law, 
Phinehas’wife, was with child, near to 
be delivered; and when she heard the 
tidings that the ark of God was taken, 
and that her father-in-law and her 


husband were dead, she bowed herself 
and brought forth; for her pains came 
suddenly upon her. 20And about the 
time of her death the women that stood 
by her said unto her: ‘Fear not; for 
thou hast brought forth a son.’ But she 
answered not, neither did she regard it. 
21And she named the child aIchabod, 
saying: ‘The glory is departed from 
Israel’; because the ark of God was 
taken, and because of her father-in-law 
and her husband. 22And she said: ‘The 
glory is departed from Israel; for the 
ark of God is taken.’ 

a That is, There is no glory. 

Now the Philistines had taken the 
ark of God, and they brought it 
from Eben-ezer unto Ashdod. 2And the 
Philistines took the ark of God, and 
brought it into the house of Dagon, 
and set it by Dagon. 3And when they 
of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, 
behold, Dagon was fallen upon his 
face to the ground before the ark of the 
LORD. And they took Dagon, and set 
him in his place again. 4And when they 
arose early on the morrow morning, 
behold, Dagon was fallen upon his 
face to the ground before the ark of the 
LORD; and the head of Dagon and both 
the palms of his hands lay cut off upon 
the threshold; only the trunk of Dagon 
was left to him. 5Therefore neither the 
priests of Dagon, nor any that come 
into Dagon’s house, tread on the 
threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto 
this day. 

6But the hand of the LORD was heavy 
upon them of Ashdod, and He 
destroyed them, and smote them with 
emerods, even Ashdod and the borders 
thereof. 7And when the men of Ashdod 
saw that it was so, they said: ‘The ark 
of the God of Israel shall not abide 
with us; for His hand is sore upon us, 
and upon Dagon our god.’ 8They sent 
therefore and gathered all the lords of 
the Philistines unto them, and said: 
‘What shall we do with the ark of the 
God of Israel?’ And they answered: 
‘Let the ark of the God of Israel be 
carried about unto Gath.’ And they 
carried the ark of the God of Israel 
about thither. 9And it was so, that, after 
they had carried it about, the hand of 
the LORD was against the city with a 
very great discomfiture; and He smote 
the men of the city, both small and 
great, and emerods broke out upon 
them. 10So they sent the ark of God to 
Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark 
of God came to Ekron, that the 
Ekronites cried out, saying: ‘They 
have brought about the ark of the God 
of Israel to us, to slay us and our 
people.’ 11They sent therefore and 
gathered together all the lords of the 
Philistines, and they said: ‘Send away 
the ark of the God of Israel, and let it 
go back to its own place, that it slay us 
not, and our people’; for there was a 
deadly discomfiture throughout all the 
city; the hand of God was very heavy 
there. 12And the men that died not 
were smitten with the emerods; and 
the cry of the city went up to heaven. 
5 




And the ark of the LORD was in 
the country of the Philistines 
seven months. 2And the Philistines 
called for the priests and the diviners, 
saying: ‘What shall we do with the ark 
of the LORD? declare unto us 
wherewith we shall send it to its 
place.’ 3And they said: ‘If ye send 
away the ark of the God of Israel, send 
it not empty; but in any wise return 
Him a guilt-offering; then ye shall be 
healed, and it shall be known to you 
why His hand is not removed from 
you.’ 4Then said they: ‘What shall be 
the guilt-offering which we shall 
return to Him?’ And they said: ‘Five 
golden emerods, and five golden mice, 
according to the number of the lords of 
the Philistines; for one plague was on 
you all, and on your lords. 5Wherefore 
ye shall make images of your emerods, 
and images of your mice that mar the 
land; and ye shall give glory unto the 
God of Israel; peradventure He will 
lighten His hand from off you, and 
from off your gods, and from off your 
land. 6Wherefore then do ye harden 
your hearts, as the Egyptians and 
Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when 
He had wrought among them, did they 
not let the people go, and they 
departed? 7Now therefore take and 
prepare you a new cart, and two milch 
kine, on which there hath come no 
yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and 
bring their calves home from them. 
8And take the ark of the LORD, and lay 
it upon the cart; and put the jewels of 
gold, which ye return Him for a guilt-
offering, in a coffer by the side 
thereof; and send it away, that it may 
go. 9And see, if it goeth up by the way 
of its own border to Beth-shemesh, 
then He hath done us this great evil; 
but if not, then we shall know that it is 
not His hand that smote us; it was a 
chance that happened to us.’ 

10And the men did so; and took two 
milch kine, and tied them to the cart, 
and shut up their calves at home. 
11And they put the ark of the LORD 
upon the cart, and the coffer with the 
mice of gold and the images of their 
emerods. 12And the kine took the 
straight way by the way to Beth-
shemesh; they went along the 
highway, lowing as they went, and 
turned not aside to the right hand or to 
the left; and the lords of the Philistines 
went after them unto the border of 
Beth-shemesh. 13And they of Beth-
shemesh were reaping their wheat 
harvest in the valley; and they lifted up 
their eyes, and saw the ark, and 
rejoiced to see it. 14And the cart came 
into the field of Joshua the Beth-
shemite, and stood there, where there 
was a great stone; and they cleaved the 
wood of the cart, and offered up the 
kine for a burnt-offering unto the 
LORD. 15And the Levites took down the 
ark of the LORD, and the coffer that 
was with it, wherein the jewels of gold 
were, and put them on the great stone; 
and the men of Beth-shemesh offered 
burnt-offerings and sacrificed 
sacrifices the same day unto the LORD. 
16And when the five lords of the 
6 




Philistines had seen it, they returned to 
Ekron the same day. 

17And these are the golden emerods 
which the Philistines returned for a 
guilt-offering unto the LORD: for 
Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for 
Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron 
one; 18and the golden mice, according 
to the number of all the cities of the 
Philistines belonging to the five lords, 
both of fortified cities and of country 
villages, even unto Abel by the great 
stone, whereon they set down the ark 
of the LORD, which stone remaineth 
unto this day in the field of Joshua the 
Beth-shemite. 19And He smote of the 
men of Beth-shemesh, because they 
had gazed upon the ark of the LORD, 
even He smote of the people seventy 
men, and fifty thousand men; and the 
people amourned, because the LORD 
had smitten the people with a great 
slaughter. 20And the men of Beth-
shemesh said: ‘Who is able to stand 
before the LORD, this holy God? and to 
whom shall it go up from us?’ 21And 
they sent messengers to the inhabitants 
of Kiriath-jearim, saying: ‘The 
Philistines have brought back the ark 
of the LORD; come ye down, and fetch 
it up to you.’ 

a From the Hebrew root abel. 

And the men of Kiriath-jearim 
came, and fetched up the ark of 
the LORD, and brought it into the house 
of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified 
Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the 
LORD. 

2And it came to pass, from the day 
that the ark abode in Kiriath-jearim, 
that the time was long; for it was 
twenty years; and all the house of 
Israel yearned after the LORD. 3And 
Samuel spoke unto all the house of 
Israel, saying: ‘If ye do return unto the 
LORD with all your heart, then put 
away the foreign gods and the 
Ashtaroth from among you, and direct 
your hearts unto the LORD, and serve 
Him only; and He will deliver you out 
of the hand of the Philistines.’ 4Then 
the children of Israel did put away the 
Baalim and the Ashtaroth, and served 
the LORD only. 

5And Samuel said: ‘Gather all Israel 
to Mizpah, and I will pray for you unto 
the LORD.’ 6And they gathered together 
to Mizpah, and drew water, and 
poured it out before the LORD, and 
fasted on that day, and said there: ‘We 
have sinned against the LORD.’ And 
Samuel judged the children of Israel in 
Mizpah. 

7And when the Philistines heard that 
the children of Israel were gathered 
together to Mizpah, the lords of the 
Philistines went up against Israel. And 
when the children of Israel heard it, 
they were afraid of the Philistines. 
8And the children of Israel said to 
Samuel: ‘Cease not to cry unto the 
LORD our God for us, that He save us 
out of the hand of the Philistines.’ 
9And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and 
offered it for a whole burnt-offering 
unto the LORD; and Samuel cried unto 
the LORD for Israel; and the LORD 
7 




answered him. 10And as Samuel was 
offering up the burnt-offering, the 
Philistines drew near to battle against 
Israel; but the LORD thundered with a 
great thunder on that day upon the 
Philistines, and discomfited them; and 
they were smitten down before Israel. 
11And the men of Israel went out of 
Mizpah, and pursued the Philistines, 
and smote them, until they came under 
Beth-car. 12Then Samuel took a stone, 
and set it between Mizpah and Shen, 
and called the name of it aEben-ezer, 
saying: ‘Hitherto hath the LORD helped 
us.’ 13So the Philistines were subdued, 
and they came no more within the 
border of Israel; and the hand of the 
LORD was against the Philistines all the 
days of Samuel. 14And the cities which 
the Philistines had taken from Israel 
were restored to Israel, from Ekron 
even unto Gath; and the border thereof 
did Israel deliver out of the hand of the 
Philistines. And there was peace 
between Israel and the Amorites. 
15And Samuel judged Israel all the 
days of his life. 16And he went from 
year to year in circuit to Beth-el, and 
Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged 
Israel in all those places. 17And his 
return was to Ramah, for there was his 
house; and there he judged Israel; and 
he built there an altar unto the LORD. 

a That is, The stone of help. 

And it came to pass, when 
Samuel was old, that he made his 
sons judges over Israel. 2Now the 
name of his first-born was Joel; and 

the name of his second, Abijah; they 
were judges in Beer-sheba. 3And his 
sons walked not in his ways, but 
turned aside after lucre, and took 
bribes, and perverted justice. 

4Then all the elders of Israel 
gathered themselves together, and 
came to Samuel unto Ramah. 5And 
they said unto him: ‘Behold, thou art 
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways; 
now make us a king to judge us like all 
the nations.’ 6But the thing displeased 
Samuel, when they said: ‘Give us a 
king to judge us.’ And Samuel prayed 
unto the LORD. 7And the LORD said unto 
Samuel: ‘Hearken unto the voice of 
the people in all that they say unto 
thee; for they have not rejected thee, 
but they have rejected Me, that I 
should not be king over them. 
8According to all the works which they 
have done since the day that I brought 
them up out of Egypt even unto this 
day, in that they have forsaken Me, 
and served other gods, so do they also 
unto thee. 9Now therefore hearken 
unto their voice; howbeit thou shalt 
earnestly forewarn them, and shalt 
declare unto them the manner of the 
king that shall reign over them.’ 

10And Samuel told all the words of 
the LORD unto the people that asked of 
him a king. 11And he said: ‘This will 
be the manner of the king that shall 
reign over you: he will take your sons, 
and appoint them unto him, for his 
chariots, and to be his horsemen; and 
they shall run before his chariots. 
12And he will appoint them unto him 
8 




for captains of thousands, and captains 
of fifties; and to plow his ground, and 
to reap his harvest, and to make his 
instruments of war, and the 
instruments of his chariots. 13And he 
will take your daughters to be 
perfumers, and to be cooks, and to be 
bakers. 14And he will take your fields, 
and your vineyards, and your 
oliveyards, even the best of them, and 
give them to his servants. 15And he 
will take the tenth of your seed, and of 
your vineyards, and give to his 
officers, and to his servants. 16And he 
will take your men-servants, and your 
maid-servants, and your goodliest 
young men, and your asses, and put 
them to his work. 17He will take the 
tenth of your flocks; and ye shall be 
his servants. 18And ye shall cry out in 
that day because of your king whom 
ye shall have chosen you; and the 
LORD will not answer you in that day.’ 
19But the people refused to hearken 
unto the voice of Samuel; and they 
said: ‘Nay; but there shall be a king 
over us; 20that we also may be like all 
the nations; and that our king may 
judge us, and go out before us, and 
fight our battles.’ 21And Samuel heard 
all the words of the people, and he 
spoke them in the ears of the LORD. 
22And the LORD said to Samuel: 
‘Hearken unto their voice, and make 
them a king.’ And Samuel said unto 
the men of Israel: ‘Go ye every man 
unto his city.’ 

Now there was a man of 
Benjamin, whose name was Kish, 
the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the 
son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, the 
son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of 
valour. 2And he had a son, whose 
name was Saul, young and goodly, and 
there was not among the children of 
Israel a goodlier person than he: from 
his shoulders and upward he was 
higher than any of the people. 3Now 
the asses of Kish Saul’s father were 
lost. And Kish said to Saul his son: 
‘Take now one of the servants with 
thee, and arise, go seek the asses.’ 
4And he passed through the hill-
country of Ephraim, and passed 
through the land of Shalishah, but they 
found them not; then they passed 
through the land of Shaalim, and there 
they were not; and he passed through 
the land of the Benjamites, but they 
found them not. 5When they were 
come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to 
his servant that was with him: ‘Come 
and let us return; lest my father leave 
caring for the asses, and become 
anxious concerning us.’ 6And he said 
unto him: ‘Behold now, there is in this 
city a man of God, and he is a man that 
is held in honour; all that he saith 
cometh surely to pass; now let us go 
thither; peradventure he can tell us 
concerning our journey whereon we 
go.’ 7Then said Saul to his servant: 
‘But, behold, if we go, what shall we 
bring the man? for the bread is spent in 
our vessels, and there is not a present 
to bring to the man of God; what have 
we?’ 8And the servant answered Saul 
again, and said: ‘Behold, I have in my 9 




hand the fourth part of a shekel of 
silver, that will I give to the man of 
God, to tell us our way.’— 
9Beforetime in Israel, when a man 
went to inquire of God, thus he said: 
‘Come and let us go to the seer’; for he 
that is now called a prophet was 
beforetime called a seer.—10Then said 
Saul to his servant: ‘Well said; come, 
let us go.’ So they went unto the city 
where the man of God was. 11As they 
went up the ascent to the city, they 
found young maidens going out to 
draw water, and said unto them: ‘Is the 
seer here?’ 12And they answered them, 
and said: ‘He is; behold, he is before 
thee; make haste now, for he is come 
to-day into the city; for the people 
have a sacrifice to-day in the high 
place. 13As soon as ye are come into 
the city, ye shall straightway find him, 
before he go up to the high place to 
eat; for the people will not eat until he 
come, because he doth bless the 
sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that 
are bidden. Now therefore get you up; 
for at this time ye shall find him.’ 
14And they went up to the city; and as 
they came within the city, behold, 
Samuel came out toward them, to go 
up to the high place. 

15Now the LORD had revealed unto 
Samuel a day before Saul came, 
saying: 16’To-morrow about this time I 
will send thee a man out of the land of 
Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to 
be prince over My people Israel, and 
he shall save My people out of the 
hand of the Philistines; for I have 
looked upon My people, because their 
cry is come unto Me.’ 17And when 
Samuel saw Saul, the LORD spoke unto 
him: ‘Behold the man of whom I said 
unto thee: This same shall have 
authority over My people.’ 18Then 
Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, 
and said: ‘Tell me, I pray thee, where 
the seer’s house is.’ 19And Samuel 
answered Saul, and said: ‘I am the 
seer; go up before me unto the high 
place, for ye shall eat with me to-day; 
and in the morning I will let thee go, 
and will tell thee all that is in thy heart. 
20And as for thine asses that were lost 
three days ago, set not thy mind on 
them; for they are found. And on 
whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it 
not on thee, and on all thy father’s 
house?’ 21And Saul answered and said: 
‘Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest 
of the tribes of Israel? and my family 
the least of all the families of the tribe 
of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest 
thou to me after this manner?’ 

22And Samuel took Saul and his 
servant, and brought them into the 
chamber, and made them sit in the 
chiefest place among them that were 
bidden, who were about thirty persons. 
23And Samuel said unto the cook: 
‘Bring the portion which I gave thee, 
of which I said unto thee: Set it by 
thee.’ 24And the cook took up the 
thigh, and that which was upon it, and 
set it before Saul. And [Samuel] said: 
‘Behold that which hath been 
reserved! set it before thee and eat; 
because unto the appointed time hath it 


been kept for thee, for I said: I have 
invited the people.’ So Saul did eat 
with Samuel that day. 25And when 
they were come down from the high 
place into the city, he spoke with Saul 
upon the housetop. 26And they arose 
early; and it came to pass about the 
break of day, that Samuel called to 
Saul on the housetop, saying: ‘Up, that 
I may send thee away.’ And Saul 
arose, and they went out both of them, 
he and Samuel, abroad. 27As they were 
going down at the end of the city, 
Samuel said to Saul: ‘Bid the servant 
pass on before us—and he passed 
on—but stand thou still at this time, 
that I may cause thee to hear the word 
of God.’ 

Then Samuel took the vial of 
oil, and poured it upon his 
head, and kissed him, and said: ‘Is it 
not that the LORD hath anointed thee to 
be prince over His inheritance? 2When 
thou art departed from me to-day, then 
thou shalt find two men by the tomb of 
Rachel, in the border of Benjamin at 
Zelzah; and they will say unto thee: 
The asses which thou wentest to seek 
are found; and, lo, thy father hath left 
off caring for the asses, and is anxious 
concerning you, saying: What shall I 
do for my son? 3Then shalt thou go on 
forward from thence, and thou shalt 
come to the terebinth of Tabor, and 
there shall meet thee there three men 
going up to God to Beth-el, one 
carrying three kids, and another 
carrying three loaves of bread, and 
another carrying a bottle of wine. 4And 
they will salute thee, and give thee two 
cakes of bread; which thou shalt 
receive of their hand. 5After that thou 
shalt come to the hill of God, where is 
the garrison of the Philistines; and it 
shall come to pass, when thou art 
come thither to the city, that thou shalt 
meet a band of prophets coming down 
from the high place with a psaltery, 
and a timbrel, and a pipe, and a harp, 
before them; and they will be 
prophesying. 6And the spirit of the 
LORD will come mightily upon thee, 
and thou shalt prophesy with them, 
and shalt be turned into another man. 
7And let it be, when these signs are 
come unto thee, that thou do as thy 
hand shall find; for God is with thee. 
8And thou shalt go down before me to 
Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down 
unto thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and 
to sacrifice sacrifices of peace-
offerings; seven days shalt thou tarry, 
till I come unto thee, and tell thee what 
thou shalt do.’ 

9And it was so, that when he had 
turned his back to go from Samuel, 
God gave him another heart; and all 
those signs came to pass that day. 
10And when they came thither to the 
hill, behold, a band of prophets met 
him; and the spirit of God came 
mightily upon him, and he prophesied 
among them. 11And it came to pass, 
when all that knew him beforetime 
saw that, behold, he prophesied with 
the prophets, then the people said one 
to another: ‘What is this that is come 
unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also 
10 




among the prophets?’ 12And one of the 
same place answered and said: ‘And 
who is their father?’ Therefore it 
became a proverb: ‘Is Saul also among 
the prophets?’ 13And when he had 
made an end of prophesying, he came 
to the high place. 

14And Saul’s uncle said unto him 
and to his servant: ‘Whither went ye?’ 
And he said: ‘To seek the asses; and 
when we saw that they were not found, 
we came to Samuel.’ 15And Saul’s 
uncle said: ‘Tell me, I pray thee, what 
Samuel said unto you.’ 16And Saul 
said unto his uncle: ‘He told us plainly 
that the asses were found.’ But 
concerning the matter of the kingdom, 
whereof Samuel spoke, he told him 
not. 

17And Samuel called the people 
together unto the LORD to Mizpah. 
18And he said unto the children of 
Israel: ‘Thus saith the LORD, the God 
of Israel: I brought up Israel out of 
Egypt, and I delivered you out of the 
hand of the Egyptians, and out of the 
hand of all the kingdoms that 
oppressed you. 19But ye have this day 
rejected your God, who Himself 
saveth you out of all your calamities 
and your distresses; and ye have said 
unto Him: Nay, but set a king over us. 
Now therefore present yourselves 
before the LORD by your tribes, and by 
your thousands.’ 20So Samuel brought 
all the tribes of Israel near, and the 
tribe of Benjamin was taken. 21And he 
brought the tribe of Benjamin near by 
their families, and the family of the 
Matrites was taken; and Saul the son 
of Kish was taken; but when they 
sought him, he could not be found. 
22Therefore they asked of the LORD 
further: ‘Is there yet a man come 
hither?’ And the LORD answered: 
‘Behold, he hath hid himself among 
the baggage.’ 23And they ran and 
fetched him thence; and when he stood 
among the people, he was higher than 
any of the people from his shoulders 
and upward. 24And Samuel said to all 
the people: ‘See ye him whom the 
LORD hath chosen, that there is none 
like him among all the people?’ And 
all the people shouted, and said: ‘Long 
live the king.’ 

25Then Samuel told the people the 
manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in 
a book, and laid it up before the LORD. 
And Samuel sent all the people away, 
every man to his house. 26And Saul 
also went to his house to Gibeah; and 
there went with him the men of valour, 
whose hearts God had touched. 27But 
certain base fellows said: ‘How shall 
this man save us?’ And they despised 
him, and brought him no present. But 
he was as one that held his peace. 

Then Nahash the Ammonite 
came up, and encamped 
against Jabesh-gilead; and all the men 
of Jabesh said unto Nahash: ‘Make a 
covenant with us, and we will serve 
thee.’ 2And Nahash the Ammonite said 
unto them: ‘On this condition will I 
make it with you, that all your right 
eyes be put out; and I will lay it for a 
reproach upon all Israel.’ 3And the 
11 




elders of Jabesh said unto him: ‘Give 
us seven days’respite, that we may 
send messengers unto all the borders 
of Israel; and then, if there be none to 
deliver us, we will come out to thee.’ 
4Then came the messengers to 
Gibeath-shaul, and spoke these words 
in the ears of the people; and all the 
people lifted up their voice, and wept. 
5And, behold, Saul came following the 
oxen out of the field; and Saul said: 
‘What aileth the people that they 
weep?’ And they told him the words of 
the men of Jabesh. 6And the spirit of 
God came mightily upon Saul when he 
heard those words, and his anger was 
kindled greatly. 7And he took a yoke 
of oxen, and cut them in pieces, and 
sent them throughout all the borders of 
Israel by the hand of messengers, 
saying: ‘Whosoever cometh not forth 
after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it 
be done unto his oxen.’ And the dread 
of the LORD fell on the people, and 
they came out as one man. 8And he 
numbered them in Bezek; and the 
children of Israel were three hundred 
thousand, and the men of Judah thirty 
thousand. 9And they said unto the 
messengers that came: ‘Thus shall ye 
say unto the men of Jabesh-gilead: To-
morrow, by the time the sun is hot, ye 
shall have deliverance.’ And the 
messengers came and told the men of 
Jabesh; and they were glad. 10And the 
men of Jabesh said: ‘To-morrow we 
will come out unto you, and ye shall 
do with us all that seemeth good unto 
you.’ 

11And it was so on the morrow, that 
Saul put the people in three 
companies; and they came into the 
midst of the camp in the morning 
watch, and smote the Ammonites until 
the heat of the day; and it came to 
pass, that they that remained were 
scattered, so that two of them were not 
left together. 12And the people said 
unto Samuel: ‘Who is he that said: 
Shall Saul reign over us? bring the 
men, that we may put them to death.’ 
13And Saul said: ‘There shall not a 
man be put to death this day; for to-
day the LORD hath wrought deliverance 
in Israel.’ 

14Then said Samuel to the people: 
‘Come and let us go to Gilgal, and 
renew the kingdom there.’ 15And all 
the people went to Gilgal; and there 
they made Saul king before the LORD 
in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed 
sacrifices of peace-offerings before the 
LORD; and there Saul and all the men 
of Israel rejoiced greatly. 

And Samuel said unto all 
Israel: ‘Behold, I have 
hearkened unto your voice in all that 
ye said unto me, and have made a king 
over you. 2And now, behold, the king 
walketh before you; and I am old and 
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are 
with you; and I have walked before 
you from my youth unto this day. 
3Here I am; witness against me before 
the LORD, and before His anointed: 
whose ox have I taken? or whose ass 
have I taken? or whom have I 
defrauded? or whom have I oppressed? 
12 




or of whose hand have I taken a 
ransom to blind mine eyes therewith? 
and I will restore it you.’ 4And they 
said: ‘Thou hast not defrauded us, nor 
oppressed us, neither hast thou taken 
aught of any man’s hand.’ 5And he 
said unto them: ‘The LORD is witness 
against you, and His anointed is 
witness this day, that ye have not 
found aught in my hand.’ And they 
said: ‘He is witness.’ 

6And Samuel said unto the people: 
‘It is the LORD that made Moses and 
Aaron, and that brought your fathers 
up out of the land of Egypt. 7Now 
therefore stand still, that I may plead 
with you before the LORD concerning 
all the righteous acts of the LORD, 
which He did to you and to your 
fathers. 8When Jacob was come into 
Egypt, then your fathers cried unto the 
LORD, and the LORD sent Moses and 
Aaron, who brought forth your fathers 
out of Egypt, and they were made to 
dwell in this place. 9But they forgot the 
LORD their God, and He gave them 
over into the hand of Sisera, captain of 
the host of Hazor, and into the hand of 
the Philistines, and into the hand of the 
king of Moab, and they fought against 
them. 10And they cried unto the LORD, 
and said: We have sinned, because we 
have forsaken the LORD, and have 
served the Baalim and the Ashtaroth; 
but now deliver us out of the hand of 
our enemies, and we will serve Thee. 
11And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and 
Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and 
delivered you out of the hand of your 
enemies on every side, and ye dwelt in 
safety. 12And when ye saw that Nahash 
the king of the children of Ammon 
came against you, ye said unto me: 
Nay, but a king shall reign over us; 
when the LORD your God was your 
king. 13Now therefore behold the king 
whom ye have chosen, and whom ye 
have asked for; and, behold, the LORD 
hath set a king over you. 14If ye will 
fear the LORD, and serve Him, and 
hearken unto His voice, and not rebel 
against the commandment of the LORD, 
and both ye and also the king that 
reigneth over you be followers of the 
LORD your God—; 15but if ye will not 
hearken unto the voice of the LORD, but 
rebel against the commandment of the 
LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD 
be against you, and against your 
fathers. 16Now therefore stand still and 
see this great thing, which the LORD 
will do before your eyes. 17Is it not 
wheat harvest to-day? I will call unto 
the LORD, that He may send thunder 
and rain; and ye shall know and see 
that your wickedness is great, which 
ye have done in the sight of the LORD, 
in asking you a king.’ 18So Samuel 
called unto the LORD; and the LORD 
sent thunder and rain that day; and all 
the people greatly feared the LORD and 
Samuel. 19And all the people said unto 
Samuel: ‘Pray for thy servants unto the 
LORD thy God, that we die not; for we 
have added unto all our sins this evil, 
to ask us a king.’ 20And Samuel said 
unto the people: ‘Fear not; ye have 
indeed done all this evil; yet turn not 


aside from following the LORD, but 
serve the LORD with all your heart; 
21and turn ye not aside; for then should 
ye go after vain things which cannot 
profit nor deliver, for they are vain. 
22For the LORD will not forsake His 
people for His great name’s sake; 
because it hath pleased the LORD to 
make you a people unto Himself. 
23Moreover as for me, far be it from 
me that I should sin against the LORD 
in ceasing to pray for you; but I will 
instruct you in the good and the right 
way. 24Only fear the LORD, and serve 
Him in truth with all your heart; for 
consider how great things He hath 
done for you. 25But if ye shall still do 
wickedly, ye shall be swept away, both 
ye and your king.’ 

Saul was a—years old when he 
began to reign; and two years 
he reigned over Israel. 2And Saul 
chose him three thousand men of 
Israel; whereof two thousand were 
with Saul in Michmas and in the 
mount of Beth-el, and a thousand were 
with Jonathan in Gibeath-benjamin; 
and the rest of the people he sent every 
man to his tent. 3And Jonathan smote 
the garrison of the Philistines that was 
in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. 
And Saul blew the horn throughout all 
the land, saying: ‘Let the Hebrews 
hear.’ 4And all Israel heard say that 
Saul had smitten the garrison of the 
Philistines, and that Israel also had 

a The number is wanting in the 
Hebrew. 

made himself odious with the 
Philistines. And the people were 
gathered together after Saul to Gilgal. 

5And the Philistines assembled 
themselves together to fight with 
Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six 
thousand horsemen, and people as the 
sand which is on the sea-shore in 
multitude; and they came up, and 
pitched in Michmas, eastward of Beth-
aven. 6When the men of Israel saw that 
they were in a strait—for the people 
were distressed—then the people did 
hide themselves in caves, and in 
thickets, and in rocks, and in holds, 
and in pits. 7Now some of the Hebrews 
had gone over the Jordan to the land of 
Gad and Gilead; but as for Saul, he 
was yet in Gilgal, and all the people 
followed him trembling. 

8And he tarried seven days, 
according to the set time that Samuel 
had appointed; but Samuel came not to 
Gilgal; and the people were scattered 
from him. 9And Saul said: ‘Bring 
hither to me the burnt-offering and the 
peace-offerings.’ And he offered the 
burnt-offering. 10And it came to pass 
that, as soon as he had made an end of 
offering the burnt-offering, behold, 
Samuel came; and Saul went out to 
meet him, that he might salute him. 
11And Samuel said: ‘What hast thou 
done?’ And Saul said: ‘Because I saw 
that the people were scattered from 
me, and that thou camest not within 
the days appointed, and that the 
Philistines assembled themselves 
together against Michmas; 12therefore 
13 




said I: Now will the Philistines come 
down upon me to Gilgal, and I have 
not entreated the favour of the LORD; I 
forced myself therefore, and offered 
the burnt-offering.’ 13And Samuel said 
to Saul: ‘Thou hast done foolishly; 
thou hast not kept the commandment 
of the LORD thy God, which He 
commanded thee; for now would the 
LORD have established thy kingdom 
upon Israel for ever. 14But now thy 
kingdom shall not continue; the LORD 
hath sought him a man after His own 
heart, and the LORD hath appointed him 
to be prince over His people, because 
thou hast not kept that which the LORD 
commanded thee.’ 

15And Samuel arose, and got him up 
from Gilgal unto Gibeath-benjamin. 
And Saul numbered the people that 
were present with him, about six 
hundred men. 16And Saul, and 
Jonathan his son, and the people that 
were present with them, abode in 
aGibeath-benjamin; but the Philistines 
encamped in Michmas. 17And the 
spoilers came out of the camp of the 
Philistines in three companies: one 
company turned unto the way that 
leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of 
Shual; 18and another company turned 
the way to Beth-horon; and another 
company turned the way of the border 
that looketh down upon the valley of 
Zeboim toward the wilderness. 

a Heb. Geba. 

19Now there was no smith found 
throughout all the land of Israel; for 

the Philistines said: ‘Lest the Hebrews 
make them swords or spears’; 20but all 
the Israelites went down to the 
Philistines, to sharpen every man his 
plowshare, and his coulter, and his 
axe, and his mattock. 21And the price 
of the filing was ba pim for the 
mattocks, and for the coulters, and for 
the forks with three teeth, and for the 
axes; and to set the goads. 22So it came 
to pass in the day of battle, that there 
was neither sword nor spear found in 
the hand of any of the people that were 
with Saul and Jonathan; but with Saul 
and with Jonathan his son was there 
found. 23And the garrison of the 
Philistines went out unto the pass of 
Michmas. 

b That is, two-thirds of a shekel. 

14 



Now it fell upon a day, that 
Jonathan the son of Saul said 
unto the young man that bore his 
armour: ‘Come and let us go over to 
the Philistines’garrison, that is on 
yonder side. But he told not his father. 
2And Saul tarried in the uttermost part 
of Gibeah under the pomegranate-tree 
which is in Migron; and the people 
that were with him were about six 
hundred men, 3and Ahijah, the son of 
Ahitub, Ichabod’s brother, the son of 
Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of 
the LORD in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. 
And the people knew not that Jonathan 
was gone. 4And between the passes, by 
which Jonathan sought to go over unto 
the Philistines’garrison, there was a 
rocky crag on the one side, and a rocky 


crag on the other side; and the name of 
the one was Bozez, and the name of 
the other Seneh. 5The one crag rose up 
on the north in front of Michmas, and 
the other on the south in front of Geba. 

6And Jonathan said to the young 
man that bore his armour: ‘Come and 
let us go over unto the garrison of 
these uncircumcised; it may be that the 
LORD will work for us; for there is no 
restraint to the LORD to save by many 
or by few.’ 7And his armour-bearer 
said unto him: ‘Do all that is in thy 
heart; turn thee, behold I am with thee 
according to thy heart.’ 8Then said 
Jonathan: ‘Behold, we will pass over 
unto the men, and we will disclose 
ourselves unto them. 9If they say thus 
unto us: Tarry until we come to you; 
then we will stand still in our place, 
and will not go up unto them. 10But if 
they say thus: Come up unto us; then 
we will go up; for the LORD hath 
delivered them into our hand; and this 
shall be the sign unto us.’ 11And both 
of them disclosed themselves unto the 
garrison of the Philistines; and the 
Philistines said: ‘Behold Hebrews 
coming forth out of the holes where 
they hid themselves.’ 12And the men of 
the garrison spoke to Jonathan and his 
armour-bearer, and said: ‘Come up to 
us, and we will show you a thing.’ 
And Jonathan said unto his armour-
bearer: ‘Come up after me; for the 
LORD hath delivered them into the hand 
of Israel.’ 13And Jonathan climbed up 
upon his hands and upon his feet, and 
his armour-bearer after him; and they 
fell before Jonathan; and his armour-
bearer slew them after him. 14And that 
first slaughter, which Jonathan and his 
armour-bearer made, was about twenty 
men, within as it were half a furrow’s 
length in an acre of land. 15And there 
was a trembling in the camp in the 
field, and among all the people; the 
garrison, and the spoilers, they also 
trembled; and the earth quaked; so it 
grew into a terror from God. 16And the 
watchmen of Saul in Gibeath-
benjamin looked; and, behold, the 
multitude melted away, and they went 
hither and thither. 

17Then said Saul unto the people 
that were with him: ‘Number now, and 
see who is gone from us.’ And when 
they had numbered, behold, Jonathan 
and his armour-bearer were not there. 
18And Saul said unto Ahijah: ‘Bring 
hither the ark of God.’ For the ark of 
God was there at that time with the 
children of Israel. 19And it came to 
pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, 
that the tumult that was in the camp of 
the Philistines went on and increased; 
and Saul said unto the priest: 
‘Withdraw thy hand.’ 20And Saul and 
all the people that were with him were 
gathered together, and came to the 
battle; and, behold, every man’s sword 
was against his fellow, and there was a 
very great discomfiture. 21Now the 
Hebrews that were with the Philistines 
as beforetime, and that went up with 
them into the camp round about; even 
they also turned to be with the 
Israelites that were with Saul and 


Jonathan. 22Likewise all the men of 
Israel that had hid themselves in the 
hill-country of Ephraim, when they 
heard that the Philistines fled, even 
they also followed hard after them in 
the battle. 23So the LORD saved Israel 
that day; and the battle passed on as 
far as Beth-aven. 

24And the men of Israel were 
distressed that day; but Saul adjured 
the people, saying: ‘Cursed be the man 
that eateth any food until it be evening, 
and I be avenged on mine enemies.’ 
So none of the people tasted food. 
25And all the people came into the 
forest; and there was honey upon the 
ground. 26And when the people were 
come unto the forest, behold a flow of 
honey; but no man put his hand to his 
mouth; for the people feared the oath. 
27But Jonathan heard not when his 
father charged the people with the 
oath; and he put forth the end of the 
rod that was in his hand, and dipped it 
in the honeycomb, and put his hand to 
his mouth; and his eyes brightened. 
28Then answered one of the people, 
and said: ‘Thy father straitly charged 
the people with an oath, saying: 
Cursed be the man that eateth food this 
day; and the people are faint.’ 29Then 
said Jonathan: ‘My father hath 
troubled the land; see, I pray you, how 
mine eyes are brightened, because I 
tasted a little of this honey. 30How 
much more, if haply the people had 
eaten freely to-day of the spoil of their 
enemies which they found? had there 
not been then a much greater slaughter 
among the Philistines?’ 31And they 
smote of the Philistines that day from 
Michmas to Aijalon; and the people 
were very faint. 32And the people flew 
upon the spoil, and took sheep, and 
oxen, and calves, and slew them on the 
ground; and the people did eat them 
with the blood. 33Then they told Saul, 
saying: ‘Behold, the people sin against 
the LORD, in that they eat with the 
blood.’ And he said: ‘Ye have dealt 
treacherously; roll a great stone unto 
me this day.’ 34And Saul said: 
‘Disperse yourselves among the 
people, and say unto them: Bring me 
hither every man his ox, and every 
man his sheep, and slay them here, and 
eat; and sin not against the LORD in 
eating with the blood.’ And all the 
people brought every man his ox with 
him that night, and slew them there. 
35And Saul built an altar unto the 
LORD; the same was the first altar that 
he built unto the LORD. 

36And Saul said: ‘Let us go down 
after the Philistines by night, and spoil 
them until the morning light, and let us 
not leave a man of them.’ And they 
said: ‘Do whatsoever seemeth good 
unto thee.’ Then said the priest: ‘Let 
us draw near hither unto God.’ 37And 
Saul asked counsel of God: ‘Shall I go 
down after the Philistines? wilt Thou 
deliver them into the hand of Israel?’ 
But He answered him not that day. 
38And Saul said: ‘Draw nigh hither, all 
ye chiefs of the people; and know and 
see wherein this sin hath been this day. 
39For, as the LORD liveth, who saveth 


Israel, though it be in Jonathan my 
son, he shall surely die.’ But there was 
not a man among all the people that 
answered him. 40Then said he unto all 
Israel: ‘Be ye on one side, and I and 
Jonathan my son will be on the other 
side.’ And the people said unto Saul: 
‘Do what seemeth good unto thee.’ 
41Therefore Saul said unto the LORD, 
the God of Israel: ‘Declare the right.’ 
And Jonathan and Saul were taken by 
lot; but the people escaped. 42And Saul 
said: ‘Cast lots between me and 
Jonathan my son.’ And Jonathan was 
taken. 43Then Saul said to Jonathan: 
‘Tell me what thou hast done.’ And 
Jonathan told him, and said: ‘I did 
certainly taste a little honey with the 
end of the rod that was in my hand; 
here am I: I will die.’ 44And Saul said: 
‘God do so and more also; thou shalt 
surely die, Jonathan.’ 45And the people 
said unto Saul: ‘Shall Jonathan die, 
who hath wrought this great salvation 
in Israel? Far from it; as the LORD 
liveth, there shall not one hair of his 
head fall to the ground; for he hath 
wrought with God this day.’ So the 
people rescued Jonathan, that he died 
not. 46Then Saul went up from 
following the Philistines; and the 
Philistines went to their own place. 

47So Saul took the kingdom over 
Israel, and fought against all his 
enemies on every side, against Moab, 
and against the children of Ammon, 
and against Edom, and against the 
kings of Zobah, and against the 
Philistines; and whithersoever he 
turned himself, he put them to the 
worse. 48And he did valiantly, and 
smote the Amalekites, and delivered 
Israel out of the hands of them that 
spoiled them. 

49Now the sons of Saul were 
Jonathan, and Ishvi, and Malchi-shua; 
and the names of his two daughters 
were these: the name of the first-born 
Merab, and the name of the younger 
Michal; 50and the name of Saul’s wife 
was Ahinoam the daughter of 
Ahimaaz; and the name of the captain 
of his host was aAbner, the son of Ner, 
Saul’s uncle. 51And Kish was the 
father of Saul, and Ner the father of 
Abner was the son of Abiel. 

a Heb. Abiner. 

52And there was sore war against the 
Philistines all the days of Saul; and 
when Saul saw any mighty man, or 
any valiant man, he took him unto 
him. 

15 



And Samuel said unto Saul: 
‘The LORD sent me to anoint 
thee to be king over His people, over 
Israel; now therefore hearken thou 
unto the voice of the words of the 
LORD. 2Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I 
remember that which Amalek did to 
Israel, how he set himself against him 
in the way, when he came up out of 
Egypt. 3Now go and smite Amalek, 
and utterly destroy all that they have, 
and spare them not; but slay both man 
and woman, infant and suckling, ox 
and sheep, camel and ass.’ 


4And Saul summoned the people, 
and numbered them in Telaim, two 
hundred thousand footmen, and ten 
thousand men of Judah. 5And Saul 
came to the city of Amalek, and lay in 
wait in the valley. 6And Saul said unto 
the Kenites: ‘Go, depart, get you down 
from among the Amalekites, lest I 
destroy you with them; for ye showed 
kindness to all the children of Israel, 
when they came up out of Egypt.’ So 
the Kenites departed from among the 
Amalekites. 7And Saul smote the 
Amalekites, from Havilah as thou 
goest to Shur, that is in front of Egypt. 
8And he took Agag the king of the 
Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed 
all the people with the edge of the 
sword. 9But Saul and the people spared 
Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of 
the oxen, even the young of the second 
birth, and the lambs, and all that was 
good, and would not utterly destroy 
them; but every thing that was of no 
account and feeble, that they destroyed 
utterly. 

10Then came the word of the LORD 
unto Samuel, saying: 11’It repenteth 
Me that I have set up Saul to be king; 
for he is turned back from following 
Me, and hath not performed My 
commandments.’ And it grieved 
Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD all 
night. 12And Samuel rose early to meet 
Saul in the morning; and it was told 
Samuel, saying: ‘Saul came to Carmel, 
and, behold, he is setting him up a 
monument, and is gone about, and 
passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.’ 
13And Samuel came to Saul; and Saul 
said unto him: ‘Blessed be thou of the 
LORD; I have performed the 
commandment of the LORD.’ 14And 
Samuel said: ‘What meaneth then this 
bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and 
the lowing of the oxen which I hear?’ 
15And Saul said: ‘They have brought 
them from the Amalekites; for the 
people spared the best of the sheep and 
of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD 
thy God; and the rest we have utterly 
destroyed.’ 16Then Samuel said unto 
Saul: ‘Stay, and I will tell thee what 
the LORD hath said to me this night.’ 
And he said unto him: ‘Say on.’ 

17And Samuel said: ‘Though thou be 
little in thine own sight, art thou not 
head of the tribes of Israel? And the 
LORD anointed thee king over Israel; 
18and the LORD sent thee on a journey, 
and said: Go and utterly destroy the 
sinners the Amalekites, and fight 
against them until they be consumed. 
19Wherefore then didst thou not 
hearken to the voice of the LORD, but 
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD?’ 20And Saul said unto Samuel: 
‘Yea, I have hearkened to the voice of 
the LORD, and have gone the way 
which the LORD sent me, and have 
brought Agag the king of Amalek, and 
have utterly destroyed the Amalekites. 
21But the people took of the spoil, 
sheep and oxen, the chief of the 
devoted things, to sacrifice unto the 
LORD thy God in Gilgal.’ 22And 
Samuel said: 


‘Hath the LORD as great delight in 
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, 

As in hearkening to the voice of the 
LORD? 

Behold, to obey is better than 
sacrifice, 

And to hearken than the fat of rams. 

23For rebellion is as the sin of 
witchcraft, 

And stubbornness is as idolatry and 
teraphim. 

Because thou hast rejected the word 
of the LORD, He hath also rejected thee 
from being king.’ 24And Saul said unto 
Samuel: ‘I have sinned; for I have 
transgressed the commandment of the 
LORD, and thy words; because I feared 
the people, and hearkened to their 
voice. 25Now therefore, I pray thee, 
pardon my sin, and return with me, 
that I may worship the LORD.’ 26And 
Samuel said unto Saul: ‘I will not 
return with thee; for thou hast rejected 
the word of the LORD, and the LORD 
hath rejected thee from being king 
over Israel.’ 27And as Samuel turned 
about to go away, he laid hold upon 
the skirt of his robe, and it rent. 28And 
Samuel said unto him: ‘The LORD hath 
rent the kingdom of Israel from thee 
this day, and hath given it to a 
neighbour of thine, that is better than 
thou. 29And also the Glory of Israel 
will not lie nor repent; for He is not a 
man, that He should repent.’ 30Then he 
said: ‘I have sinned; yet honour me 
now, I pray thee, before the elders of 
my people, and before Israel, and 
return with me, that I may worship the 
LORD thy God.’ 31So Samuel returned 
after Saul; and Saul worshipped the 
LORD. 

32Then said Samuel: ‘Bring ye hither 
to me Agag the king of the 
Amalekites.’ And Agag came unto 
him in chains. And Agag said: ‘Surely 
the bitterness of death is at hand.’ 
33And Samuel said: 

As thy sword hath made women 
childless, 

So shall thy mother be childless 
among women. 

And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces 
before the LORD in Gilgal. 

34Then Samuel went to Ramah; and 
Saul went up to his house to Gibeath-
shaul. 35And Samuel never beheld Saul 
again until the day of his death; for 
Samuel mourned for Saul; and the 
LORD repented that He had made Saul 
king over Israel. 

And the LORD said unto 
Samuel: ‘How long wilt thou 
mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected 
him from being king over Israel? fill 
thy horn with oil, and go, I will send 
thee to Jesse the Beth-lehemite; for I 
have provided Me a king among his 
sons.’ 2And Samuel said: ‘How can I 
go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me.’ 
And the LORD said: ‘Take a heifer with 
thee, and say: I am come to sacrifice to 
the LORD. 3And call Jesse to the 
sacrifice, and I will tell thee what thou 
shalt do; and thou shalt anoint unto Me 
him whom I name unto thee.’ 4And 
Samuel did that which the LORD spoke, 
and came to Beth-lehem. And the 
16 




elders of the city came to meet him 
trembling, and said: ‘Comest thou 
peaceably?’ 5And he said: ‘Peaceably; 
I am come to sacrifice unto the LORD; 
sanctify yourselves and come with me 
to the sacrifice.’ And he sanctified 
Jesse and his sons, and called them to 
the sacrifice. 6And it came to pass, 
when they were come, that he beheld 
Eliab, and said: ‘Surely the LORD’S 
anointed is before Him.’ 7But the LORD 
said unto Samuel: ‘Look not on his 
countenance, or on the height of his 
stature; because I have rejected him; 
for it is not as man seeth: for man 
looketh on the outward appearance, 
but the LORD looketh on the heart.’ 
8Then Jesse called Abinadab, and 
made him pass before Samuel. And he 
said: ‘Neither hath the LORD chosen 
this.’ 9Then Jesse made Shammah to 
pass by. And he said: ‘Neither hath the 
LORD chosen this.’ 10And Jesse made 
seven of his sons to pass before 
Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse: 
‘The LORD hath not chosen these.’ 
11And Samuel said unto Jesse: ‘Are 
here all thy children?’ And he said: 
‘There remaineth yet the youngest, 
and, behold, he keepeth the sheep.’ 
And Samuel said unto Jesse: ‘Send 
and fetch him; for we will not sit down 
till he come hither.’ 12And he sent, and 
brought him in. Now he was ruddy, 
and withal of beautiful eyes, and 
goodly to look upon. And the LORD 
said: ‘Arise, anoint him; for this is he.’ 
13Then Samuel took the horn of oil, 
and anointed him in the midst of his 
brethren; and the spirit of the LORD 
came mightily upon David from that 
day forward. So Samuel rose up, and 
went to Ramah. 

14Now the spirit of the LORD had 
departed from Saul, and an evil spirit 
from the LORD terrified him. 15And 
Saul’s servants said unto him: ‘Behold 
now, an evil spirit from God terrifieth 
thee. 16Let our lord now command thy 
servants, that are before thee, to seek 
out a man who is a skilful player on 
the harp; and it shall be, when the evil 
spirit from God cometh upon thee, that 
he shall play with his hand, and thou 
shalt be well.’ 17And Saul said unto his 
servants: ‘Provide me now a man that 
can play well, and bring him to me.’ 
18Then answered one of the young 
men, and said: ‘Behold, I have seen a 
son of Jesse the Beth-lehemite, that is 
skilful in playing, and a mighty man of 
valour, and a man of war, and prudent 
in affairs, and a comely person, and 
the LORD is with him.’ 19Wherefore 
Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and 
said: ‘Send me David thy son, who is 
with the sheep.’ 20And Jesse took an 
ass laden with bread, and a bottle of 
wine, and a kid, and sent them by 
David his son unto Saul. 21And David 
came to Saul, and stood before him; 
and he loved him greatly; and he 
became his armour-bearer. 22And Saul 
sent to Jesse, saying: ‘Let David, I 
pray thee, stand before me; for he hath 
found favour in my sight.’ 23And it 
came to pass, when the [evil] spirit 
from God was upon Saul, that David 


took the harp, and played with his 
hand; so Saul found relief, and it was 
well with him, and the evil spirit 
departed from him. 

Now the Philistines gathered 
together their armies to battle, 
and they were gathered together at 
Socoh, which belongeth to Judah, and 
pitched between Socoh and Azekah, in 
Ephes-dammim. 2And Saul and the 
men of Israel were gathered together, 
and pitched in the vale of Elah, and set 
the battle in array against the 
Philistines. 3And the Philistines stood 
on the mountain on the one side, and 
Israel stood on the mountain on the 
other side; and there was a valley 
between them. 4And there went out a 
champion from the camp of the 
Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, 
whose height was six cubits and a 
span. 5And he had a helmet of brass 
upon his head, and he was clad with a 
coat of mail; and the weight of the coat 
was five thousand shekels of brass. 
6And he had greaves of brass upon his 
legs, and a javelin of brass between his 
shoulders. 7And the shaft of his spear 
was like a weaver’s beam; and his 
spear’s head weighed six hundred 
shekels of iron; and his shield-bearer 
went before him. 8And he stood and 
cried unto the armies of Israel, and 
said unto them: ‘Why do ye come out 
to set your battle in array? am not I a 
Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? 
choose you a man for you, and let him 
come down to me. 9If he be able to 
fight with me, and kill me, then will 
we be your servants; but if I prevail 
against him, and kill him, then shall ye 
be our servants, and serve us.’ 10And 
the Philistine said: ‘I do taunt the 
armies of Israel this day; give me a 
man, that we may fight together.’ 
11And when Saul and all Israel heard 
those words of the Philistine, they 
were dismayed, and greatly afraid. 

12Now David was the son of that 
Ephrathite of Beth-lehem in Judah, 
whose name was Jesse; and he had 
eight sons; and the man was an old 
man in the days of Saul, stricken in 
years among men. 13And the three 
eldest sons of Jesse had gone after 
Saul to the battle; and the names of his 
three sons that went to the battle were 
Eliab the first-born, and next unto him 
Abinadab, and the third Shammah. 
14And David was the youngest; and the 
three eldest followed Saul.—15Now 
David went to and fro from Saul to 
feed his father’s sheep at Beth-
lehem.—16And the Philistine drew 
near morning and evening, and 
presented himself forty days. 

17And Jesse said unto David his son: 
‘Take now for thy brethren an ephah 
of this parched corn, and these ten 
loaves, and carry them quickly to the 
camp to thy brethren. 18And bring 
these ten cheeses unto the captain of 
their thousand, and to thy brethren 
shalt thou bring greetings, and take 
their pledge; 19now Saul, and they, and 
all the men of Israel, are in the vale of 
Elah, fighting with the Philistines.’ 
20And David rose up early in the 
17 




morning, and left the sheep with a 
keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse 
had commanded him; and he came to 
the barricade, as the host which was 
going forth to the fight shouted for the 
battle. 21And Israel and the Philistines 
put the battle in array, army against 
army. 22And David left his baggage in 
the hand of the keeper of the baggage, 
and ran to the army, and came and 
greeted his brethren. 23And as he 
talked with them, behold, there came 
up the champion, the Philistine of 
Gath, Goliath by name, out of the 
ranks of the Philistines, and spoke 
according to the same words; and 
David heard them. 24And all the men 
of Israel, when they saw the man, fled 
from him, and were sore afraid. 25And 
the men of Israel said: ‘Have ye seen 
this man that is come up? surely to 
taunt Israel is he come up; and it shall 
be, that the man who killeth him, the 
king will enrich him with great riches, 
and will give him his daughter, and 
make his father’s house free in Israel.’ 

26And David spoke to the men that 
stood by him, saying: ‘What shall be 
done to the man that killeth this 
Philistine, and taketh away the taunt 
from Israel? for who is this 
uncircumcised Philistine, that he 
should have taunted the armies of the 
living God?’ 27And the people 
answered him after this manner, 
saying: ‘So shall it be done to the man 
that killeth him.’ 28And Eliab his eldest 
brother heard when he spoke unto the 
men; and Eliab’s anger was kindled 
against David, and he said: ‘Why art 
thou come down? and with whom hast 
thou left those few sheep in the 
wilderness? I know thy 
presumptuousness, and the 
naughtiness of thy heart; for thou art 
come down that thou mightest see the 
battle.’ 29And David said: ‘What have 
I now done? Was it not but a word?’ 
30And he turned away from him 
toward another, and spoke after the 
same manner; and the people answered 
him after the former manner. 

31And when the words were heard 
which David spoke, they rehearsed 
them before Saul; and he was taken to 
him. 32And David said to Saul: ‘Let no 
man’s heart fail within him; thy 
servant will go and fight with this 
Philistine.’ 33And Saul said to David: 
‘Thou art not able to go against this 
Philistine to fight with him; for thou 
art but a youth, and he a man of war 
from his youth.’ 34And David said unto 
Saul: ‘Thy servant kept his father’s 
sheep; and when there came a lion, or 
a bear, and took a lamb out of the 
flock, 35I went out after him, and 
smote him, and delivered it out of his 
mouth; and when he arose against me, 
I caught him by his beard, and smote 
him, and slew him. 36Thy servant 
smote both the lion and the bear; and 
this uncircumcised Philistine shall be 
as one of them, seeing he hath taunted 
the armies of the living God.’ 37And 
David said: ‘The LORD that delivered 
me out of the paw of the lion, and out 
of the paw of the bear, He will deliver 


me out of the hand of this Philistine.’ 
And Saul said unto David: ‘Go, and 
the LORD shall be with thee.’ 38And 
Saul clad David with his apparel, and 
he put a helmet of brass upon his head, 
and he clad him with a coat of mail. 
39And David girded his sword upon his 
apparel, and he essayed to go [, but 
could not]; for he had not tried it. And 
David said unto Saul: ‘I cannot go 
with these; for I have not tried them.’ 
And David put them off him. 40And he 
took his staff in his hand, and chose 
him five smooth stones out of the 
brook, and put them in the shepherd’s 
bag which he had, even in his scrip; 
and his sling was in his hand; and he 
drew near to the Philistine. 

41And the Philistine came nearer and 
nearer unto David; and the man that 
bore the shield went before him. 42And 
when the Philistine looked about, and 
saw David, he disdained him; for he 
was but a youth, and ruddy, and withal 
of a fair countenance. 43And the 
Philistine said unto David: ‘Am I a 
dog, that thou comest to me with 
staves?’ And the Philistine cursed 
David by his god. 44And the Philistine 
said to David: ‘Come to me, and I will 
give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, 
and to the beasts of the field.’ 45Then 
said David to the Philistine: ‘Thou 
comest to me with a sword, and with a 
spear, and with a javelin; but I come to 
thee in the name of the LORD of hosts, 
the God of the armies of Israel, whom 
thou hast taunted. 46This day will the 
LORD deliver thee into my hand; and I 
will smite thee, and take thy head from 
off thee; and I will give the carcasses 
of the host of the Philistines this day 
unto the fowls of the air, and to the 
wild beasts of the earth; that all the 
earth may know that there is a God in 
Israel; 47and that all this assembly may 
know that the LORD saveth not with 
sword and spear; for the battle is the 
LORD’S, and He will give you into our 
hand.’ 48And it came to pass, when the 
Philistine arose, and came and drew 
nigh to meet David, that David 
hastened, and ran toward the army to 
meet the Philistine. 49And David put 
his hand in his bag, and took thence a 
stone, and slung it, and smote the 
Philistine in his forehead; and the 
stone sank into his forehead, and he 
fell upon his face to the earth. 50So 
David prevailed over the Philistine 
with a sling and with a stone, and 
smote the Philistine, and slew him; but 
there was no sword in the hand of 
David. 51And David ran, and stood 
over the Philistine, and took his sword, 
and drew it out of the sheath thereof, 
and slew him, and cut off his head 
therewith. And when the Philistines 
saw that their mighty man was dead, 
they fled. 52And the men of Israel and 
of Judah arose, and shouted, and 
pursued the Philistines, until thou 
comest to Gai, and to the gates of 
Ekron. And the wounded of the 
Philistines fell down by the way to 
Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto 
Ekron. 53And the children of Israel 
returned from chasing after the 


Philistines, and they spoiled their 
camp. 54And David took the head of 
the philistine, and brought it to 
Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his 
tent. 

55And when Saul saw David go 
forth against the Philistine, he said 
unto Abner, the captain of the host: 
‘Abner, whose son is this youth?’ And 
Abner said: ‘As thy soul liveth, O 
king, I cannot tell.’ 56And the king 
said: ‘Inquire thou whose son the 
stripling is.’ 57And as David returned 
from the slaughter of the Philistine, 
Abner took him, and brought him 
before Saul with the head of the 
Philistine in his hand. 58And Saul said 
to him: ‘Whose son art thou, thou 
young man?’ And David answered: ‘I 
am the son of thy servant Jesse the 
Beth-lehemite.’ 

And it came to pass, when he 
had made an end of speaking 
unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan 
was knit with the soul of David, and 
Jonathan loved him as his own soul. 
2And Saul took him that day, and 
would let him go no more home to his 
father’s house. 3Then Jonathan made a 
covenant with David, because he loved 
him as his own soul. 4And Jonathan 
stripped himself of the robe that was 
upon him, and gave it to David, and 
his apparel, even to his sword, and to 
his bow, and to his girdle. 5And David 
went out; whithersoever Saul sent him, 
he had good success; and Saul set him 
over the men of war; and it was good 
in the sight of all the people, and also 
in the sight of Saul’s servants. 

6And it came to pass as they came, 
when David returned from the 
slaughter of the Philistine, that the 
women came out of all the cities of 
Israel, singing and dancing, to meet 
king Saul, with timbrels, with joy, and 
with three-stringed instruments. 7And 
the women sang one to another in their 
play, and said: 

Saul hath slain his thousands, 

And David his ten thousands. 

8And Saul was very wroth, and this 
saying displeased him; and he said: 
‘They have ascribed unto David ten 
thousands, and to me they have 
ascribed but thousands; and all he 
lacketh is the kingdom! ’ 9And Saul 
eyed David from that day and forward. 

10And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that an evil spirit from God 
came mightily upon Saul, and he raved 
in the midst of the house; and David 
played with his hand, as he did day by 
day; and Saul had his spear in his 
hand. 11And Saul cast the spear; for he 
said: ‘I will smite David even to the 
wall.’ And David stepped aside out of 
his presence twice. 12And Saul was 
afraid of David, because the LORD was 
with him, and was departed from Saul. 
13Therefore Saul removed him from 
him, and made him his captain over a 
thousand; and he went out and came in 
before the people. 14And David had 
great success in all his ways; and the 
LORD was with him. 15And when Saul 
saw that he had great success, he stood 
18 




in awe of him. 16But all Israel and 
Judah loved David; for he went out 
and came in before them. 

17And Saul said to David: ‘Behold 
my elder daughter Merab, her will I 
give thee to wife; only be thou valiant 
for me, and fight the LORD’S battles.’ 
For Saul said: ‘Let not my hand be 
upon him, but let the hand of the 
Philistines be upon him.’ 18And David 
said unto Saul: ‘Who am I, and what is 
my life, or my father’s family in Israel, 
that I should be son-in-law to the 
king?’ 19But it came to pass at the time 
when Merab Saul’s daughter should 
have been given to David, that she was 
given unto Adriel the Meholathite to 
wife. 20And Michal Saul’s daughter 
loved David; and they told Saul, and 
the thing pleased him. 21And Saul said: 
‘I will give him her, that she may be a 
snare to him, and that the hand of the 
Philistines may be against him.’ 
Wherefore Saul said to David: ‘Thou 
shalt this day be my son-in-law 
through the one of the twain.’ 22And 
Saul commanded his servants: ‘Speak 
with David secretly, and say: Behold, 
the king hath delight in thee, and all 
his servants love thee; now therefore 
be the king’s son-in-law.’ 23And Saul’s 
servants spoke those words in the ears 
of David. And David said: ‘Seemeth it 
to you a light thing to be the king’s 
son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor 
man, and lightly esteemed?’ 24And the 
servants of Saul told him, saying: ‘On 
this manner spoke David.’ 25And Saul 
said: ‘Thus shall ye say to David: The 
king desireth not any dowry, but a 
hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to 
be avenged of the king’s enemies.’ For 
Saul thought to make David fall by the 
hand of the Philistines. 26And when his 
servants told David these words, it 
pleased David well to be the king’s 
son-in-law. And the days were not 
expired; 27and David arose and went, 
he and his men, and slew of the 
Philistines two hundred men; and 
David brought their foreskins, and 
they gave them in full number to the 
king, that he might be the king’s son-
in-law. And Saul gave him Michal his 
daughter to wife. 28And Saul saw and 
knew that the LORD was with David; 
and Michal Saul’s daughter loved him. 
29And Saul was yet the more afraid of 
David; and Saul was David’s enemy 
continually. 

30Then the princes of the Philistines 
went forth; and it came to pass, as 
often as they went forth, that David 
prospered more than all the servants of 
Saul; so that his name was much set 
by. 

And Saul spoke to Jonathan 
his son, and to all his servants, 
that they should slay David; but 
Jonathan Saul’s son delighted much in 
David. 2And Jonathan told David, 
saying: ‘Saul my father seeketh to slay 
thee; now therefore, I pray thee, take 
heed to thyself in the morning, and 
abide in a secret place, and hide 
thyself. 3And I will go out and stand 
beside my father in the field where 
thou art, and I will speak with my 
19 




father of thee; and if I see aught, I will 
tell thee.’ 

4And Jonathan spoke good of David 
unto Saul his father, and said unto 
him: ‘Let not the king sin against his 
servant, against David; because he 
hath not sinned against thee, and 
because his work hath been very good 
towards thee; 5for he put his life in his 
hand, and smote the Philistine, and the 
LORD wrought a great victory for all 
Israel; thou sawest it, and didst rejoice; 
wherefore then wilt thou sin against 
innocent blood, to slay David without 
a cause?’ 6And Saul hearkened unto 
the voice of Jonathan; and Saul swore: 
‘As the LORD liveth, he shall not be put 
to death.’ 7And Jonathan called David, 
and Jonathan told him all those things. 
And Jonathan brought David to Saul, 
and he was in his presence, as 
beforetime. 

8And there was war again; and 
David went out, and fought with the 
Philistines, and slew them with a great 
slaughter; and they fled before him. 
9And an evil spirit from the LORD was 
upon Saul, as he sat in his house with 
his spear in his hand; and David was 
playing with his hand. 10And Saul 
sought to smite David even to the wall 
with the spear; but he slipped away out 
of Saul’s presence, and he smote the 
spear into the wall; and David fled, 
and escaped that night. 11And Saul sent 
messengers unto David’s house, to 
watch him, and to slay him in the 
morning; and Michal David’s wife told 
him, saying: ‘If thou save not thy life 
to-night, to-morrow thou shalt be 
slain.’ 12So Michal let David down 
through the window; and he went, and 
fled, and escaped. 13And Michal took 
the teraphim, and laid it in the bed, and 
put a quilt of goats’hair at the head 
thereof, and covered it with a cloth. 
14And when Saul sent messengers to 
take David, she said: ‘He is sick.’ 
15And Saul sent the messengers to see 
David, saying: ‘Bring him up to me in 
the bed, that I may slay him.’ 16And 
when the messengers came in, behold, 
the teraphim was in the bed, with the 
quilt of goats’hair at the head thereof. 
17And Saul said unto Michal: ‘Why 
hast thou deceived me thus, and let 
mine enemy go, that he is escaped?’ 
And Michal answered Saul: ‘He said 
unto me: Let me go; why should I kill 
thee?’ 

18Now David fled, and escaped, and 
came to Samuel to Ramah, and told 
him all that Saul had done to him. And 
he and Samuel went and dwelt in 
Naioth. 19And it was told Saul, saying: 
‘Behold, David is at Naioth in 
Ramah.’ 20And Saul sent messengers 
to take David; and when they saw the 
company of the prophets prophesying, 
and Samuel standing as head over 
them, the spirit of God came upon the 
messengers of Saul, and they also 
prophesied. 21And when it was told 
Saul, he sent other messengers, and 
they also prophesied. And Saul sent 
messengers again the third time, and 
they also prophesied. 22Then went he 
also to Ramah, and came to the great 


cistern that is in Secu; and he asked 
and said: ‘Where are Samuel and 
David?’ And one said: ‘Behold, they 
are at Naioth in Ramah.’ 23And he 
went thither to Naioth in Ramah; and 
the spirit of God came upon him also, 
and he went on, and prophesied, until 
he came to Naioth in Ramah. 24And he 
also stripped off his clothes, and he 
also prophesied before Samuel, and 
lay down naked all that day and all 
that night. Wherefore they say: ‘Is 
Saul also among the prophets?’ 

And David fled from Naioth in 
Ramah, and came and said 
before Jonathan: ‘What have I done? 
what is mine iniquity? and what is my 
sin before thy father, that he seeketh 
my life?’ 2And he said unto him: ‘Far 
from it; thou shalt not die; behold, my 
father doeth nothing either great or 
small, but that he discloseth it unto 
me; and why should my father hide 
this thing from me? it is not so.’ 3And 
David swore moreover, and said: ‘Thy 
father knoweth well that I have found 
favour in thine eyes; and he saith: Let 
not Jonathan know this, lest he be 
grieved; but truly as the LORD liveth, 
and as thy soul liveth, there is but a 
step between me and death.’ 4Then 
said Jonathan unto David: ‘What doth 
thy soul desire, that I should do it for 
thee?’ 5And David said unto Jonathan: 
‘Behold, to-morrow is the new moon, 
when I should sit with the king to eat; 
so let me go, that I may hide myself in 
the field unto the third day at even. 6If 
thy father miss me at all, then say: 
David earnestly asked leave of me that 
he might run to Beth-lehem his city; 
for it is the yearly sacrifice there for all 
the family. 7If he say thus: It is well; 
thy servant shall have peace; but if he 
be wroth, then know that evil is 
determined by him. 8Therefore deal 
kindly with thy servant; for thou hast 
brought thy servant into a covenant of 
the LORD with thee; but if there be in 
me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why 
shouldest thou bring me to thy father?’ 
9And Jonathan said: ‘Far be it from 
thee; for if I should at all know that 
evil were determined by my father to 
come upon thee, then would not I tell 
it thee? 10Then said David to Jonathan: 
‘Who shall tell me if perchance thy 
father answer thee roughly?’ 11And 
Jonathan said unto David: ‘Come and 
let us go out into the field.’ And they 
went out both of them into the field. 

12And Jonathan said unto David: 
‘The LORD, the God of Israel—when I 
have sounded my father about this 
time to-morrow, or the third day, 
behold, if there be good toward David, 
shall I not then send unto thee, and 
disclose it unto thee? 13The LORD do so 
to Jonathan, and more also, should it 
please my father to do thee evil, if I 
disclose it not unto thee, and send thee 
away, that thou mayest go in peace; 
and the LORD be with thee, as He hath 
been with my father. 14And thou shalt 
not only while yet I live show me the 
kindness of the LORD, that I die not; 
15but also thou shalt not cut off thy 
kindness from my house for ever; no, 
20 




not when the LORD hath cut off the 
enemies of David every one from the 
face of the earth.’ 16So Jonathan made 
a covenant with the house of David: 
‘The LORD even require it at the hand 
of David’s enemies.’ 17And Jonathan 
caused David to swear again, for the 
love that he had to him; for he loved 
him as he loved his own soul. 

18And Jonathan said unto him: ‘To-
morrow is the new moon; and thou 
wilt be missed, thy seat will be empty. 
19And in the third day thou shalt hide 
thyself well, and come to the place 
where thou didst hide thyself in the 
day of work, and shalt remain by the 
stone Ezel. 20And I will shoot three 
arrows to the side-ward, as though I 
shot at a mark. 21And, behold, I will 
send the lad: Go, find the arrows. If I 
say unto the lad: Behold, the arrows 
are on this side of thee; take them, and 
come; for there is peace to thee and no 
hurt, as the LORD liveth. 22But if I say 
thus unto the boy: Behold, the arrows 
are beyond thee; go thy way; for the 
LORD hath sent thee away. 23And as 
touching the matter which I and thou 
have spoken of, behold, the LORD is 
between me and thee for ever.’ 

24So David hid himself in the field; 
and when the new moon was come, 
the king sat him down to the meal to 
eat. 25And the king sat upon his seat, as 
at other times, even upon the seat by 
the wall; and Jonathan stood up, and 
Abner sat by Saul’s side; but David’s 
place was empty. 26Nevertheless Saul 
spoke not any thing that day; for he 
thought: ‘Something hath befallen 
him, he is unclean; surely he is not 
clean.’ 27And it came to pass on the 
morrow after the new moon, which 
was the second day, that David’s place 
was empty; and Saul said unto 
Jonathan his son: ‘Wherefore cometh 
not the son of Jesse to the meal, 
neither yesterday, nor to-day?’ 28And 
Jonathan answered Saul: ‘David 
earnestly asked leave of me to go to 
Beth-lehem; 29and he said: Let me go, 
I pray thee; for our family hath a 
sacrifice in the city; and my brother, 
he hath commanded me; and now, if I 
have found favour in thine eyes, let me 
get away, I pray thee, and see my 
brethren. Therefore he is not come 
unto the king’s table.’ 

30Then Saul’s anger was kindled 
against Jonathan, and he said unto 
him: ‘Thou son of perverse rebellion, 
do not I know that thou hast chosen 
the son of Jesse to thine own shame, 
and unto the shame of thy mother’s 
nakedness? 31For as long as the son of 
Jesse liveth upon the earth, thou shalt 
not be established, nor thy kingdom. 
Wherefore now send and fetch him 
unto me, for he deserveth to die.’ 
32And Jonathan answered Saul his 
father, and said unto him: ‘Wherefore 
should he be put to death? what hath 
he done?’ 33And Saul cast his spear at 
him to smite him; whereby Jonathan 
knew that it was determined of his 
father to put David to death. 34So 
Jonathan arose from the table in fierce 
anger, and did eat no food the second 


day of the month; for he was grieved 
for David, and because his father had 
put him to shame. 

35And it came to pass in the 
morning, that Jonathan went out into 
the field at the time appointed with 
David, and a little lad with him. 36And 
he said unto his lad: ‘Run, find now 
the arrows which I shoot.’ And as the 
lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him. 
37And when the lad was come to the 
place of the arrow which Jonathan had 
shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and 
said: ‘Is not the arrow beyond thee?’ 
38And Jonathan cried after the lad: 
‘Make speed, hasten, stay not.’ And 
Jonathan’s lad gathered up the arrows, 
and came to his master. 39But the lad 
knew not any thing; only Jonathan and 
David knew the matter. 40And 
Jonathan gave his weapons unto his 
lad, and said unto him: ‘Go, carry 
them to the city.’ 41And as soon as the 
lad was gone, David arose out of a 
place toward the South, and fell on his 
face to the ground, and bowed down 
three times; and they kissed one 
another, and wept one with another, 
until David exceeded. 42And Jonathan 
said to David: ‘Go in peace, forasmuch 
as we have sworn both of us in the 
name of the LORD, saying: The LORD 
shall be between me and thee, and 

Between my seed and thy 
seed, for ever.’ 1And he arose 
and departed; and Jonathan went into 
the city. 

2Then came David to Nob to 
Ahimelech the priest; and Ahimelech 
came to meet David trembling, and 
said unto him: ‘Why art thou alone, 
and no man with thee?’ 3 And David 
said unto Ahimelech the priest: ‘The 
king hath commanded me a business, 
and hath said unto me: Let no man 
know any thing of the business 
whereabout I send thee, and what I 
have commanded thee; and the young 
men have I appointed to such and such 
a place. 4 Now therefore what is under 
thy hand? five loaves of bread? give 
them in my hand, or whatsoever there 
is present.’ 5And the priest answered 
David, and said: ‘There is no common 
bread under my hand, but there is holy 
bread; if only the young men have kept 
themselves from women.’ 6 And David 
answered the priest, and said unto him: 
‘Of a truth women have been kept 
from us about these three days; when I 
came out, the vessels of the young 
men were holy, though it was but a 
common journey; how much more 
then to-day, when there shall be holy 
bread in their vessels?’ 7 So the priest 
gave him holy bread; for there was no 
bread there but the showbread, that 
was taken from before the LORD, to put 
hot bread in the day when it was taken 
away.— 8 Now a certain man of the 
servants of Saul was there that day, 
detained before the LORD; and his 
name was Doeg the Edomite, the 
chiefest of the herdmen that belonged 
to Saul.— 9 And David said unto 
Ahimelech: ‘And is there peradventure 
here under thy hand spear or sword? 
for I have neither brought my sword 
21 




nor my weapons with me, because the 
king’s business required haste.’ 10And 
the priest said: ‘The sword of Goliath 
the Philistine, whom thou slewest in 
the vale of Elah, behold, it is here 
wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod; if 
thou wilt take that, take it; for there is 
no other save that here.’ And David 
said: ‘There is none like that; give it 
me.’ 

11And David arose, and fled that day 
for fear of Saul, and went to Achish 
the king of Gath. 12And the servants of 
Achish said unto him: ‘Is not this 
David the king of the land? Did they 
not sing one to another of him in 
dances, saying: 

Saul hath slain his thousands, 

And David his ten thousands?’ 

13And David laid up these words in 
his heart, and was sore afraid of 
Achish the king of Gath. 14And he 
changed his demeanour before them, 
and feigned himself mad in their 
hands, and scrabbled on the doors of 
the gate, and let his spittle fall down 
upon his beard. 15Then said Achish 
unto his servants: ‘Lo, when ye see a 
man that is mad, wherefore do ye 
bring him to me? 16Do I lack madmen, 
that ye have brought this fellow to play 
the madman in my presence? shall this 
fellow come into my house?’ 

 

David therefore departed 
thence, and escaped to the 
cave of Adullam; and when his 
brethren and all his father’s house 
heard it, they went down thither to 
him. 2And every one that was in 
distress, and every one that was in 
debt, and every one that was 
discontented, gathered themselves 
unto him; and he became captain over 
them; and there were with him about 
four hundred men. 

3And David went thence to Mizpeh 
of Moab; and he said unto the king of 
Moab: ‘Let my father and my mother, 
I pray thee, come forth, and be with 
you, till I know what God will do for 
me.’ 4And he brought them before the 
king of Moab; and they dwelt with him 
all the while that David was in the 
stronghold. 5And the prophet Gad said 
unto David: ‘Abide not in the 
stronghold; depart, and get thee into 
the land of Judah.’ Then David 
departed, and came into the forest of 
Hereth. 

6And Saul heard that David was 
discovered, and the men that were with 
him; now Saul was sitting in Gibeah, 
under the tamarisk-tree in Ramah, with 
his spear in his hand, and all his 
servants were standing about him. 
7And Saul said unto his servants that 
stood about him: ‘Hear now, ye 
Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give 
every one of you fields and vineyards, 
will he make you all captains of 
thousands and captains of hundreds; 
8that all of you have conspired against 
me, and there was none that disclosed 
it to me when my son made a league 
with the son of Jesse, and there is none 
of you that is sorry for me, or 
discloseth unto me that my son hath 
22 




stirred up my servant against me, to lie 
in wait, as at this day?’ 9Then 
answered Doeg the Edomite, who was 
set over the servants of Saul, and said: 
‘I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, 
to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub. 10And 
he inquired of the LORD for him, and 
gave him victuals, and gave him the 
sword of Goliath the Philistine.’ 

11Then the king sent to call 
Ahimelech the priest, the son of 
Ahitub, and all his father’s house, the 
priests that were in Nob; and they 
came all of them to the king. 12And 
Saul said: ‘Hear now, thou son of 
Ahitub.’ And he answered: ‘Here I am, 
my lord.’ 13And Saul said unto him: 
‘Why have ye conspired against me, 
thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou 
hast given him bread, and a sword, and 
hast inquired of God for him, that he 
should rise against me, to lie in wait, 
as at this day?’ 14Then Ahimelech 
answered the king, and said: ‘And who 
among all thy servants is so trusted as 
David, who is the king’s son-in-law, 
and giveth heed unto thy bidding, and 
is honourable in thy house? 15Have I 
to-day begun to inquire of God for 
him? be it far from me; let not the king 
impute any thing unto his servant, nor 
to all the house of my father; for thy 
servant knoweth nothing of all this, 
less or more.’ 16And the king said: 
‘Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, 
thou, and all thy father’s house.’ 17And 
the king said unto the guard that stood 
about him: ‘Turn, and slay the priests 
of the LORD; because their hand also is 
with David, and because they knew 
that he fled, and did not disclose it to 
me.’ But the servants of the king 
would not put forth their hand to fall 
upon the priests of the LORD. 18And the 
king said to Doeg: ‘Turn thou, and fall 
upon the priests.’ And Doeg the 
Edomite turned, and he fell upon the 
priests, and he slew on that day 
fourscore and five persons that did 
wear a linen ephod. 19And Nob, the 
city of the priests, smote he with the 
edge of the sword, both men and 
women, children and sucklings, and 
oxen and asses and sheep, with the 
edge of the sword. 20And one of the 
sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, 
named Abiathar, escaped, and fled 
after David. 21And Abiathar told David 
that Saul had slain the LORD’S priests. 
22And David said unto Abiathar: ‘I 
knew on that day, when Doeg the 
Edomite was there, that he would 
surely tell Saul; I have brought about 
the death of all the persons of thy 
father’s house. 23Abide thou with me, 
fear not; for he that seeketh my life 
seeketh thy life; for with me thou shalt 
be in safeguard.’ 

And they told David, saying: 
‘Behold, the Philistines are 
fighting against Keilah, and they rob 
the threshing-floors.’ 2Therefore David 
inquired of the LORD, saying: ‘Shall I 
go and smite these Philistines?’ And 
the LORD said unto David: ‘Go, and 
smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.’ 
3And David’s men said unto him: 
‘Behold, we are afraid here in Judah; 
23 




how much more then if we go to 
Keilah against the armies of the 
Philistines?’ 4Then David inquired of 
the LORD yet again. And the LORD 
answered him and said: ‘Arise, go 
down to Keilah; for I will deliver the 
Philistines into thy hand.’ 5And David 
and his men went to Keilah, and 
fought with the Philistines, and 
brought away their cattle, and slew 
them with a great slaughter. So David 
saved the inhabitants of Keilah. 

6And it came to pass, when Abiathar 
the son of Ahimelech fled to David to 
Keilah, that he came down with an 
ephod in his hand. 7And it was told 
Saul that David was come to Keilah. 
And Saul said: ‘God hath delivered 
him into my hand; for he is shut in, by 
entering into a town that hath gates 
and bars.’ 8And Saul summoned all the 
people to war, to go down to Keilah, to 
besiege David and his men. 9And 
David knew that Saul devised mischief 
against him; and he said to Abiathar 
the priest: ‘Bring hither the ephod.’ 
10Then said David: ‘O LORD, the God 
of Israel, Thy servant hath surely heard 
that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to 
destroy the city for my sake. 11Will the 
men of Keilah deliver me up into his 
hand? will Saul come down, as Thy 
servant hath heard?’ O LORD, the God 
of Israel, I beseech Thee, tell Thy 
servant.’ And the LORD said: ‘He will 
come down.’ 12Then said David: ‘Will 
the men of Keilah deliver up me and 
my men into the hand of Saul?’ And 
the LORD said: ‘They will deliver thee 
up.’ 13Then David and his men, who 
were about six hundred, arose and 
departed out of Keilah, and went 
whithersoever they could go. And it 
was told Saul that David was escaped 
from Keilah; and he forbore to go 
forth. 

14And David abode in the wilderness 
in the strongholds, and remained in the 
hill-country in the wilderness of Ziph. 
And Saul sought him every day, but 
God delivered him not into his hand. 
15And David saw that Saul was come 
out to seek his life; and David was in 
the wilderness of Ziph in the wood. 
16And Jonathan Saul’s son arose, and 
went to David into the wood, and 
strengthened his hand in God. 17And 
he said unto him: ‘Fear not; for the 
hand of Saul my father shall not find 
thee; and thou shalt be king over 
Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; 
and that also Saul my father knoweth.’ 
18And they two made a covenant 
before the LORD; and David abode in 
the wood, and Jonathan went to his 
house. 

19Then came up the Ziphites to Saul 
to Gibeah, saying: ‘Doth not David 
hide himself with us in the strongholds 
in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, 
which is on the south of Jeshimon? 
20Now therefore, O king, come down, 
according to all the desire of thy soul 
to come down; and our part shall be to 
deliver him up into the king’s hand.’ 
21And Saul said: ‘Blessed be ye of the 
LORD; for ye have had compassion on 
me. 22Go, I pray you, make yet more 


sure, and know and see his place 
where his haunt is, and who hath seen 
him there; for it is told me that he 
dealeth very subtly. 23See therefore, 
and take knowledge of all the lurking-
places where he hideth himself, and 
come ye back to me with the certainty, 
and I will go with you; and it shall 
come to pass, if he be in the land, that 
I will search him out among all the 
thousands of Judah.’ 24And they arose, 
and went to Ziph before Saul; but 
David and his men were in the 
wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah on 
the south of Jeshimon. 25And Saul and 
his men went to seek him. And they 
told David; wherefore he came down 
to the rock, and abode in the 
wilderness of Maon. And when Saul 
heard that, he pursued after David in 
the wilderness of Maon. 26And Saul 
went on this side of the mountain, and 
David and his men on that side of the 
mountain; and David made haste to get 
away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his 
men compassed David and his men 
round about to take them. 27But there 
came a messenger unto Saul, saying: 
‘Haste thee, and come; for the 
Philistines have made a raid upon the 
land.’ 28So Saul returned from 
pursuing after David, and went against 
the Philistines; therefore they called 

that place aSela-
hammahlekoth. 1And David 
went up from thence, and dwelt in the 
strongholds of En-gedi. 

a That is, The rock of divisions. 

2And it came to pass, when Saul was 
returned from following the 
Philistines, that it was told him, 
saying: ‘Behold, David is in the 
wilderness of En-gedi.’ 3Then Saul 
took three thousand chosen men out of 
all Israel, and went to seek David and 
his men upon the rocks of the wild 
goats. 4And he came to the sheepcotes 
by the way, where was a cave; and 
Saul went in to cover his feet. Now 
David and his men were sitting in the 
innermost parts of the cave. 5And the 
men of David said unto him: ‘Behold 
the day in which the LORD hath said 
unto thee: Behold, I will deliver thine 
enemy into thy hand, and thou shalt do 
to him as it shall seem good unto thee.’ 
Then David arose, and cut off the skirt 
of Saul’s robe privily. 6And it came to 
pass afterward, that David’s heart 
smote him, because he had cut off 
Saul’s skirt. 7And he said unto his 
men: ‘The LORD forbid it me, that I 
should do this thing unto my lord, the 
LORD’S anointed, to put forth my hand 
against him, seeing he is the LORD’S 
anointed.’ 8So David checked his men 
with these words, and suffered them 
not to rise against Saul. And Saul rose 
up out of the cave, and went on his 
way. 

9David also arose afterward, and 
went out of the cave, and cried after 
Saul, saying: ‘My lord the king.’ And 
when Saul looked behind him, David 
bowed with his face to the earth, and 
prostrated himself. 10And David said to 
Saul: ‘Wherefore hearkenest thou to 
24 




men’s words, saying: Behold, David 
seeketh thy hurt? 11Behold, this day 
thine eyes have seen how that the LORD 
had delivered thee to-day into my hand 
in the cave; and some bade me kill 
thee; but mine eye spared thee; and I 
said: I will not put forth my hand 
against my lord; for he is the LORD’S 
anointed. 12Moreover, my father, see, 
yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my 
hand; for in that I cut off the skirt of 
thy robe, and killed thee not, know 
thou and see that there is neither evil 
nor transgression in my hand, and I 
have not sinned against thee, though 
thou layest wait for my soul to take it. 
13The LORD judge between me and 
thee, and the LORD avenge me of thee; 
but my hand shall not be upon thee. 
14As saith the proverb of the ancients: 
Out of the wicked cometh forth 
wickedness; but my hand shall not be 
upon thee. 15After whom is the king of 
Israel come out? after whom dost thou 
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea. 
16The LORD therefore be judge, and 
give sentence between me and thee, 
and see, and plead my cause, and 
deliver me out of thy hand.’ 

17And it came to pass, when David 
had made an end of speaking these 
words unto Saul, that Saul said: ‘Is this 
thy voice, my son David?’ And Saul 
lifted up his voice, and wept. 18And he 
said to David: ‘Thou art more 
righteous than I; for thou hast rendered 
unto me good, whereas I have 
rendered unto thee evil. 19And thou 
hast declared this day how that thou 
hast dealt well with me; forasmuch as 
when the LORD had delivered me up 
into thy hand, thou didst not kill me. 
20For if a man find his enemy, will he 
let him go well away? wherefore the 
LORD reward thee good for that which 
thou hast done unto me this day. 21And 
now, behold, I know that thou shalt 
surely be king, and that the kingdom 
of Israel shall be established in thy 
hand. 22Swear now therefore unto me 
by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut off 
my seed after me, and that thou wilt 
not destroy my name out of my 
father’s house.’ 23And David swore 
unto Saul. And Saul went home; but 
David and his men got them up unto 
the stronghold. 

And Samuel died; and all 
Israel gathered themselves 
together, and lamented him, and buried 
him in his house at Ramah. And David 
arose, and went down to the 
wilderness of Paran. 

2And there was a man in Maon, 
whose possessions were in Carmel; 
and the man was very great, and he 
had three thousand sheep, and a 
thousand goats; and he was shearing 
his sheep in Carmel. 3Now the name of 
the man was Nabal; and the name of 
his wife Abigail; and the woman was 
of good understanding, and of a 
beautiful form; but the man was 
churlish and evil in his doings; and he 
was of the house of Caleb. 4And David 
heard in the wilderness that Nabal was 
shearing his sheep. 5And David sent 
ten young men, and David said unto 
25 




the young men: ‘Get you up to 
Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet 
him in my name; 6and thus ye shall 
say: All hail! and peace be both unto 
thee, and peace be to thy house, and 
peace be unto all that thou hast. 7And 
now I have heard that thou hast 
shearers; thy shepherds have now been 
with us, and we did them no hurt, 
neither was there aught missing unto 
them, all the while they were in 
Carmel. 8Ask thy young men, and they 
will tell thee; wherefore let the young 
men find favour in thine eyes; for we 
come on a good day; give, I pray thee, 
whatsoever cometh to thy hand, unto 
thy servants, and to thy son David.’ 

9And when David’s young men 
came, they spoke to Nabal according 
to all those words in the name of 
David, and ceased. 10And Nabal 
answered David’s servants, and said: 
‘Who is David? and who is the son of 
Jesse? there are many servants now-a-
days that break away every man from 
his master; 11shall I then take my 
bread, and my water, and my flesh that 
I have killed for my shearers, and give 
it unto men of whom I know not 
whence they are?’ 12So David’s young 
men turned on their way, and went 
back, and came and told him according 
to all these words. 13And David said 
unto his men: ‘Gird ye on every man 
his sword.’ And they girded on every 
man his sword; and David also girded 
on his sword; and there went up after 
David about four hundred men; and 
two hundred abode by the baggage. 

14But one of the young men told 
Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying: 
‘Behold, David sent messengers out of 
the wilderness to salute our master; 
and he flew upon them. 15But the men 
were very good unto us, and we were 
not hurt, neither missed we any thing, 
as long as we went with them, when 
we were in the fields; 16they were a 
wall unto us both by night and by day, 
all the while we were with them 
keeping the sheep. 17Now therefore 
know and consider what thou wilt do; 
for evil is determined against our 
master, and against all his house; for 
he is such a base fellow, that one 
cannot speak to him.’ 

18Then Abigail made haste, and took 
two hundred loaves, and two bottles of 
wine, and five sheep ready dressed, 
and five measures of parched corn, and 
a hundred clusters of raisins, and two 
hundred cakes of figs, and laid them 
on asses. 19And she said unto her 
young men: ‘Go on before me; behold, 
I come after you.’ But she told not her 
husband Nabal. 20And it was so, as she 
rode on her ass, and came down by the 
covert of the mountain, that, behold, 
David and his men came down 
towards her; and she met them.— 
21Now David had said: ‘Surely in vain 
have I kept all that this fellow hath in 
the wilderness, so that nothing was 
missed of all that pertained unto him; 
and he hath returned me evil for good. 
22God do so unto the enemies of 
David, and more also, if I leave of all 
that pertain to him by the morning 


light so much as one male.’— 23And 
when Abigail saw David, she made 
haste, and alighted from her ass, and 
fell before David on her face, and 
bowed down to the ground. 24And she 
fell at his feet, and said: ‘Upon me, my 
lord, upon me be the iniquity; and let 
thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak in 
thine ears, and hear thou the words of 
thy handmaid. 25Let not my lord, I 
pray thee, regard this base fellow, even 
Nabal; for as his name is, so is he: 
aNabal is his name, and churlishness is 
with him; but I thy handmaid saw not 
the young men of my lord, whom thou 
didst send. 26Now therefore, my lord, 
as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul 
liveth, seeing the LORD hath 
withholden thee from bloodguiltiness, 
and from finding redress for thyself 
with thine own hand, now therefore let 
thine enemies, and them that seek evil 
to my lord, be as Nabal. 27And now 
this present which thy servant hath 
brought unto my lord, let it be given 
unto the young men that follow my 
lord. 28Forgive, I pray thee, the 
trespass of thy handmaid; for the LORD 
will certainly make my lord a sure 
house, because my lord fighteth the 
battles of the LORD; and evil is not 
found in thee all thy days. 29And 
though man be risen up to pursue thee, 
and to seek thy soul, yet the soul of my 
lord shall be bound in the bundle of 
life with the LORD thy God; and the 
souls of thine enemies, them shall he 

a That is, Churl. 

sling out, as from the hollow of a 
sling. 30And it shall come to pass, 
when the LORD shall have done to my 
lord according to all the good that He 
hath spoken concerning thee, and shall 
have appointed thee prince over Israel; 
31that this shall be no stumbling-block 
unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my 
lord, either that thou hast shed blood 
without cause, or that my lord hath 
found redress for himself. And when 
the LORD shall have dealt well with my 
lord, then remember thy handmaid.’ 

32And David said to bAbigail: 
‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, who sent thee this day to meet 
me; 33and blessed be thy discretion, 
and blessed be thou, that hast kept me 
this day from bloodguiltiness, and 
from finding redress for myself with 
mine own hand. 34For in very deed, as 
the LORD, the God of Israel, liveth, 
who hath withholden me from hurting 
thee, except thou hadst made haste and 
come to meet me, surely there had not 
been left unto Nabal by the morning 
light so much as one male.’ 35So David 
received of her hand that which she 
had brought him; and he said unto her: 
‘Go up in peace to thy house; see, I 
have hearkened to thy voice, and have 
accepted thy person.’ 

b Heb. Abigal. 

36And Abigail came to Nabal; and, 
behold, he held a feast in his house, 
like the feast of a king; and Nabal’s 
heart was merry within him, for he 
was very drunken; wherefore she told 


him nothing, less or more, until the 
morning light. 37And it came to pass in 
the morning, when the wine was gone 
out of Nabal, that his wife told him 
these things, and his heart died within 
him, and he became as a stone. 38And 
it came to pass about ten days after, 
that the LORD smote Nabal, so that he 
died. 

39And when David heard that Nabal 
was dead, he said: ‘Blessed be the 
LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of 
my reproach from the hand of Nabal, 
and hath kept back His servant from 
evil; and the evil-doing of Nabal hath 
the LORD returned upon his own head.’ 
And David sent and spoke concerning 
Abigail, to take her to him to wife. 
40And when the servants of David 
were come to Abigail to Carmel, they 
spoke unto her, saying: ‘David hath 
sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to 
wife.’ 41And she arose, and bowed 
down with her face to the earth, and 
said: ‘Behold, thy handmaid is a 
servant to wash the feet of the servants 
of my lord.’ 42And Abigail hastened, 
and arose, and rode upon an ass, with 
five damsels of hers that followed her; 
and she went after the messengers of 
David, and became his wife. 

43David also took Ahinoam of 
Jezreel; and they became both of them 
his wives. 44Now Saul had given 
Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to 
Palti the son of Laish, who was of 
Gallim. 

And the Ziphites came unto 
Saul to Gibeah, saying: ‘Doth 
not David hide himself in the hill of 
Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?’ 
2Then Saul arose, and went down to 
the wilderness of Ziph, having three 
thousand chosen men of Israel with 
him, to seek David in the wilderness of 
Ziph. 3And Saul pitched in the hill of 
Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, 
by the way. But David abode in the 
wilderness, and he saw that Saul came 
after him into the wilderness. 4David 
therefore sent out spies, and 
understood that Saul was come of a 
certainty. 5And David arose, and came 
to the place where Saul had pitched; 
and David beheld the place where Saul 
lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the 
captain of his host; and Saul lay within 
the barricade, and the people pitched 
round about him. 

6Then answered David and said to 
Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai 
the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, 
saying: ‘Who will go down with me to 
Saul to the camp?’ And Abishai said: 
‘I will go down with thee.’ 7So David 
and Abishai came to the people by 
night; and, behold, Saul lay sleeping 
within the barricade, with his spear 
stuck in the ground at his head; and 
Abner and the people lay round about 
him. 8Then said Abishai to David: 
‘God hath delivered up thine enemy 
into thy hand this day; now therefore 
let me smite him, I pray thee, with the 
spear to the earth at one stroke, and I 
will not smite him the second time.’ 
9And David said to Abishai: ‘Destroy 
him not; for who can put forth his 26 




hand against the LORD’S anointed, and 
be guiltless?’ 10And David said: ‘As 
the LORD liveth, nay, but the LORD shall 
smite him; or his day shall come to 
die; or he shall go down into battle, 
and be swept away. 11The LORD forbid 
it me, that I should put forth my hand 
against the LORD’S anointed; but now 
take, I pray thee, the spear that is at his 
head, and the cruse of water and let us 
go.’ 12So David took the spear and the 
cruse of water from Saul’s head; and 
they got them away, and no man saw 
it, nor knew it, neither did any awake; 
for they were all asleep; because a 
deep sleep from the LORD was fallen 
upon them. 

13Then David went over to the other 
side, and stood on the top of the 
mountain afar off; a great space being 
between them. 14And David cried to 
the people, and to Abner the son of 
Ner, saying: ‘Answerest thou not, 
Abner?’ Then Abner answered and 
said: ‘Who art thou that criest to the 
king?’ 15And David said to Abner: ‘Art 
not thou a valiant man? and who is 
like to thee in Israel? wherefore then 
hast thou not kept watch over thy lord 
the king? for there came one of the 
people in to destroy the king thy lord. 
16This thing is not good that thou hast 
done. As the LORD liveth, ye deserve to 
die, because ye have not kept watch 
over your lord, the LORD’S anointed. 
And now, see, where the king’s spear 
is, and the cruse of water that was at 
his head.’ 

17And Saul knew David’s voice, and 
said: ‘Is this thy voice, my son 
David?’ And David said: ‘It is my 
voice, my lord, O king.’ 18And he said: 
‘Wherefore doth my lord pursue after 
his servant? for what have I done? or 
what evil is in my hand? 19Now 
therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the 
king hear the words of his servant. If it 
be the LORD that hath stirred thee up 
against me, let Him accept an offering; 
but if it be the children of men, cursed 
be they before the LORD; for they have 
driven me out this day that I should 
not cleave unto the inheritance of the 
LORD, saying: Go, serve other gods. 
20Now therefore, let not my blood fall 
to the earth away from the presence of 
the LORD; for the king of Israel is come 
out to seek a single flea, as when one 
doth hunt a partridge in the 
mountains.’ 

21Then said Saul: ‘I have sinned; 
return, my son David; for I will no 
more do thee harm, because my life 
was precious in thine eyes this day; 
behold, I have played the fool and 
erred exceedingly.’ 22And David 
answered and said: ‘Behold the king’s 
spear! let then one of the young men 
come over and fetch it. 23And the LORD 
will render to every man his 
righteousness and his faithfulness; 
forasmuch as the LORD delivered thee 
into my hand to-day, and I would not 
put forth my hand against the LORD’S 
anointed. 24And, behold, as thy life 
was much set by this day in mine eyes, 
so let my life be much set by in the 


eyes of the LORD, and let Him deliver 
me out of all tribulation.’ 25Then Saul 
said to David: ‘Blessed be thou, my 
son David; thou shalt both do mightily, 
and shalt surely prevail.’ So David 
went his way, and Saul returned to his 
place. 

And David said in his heart: ‘I 
shall now be swept away one 
day by the hand of Saul; there is 
nothing better for me than that I should 
escape into the land of the Philistines; 
and Saul will despair of me, to seek 
me any more in all the borders of 
Israel; so shall I escape out of his 
hand.’ 2And David arose, and passed 
over, he and the six hundred men that 
were with him, unto Achish the son of 
Maoch, king of Gath. 3And David 
dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his 
men, every man with his household, 
even David with his two wives, 
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail 
the Carmelitess, Nabal’s wife. 4And it 
was told Saul that David was fled to 
Gath; and he sought no more again for 
him. 

5And David said unto Achish: ‘If 
now I have found favour in thine eyes, 
let them give me a place in one of the 
cities in the country, that I may dwell 
there; for why should thy servant 
dwell in the royal city with thee?’ 
6Then Achish gave him Ziklag that 
day; wherefore Ziklag belongeth unto 
the kings of Judah unto this day. 

7And the number of the days that 
David dwelt in the country of the 
Philistines was a full year and four 
months. 8And David and his men went 
up, and made a raid upon the 
Geshurites, and the Gizrites, and the 
Amalekites; for those were the 
inhabitants of the land, who were of 
old, as thou goest to Shur, even unto 
the land of Egypt. 9And David smote 
the land, and left neither man nor 
woman alive, and took away the 
sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and 
the camels, and the apparel. And he 
returned, and came to Achish. 10And 
Achish said: ‘Whither have ye made a 
raid to-day?’ And David said: ‘Against 
the South of Judah, and against the 
South of the Jerahmeelites, and against 
the South of the Kenites.’ 11And David 
left neither man nor woman alive, to 
bring them to Gath, saying: ‘Lest they 
should tell on us, saying: So did 
David, and so hath been his manner all 
the while he hath dwelt in the country 
of the Philistines.’ 12And Achish 
believed David, saying: ‘He hath made 
his people Israel utterly to abhor him; 
therefore he shall be my servant for 
ever.’ 

And it came to pass in those 
days, that the Philistines 
gathered their hosts together for 
warfare, to fight with Israel. And 
Achish said unto David: ‘Know thou 
assuredly, that thou shalt go out with 
me in the host, thou and thy men.’ 
2And David said to Achish: ‘Therefore 
thou shalt know what thy servant will 
do.’ And Achish said to David: 
‘Therefore will I make thee keeper of 
my head for ever.’ 
27 

28 




3Now Samuel was dead, and all 
Israel had lamented him, and buried 
him in Ramah, even in his own city. 
And Saul had put away those that 
divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit 
out of the land. 4And the Philistines 
gathered themselves together, and 
came and pitched in Shunem; and Saul 
gathered all Israel together, and they 
pitched in Gilboa. 5And when Saul 
saw the host of the Philistines, he was 
afraid, and his heart trembled greatly. 
6And when Saul inquired of the LORD, 
the LORD answered him not, neither by 
dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets. 
7Then said Saul unto his servants: 
‘Seek me a woman that divineth by a 
ghost, that I may go to her, and inquire 
of her.’ And his servants said to him: 
‘Behold, there is a woman that 
divineth by a ghost at En-dor.’ 

8And Saul disguised himself, and 
put on other raiment, and went, he and 
two men with him, and they came to 
the woman by night; and he said: 
‘Divine unto me, I pray thee, by a 
ghost, and bring me up whomsoever I 
shall name unto thee.’ 9And the 
woman said unto him: ‘Behold, thou 
knowest what Saul hath done, how he 
hath cut off those that divine by a 
ghost or a familiar spirit out of the 
land; wherefore then layest thou a 
snare for my life, to cause me to die?’ 
10And Saul swore to her by the LORD, 
saying: ‘As the LORD liveth, there shall 
no punishment happen to thee for this 
thing.’ 11Then said the woman: ‘Whom 
shall I bring up unto thee?’ And he 
said: ‘Bring me up Samuel.’ 12And 
when the woman saw Samuel, she 
cried with a loud voice; and the 
woman spoke to Saul, saying: ‘Why 
hast thou deceived me? for thou art 
Saul.’ 13And the king said unto her: 
‘Be not afraid; for what seest thou?’ 
And the woman said unto Saul: ‘I see 
a godlike being coming up out of the 
earth.’ 14And he said unto her: ‘What 
form is he of?’ And she said: ‘An old 
man cometh up; and he is covered with 
a robe.’ And Saul perceived that it was 
Samuel, and he bowed with his face to 
the ground, and prostrated himself. 

15And Samuel said to Saul: ‘Why 
hast thou disquieted me, to bring me 
up?’ And Saul answered: ‘I am sore 
distressed; for the Philistines make war 
against me, and God is departed from 
me, and answereth me no more, 
neither by prophets, nor by dreams; 
therefore I have called thee, that thou 
mayest make known unto me what I 
shall do.’ 16And Samuel said: 
‘Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, 
seeing the LORD is departed from thee, 
and is become thine adversary? 17And 
the LORD hath wrought for Himself; as 
He spoke by me; and the LORD hath 
rent the kingdom out of thy hand, and 
given it to thy neighbour, even to 
David. 18Because thou didst not 
hearken to the voice of the LORD, and 
didst not execute His fierce wrath 
upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD 
done this thing unto thee this day. 
19Moreover the LORD will deliver Israel 
also with thee into the hand of the 


Philistines; and to-morrow shalt thou 
and thy sons be with me; the LORD will 
deliver the host of Israel also into the 
hand of the Philistines.’ 

20Then Saul fell straightway his full 
length upon the earth, and was sore 
afraid, because of the words of 
Samuel; and there was no strength in 
him; for he had eaten no bread all the 
day, nor all the night. 21And the 
woman came unto Saul, and saw that 
he was sore affrighted, and said unto 
him: ‘Behold, thy handmaid hath 
hearkened unto thy voice, and I have 
put my life in my hand, and have 
hearkened unto thy words which thou 
spokest unto me. 22Now therefore, I 
pray thee, hearken thou also unto the 
voice of thy handmaid, and let me set a 
morsel of bread before thee; and eat, 
that thou mayest have strength, when 
thou goest on thy way.’ 23But he 
refused, and said: ‘I will not eat.’ But 
his servants, together with the woman, 
urged him; and he hearkened unto 
their voice. So he arose from the earth, 
and sat upon the bed. 24And the 
woman had a fatted calf in the house; 
and she made haste, and killed it; and 
she took flour, and kneaded it, and did 
bake unleavened bread thereof; 25and 
she brought it before Saul, and before 
his servants; and they did eat. Then 
they rose up, and went away that night. 

Now the Philistines gathered 
together all their hosts to 
Aphek; and the Israelites pitched by 
the fountain which is in Jezreel. 2And 
the lords of the Philistines passed on 
by hundreds, and by thousands; and 
David and his men passed on in the 
rearward with Achish. 3Then said the 
princes of the Philistines: ‘What do 
these Hebrews here?’ And Achish said 
unto the princes of the Philistines: ‘Is 
not this David, the servant of Saul the 
king of Israel, who hath been with me 
these days or these years, and I have 
found no fault in him since he fell 
away unto me unto this day?’ 4But the 
princes of the Philistines were wroth 
with him; and the princes of the 
Philistines said unto him: ‘Make the 
man return, that he may go back to his 
place where thou hast appointed him, 
and let him not go down with us to 
battle, lest in the battle he become an 
adversary to us; for wherewith should 
this fellow reconcile himself unto his 
lord? should it not be with the heads of 
these men? 5Is not this David, of 
whom they sang one to another in 
dances, saying: 

Saul hath slain his thousands, 

And David his ten thousands?’ 

6Then Achish called David, and said 
unto him: ‘As the LORD liveth, thou 
hast been upright, and thy going out 
and thy coming in with me in the host 
is good in my sight; for I have not 
found evil in thee since the day of thy 
coming unto me unto this day; 
nevertheless the lords favour thee not. 
7Wherefore now return, and go in 
peace, that thou displease not the lords 
of the Philistines.’ 8And David said 
unto Achish: ‘But what have I done? 
and what hast thou found in thy 
29 




servant so long as I have been before 
thee unto this day, that I may not go 
and fight against the enemies of my 
lord the king?’ 9And Achish answered 
and said to David: ‘I know that thou 
art good in my sight, as an angel of 
God; notwithstanding the princes of 
the Philistines have said: He shall not 
go up with us to the battle. 
10Wherefore now rise up early in the 
morning with the servants of thy lord 
that are come with thee; and as soon as 
ye are up early in the morning, and 
have light, depart.’ 11So David rose up 
early, he and his men, to depart in the 
morning, to return into the land of the 
Philistines. And the Philistines went 
up to Jezreel. 

And it came to pass, when 
David and his men were come 
to Ziklag on the third day, that the 
Amalekites had made a raid upon the 
South, and upon Ziklag, and had 
smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire; 
2and had taken captive the women and 
all that were therein, both small and 
great; they slew not any, but carried 
them off, and went their way. 3And 
when David and his men came to the 
city, behold, it was burned with fire; 
and their wives, and their sons, and 
their daughters, were taken captives. 
4Then David and the people that were 
with him lifted up their voice and 
wept, until they had no more power to 
weep. 5And David’s two wives were 
taken captives, Ahinoam the 
Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of 
Nabal the Carmelite. 6And David was 
greatly distressed; for the people spoke 
of stoning him, because the soul of all 
the people was grieved, every man for 
his sons and for his daughters; but 
David strengthened himself in the 
LORD his God. 

7And David said to Abiathar the 
priest, the son of Ahimelech: ‘I pray 
thee, bring me hither the ephod.’ And 
Abiathar brought thither the ephod to 
David. 8And David inquired of the 
LORD, saying: ‘Shall I pursue after this 
troop? shall I overtake them?’ And He 
answered him: ‘Pursue; for thou shalt 
surely overtake them, and shalt 
without fail recover all.’ 9So David 
went, he and the six hundred men that 
were with him, and came to the brook 
Besor, where those that were left 
behind stayed. 10But David pursued, he 
and four hundred men; for two 
hundred stayed behind, who were so 
faint that they could not go over the 
brook Besor. 

11And they found an Egyptian in the 
field, and brought him to David, and 
gave him bread, and he did eat; and 
they gave him water to drink; 12and 
they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, 
and two clusters of raisins; and when 
he had eaten, his spirit came back to 
him; for he had eaten no bread, nor 
drunk any water, three days and three 
nights. 13And David said unto him: ‘To 
whom belongest thou? and whence art 
thou?’ And he said: ‘I am a young 
Egyptian, servant to an Amalekite; and 
my master left me, because three days 
ago I fell sick. 14We made a raid upon 
30 




the South of the Cherethites, and upon 
that which belongeth to Judah, and 
upon the South of Caleb; and we 
burned Ziklag with fire.’ 15And David 
said to him: ‘Wilt thou bring me down 
to this troop?’ And he said: ‘Swear 
unto me by God, that thou wilt neither 
kill me, nor deliver me up into the 
hands of my master, and I will bring 
thee down to this troop.’ 

16And when he had brought him 
down, behold, they were spread abroad 
over all the ground, eating and 
drinking, and feasting, because of all 
the great spoil that they had taken out 
of the land of the Philistines, and out 
of the land of Judah. 17And David 
smote them from the twilight even 
unto the evening of the next day; and 
there escaped not a man of them, save 
four hundred young men, who rode 
upon camels and fled. 18And David 
recovered all that the Amalekites had 
taken; and David rescued his two 
wives. 19And there was nothing 
lacking to them, neither small nor 
great, neither sons nor daughters, 
neither spoil, nor any thing that they 
had taken to them; David brought back 
all. 20And David took all the flocks and 
the herds, which they drove before 
those other cattle, and said: ‘This is 
David’s spoil.’ 

21And David came to the two 
hundred men, who were so faint that 
they could not follow David, whom 
also they had made to abide at the 
brook Besor; and they went forth to 
meet David, and to meet the people 
that were with him; and when David 
came near to the people, he saluted 
them. 22Then answered all the wicked 
men and base fellows, of those that 
went with David, and said: ‘Because 
they went not with us, we will not give 
them aught of the spoil that we have 
recovered, save to every man his wife 
and his children, that they may lead 
them away, and depart.’ 23Then said 
David: ‘Ye shall not do so, my 
brethren, with that which the LORD 
hath given unto us, who hath preserved 
us, and delivered the troop that came 
against us into our hand. 24And who 
will hearken unto you in this matter? 
for as is the share of him that goeth 
down to the battle, so shall be the 
share of him that tarrieth by the 
baggage; they shall share alike.’ 25And 
it was so from that day forward, that 
he made it a statute and an ordinance 
for Israel unto this day. 

26And when David came to Ziklag, 
he sent of the spoil unto the elders of 
Judah, even to his friends, saying: 
‘Behold a present for you of the spoil 
of the enemies of the LORD’; 27to them 
that were in Beth-el, and to them that 
were in Ramoth of the South, and to 
them that were in Jattir; 28and to them 
that were in Aroer, and to them that 
were in Siphmoth, and to them that 
were in Eshtemoa; 29and to them that 
were in Racal, and to them that were in 
the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to 
them that were in the cities of the 
Kenites; 30and to them that were in 
Hormah, and to them that were in Bor-


ashan, and to them that were in 
Athach; 31and to them that were in 
Hebron, and to all the places where 
David himself and his men were wont 
to haunt. 

31 



Now the Philistines fought 
against Israel, and the men of 
Israel fled from before the Philistines, 
and fell down slain in mount Gilboa. 
2And the Philistines followed hard 
upon Saul and upon his sons; and the 
Philistines slew Jonathan, and 
Abinadab, and Malchishua, the sons of 
Saul. 3And the battle went sore against 
Saul, an the archers overtook him; and 
he was in great anguish by reason of 
the archers. 4Then said Saul to his 
armour-bearer: ‘Draw thy sword, and 
thrust me through therewith; lest these 
uncircumcised come and thrust me 
through, and make a mock of me.’ But 
his armour-bearer would not; for he 
was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took 
his sword, and fell upon it. 5And when 
his armour-bearer saw that Saul was 
dead, he likewise fell upon his sword, 
and died with him. 6So Saul died, and 
his three sons, and his armour-bearer, 
and all his men, that same day 
together. 7And when the men of Israel 
that were on the other side of the 
valley, and they that were beyond the 
Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, 
and that Saul and his sons were dead, 
they forsook the cities, and fled; and 
the Philistines came and dwelt in them. 

8And it came to pass on the morrow, 
when the Philistines came to strip the 
slain, that they found Saul and his 
three sons fallen in mount Gilboa. 
9And they cut off his head, and 
stripped off his armour, and sent into 
the land of the Philistines round about, 
to carry the tidings unto the house of 
their idols, and to the people. 10And 
they put his armour in the house of the 
Ashtaroth; and they fastened his body 
to the wall of Beth-shan. 11And when 
the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard 
concerning him that which the 
Philistines had done to Saul, 12all the 
valiant men arose, and went all night, 
and took the body of Saul and the 
bodies of his sons from the wall of 
Beth-shan; and they came to Jabesh, 
and burnt them there. 13And they took 
their bones, and buried them under the 
tamarisk-tree in Jabesh, and fasted 
seven days. 




. ..... 

SECOND SAMUEL 

 

And it came to pass after the 
death of Saul, when David was 
returned from the slaughter of the 
Amalekites, and David had abode two 
days in Ziklag; 2it came even to pass 
on the third day, that, behold, a man 
came out of the camp from Saul with 
his clothes rent, and earth upon his 
head; and so it was, when he came to 
David, that he fell to the earth, and 
prostrated himself. 3And David said 
unto him: ‘From whence comest 
thou?’ And he said unto him: ‘Out of 
the camp of Israel am I escaped.’ 4And 
David said unto him: ‘How went the 
matter? I pray thee, tell me.’ And he 
answered: ‘The people are fled from 
the battle, and many of the people also 
are fallen and dead; and Saul and 
Jonathan his son are dead also.’ 5And 
David said unto the young man that 
told him: ‘How knowest thou that Saul 
and Jonathan his son are dead?’ 6And 
the young man that told him said: ‘As 
I happened by chance upon mount 
Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his 
spear; and, lo, the chariots and the 
horsemen pressed hard upon him. 
7And when he looked behind him, he 
saw me, and called unto me. And I 
answered: Here am I. 8And he said 
unto me: Who art thou? And I 
answered him: I am an Amalekite. 
9And he said unto me: Stand, I pray 
thee, beside me, and slay me, for the 
agony hath taken hold of me; because 
my life is just yet in me. 10So I stood 
beside him, and slew him, because I 
was sure that he could not live after 
that he was fallen; and I took the 
crown that was upon his head, and the 
bracelet that was on his arm, and have 
brought them hither unto my lord.’ 

11Then David took hold on his 
clothes, and rent them; and likewise all 
the men that were with him. 12And 
they wailed, and wept, and fasted until 
even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his 
son, and for the people of the LORD, 
and for the house of Israel; because 
they were fallen by the sword. 13And 
David said unto the young man that 
told him: ‘Whence art thou?’ And he 
answered: ‘I am the son of an 
Amalekite stranger.’ 14And David said 
unto him: ‘How wast thou not afraid to 
put forth thy hand to destroy the 
LORD’S anointed?’ 15And David called 
one of the young men, and said: ‘Go 
near, and fall upon him.’ And he smote 
him that he died. 16And David said 
unto him: ‘Thy blood be upon thy 
head; for thy mouth hath testified 
against thee, saying: I have slain the 
LORD’S anointed.’ 

17And David lamented with this 
lamentation over Saul and over 
Jonathan his son, 18and said—To teach 
1 




the sons of Judah the bow. Behold, it 
is written in the book of Jashar: 

19Thy beauty, O Israel, upon thy 
high places is slain! 

How are the mighty fallen! 

 

20Tell it not in Gath, 

Publish it not in the streets of 
Ashkelon; 

Lest the daughters of the Philistines 

 rejoice, 

Lest the daughters of the 
uncircumcised triumph. 

21Ye mountains of Gilboa, 

Let there be no dew nor rain upon 
you, 

Neither fields of choice fruits; 

For there the shield of the mighty 
was vilely cast away, 

The shield of Saul, not anointed 
with oil. 

22From the blood of the slain, from 
the fat of the mighty, 

The bow of Jonathan turned not 
back, 

And the sword of Saul returned not 
empty. 

23Saul and Jonathan, the lovely and 
the pleasant 

In their lives, even in their death 
they were not divided; 

They were swifter than eagles, 

They were stronger than lions. 

24Ye daughters of Israel, weep over 
Saul, 

Who clothed you in scarlet, with 
other delights, 

Who put ornaments of gold upon 
your apparel. 

25How are the mighty fallen in the 
midst of the battle! 

 

Jonathan upon thy high places is 
slain! 

26I am distressed for thee, my 
brother Jonathan; 

Very pleasant hast thou been unto 
me; 

Wonderful was thy love to me, 

Passing the love of women. 

27How are the mighty fallen, 

And the weapons of war perished! 

 

And it came to pass after this, that 
David inquired of the LORD, 
saying: ‘Shall I go up into any of the 
cities of Judah?’ And the LORD said 
unto him: ‘Go up.’ And David said: 
‘Whither shall I go up?’ And He said: 
‘Unto Hebron.’ 2So David went up 
thither, and his two wives also, 
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail 
the wife of Nabal the Carmelite. 3And 
his men that were with him did David 
bring up, every man with his 
household; and they dwelt in the cities 
of Hebron. 4And the men of Judah 
came, and they there anointed David 
king over the house of Judah. 

And they told David, saying: ‘The 
men of Jabesh-gilead were they that 
buried Saul.’ 5And David sent 
messengers unto the men of Jabesh-
gilead, and said unto them: ‘Blessed be 
ye of the LORD, that ye have shown this 
kindness unto your lord, even unto 
Saul, and have buried him. 6And now 
the LORD show kindness and truth unto 
2 




you; and I also will requite you this 
kindness, because ye have done this 
thing. 7Now therefore let your hands 
be strong, and be ye valiant; for Saul 
your lord is dead, and also the house of 
Judah have anointed me king over 
them.’ 

8Now Abner the son of Ner, captain 
of Saul’s host, had taken Ish-bosheth 
the son of Saul, and brought him over 
to Mahanaim; 9and he made him king 
over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, 
and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, 
and over Benjamin, and over all Israel. 
10Ish-bosheth Saul’s son was forty 
years old when he began to reign over 
Israel, and he reigned two years. But 
the house of Judah followed David. 
11And the time that David was king in 
Hebron over the house of Judah was 
seven years and six months. 

12And Abner the son of Ner, and the 
servants of Ish-bosheth the son of 
Saul, went out from Mahanaim to 
Gibeon. 13And Joab the son of Zeruiah, 
and the servants of David, went out; 
and they met together by the pool of 
Gibeon, and sat down, the one on the 
one side of the pool, and the other on 
the other side of the pool. 14And Abner 
said to Joab: ‘Let the young men, I 
pray thee, arise and play before us.’ 
And Joab said: ‘Let them arise.’ 
15Then they arose and passed over by 
number: twelve for Benjamin, and for 
Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and 
twelve of the servants of David. 16And 
they caught every one his fellow by 
the head, and thrust his sword in his 
fellow’s side; so they fell down 
together; wherefore that place was 
called aHelkath-hazzurim, which is in 
Gibeon. 17And the battle was very sore 
that day; and Abner was beaten, and 
the men of Israel, before the servants 
of David. 

a That is, The field of the sharp 
knives. 

18And the three sons of Zeruiah 
were there, Joab, and Abishai, and 
Asahel; and Asahel was as light of foot 
as one of the roes that are in the field. 
19And Asahel pursued after Abner; and 
in going he turned not to the right hand 
nor to the left from following Abner. 
20Then Abner looked behind him, and 
said: ‘Is it thou, Asahel?’ And he 
answered: ‘It is I.’ 21And Abner said to 
him: ‘Turn thee aside to thy right hand 
or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one 
of the young men, and take thee his 
armour.’ But Asahel would not turn 
aside from following him. 22And 
Abner said again to Asahel: ‘Turn thee 
aside from following me; wherefore 
should I smite thee to the ground? how 
then should I hold up my face to Joab 
thy brother?’ 23Howbeit he refused to 
turn aside; wherefore Abner with the 
hinder end of the spear smote him in 
the groin, that the spear came out 
behind him; and he fell down there, 
and died in the same place; and it 
came to pass, that as many as came to 
the place where Asahel fell down and 
died stood still. 


24But Joab and Abishai pursued after 
Abner; and the sun went down when 
they were come to the hill of Ammah, 
that lieth before Giah by the way of 
the wilderness of Gibeon. 25And the 
children of Benjamin gathered 
themselves together after Abner, and 
became one band, and stood on the top 
of a hill. 26Then Abner called to Joab, 
and said: ‘Shall the sword devour for 
ever? knowest thou not that it will be 
bitterness in the end? how long shall it 
be then, ere thou bid the people return 
from following their brethren?’ 27And 
Joab said: ‘As God liveth, if thou hadst 
not spoken, surely then only after the 
morning the people had gone away, 
every one from following his brother.’ 
28So Joab blew the horn, and all the 
people stood still, and pursued after 
Israel no more, neither fought they any 
more. 29And Abner and his men went 
all that night through the Arabah; and 
they passed over the Jordan, and went 
through all Bithron, and came to 
Mahanaim. 

30And Joab returned from following 
Abner; and when he had gathered all 
the people together, there lacked of 
David’s servants nineteen men and 
Asahel. 31But the servants of David 
had smitten of Benjamin, even of 
Abner’s men—three hundred and 
threescore men died. 32And they took 
up Asahel, and buried him in the 
sepulchre of his father, which was in 
Beth-lehem. And Joab and his men 
went all night, and the day broke upon 
them at Hebron. 

Now there was long war between 
the house of Saul and the house of 
David; and David waxed stronger and 
stronger, but the house of Saul waxed 
weaker and weaker. 

2And unto David were sons born in 
Hebron; and his first-born was 
Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; 
3and his second, Chileab, of Abigail 
the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and 
the third, Absalom the son of Maacah 
the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; 
4and the fourth, Adonijah the son of 
Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the 
son of Abital; 5and the sixth, Ithream, 
of Eglah David’s wife. These were 
born to David in Hebron. 

6And it came to pass, while there 
was war between the house of Saul 
and the house of David, that Abner 
showed himself strong in the house of 
Saul. 7Now Saul had a concubine, 
whose name was Rizpah, the daughter 
of Aiah; and [Ish-bosheth] said to 
Abner: ‘Wherefore hast thou gone in 
unto my father’s concubine?’ 8Then 
was Abner very wroth for the words of 
Ish-bosheth, and said: ‘Am I a dog’s 
head that belongeth to Judah? This day 
do I show kindness unto the house of 
Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to 
his friends, and have not delivered thee 
into the hand of David, and yet thou 
chargest me this day with a fault 
concerning this woman. 9God do so to 
Abner, and more also, if, as the LORD 
hath sworn to David, I do not even so 
to him; 10to transfer the kingdom from 
the house of Saul, and to set up the 
3 




throne of David over Israel and over 
Judah, from Dan even to Beer-sheba.’ 
11And he could not answer Abner 
another word, because he feared him. 

12And Abner sent messengers to 
David straightway, saying: ‘Whose is 
the land?’ saying also: ‘Make thy 
league with me, and, behold, my hand 
shall be with thee, to bring over all 
Israel unto thee.’ 13And he said: ‘Well; 
I will make a league with thee; but one 
thing I require of thee, that is, thou 
shalt not see my face, except thou first 
bring Michal Saul’s daughter, when 
thou comest to see my face.’ 14And 
David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth 
Saul’s son, saying: ‘Deliver me my 
wife Michal, whom I betrothed to me 
for a hundred foreskins of the 
Philistines.’ 15And Ish-bosheth sent, 
and took her from her husband, even 
from Paltiel the son of Laish. 16And 
her husband went with her, weeping as 
he went, and followed her to Bahurim. 
Then said Abner unto him: ‘Go, 
return’; and he returned. 

17And Abner had communication 
with the elders of Israel, saying: ‘In 
times past ye sought for David to be 
king over you; 18now then do it; for the 
LORD hath spoken of David, saying: By 
the hand of My servant David I will 
save My people Israel out of the hand 
of the Philistines, and out of the hand 
of all their enemies.’ 19And Abner also 
spoke in the ears of Benjamin; and 
Abner went also to speak in the ears of 
David in Hebron all that seemed good 
to Israel, and to the whole house of 
Benjamin. 20So Abner came to David 
to Hebron, and twenty men with him. 
And David made Abner and the men 
that were with him a feast. 21And 
Abner said unto David: ‘I will arise 
and go, and will gather all Israel unto 
my lord the king, that they may make a 
covenant with thee, and that thou 
mayest reign over all that thy soul 
desireth.’ And David sent Abner away; 
and he went in peace. 

22And, behold, the servants of David 
and Joab came from a foray, and 
brought in a great spoil with them; but 
Abner was not with David in Hebron; 
for he had sent him away, and he was 
gone in peace. 23When Joab and all the 
host that was with him were come, 
they told Joab, saying: ‘Abner the son 
of Ner came to the king, and he hath 
sent him away, and he is gone in 
peace.’ 24Then Joab came to the king, 
and said: ‘What hast thou done? 
behold, Abner came unto thee; why is 
it that thou hast sent him away, and he 
is quite gone? 25Thou knowest Abner 
the son of Ner, that he came to deceive 
thee, and to know thy going out and 
thy coming in, and to know all that 
thou doest.’ 26And when Joab was 
come out from David, he sent 
messengers after Abner, and they 
brought him back from Bor-sirah; but 
David knew it not. 

27And when Abner was returned to 
Hebron, Joab took him aside into the 
midst of the gate to speak with him 
quietly, and smote him there in the 
groin, that he died, for the blood of 


Asahel his brother. 28And afterward 
when David heard it, he said: ‘I and 
my kingdom are guiltless before the 
LORD for ever from the blood of Abner 
the son of Ner; 29let it fall upon the 
head of Joab, and upon all his father’s 
house; and let there not fail from the 
house of Joab one that hath an issue, or 
that is a leper, or that leaneth on a 
staff, or that falleth by the sword, or 
that lacketh bread.’ 30So Joab and 
Abishai his brother slew Abner, 
because he had killed their brother 
Asahel at Gibeon in the battle. 

31And David said to Joab, and to all 
the people that were with him: ‘Rend 
your clothes, and gird you with 
sackcloth, and wail before Abner.’ 
And king David followed the bier. 
32And they buried Abner in Hebron; 
and the king lifted up his voice, and 
wept at the grave of Abner; and all the 
people wept. 33And the king lamented 
for Abner, and said: 

Should Abner die as a churl dieth 

34Thy hands were not bound, nor thy 
feet put into fetters; 

As a man falleth before the children 
of iniquity, so didst thou fall. 

And all the people wept again over 
him. 35And all the people came to 
cause David to eat bread while it was 
yet day; but David swore, saying: 
‘God do so to me, and more also, if I 
taste bread, or aught else, till the sun 
be down.’ 36And all the people took 
notice of it, and it pleased them; 
whatsoever the king did, pleased all 
the people. 37So all the people and all 
Israel understood that day that it was 
not of the king to slay Abner the son of 
Ner. 38And the king said unto his 
servants: ‘Know ye not that there is a 
prince and a great man fallen this day 
in Israel? 39And I am this day weak, 
and just anointed king; and these men 
the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for 
me; the LORD reward the evildoer 
according to his wickedness.’ 

 

And when Saul’s son heard that 
Abner was dead in Hebron, his 
hands became feeble, and all the 
Israelites were affrighted. 2And Saul’s 
son had two men that were captains of 
bands; the name of the one was 
Baanah, and the name of the other 
Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the 
Beerothite, of the children of 
Benjamin; for Beeroth also is reckoned 
to Benjamin; 3and the Beerothites fled 
to Gittaim, and have been sojourners 
there until this day. 

4Now Jonathan, Saul’s son, had a 
son that was lame of his feet. He was 
five years old when the tidings came 
of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, 
and his nurse took him up, and fled; 
and it came to pass, as she made haste 
to flee, that he fell, and became lame. 
And his name was Mephibosheth. 

5And the sons of Rimmon the 
Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, 
and came about the heat of the day to 
the house of Ish-bosheth, as he took 
his rest at noon. 6And they came 
thither into the midst of the house, as 
though they would have fetched 
4 




wheat; and they smote him in the 
groin; and Rechab and Baanah his 
brother escaped. 7Now when they 
came into the house, as he lay on his 
bed in his bed-chamber, they smote 
him, and slew him, and beheaded him, 
and took his head, and went by the 
way of the Arabah all night. 8And they 
brought the head of Ish-bosheth unto 
David to Hebron, and said to the king: 
‘Behold the head of Ish-bosheth the 
son of Saul thine enemy, who sought 
thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my 
lord the king this day of Saul, and of 
his seed.’ 2009And David answered 
Rechab and Baanah his brother, the 
sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and 
said unto them: ‘As the LORD liveth, 
who hath redeemed my soul out of all 
adversity, 10when one told me, saying: 
Behold, Saul is dead, and he was in his 
own eyes as though he brought good 
tidings, I took hold of him, and slew 
him in Ziklag, instead of giving a 
reward for his tidings. 11How much 
more, when wicked men have slain a 
righteous person in his own house 
upon his bed, shall I not now require 
his blood of your hand, and take you 
away from the earth?’ 12And David 
commanded his young men, and they 
slew them, and cut off their hands and 
their feet, and hanged them up beside 
the pool in Hebron. But they took the 
head of Ish-bosheth, and buried it in 
the grave of Abner in Hebron. 

Then came all the tribes of Israel 
to David unto Hebron, and spoke, 
saying: ‘Behold, we are thy bone and 
thy flesh. 2In times past, when Saul 
was king over us, it was thou that didst 
lead out and bring in Israel; and the 
LORD said to thee: Thou shalt feed My 
people Israel, and thou shalt be prince 
over Israel.’ 3So all the elders of Israel 
came to the king to Hebron; and king 
David made a covenant with them in 
Hebron before the LORD; and they 
anointed David king over Israel. 

4David was thirty years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned forty 
years. 5In Hebron he reigned over 
Judah seven years and six months; and 
in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and 
three years over all Israel and Judah. 

6And the king and his men went to 
Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the 
inhabitants of the land, who spoke 
unto David, saying: ‘Except thou take 
away the blind and the lame, thou shalt 
not come in hither’; thinking: ‘David 
cannot come in hither.’ 7Nevertheless 
David took the stronghold of Zion; the 
same is the city of David. 8And David 
said on that day: ‘Whosoever smiteth 
the Jebusites, and getteth up to the 
gutter, and [taketh away] the lame and 
the blind, that are hated of David’s 
soul—.’ Wherefore they say: ‘There 
are the blind and the lame; he cannot 
come into the house.’ 9And David 
dwelt in the stronghold, and called it 
the city of David. And David built 
round about from Millo and inward. 
10And David waxed greater and 
greater; for the LORD, the God of hosts, 
was with him. 5 




11And Hiram king of Tyre sent 
messengers to David, and cedar-trees, 
and carpenters, and masons; and they 
built David a house. 12And David 
perceived that the LORD had 
established him king over Israel, and 
that He had exalted his kingdom for 
His people Israel’s sake. 

13And David took him more 
concubines and wives out of 
Jerusalem, after he was come from 
Hebron; and there were yet sons and 
daughters born to David. 14And these 
are the names of those that were born 
unto him in Jerusalem: Shammua, and 
Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon; 
15and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Nepheg, 
and Japhia; 16and Elishama, and 
Eliada, and Eliphelet. 

17And when the Philistines heard 
that David was anointed king over 
Israel, all the Philistines went up to 
seek David; and David heard of it, and 
went down to the hold. 18Now the 
Philistines had come and spread 
themselves in the valley of Rephaim. 
19And David inquired of the LORD, 
saying: ‘Shall I go up against the 
Philistines? wilt Thou deliver them 
into my hand?’ And the LORD said unto 
David: ‘Go up; for I will certainly 
deliver the Philistines into thy hand.’ 
20And David came to Baal-perazim, 
and David smote them there; and he 
said: ‘The LORD hath broken mine 
enemies before me, like the breach of 
waters.’ Therefore the name of that 
place was called aBaal-perazim. 21And 
they left their images there, and David 
and his men took them away. 

a That is, The possessor of breaches. 

22And the Philistines came up yet 
again, and spread themselves in the 
valley of Rephaim. 23And when David 
inquired of the LORD, He said: ‘Thou 
shalt not go up; make a circuit behind 
them, and come upon them over 
against the mulberry-trees. 24And it 
shall be, when thou hearest the sound 
of marching in the tops of the 
mulberry-trees, that then thou shalt 
bestir thyself; for then is the LORD 
gone out before thee to smite the host 
of the Philistines.’ 25And David did so, 
as the LORD commanded him, and 
smote the Philistines from Geba until 
thou come to Gezer. 

6 



And David again gathered 
together all the chosen men of 
Israel, thirty thousand. 2And David 
arose, and went with all the people that 
were with him, from Baale-judah, to 
bring up from thence the ark of God, 
whereupon is called the Name, even 
the name of the LORD of hosts that 
sitteth upon the cherubim. 3And they 
set the ark of God upon a new cart, 
and brought it out of the house of 
Abinadab that was in the hill; and 
Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of 
Abinadab, drove the new cart. 4And 
they brought it out of the house of 
Abinadab, which was in the hill, with 
the ark of God, and Ahio went before 
the ark. 5And David and all the house 


of Israel played before the LORD with 
all manner of instruments made of 
cypress-wood, and with harps, and 
with psalteries, and with timbrels, and 
with sistra, and with cymbals. 

6And when they came to the 
threshing-floor of Nacon, Uzzah put 
forth his hand to the ark of God, and 
took hold of it; for the oxen stumbled. 
7And the anger of the LORD was 
kindled against Uzzah; and God smote 
him there for his error; and there he 
died by the ark of God. 8And David 
was displeased, because the LORD had 
broken forth upon Uzzah; and that 
place was called aPerez-uzzah, unto 
this day 9And David was afraid of the 
LORD that day; and he said: ‘How shall 
the ark of the LORD come unto me?’ 
10So David would not remove the ark 
of the LORD unto him into the city of 
David; but David carried it aside into 
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 
11And the ark of the LORD remained in 
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite 
three months; and the LORD blessed 
Obed-edom, and all his house. 

a That is, The breach of Uzzah. 

12And it was told king David, 
saying: ‘The LORD hath blessed the 
house of Obed-edom, and all that 
pertaineth unto him, because of the ark 
of God.’ And David went and brought 
up the ark of God from the house of 
Obed-edom into the city of David with 
joy. 13And it was so, that when they 
that bore the ark of the LORD had gone 
six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a 

fatling. 14And David danced before the 
LORD with all his might; and David 
was girded with a linen ephod. 15So 
David and all the house of Israel 
brought up the ark of the LORD with 
shouting, and with the sound of the 
horn. 

16And it was so, as the ark of the 
LORD came into the city of David, that 
Michal the daughter of Saul looked out 
at the window, and saw king David 
leaping and dancing before the LORD; 
and she despised him in her heart. 
17And they brought in the ark of the 
LORD, and set it in its place, in the 
midst of the tent that David had 
pitched for it; and David offered burnt-
offerings and peace-offerings before 
the LORD. 18And when David had made 
an end of offering the burnt-offering 
and the peace-offerings, he blessed the 
people in the name of the LORD of 
hosts. 19And he dealt among all the 
people, even among the whole 
multitude of Israel, both to men and 
women, to every one a cake of bread, 
and a cake made in a pan, and a sweet 
cake. So all the people departed every 
one to his house. 

20Then David returned to bless his 
household. And Michal the daughter 
of Saul came out to meet David, and 
said: ‘How did the king of Israel get 
him honour to-day, who uncovered 
himself to-day in the eyes of the 
handmaids of his servants, as one of 
the vain fellows shamelessly 
uncovereth himself! ’ 21And David 
said unto Michal: ‘Before the LORD, 


who chose me above thy father, and 
above all his house, to appoint me 
prince over the people of the LORD, 
over Israel, before the LORD will I 
make merry. 22And I will be yet more 
vile than thus, and will be base in mine 
own sight; and with the handmaids 
whom thou hast spoken of, with them 
will I get me honour.’ 23And Michal 
the daughter of Saul had no child unto 
the day of her death. 

And it came to pass, when the 
king dwelt in his house, and the 
LORD had given him rest from all his 
enemies round about, 2that the king 
said unto Nathan the prophet: ‘See 
now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but 
the ark of God dwelleth within 
curtains.’ 3And Nathan said to the 
king: ‘Go, do all that is in thy heart; 
for the LORD is with thee.’ 4And it 
came to pass the same night, that the 
word of the LORD came unto Nathan, 
saying: 5’Go and tell My servant 
David: Thus saith the LORD: Shalt thou 
build Me a house for Me to dwell in? 
6for I have not dwelt in a house since 
the day that I brought up the children 
of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, 
but have walked in a tent and in a 
tabernacle. 7In all places wherein I 
have walked among all the children of 
Israel, spoke I a word with any of the 
tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to 
feed My people Israel, saying: Why 
have ye not built Me a house of cedar? 
8Now therefore thus shalt thou say 
unto My servant David: Thus saith the 
LORD of hosts: I took thee from the 
sheepcote, from following the sheep, 
that thou shouldest be prince over My 
people, over Israel. 9And I have been 
with thee whithersoever thou didst go, 
and have cut off all thine enemies from 
before thee; and I will make thee a 
great name, like unto the name of the 
great ones that are in the earth. 10And I 
will appoint a place for My people 
Israel, and will plant them, that they 
may dwell in their own place, and be 
disquieted no more; neither shall the 
children of wickedness afflict them 
any more, as at the first, 11even from 
the day that I commanded judges to be 
over My people Israel; and I will cause 
thee to rest from all thine enemies. 
Moreover the LORD telleth thee that the 
LORD will make thee a house. 12When 
thy days are fulfilled, and thou shalt 
sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy 
seed after thee, that shall proceed out 
of thy body, and I will establish his 
kingdom. 13He shall build a house for 
My name, and I will establish the 
throne of his kingdom for ever. 14I will 
be to him for a father, and he shall be 
to Me for a son; if he commit iniquity, 
I will chasten him with the rod of men, 
and with the stripes of the children of 
men; 15but My mercy shall not depart 
from him, as I took it from Saul, 
whom I put away before thee. 16And 
thy house and thy kingdom shall be 
made sure for ever before thee; thy 
throne shall be established for ever.’ 
17According to all these words, and 
according to all this vision, so did 
Nathan speak unto David. 
7 




18Then David the king went in, and 
sat before the LORD; and he said: ‘Who 
am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my 
house, that Thou hast brought me thus 
far? 19And this was yet a small thing in 
Thine eyes, O Lord GOD; but Thou hast 
spoken also of Thy servant’s house for 
a great while to come; and this too 
after the manner of great men, O Lord 
GOD. 20And what can David say more 
unto Thee? for Thou knowest Thy 
servant, O Lord GOD. 21For Thy word’s 
sake, and according to Thine own 
heart, hast Thou wrought all this 
greatness, to make Thy servant know 
it. 22Therefore Thou art great, O LORD 
God; for there is none like Thee, 
neither is there any God beside Thee, 
according to all that we have heard 
with our ears. 23And who is like Thy 
people, like Israel, a nation one in the 
earth, whom God went to redeem unto 
Himself for a people, and to make Him 
a name, and to do for Thy land great 
things and tremendous, even for you, 
[in driving out] from before Thy 
people, whom Thou didst redeem to 
Thee out of Egypt, the nations and 
their gods? 24And Thou didst establish 
to Thyself Thy people Israel to be a 
people unto Thee for ever; and Thou, 
LORD, becamest their God. 25And now, 
O LORD God, the word that Thou hast 
spoken concerning Thy servant, and 
concerning his house, confirm Thou it 
for ever, and do as Thou hast spoken. 
26And let Thy name be magnified for 
ever, that it may be said: The LORD of 
hosts is God over Israel; and the house 
of Thy servant David shall be 
established before Thee. 27For Thou, O 
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, hast 
revealed to Thy servant, saying: I will 
build thee a house; therefore hath Thy 
servant taken heart to pray this prayer 
unto Thee. 28And now, O Lord GOD, 
Thou alone art God, and Thy words 
are truth, and Thou hast promised this 
good thing unto Thy servant; 29now 
therefore let it please Thee to bless the 
house of Thy servant, that it may 
continue for ever before Thee; for 
Thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it; and 
through Thy blessing let the house of 
Thy servant be blessed for ever.’ 

And after this it came to pass, that 
David smote the Philistines, and 
subdued them; and David took 
Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the 
Philistines. 

2And he smote Moab, and measured 
them with the line, making them to lie 
down on the ground; and he measured 
two lines to put to death, and one full 
line to keep alive. And the Moabites 
became servants to David, and brought 
presents. 3David smote also Hadadezer 
the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he 
went to establish his dominion at the 
river Euphrates. 4And David took from 
him a thousand and seven hundred 
horsemen, and twenty thousand 
footmen; and David houghed all the 
chariot horses, but reserved of them 
for a hundred chariots. 5And when the 
Arameans of Damascus came to 
succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, 
David smote of the Arameans two and 
8 




twenty thousand men. 6Then David put 
garrisons in Aram of Damascus; and 
the Arameans became servants to 
David, and brought presents. And the 
LORD gave victory to David 
whithersoever he went. 7And David 
took the shields of gold that were on 
the servants of Hadadezer, and brought 
them to Jerusalem. 8And from Betah 
and from Berothai, cities of 
Hadadezer, king David took exceeding 
much brass. 

9And when Toi king of Hamath 
heard that David had smitten all the 
host of Hadadezer, 10then Toi sent 
Joram his son unto king David, to 
salute him, and to bless him—because 
he had fought against Hadadezer and 
smitten him; for Hadadezer had wars 
with Toi—and he brought with him 
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, 
and vessels of brass. 11These also did 
king David dedicate unto the LORD, 
with the silver and gold that he 
dedicated of all the nations which he 
subdued: 12of Aram, and of Moab, and 
of the children of Ammon, and of the 
Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the 
spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king 
of Zobah. 13And David got him a name 
when he returned from smiting the 
Arameans in the Valley of Salt, even 
eighteen thousand men. 14And he put 
garrisons in Edom; throughout all 
Edom put he garrisons, and all the 
Edomites became servants to David. 
And the LORD gave victory to David 
whithersoever he went. 

15And David reigned over all Israel; 
and David executed justice and 
righteousness unto all his people. 
16And Joab the son of Zeruiah was 
over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son 
of Ahilud was recorder; 17and Zadok 
the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the 
son of Abiathar, were priests; and 
Seraiah was scribe; 18and Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada was over the 
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and 
David’s sons were chief ministers. 

And David said: ‘Is there yet any 
that is left of the house of Saul, 
that I may show him kindness for 
Jonathan’s sake?’ 2Now there was of 
the house of Saul a servant whose 
name was Ziba, and they called him 
unto David; and the king said unto 
him: ‘Art thou Ziba?’ And he said: 
‘Thy servant is he.’ 3And the king said: 
‘Is there not yet any of the house of 
Saul, that I may show the kindness of 
God unto him?’ And Ziba said unto 
the king: ‘Jonathan hath yet a son, who 
is lame on his feet.’ 4And the king said 
unto him: ‘Where is he?’ And Ziba 
said unto the king: ‘Behold, he is in 
the house of Machir the son of 
Ammiel, in Lo-debar.’ 5Then king 
David sent, and fetched him out of the 
house of Machir the son of Ammiel, 
from Lo-debar. 6And Mephibosheth, 
the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, 
came unto David, and fell on his face, 
and prostrated himself. And David 
said: ‘Mephibosheth! ’ And he 
answered: ‘Behold thy servant! ’ 7And 
David said unto him: ‘Fear not; for I 
9 




will surely show thee kindness for 
Jonathan thy father’s sake, and will 
restore thee all the land of Saul thy 
father; and thou shalt eat bread at my 
table continually.’ 8And he bowed 
down, and said: ‘What is thy servant, 
that thou shouldest look upon such a 
dead dog as I am?’ 

9Then the king called to Ziba, Saul’s 
servant, and said unto him: ‘All that 
pertained to Saul and to all his house 
have I given unto thy master’s son. 
10And thou shalt till the land for him, 
thou, and thy sons, and thy servants; 
and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that 
thy master’s son may have bread to 
eat; but Mephibosheth thy master’s 
son shall eat bread continually at my 
table.’ Now Ziba had fifteen sons and 
twenty servants. 11Then said Ziba unto 
the king: ‘According to all that my 
lord the king commandeth his servant, 
so shall thy servant do; but 
Mephibosheth eateth at my table as 
one of the king’s sons.’ 12Now 
Mephibosheth had a young son, whose 
name was Mica. And all that dwelt in 
the house of Ziba were servants unto 
Mephibosheth. 13But Mephibosheth 
dwelt in Jerusalem; for he did eat 
continually at the king’s table; and he 
was lame on both his feet. 

And it came to pass after this, 
that the king of the children of 
Ammon died, and Hanun his son 
reigned in his stead. 2And David said: 
‘I will show kindness unto Hanun the 
son of Nahash, as his father showed 
kindness unto me.’ So David sent by 
the hand of his servants to comfort him 
concerning his father. And David’s 
servants came into the land of the 
children of Ammon. 3But the princes 
of the children of Ammon said unto 
Hanun their lord: ‘Thinkest thou that 
David doth honour thy father, that he 
hath sent comforters unto thee? hath 
not David sent his servants unto thee 
to search the city, and to spy it out, and 
to overthrow it?’ 4So Hanun took 
David’s servants, and shaved off the 
one half of their beards, and cut off 
their garments in the middle, even to 
their buttocks, and sent them away. 
5When they told it unto David, he sent 
to meet them; for the men were greatly 
ashamed. And the king said: ‘Tarry at 
Jericho until your beards be grown, 
and then return.’ 

6And when the children of Ammon 
saw that they were become odious to 
David, the children of Ammon sent 
and hired the Arameans of Beth-rehob, 
and the Arameans of Zobah, twenty 
thousand footmen, and the king of 
Maacah with a thousand men, and the 
men of Tob twelve thousand men. 
7And when David heard of it, he sent 
Joab, and all the host of the mighty 
men. 8And the children of Ammon 
came out, and put the battle in array at 
the entrance of the gate; and the 
Arameans of Zobah, and of Rehob, 
and the men of Tob and Maacah, were 
by themselves in the field. 

9Now when Joab saw that the battle 
was set against him before and behind, 
he chose of all the choice men of 
10 




Israel, and put them in array against 
the Arameans; 10and the rest of the 
people he committed into the hand of 
aAbishai his brother, and he put them 
in array against the children of 
Ammon. 11And he said: ‘If the 
Arameans be too strong for me, then 
thou shalt help me, but if the children 
of Ammon be too strong for thee, then 
I will come and help thee. 12Be of 
good courage, and let us prove strong 
for our people, and for the cities of our 
God; and the LORD do that which 
seemeth Him good.’ 13So Joab and the 
people that were with him drew nigh 
unto the battle against the Arameans; 
and they fled before him. 14And when 
the children of Ammon saw that the 
Arameans were fled, they likewise fled 
before Abishai, and entered into the 
city. Then Joab returned from the 
children of Ammon, and came to 
Jerusalem. 

a Heb. Abshai. 

15And when the Arameans saw that 
they were put to the worse before 
Israel, they gathered themselves 
together. 16And Hadadezer sent, and 
brought out the Arameans that were 
beyond the River; and they came to 
Helam, with Shobach the captain of 
the host of Hadadezer at their head. 
17And it was told David; and he 
gathered all Israel together, and passed 
over the Jordan, and came to Helam. 
And the Arameans set themselves in 
array against David, and fought with 
him. 18And the Arameans fled before 

Israel; and David slew of the 
Arameans seven hundred drivers of 
chariots, and forty thousand horsemen, 
and smote Shobach the captain of their 
host, so that he died there. 19And when 
all the kings that were servants to 
Hadadezer saw that they were put to 
the worse before Israel, they made 
peace with Israel, and served them. So 
the Arameans feared to help the 
children of Ammon any more. 

And it came to pass, at the 
return of the year, at the time 
when kings go out to battle, that David 
sent Joab, and his servants with him, 
and all Israel; and they destroyed the 
children of Ammon, and besieged 
Rabbah. But David tarried at 
Jerusalem. 

2And it came to pass at eventide, 
that David arose from off his bed, and 
walked upon the roof of the king’s 
house; and from the roof he saw a 
woman bathing; and the woman was 
very beautiful to look upon. 3And 
David sent and inquired after the 
woman. And one said: ‘Is not this 
Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the 
wife of Uriah the Hittite?’ 4And David 
sent messengers, and took her; and she 
came in unto him, and he lay with her; 
for she was purified from her 
uncleanness; and she returned unto her 
house. 5And the woman conceived; 
and she sent and told David, and said: 
‘I am with child.’ 

6And David sent to Joab [, saying]: 
‘Send me Uriah the Hittite.’ And Joab 
sent Uriah to David. 7And when Uriah 
11 




was come unto him, David asked of 
him how Joab did, and how the people 
fared, and how the war prospered. 
8And David said to Uriah: ‘Go down 
to thy house, and wash thy feet.’ And 
Uriah departed out of the king’s house, 
and there followed him a mess of food 
from the king. 9But Uriah slept at the 
door of the king’s house with all the 
servants of his lord, and went not 
down to his house. 10And when they 
had told David, saying: ‘Uriah went 
not down unto his house’, David said 
unto Uriah: ‘Art thou not come from a 
journey? wherefore didst thou not go 
down unto thy house?’ 11And Uriah 
said unto David: ‘The ark, and Israel, 
and Judah, abide in booths; and my 
lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, 
are encamped in the open field; shall I 
then go into my house, to eat and to 
drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou 
livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not 
do this thing.’ 12And David said to 
Uriah: ‘Tarry here to-day also, and to-
morrow I will let thee depart.’ So 
Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and 
the morrow. 13And when David had 
called him, he did eat and drink before 
him; and he made him drunk; and at 
even he went out to lie on his bed with 
the servants of his lord, but went not 
down to his house. 

14And it came to pass in the 
morning, that David wrote a letter to 
Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah. 
15And he wrote in the letter, saying: 
‘Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the 
hottest battle, and retire ye from him, 
that he may be smitten, and die.’ 16And 
it came to pass, when Joab kept watch 
upon the city, that he assigned Uriah 
unto the place where he knew that 
valiant men were. 17And the men of 
the city went out, and fought with 
Joab; and there fell some of the 
people, even of the servants of David; 
and Uriah the Hittite died also. 18Then 
Joab sent and told David all the things 
concerning the war; 19and he charged 
the messenger, saying: ‘When thou 
hast made an end of telling all the 
things concerning the war unto the 
king, 20it shall be that, if the king’s 
wrath arise, and he say unto thee: 
Wherefore went ye so nigh unto the 
city to fight? knew ye not that they 
would shoot from the wall? 21who 
smote Abimelech the son of 
Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast an 
upper millstone upon him from the 
wall, that he died at Thebez? why went 
ye so nigh the wall? then shalt thou 
say: Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is 
dead also.’ 

22So the messenger went, and came 
and told David all that Joab had sent 
him for. 23And the messenger said unto 
David: ‘The men prevailed against us, 
and came out unto us into the field, 
and we were upon them even unto the 
entrance of the gate. 24And the 
shooters shot at thy servants from off 
the wall; and some of the king’s 
servants are dead, and thy servant 
Uriah the Hittite is dead also.’ 25Then 
David said unto the messenger: ‘Thus 
shalt thou say unto Joab: Let not this 


thing displease thee, for the sword 
devoureth in one manner or another; 
make thy battle more strong against 
the city, and overthrow it; and 
encourage thou him.’ 

26And when the wife of Uriah heard 
that Uriah her husband was dead, she 
made lamentation for her husband. 
27And when the mourning was past, 
David sent and took her home to his 
house, and she became his wife, and 
bore him a son. But the thing that 
David had done displeased the LORD. 

And the LORD sent Nathan 
unto David. And he came unto 
him, and said unto him: ‘There were 
two men in one city: the one rich, and 
the other poor. 2The rich man had 
exceeding many flocks and herds; 3but 
the poor man had nothing save one 
little ewe lamb, which he had bought 
and reared; and it grew up together 
with him, and with his children; it did 
eat of his own morsel, and drank of his 
own cup, and lay in his bosom, and 
was unto him as a daughter. 4And there 
came a traveller unto the rich man, and 
he spared to take of his own flock and 
of his own herd, to dress for the 
wayfaring man that was come unto 
him, but took the poor man’s lamb, 
and dressed it for the man that was 
come to him.’ 5And David’s anger was 
greatly kindled against the man; and 
he said to Nathan: ‘As the LORD liveth, 
the man that hath done this deserveth 
to die; 6and he shall restore the lamb 
fourfold, because he did this thing, and 
because he had no pity.’ 

7And Nathan said to David: ‘Thou 
art the man. Thus saith the LORD, the 
God of Israel: I anointed thee king 
over Israel, and I delivered thee out of 
the hand of Saul; 8and I gave thee thy 
master’s house, and thy master’s wives 
into thy bosom, and gave thee the 
house of Israel and of Judah; and if 
that were too little, then would I add 
unto thee so much more. 9Wherefore 
hast thou despised the word of the 
LORD, to do that which is evil in My 
sight? Uriah the Hittite thou hast 
smitten with the sword, and his wife 
thou hast taken to be thy wife, and him 
thou hast slain with the sword of the 
children of Ammon. 10Now therefore, 
the sword shall never depart from thy 
house; because thou hast despised Me, 
and hast taken the wife of Uriah the 
Hittite to be thy wife. 11Thus saith the 
LORD: Behold, I will raise up evil 
against thee out of thine own house, 
and I will take thy wives before thine 
eyes, and give them unto thy 
neighbour, and he shall lie with thy 
wives in the sight of this sun. 12For 
thou didst it secretly; but I will do this 
thing before all Israel, and before the 
sun.’ 13And David said unto Nathan: ‘I 
have sinned against the LORD.’ And 
Nathan said unto David: ‘The LORD 
also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt 
not die. 14Howbeit, because by this 
deed thou hast greatly blasphemed the 
enemies of the LORD, the child also that 
is born unto thee shall surely die.’ 
15And Nathan departed unto his house. 
12 




And the LORD struck the child that 
Uriah’s wife bore unto David, and it 
was very sick. 16David therefore 
besought God for the child; and David 
fasted, and as often as he went in, he 
lay all night upon the earth. 17And the 
elders of his house arose, and stood 
beside him, to raise him up from the 
earth; but he would not, neither did he 
eat bread with them. 18And it came to 
pass on the seventh day, that the child 
died. And the servants of David feared 
to tell him that the child was dead; for 
they said: ‘Behold, while the child was 
yet alive, we spoke unto him, and he 
hearkened not unto our voice; how 
then shall we tell him that the child is 
dead, so that he do himself some 
harm?’ 19But when David saw that his 
servants whispered together, David 
perceived that the child was dead; and 
David said unto his servants: ‘Is the 
child dead?’ And they said: ‘He is 
dead.’ 20Then David arose from the 
earth, and washed, and anointed 
himself, and changed his apparel; and 
he came into the house of the LORD, 
and worshipped; then he came to his 
own house; and when he required, they 
set bread before him, and he did eat. 
21Then said his servants unto him: 
‘What thing is this that thou hast done? 
thou didst fast and weep for the child, 
while it was alive; but when the child 
was dead, thou didst rise and eat 
bread.’ 22And he said: ‘While the child 
was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I 
said: Who knoweth whether the LORD 
will not be gracious to me, that the 
child may live? 23But now he is dead, 
wherefore should I fast? can I bring 
him back again? I shall go to him, but 
he will not return to me.’ 

24And David comforted Bath-sheba 
his wife, and went in unto her, and lay 
with her; and she bore a son, and 
called his name Solomon. And the 
LORD loved him; 25and He sent by the 
hand of Nathan the prophet, and he 
called his name aJedidiah, for the 
LORD’S sake. 

a That is, Beloved of the LORD. 

26Now Joab fought against Rabbah 
of the children of Ammon, and took 
the royal city. 27And Joab sent 
messengers to David, and said: ‘I have 
fought against Rabbah, yea, I have 
taken the city of waters. 28Now 
therefore gather the rest of the people 
together, and encamp against the city, 
and take it; lest I take the city, and it 
be called after my name.’ 29And David 
gathered all the people together, and 
went to Rabbah, and fought against it, 
and took it. 30And he took the crown of 
Malcam from off his head; and the 
weight thereof was a talent of gold, 
and in it were precious stones; and it 
was set on David’s head. And he 
brought forth the spoil of the city, 
exceeding much. 31And he brought 
forth the people that were therein, and 
put them under saws, and under 
harrows of iron, and under axes of 
iron, and made them pass through the 
brickkiln; and thus did he unto all the 
cities of the children of Ammon. And 


David and all the people returned unto 
Jerusalem. 

And it came to pass after this, 
that Absalom the son of David 
had a fair sister, whose name was 
Tamar; and Amnon the son of David 
loved her. 2And Amnon was so 
distressed that he fell sick because of 
his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; 
and it seemed hard to Amnon to do 
any thing unto her. 3But Amnon had a 
friend, whose name was Jonadab, the 
son of Shimeah David’s brother; and 
Jonadab was a very subtle man. 4And 
he said unto him: ‘Why, O son of the 
king, art thou thus becoming leaner 
from day to day? wilt thou not tell 
me?’ And Amnon said unto him: ‘I 
love Tamar, my brother Absalom’s 
sister.’ 5And Jonadab said unto him: 
‘Lay thee down on thy bed, and feign 
thyself sick; and when thy father 
cometh to see thee, say unto him: Let 
my sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and 
give me bread to eat, and dress the 
food in my sight, that I may see it, and 
eat it at her hand.’ 6So Amnon lay 
down, and feigned himself sick; and 
when the king was come to see him, 
Amnon said unto the king: ‘Let my 
sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and 
make me a couple of cakes in my 
sight, that I may eat at her hand.’ 

7Then David sent home to Tamar, 
saying: ‘Go now to thy brother 
Amnon’s house, and dress him food.’ 
8So Tamar went to her brother 
Amnon’s house; and he was lying 
down. And she took dough, and 
kneaded it, and made cakes in his 
sight, and did bake the cakes. 9And she 
took the pan, and poured them out 
before him; but he refused to eat. And 
Amnon said: ‘Have out all men from 
me.’ And they went out every man 
from him. 10And Amnon said unto 
Tamar: ‘Bring the food into the 
chamber, that I may eat of thy hand.’ 
And Tamar took the cakes which she 
had made, and brought them into the 
chamber to Amnon her brother. 11And 
when she had brought them near unto 
him to eat, he took hold of her, and 
said unto her: ‘Come lie with me, my 
sister.’ 12And she answered him: ‘Nay, 
my brother, do not force me; for no 
such thing ought to be done in Israel; 
do not thou this wanton deed. 13And I, 
whither shall I carry my shame? and as 
for thee, thou wilt be as one of the 
base men in Israel. Now therefore, I 
pray thee, speak unto the king; for he 
will not withhold me from thee.’ 
14Howbeit he would not hearken unto 
her voice; but being stronger than she, 
he forced her, and lay with her. 

15Then Amnon hated her with 
exceeding great hatred; for the hatred 
wherewith he hated her was greater 
than the love wherewith he had loved 
her. And Amnon said unto her: ‘Arise, 
be gone.’ 16And she said unto him: 
‘Not so, because this great wrong in 
putting me forth is worse than the 
other that thou didst unto me.’ But he 
would not hearken unto her. 17Then he 
called his servant that ministered unto 
him, and said: ‘Put now this woman 
13 




out from me, and bolt the door after 
her.’—18Now she had a garment of 
many colours upon her; for with such 
robes were the king’s daughters that 
were virgins apparelled.—And his 
servant brought her out, and bolted the 
door after her. 19And Tamar put ashes 
on her head, and rent her garment of 
many colours that was on her; and she 
laid her hand on her head, and went 
her way, crying aloud as she went. 

20And Absalom her brother said 
unto her: ‘Hath aAmnon thy brother 
been with thee? but now hold thy 
peace, my sister: he is thy brother; take 
not this thing to heart.’ So Tamar 
remained desolate in her brother, 
Absalom’s house. 21But when king 
David heard of all these things, he was 
very wroth. 22And Absalom spoke unto 
Amnon neither good nor bad; for 
Absalom hated Amnon, because he 
had forced his sister Tamar. 

a Heb. Aminon. 

23And it came to pass after two full 
years, that Absalom had sheep-
shearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside 
Ephraim; and Absalom invited all the 
king’s sons. 24And Absalom came to 
the king, and said: ‘Behold now, thy 
servant hath sheep-shearers; let the 
king, I pray thee, and his servants go 
with thy servant.’ 25And the king said 
to Absalom: ‘Nay, my son, let us not 
all go, lest we be burdensome unto 
thee.’ And he pressed him; howbeit he 
would not go, but blessed him. 26Then 
said Absalom: ‘If not, I pray thee, let 

my brother Amnon go with us.’ And 
the king said unto him: ‘Why should 
he go with thee?’ 27But Absalom 
pressed him, and he let Amnon and all 
the king’s sons go with him. 28And 
Absalom commanded his servants, 
saying: ‘Mark ye now, when Amnon’s 
heart is merry with wine; and when I 
say unto you: Smite Amnon, then kill 
him, fear not; have not I commanded 
you? be courageous, and be valiant.’ 
29And the servants of Absalom did 
unto Amnon as Absalom had 
commanded. Then all the king’s sons 
arose, and every man got him up upon 
his mule, and fled. 

30And it came to pass, while they 
were in the way, that the tidings came 
to David, saying: ‘Absalom hath slain 
all the king’s sons, and there is not one 
of them left.’ 31Then the king arose, 
and rent his garments, and lay on the 
earth; and all his servants stood by 
with their clothes rent. 32And Jonadab, 
the son of Shimeah David’s brother, 
answered and said: ‘Let not my lord 
suppose that they have killed all the 
young men the king’s sons; for Amnon 
only is dead; for by the appointment of 
Absalom this hath been determined 
from the day that he forced his sister 
Tamar. 33Now therefore let not my 
lord the king take the thing to his 
heart, to think that all the king’s sons 
are dead; for Amnon only is dead.’ 

34But Absalom fled. And the young 
man that kept the watch lifted up his 
eyes, and looked, and, behold, there 
came much people in a roundabout 


way by the hill-side. 35And Jonadab 
said unto the king: ‘Behold, the king’s 
sons are come; as thy servant said, so 
it is.’ 36And it came to pass, as soon as 
he had made an end of speaking, that, 
behold, the king’s sons came, and 
lifted up their voice, and wept; and the 
king also and all his servants wept 
very sore. 

37But Absalom fled, and went to 
Talmai the son of Ammihud, king of 
Geshur. And [David] mourned for his 
son every day. 

38So Absalom fled, and went to 
Geshur, and was there three years. 
39And the soul of king David failed 
with longing for Absalom; for he was 
comforted concerning Amnon, seeing 
he was dead. 

Now Joab the son of Zeruiah 
perceived that the king’s heart 
was toward Absalom. 2And Joab sent 
to Tekoa, and fetched thence a wise 
woman, and said unto her: ‘I pray thee, 
feign thyself to be a mourner, and put 
on mourning apparel, I pray thee, and 
anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a 
woman that had a long time mourned 
for the dead; 3and go in to the king, 
and speak on this manner unto him.’ 
So Joab put the words in her mouth. 

4And when the woman of Tekoa 
spoke to the king, she fell on her face 
to the ground, and prostrated herself, 
and said: ‘Help, O king.’ 5And the 
king said unto her: ‘What aileth thee?’ 
And she answered: ‘Of a truth I am a 
widow, my husband being dead. 6And 
thy handmaid had two sons, and they 
two strove together in the field, and 
there was none to part them, but the 
one smote the other, and killed him. 
7And, behold, the whole family is risen 
against thy handmaid, and they said: 
Deliver him that smote his brother, 
that we may kill him for the life of his 
brother whom he slew, and so destroy 
the heir also. Thus will they quench 
my coal which is left, and will leave to 
my husband neither name nor 
remainder upon the face of the earth.’ 

8And the king said unto the woman: 
‘Go to thy house, and I will give 
charge concerning thee.’ 9And the 
woman of Tekoa said unto the king: 
‘My lord, O king, the iniquity be on 
me, and on my father’s house; and the 
king and his throne be guiltless.’ 10And 
the king said: ‘Whosoever saith aught 
unto thee, bring him to me, and he 
shall not touch thee any more.’ 11Then 
said she: ‘I pray thee, let the king 
remember the LORD thy God, that the 
avenger of blood destroy not any 
more, lest they destroy my son.’ And 
he said: ‘As the LORD liveth, there shall 
not one hair of thy son fall to the 
earth.’ 

12Then the woman said: ‘Let thy 
handmaid, I pray thee, speak a word 
unto my lord the king.’ And he said: 
‘Say on.’ 13And the woman said: 
‘Wherefore then hast thou devised 
such a thing against the people of 
God? for in speaking this word the 
king is as one that is guilty, in that the 
king doth not fetch home again his 
banished one. 14For we must needs die, 
14 




and are as water spilt on the ground, 
which cannot be gathered up again; 
neither doth God respect any person; 
but let him devise means, that he that 
is banished be not an outcast from 
him. 15Now therefore seeing that I am 
come to speak this word unto my lord 
the king, it is because the people have 
made me afraid; and thy handmaid 
said: I will now speak unto the king; it 
may be that the king will perform the 
request of his servant. 16For the king 
will hear, to deliver his servant out of 
the hand of the man that would destroy 
me and my son together out of the 
inheritance of God. 17Then thy 
handmaid said: Let, I pray thee, the 
word of my lord the king be for my 
comfort; for as an angel of God, so is 
my lord the king to discern good and 
bad; and the LORD thy God be with 
thee.’ 

18Then the king answered and said 
unto the woman: ‘Hide not from me, I 
pray thee, aught that I shall ask thee.’ 
And the woman said: ‘Let my lord the 
king now speak.’ 19And the king said: 
‘Is the hand of Joab with thee in all 
this?’ And the woman answered and 
said: ‘As thy soul liveth, my lord the 
king, none can turn to the right hand or 
to the left from aught that my lord the 
king hath spoken; for thy servant Joab, 
he bade me, and he put all these words 
in the mouth of thy handmaid; 20to 
change the face of the matter hath thy 
servant Joab done this thing; and my 
lord is wise, according to the wisdom 
of an angel of God, to know all things 
that are in the earth.’ 

21And the king said unto Joab: 
‘Behold now, I have granted this 
request; go therefore, bring the young 
man Absalom back.’ 22And Joab fell to 
the ground on his face, and prostrated 
himself, and blessed the king; and Joab 
said: ‘To-day thy servant knoweth that 
I have found favour in thy sight, my 
lord, O king, in that the king hath 
performed the request of thy servant.’ 
23So Joab arose and went to Geshur, 
and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. 
24And the king said: ‘Let him turn to 
his own house, but let him not see my 
face.’ So Absalom turned to his own 
house, and saw not the king’s face. 

25Now in all Israel there was none to 
be so much praised as Absalom for his 
beauty; from the sole of his foot even 
to the crown of his head there was no 
blemish in him. 26And when he polled 
his head—now it was at every year’s 
end that he polled it; because the hair 
was heavy on him, therefore he polled 
it—he weighed the hair of his head at 
two hundred shekels, after the king’s 
weight. 27And unto Absalom there 
were born three sons, and one 
daughter, whose name was Tamar; she 
was a woman of a fair countenance. 

28And Absalom dwelt two full years 
in Jerusalem; and he saw not the kings 
face. 29Then Absalom sent for Joab, to 
send him to the king; but he would not 
come to him; and he sent again a 
second time, but he would not come. 
30Therefore he said unto his servants: 


‘See, Joab’s field is near mine, and he 
hath barley there; go and set it on fire.’ 
And Absalom’s servants set the field 
on fire. 31Then Joab arose, and came to 
Absalom unto his house, and said unto 
him: ‘Wherefore have thy servants set 
my field on fire?’ 32And Absalom 
answered Joab: ‘Behold, I sent unto 
thee, saying: Come hither, that I may 
send thee to the king, to say: 
Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it 
were better for me to be there still; 
now therefore let me see the king’s 
face; and if there be iniquity in me, let 
him kill me.’ 33So Joab came to the 
king, and told him; and when he had 
called for Absalom, he came to the 
king, and bowed himself on his face to 
the ground before the king; and the 
king kissed Absalom. 

And it came to pass after this, 
that Absalom prepared him a 
chariot and horses, and fifty men to 
run before him. 2And Absalom used to 
rise up early, and stand beside the way 
of the gate; and it was so, that when 
any man had a suit which should come 
to the king for judgment, then 
Absalom called unto him, and said: 
‘Of what city art thou?’ And he said: 
‘Thy servant is of one of the tribes of 
Israel.’ 3And Absalom said unto him: 
‘See, thy matters are good and right; 
but there is no man deputed of the king 
to hear thee.’ 4Absalom said moreover: 
‘Oh that I were made judge in the land, 
that every man who hath any suit or 
cause might come unto me, and I 
would do him justice! ’ 5And it was so, 
that when any man came nigh to 
prostrate himself before him, he put 
forth his hand, and took hold of him, 
and kissed him. 6And on this manner 
did Absalom to all Israel that came to 
the king for judgment; so Absalom 
stole the hearts of the men of Israel. 

7And it came to pass at the end of 
forty years, that Absalom said unto the 
king: ‘I pray thee, let me go and pay 
my vow, which I have vowed unto the 
LORD, in Hebron. 8For thy servant 
vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur 
in Aram, saying: If the LORD shall 
indeed bring me back to Jerusalem, 
then I will serve the LORD.’ 9And the 
king said unto him: ‘Go in peace.’ So 
he arose, and went to Hebron. 10But 
Absalom sent spies throughout all the 
tribes of Israel, saying: ‘As soon as ye 
hear the sound of the horn, then ye 
shall say: Absalom is king in Hebron.’ 
11And with Absalom went two 
hundred men out of Jerusalem, that 
were invited, and went in their 
simplicity; and they knew not any 
thing. 12And Absalom sent for 
Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s 
counsellor, from his city, even from 
Giloh, while he offered the sacrifices. 
And the conspiracy was strong; for the 
people increased continually with 
Absalom. 

13And there came a messenger to 
David, saying: ‘The hearts of the men 
of Israel are after Absalom.’ 14And 
David said unto all his servants that 
were with him at Jerusalem: ‘Arise, 
and let us flee; for else none of us shall 
15 




escape from Absalom; make speed to 
depart, lest he overtake us quickly, and 
bring down evil upon us, and smite the 
city with the edge of the sword.’ 15And 
the king’s servants said unto the king: 
‘Behold, thy servants are ready to do 
whatsoever my lord the king shall 
choose.’ 16And the king went forth, 
and all his household after him. And 
the king left ten women, that were 
concubines, to keep the house. 17And 
the king went forth, and all the people 
after him; and they tarried in Beth-
merhak. 18And all his servants passed 
on beside him; and all the Cherethites, 
and all the Pelethites, and all the 
Gittites, six hundred men that came 
after him from Gath, passed on before 
the king. 

19Then said the king to Ittai the 
Gittite: ‘Wherefore goest thou also 
with us? return, and abide with the 
king; for thou art a foreigner, and also 
an exile from thine own place. 
20Whereas thou camest but yesterday, 
should I this day make thee go up and 
down with us, seeing I go whither I 
may? return thou, and take back thy 
brethren with thee in kindness and 
truth.’ 21And Ittai answered the king, 
and said: ‘As the LORD liveth, and as 
my lord the king liveth, surely in what 
place my lord the king shall be, 
whether for death or for life, even 
there also will thy servant be.’ 22And 
David said to Ittai: ‘Go and pass over.’ 
And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and 
all his men, and all the little ones that 
were with him. 23And all the country 
wept with a loud voice, as all the 
people passed over; and as the king 
passed over the brook Kidron, all the 
people passed over, toward the way of 
the wilderness. 

24And, lo, Zadok also came, and all 
the Levites with him, bearing the ark 
of the covenant of God; and they set 
down the ark of God—but Abiathar 
went up—until all the people had done 
passing out of the city. 25And the king 
said unto Zadok: ‘Carry back the ark 
of God into the city; if I shall find 
favour in the eyes of the LORD, He will 
bring me back, and show me both it, 
and His habitation; 26but if He say 
thus: I have no delight in thee; behold, 
here am I, let Him do to me as seemeth 
good unto Him.’ 27The king said also 
unto Zadok the priest: ‘Seest thou? 
return into the city in peace, and your 
two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, 
and Jonathan the son of Abiathar. 
28See, I will tarry in the plains of the 
wilderness, until there come word 
from you to announce unto me.’ 
29Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried 
the ark of God back to Jerusalem; and 
they abode there. 

30And David went up by the ascent 
of the mount of Olives, and wept as he 
went up; and he had his head covered, 
and went barefoot; and all the people 
that were with him covered every man 
his head, and they went up, weeping as 
they went up. 31And one told David, 
saying: ‘Ahithophel is among the 
conspirators with Absalom.’ And 
David said: ‘O LORD, I pray Thee, turn 


the counsel of Ahithophel into 
foolishness.’ 32And it came to pass, 
that when David was come to the top 
of the ascent, where God was wont to 
be worshipped, behold, Hushai the 
Archite came to meet him with his 
coat rent, and earth upon his head. 
33And David said unto him: ‘If thou 
passest on with me, then thou wilt be a 
burden unto Me; 34but if thou return to 
the city, and say unto Absalom: I will 
be thy servant, O king; as I have been 
thy father’s servant in time past, so 
will I now be thy servant; then wilt 
thou defeat for me the counsel of 
Ahithophel. 35And hast thou not there 
with thee Zadok and Abiathar the 
priests? therefore it shall be, that what 
thing soever thou shalt hear out of the 
king’s house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok 
and Abiathar the priests. 36Behold, 
they have there with them their two 
sons, Ahimaaz Zadok’s son, and 
Jonathan Abiathar’s son; and by them 
ye shall send unto me every thing that 
ye shall hear.’ 37So Hushai David’s 
friend came into the city; and Absalom 
was at the point of coming into 
Jerusalem. 

And when David was a little 
past the top, behold, Ziba the 
servant of Mephibosheth met him, 
with a couple of asses saddled, and 
upon them two hundred loaves of 
bread, and a hundred clusters of 
raisins, and a hundred of summer 
fruits, and a bottle of wine. 2And the 
king said unto Ziba: ‘What meanest 
thou by these?’ And Ziba said: ‘The 
asses are for the king’s household to 
ride on; and the bread and summer 
fruit for the young men to eat; and the 
wine, that such as are faint in the 
wilderness may drink.’ 3And the king 
said: ‘And where is thy master’s son?’ 
And Ziba said unto the king: ‘Behold, 
he abideth at Jerusalem; for he said: 
To-day will the house of Israel restore 
me the kingdom of my father.’ 4Then 
said the king to Ziba: ‘Behold, thine is 
all that pertaineth unto Mephibosheth.’ 
And Ziba said: ‘I prostrate myself; let 
me find favour in thy sight, my lord, O 
king.’ 

5And when king David came to 
Bahurim, behold, there came out 
thence a man of the family of the 
house of Saul, whose name was 
Shimei, the son of Gera; he came out, 
and kept on cursing as he came. 6And 
he cast stones at David, and at all the 
servants of king David; and all the 
people and all the mighty men were on 
his right hand and on his left. 7And 
thus said Shimei when he cursed: 
‘Begone, begone, thou man of blood, 
and base fellow; 8the LORD hath 
returned upon thee all the blood of the 
house of Saul, in whose stead thou 
hast reigned; and the LORD hath 
delivered the kingdom into the hand of 
Absalom thy son; and, behold, thou art 
taken in thine own mischief, because 
thou art a man of blood.’ 

9Then said Abishai the son of 
Zeruiah unto the king: ‘Why should 
this dead dog curse my lord the king? 
let me go over, I pray thee, and take 
16 




off his head.’ 10And the king said: 
‘What have I to do with you, ye sons 
of Zeruiah? So let him curse, because 
the LORD hath said unto him: Curse 
David; who then shall say: Wherefore 
hast thou done so?’ 11And David said 
to Abishai, and to all his servants: 
‘Behold, my son, who came forth of 
my body, seeketh my life; how much 
more this Benjamite now? let him 
alone, and let him curse; for the LORD 
hath bidden him. 12It may be that the 
LORD will look on mine eye, and that 
the LORD will requite me good for his 
cursing of me this day.’ 13So David 
and his men went by the way; and 
Shimei went along on the hill-side 
over against him, and cursed as he 
went, and threw stones at him, and cast 
dust. 14And the king, and all the people 
that were with him, came weary; and 
he refreshed himself there. 

15And Absalom, and all the people, 
the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, 
and Ahithophel with him. 16And it 
came to pass, when Hushai the 
Archite, David’s friend, was come 
unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto 
Absalom: ‘Long live the king, long 
live the king.’ 17And Absalom said to 
Hushai: ‘Is this thy kindness to thy 
friend? why wentest thou not with thy 
friend?’ 18And Hushai said unto 
Absalom: ‘Nay; but whom the LORD, 
and this people, and all the men of 
Israel have chosen, his will I be, and 
with him will I abide. 19And again, 
whom should I serve? should I not 
serve in the presence of his son? as I 
have served in thy father’s presence, 
so will I be in thy presence.’ 

20Then said Absalom to Ahithophel: 
‘Give your counsel what we shall do.’ 
21And Ahithophel said unto Absalom: 
‘Go in unto thy father’s concubines, 
that he hath left to keep the house; and 
all Israel will hear that thou art 
abhorred of thy father; then will the 
hands of all that are with thee be 
strong.’ 22So they spread Absalom a 
tent upon the top of the house; and 
Absalom went in unto his father’s 
concubines in the sight of all Israel.— 
23Now the counsel of Ahithophel, 
which he counselled in those days, was 
as if a man inquired of the word of 
God; so was all the counsel of 
Ahithophel both with David and with 
Absalom. 

Moreover Ahithophel said 
unto Absalom: ‘Let me now 
choose out twelve thousand men, and I 
will arise and pursue after David this 
night; 2and I will come upon him while 
he is weary and weak-handed, and will 
make him afraid; and all the people 
that are with him shall flee; and I will 
smite the king only; 3and I will bring 
back all the people unto thee; when all 
shall have returned, [save] the man 
whom thou seekest, all the people will 
be in peace.’ 4And the saying pleased 
Absalom well, and all the elders of 
Israel. 

5Then said Absalom: ‘Call now 
Hushai the Archite also, and let us 
hear likewise what he saith.’ 6And 
when Hushai was come to Absalom, 
17 




Absalom spoke unto him, saying: 
‘Ahithophel hath spoken after this 
manner; shall we do after his saying? 
if not, speak thou.’ 7And Hushai said 
unto Absalom: ‘The counsel that 
Ahithophel hath given this time is not 
good.’ 8Hushai said moreover: ‘Thou 
knowest thy father and his men, that 
they are mighty men, and they are 
embittered in their minds, as a bear 
robbed of her whelps in the field; and 
thy father is a man of war, and will not 
lodge with the people. 9Behold, he is 
hid now in some pit, or in some place; 
and it will come to pass, when they fall 
upon them at the first, and whosoever 
heareth it shall say: There is a 
slaughter among the people that follow 
Absalom; 10then even he that is 
valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a 
lion, will utterly melt; for all Israel 
knoweth that thy father is a mighty 
man, and they that are with him are 
valiant men. 11But I counsel that all 
Israel be gathered together unto thee, 
from Dan even to Beer-sheba, as the 
sand that is by the sea for multitude; 
and that thou go to battle in thine own 
person. 12So shall we come upon him 
in some place where he shall be found, 
and we will light upon him as the dew 
falleth on the ground; and of him and 
of all the men that are with him we 
will not leave so much as one. 
13Moreover, if he withdraw himself 
into a city, then shall all Israel bring up 
ropes to that city, and we will draw it 
into the valley until there be not one 
small stone found there.’ 14And 
Absalom and all the men of Israel said: 
‘The counsel of Hushai the Archite is 
better than the counsel of 
Ahithophel.’—For the LORD had 
ordained to defeat the good counsel of 
Ahithophel, to the intent that the LORD 
might bring evil upon Absalom. 

15Then said Hushai unto Zadok and 
to Abiathar the priests: ‘Thus and thus 
did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and 
the elders of Israel; and thus and thus 
have I counselled. 16Now therefore 
send quickly, and tell David, saying: 
Lodge not this night in the plains of 
the wilderness, but in any wise pass 
over; lest the king be swallowed up, 
and all the people that are with him.’ 
17Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed 
by En-rogel; and a maid-servant used 
to go and tell them; and they went and 
told king David; for they might not be 
seen to come into the city. 18But a lad 
saw them, and told Absalom; and they 
went both of them away quickly, and 
came to the house of a man in 
Bahurim, who had a well in his court; 
and they went down thither. 19And the 
woman took and spread the covering 
over the well’s mouth, and strewed 
groats thereon; and nothing was 
known. 20And Absalom’s servants 
came to the woman to the house; and 
they said: ‘Where are Ahimaaz and 
Jonathan?’ And the woman said unto 
them: ‘They are gone over the brook 
of water.’ And when they had sought 
and could not find them, they returned 
to Jerusalem. 


21And it came to pass, after they 
were departed, that they came up out 
of the well, and went and told king 
David; and they said unto David: 
‘Arise ye, and pass quickly over the 
water; for thus hath Ahithophel 
counselled against you.’ 22Then David 
arose, and all the people that were with 
him, and they passed over the Jordan; 
by the morning light there lacked not 
one of them that was not gone over the 
Jordan. 

23And when Ahithophel saw that his 
counsel was not followed, he saddled 
his ass, and arose, and got him home, 
unto his city, and set his house in 
order, and strangled himself; and he 
died, and was buried in the sepulchre 
of his father. 24When David was come 
to Mahanaim, Absalom passed over 
the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel 
with him. 25And Absalom had set 
Amasa over the host instead of Joab. 
Now Amasa was the son of a man, 
whose name was Ithra the Jesraelite, 
that went in to Abigal the daughter of 
Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab’s 
mother. 26And Israel and Absalom 
pitched in the land of Gilead. 

27And it came to pass, when David 
was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the 
son of Nahash of Rabbah of the 
children of Ammon, and Machir the 
son of Ammiel of Lo-debar, and 
Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim, 
28brought beds, and basins, and earthen 
vessels, and wheat, and barley, and 
meal, and parched corn, and beans, 
and lentils, and parched pulse, 29and 
honey, and curd, and sheep, and 
cheese of kine, for David, and for the 
people that were with him, to eat; for 
they said: ‘The people is hungry, and 
faint, and thirsty, in the wilderness.’ 

And David numbered the 
people that were with him, and 
set captains of thousands and captains 
of hundreds over them. 2And David 
sent forth the people, a third part under 
the hand of Joab, and a third part under 
the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, 
Joab’s brother, and a third part under 
the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the 
king said unto the people: ‘I will 
surely go forth with you myself also.’ 
3But the people said: ‘Thou shalt not 
go forth; for if we flee away, they will 
not care for us; neither if half of us die, 
will they care for us; but thou art 
worth ten thousand of us: therefore 
now it is better that thou be ready to 
succour us out of the city.’ 4And the 
king said unto them: ‘What seemeth 
you best I will do.’ And the king stood 
by the gate-side, and all the people 
went out by hundreds and by 
thousands. 5And the king commanded 
Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying: 
‘Deal gently for my sake with the 
young man, even with Absalom.’ And 
all the people heard when the king 
gave all the captains charge 
concerning Absalom. 

6So the people went out into the 
field against Israel; and the battle was 
in the forest of Ephraim. 7And the 
people of Israel were smitten there 
before the servants of David, and there 
18 




was a great slaughter there that day of 
twenty thousand men. 8For the battle 
was there spread over the face of all 
the country; and the forest devoured 
more people that day than the sword 
devoured. 

9And Absalom chanced to meet the 
servants of David. And Absalom was 
riding upon his mule, and the mule 
went under the thick boughs of a great 
terebinth, and his head caught hold of 
the terebinth, and he was taken up 
between the heaven and the earth; and 
the mule that was under him went on. 
10And a certain man saw it, and told 
Joab, and said: ‘Behold, I saw 
Absalom hanging in a terebinth.’ 
11And Joab said unto the man that told 
him: ‘And, behold, thou sawest it, and 
why didst thou not smite him there to 
the ground? and I would have had to 
give thee ten pieces of silver, and a 
girdle.’ 12And the man said unto Joab: 
‘Though I should receive a thousand 
pieces of silver in my hand, yet would 
I not put forth my hand against the 
king’s son; for in our hearing the king 
charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, 
saying: Beware that none touch the 
young man Absalom. 13Otherwise if I 
had dealt falsely against mine own 
life—and there is no matter hid from 
the king—then thou thyself wouldest 
have stood aloof.’ 14Then said Joab: ‘I 
may not tarry thus with thee.’ And he 
took three darts in his hand, and thrust 
them through the heart of Absalom, 
while he was yet alive in the midst of 
the terebinth. 15And ten young men 
that bore Joab’s armour compassed 
about and smote Absalom, and slew 
him. 

16And Joab blew the horn, and the 
people returned from pursuing after 
Israel; for Joab held back the people. 
17And they took Absalom, and cast 
him into the great pit in the forest, and 
raised over him a very great heap of 
stones; and all Israel fled every one to 
his tent.—18Now Absalom in his life-
time had taken and reared up for 
himself the pillar, which is in the 
king’s dale; for he said: ‘I have no son 
to keep my name in remembrance’; 
and he called the pillar after his own 
name; and it is called Absalom’s 
monument unto this day. 

19Then said Ahimaaz the son of 
Zadok: ‘Let me now run, and bear the 
king tidings, how that the LORD hath 
avenged him of his enemies.’ 20And 
Joab said unto him: ‘Thou shalt not be 
the bearer of tidings this day, but thou 
shalt bear tidings another day; but this 
day thou shalt bear no tidings, 
forasmuch as the king’s son is dead.’ 
21Then said Joab to the Cushite: ‘Go 
tell the king what thou hast seen.’ And 
the Cushite bowed down unto Joab, 
and ran. 22Then said Ahimaaz the son 
of Zadok yet again to Joab: ‘But come 
what may, let me, I pray thee, also run 
after the Cushite.’ And Joab said: 
‘Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, 
seeing that thou wilt have no reward 
for the tidings?’ 23’But come what 
may, [said he,] I will run.’ And he said 
unto him: ‘Run.’ Then Ahimaaz ran by 


the way of the Plain, and overran the 
Cushite. 

24Now David sat between the two 
gates; and the watchman went up to 
the roof of the gate unto the wall, and 
lifted up his eyes, and looked, and 
behold a man running alone. 25And the 
watchman cried, and told the king. 
And the king said: ‘If he be alone, 
there is tidings in his mouth.’ And he 
came apace, and drew near. 26And the 
watchman saw another man running; 
and the watchman called unto the 
porter, and said: ‘Behold another man 
running alone.’ And the king said: ‘He 
also bringeth tidings.’ 27And the 
watchman said: ‘I think the running of 
the foremost is like the running of 
Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.’ And the 
king said: ‘He is a good man, and 
cometh with good tidings.’ 

28And Ahimaaz called, and said unto 
the king: ‘All is well.’ And he bowed 
down before the king with his face to 
the earth, and said: ‘Blessed be the 
LORD thy God, who hath delivered up 
the men that lifted up their hand 
against my lord the king.’ 29And the 
king said: ‘Is it well with the young 
man Absalom?’ And Ahimaaz 
answered: ‘When Joab sent the king’s 
servant, and me thy servant, I saw a 
great tumult, but I knew not what it 
was.’ 30And the king said: ‘Turn aside, 
and stand here.’ And he turned aside, 
and stood still. 

31And, behold, the Cushite came; 
and the Cushite said: ‘Tidings for my 
lord the king; for the LORD hath 
avenged thee this day of all them that 
rose up against thee.’ 32And the king 
said unto the Cushite: ‘Is it well with 
the young man Absalom?’ And the 
Cushite answered: ‘The enemies of my 
lord the king and all that rise up 
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that 
young man is.’ 

And the king was much 
moved, and went up to the 
chamber over the gate, and wept; and 
as he went, thus he said: ‘O my son 
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! 
would I had died for thee, O Absalom, 
my son, my son! ’ 

2And it was told Joab: ‘Behold, the 
king weepeth and mourneth for 
Absalom.’ 3 And the victory that day 
was turned into mourning unto all the 
people; for the people heard say that 
day: ‘The king grieveth for his son.’ 
4And the people got them by stealth 
that day into the city, as people that are 
ashamed steal away when they flee in 
battle. 5And the king covered his face, 
and the king cried with a loud voice: 
‘O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my 
son, my son! ’ 6And Joab came into 
the house to the king, and said: ‘Thou 
hast shamed this day the faces of all 
thy servants, who this day have saved 
thy life, and the lives of thy sons and 
of thy daughters, and the lives of thy 
wives, and the lives of thy concubines; 
7in that thou lovest them that hate thee, 
and hatest them that love thee. For 
thou hast declared this day, that 
princes and servants are nought unto 
thee; for this day I perceive, that if 
19 




Absalom had lived, and all we had 
died this day, then it had pleased thee 
well. 8Now therefore arise, go forth, 
and speak to the heart of thy servants; 
for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not 
forth, there will not tarry a man with 
thee this night; and that will be worse 
unto thee than all the evil that hath 
befallen thee from thy youth until 
now.’ 9Then the king arose, and sat in 
the gate. And they told unto all the 
people, saying: ‘Behold, the king doth 
sit in the gate’; and all the people came 
before the king. 

Now Israel had fled every man to 
his tent. 10And all the people were at 
strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, 
saying: ‘The king delivered us out of 
the hand of our enemies, and he saved 
us out of the hand of the Philistines; 
and now he is fled out of the land from 
Absalom. 11And Absalom, whom we 
anointed over us, is dead in battle. 
Now, therefore, why speak ye not a 
word of bringing the king back?’ 

12And king David sent to Zadok and 
to Abiathar the priests, saying: ‘Speak 
unto the elders of Judah, saying: Why 
are ye the last to bring the king back to 
his house?—For the speech of all 
Israel was come to the king, to bring 
him to his house.—13Ye are my 
brethren, ye are my bone and my flesh; 
wherefore then should ye be the last to 
bring back the king? 14And say ye to 
Amasa: Art thou not my bone and my 
flesh? God do so to me, and more also, 
if thou be not captain of the host 
before me continually in the room of 
Joab.’ 15And he bowed the heart of all 
the men of Judah, even as the heart of 
one man; so that they sent unto the 
king: ‘Return thou, and all thy 
servants.’ 

16So the king returned, and came to 
the Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, 
to go to meet the king, to bring the 
king over the Jordan. 17And Shimei the 
son of Gera, the Benjamite, who was 
of Bahurim, made haste and came 
down with the men of Judah to meet 
king David. 18And there were a 
thousand men of Benjamin with him, 
and Ziba the servant of the house of 
Saul, and his fifteen sons and his 
twenty servants with him. And they 
rushed into the Jordan before the king. 
19And the ferryboat passed to and fro 
to bring over the king’s household, and 
to do what he thought good. And 
Shimei the son of Gera fell down 
before the king, when he would go 
over the Jordan. 20And he said unto the 
king: ‘Let not my lord impute iniquity 
unto me, neither do thou remember 
that which thy servant did iniquitously 
the day that my lord the king went out 
of Jerusalem, that the king should take 
it to his heart. 21For thy servant doth 
know that I have sinned; therefore, 
behold, I am come this day the first of 
all the house of Joseph to go down to 
meet my lord the king.’ 22But Abishai 
the son of Zeruiah answered and said: 
‘Shall not Shimei be put to death for 
this, because he cursed the LORD’S 
anointed?’ 23And David said: ‘What 
have I to do with you, ye sons of 


Zeruiah, that ye should this day be 
adversaries unto me? shall there any 
man be put to death this day in Israel? 
for do not I know that I am this day 
king over Israel?’ 24And the king said 
unto Shimei: ‘Thou shalt not die.’ And 
the king swore unto him. 

25And Mephibosheth the son of Saul 
came down to meet the king; and he 
had neither dressed his feet, nor 
trimmed his beard, nor washed his 
clothes, from the day the king departed 
until the day he came home in peace. 
26And it came to pass, when he was 
come to Jerusalem to meet the king, 
that the king said unto him: 
‘Wherefore wentest not thou with me, 
Mephibosheth?’ 27And he answered: 
‘My lord, O king, my servant deceived 
me; for thy servant said: I will saddle 
me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and 
go with the king; because thy servant 
is lame. 28And he hath slandered thy 
servant unto my lord the king; but my 
lord the king is as an angel of God; do 
therefore what is good in thine eyes. 
29For all my father’s house were 
deserving of death at the hand of my 
lord the king; yet didst thou set thy 
servant among them that did eat at 
thine own table. What right therefore 
have I yet? or why should I cry any 
more unto the king?’ 30And the king 
said unto him: ‘Why speakest thou any 
more of thy matters? I say: Thou and 
Ziba divide the land.’ 31And 
Mephibosheth said unto the king: 
‘Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as 
my lord the king is come in peace unto 
his own house.’ 

32And Barzillai the Gileadite came 
down from Rogelim; and he passed on 
to Jordan with the king, to bring him 
on the way over the Jordan. 33Now 
Barzillai was a very aged man, even 
fourscore years old; and he had 
provided the king with sustenance 
while he lay at Mahanaim; for he was 
a very great man. 34And the king said 
unto Barzillai: ‘Come thou over with 
me, and I will sustain thee with me in 
Jerusalem.’ 35And Barzillai said unto 
the king: ‘How many are the days of 
the years of my life, that I should go 
up with the king unto Jerusalem? 36I 
am this day fourscore years old; can I 
discern between good and bad? can 
thy servant taste what I eat or what I 
drink? can I hear any more the voice 
of singing men and singing women? 
wherefore then should thy servant be 
yet a burden unto my lord the king? 
37Thy servant would but just go over 
the Jordan with the king; and why 
should the king recompense it me with 
such a reward? 38Let thy servant, I 
pray thee, turn back, that I may die in 
mine own city, by the grave of my 
father and my mother. But behold thy 
servant Chimham; let him go over 
with my lord the king; and do to him 
what shall seem good unto thee.’ 
39And the king answered: ‘Chimham 
shall go over with me, and I will do to 
him that which shall seem good unto 
thee; and whatsoever thou shalt require 
of me, that will I do for thee.’ 40And 


all the people went over the Jordan, 
and the king went over; and the king 
kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and 
he returned unto his own place. 

41So the king went over to Gilgal, 
and aChimham went over with him; 
and all the people of Judah brought the 
king over, and also half the people of 
Israel. 42And, behold, all the men of 
Israel came to the king, and said unto 
the king: ‘Why have our brethren the 
men of Judah stolen thee away, and 
brought the king, and his household, 
over the Jordan, and all David’s men 
with him?’ 43And all the men of Judah 
answered the men of Israel: ‘Because 
the king is near of kin to us; wherefore 
then are ye angry for this matter? have 
we eaten at all of the king’s cost? or 
hath any gift been given us?’ 44And the 
men of Israel answered the men of 
Judah, and said: ‘We have ten parts in 
the king, and we have also more right 
in David than ye; why then did ye 
despise us, that our advice should not 
be first had in bringing back our king?’ 
And the words of the men of Judah 
were fiercer than the words of the men 
of Israel. 

a Heb. Chimhan. 

Now there happened to be 
there a base fellow, whose 
name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a 
Benjamite; and he blew the horn, and 
said: ‘We have no portion in David, 
neither have we inheritance in the son 
of Jesse; every man to his tents, O 
Israel.’ 2So all the men of Israel went 

up from following David, and 
followed Sheba the son of Bichri; but 
the men of Judah did cleave unto their 
king, from the Jordan even to 
Jerusalem. 

3And David came to his house at 
Jerusalem; and the king took the ten 
women his concubines, whom he had 
left to keep the house, and put them in 
ward, and provided them with 
sustenance, but went not in unto them. 
So they were shut up unto the day of 
their death, in widowhood, with their 
husband alive. 

4Then said the king to Amasa: ‘Call 
me the men of Judah together within 
three days, and be thou here present.’ 
5So Amasa went to call the men of 
Judah together; but he tarried longer 
than the set time which he had 
appointed him. 6And David said to 
Abishai: ‘Now will Sheba the son of 
Bichri do us more harm than did 
Absalom; take thou thy lord’s 
servants, and pursue after him, lest he 
get him fortified cities, and escape out 
of our sight.’ 7And there went out after 
him Joab’s men, and the Cherethites 
and the Pelethites, and all the mighty 
men; and they went out of Jerusalem, 
to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. 
8When they were at the great stone 
which is in Gibeon, Amasa came to 
meet them. And Joab was girded with 
his apparel of war that he had put on, 
and thereon was a girdle with a sword 
fastened upon his loins in the sheath 
thereof; and as he went forth it fell out. 
9And Joab said to Amasa: ‘Is it well 
20 




with thee, my brother?’ And Joab took 
Amasa by the beard with his right 
hand to kiss him. 10But Amasa took no 
heed to the sword that was in Joab’s 
hand; so he smote him therewith in the 
groin, and shed out his bowels to the 
ground, and struck him not again; and 
he died. 

And Joab and Abishai his brother 
pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri. 
11And there stood by him one of Joab’s 
young men, and said: ‘He that 
favoureth Joab, and he that is for 
David let him follow Joab.’ 12And 
Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in 
the midst of the highway. And when 
the man saw that all the people stood 
still, he carried Amasa out of the 
highway into the field, and cast a 
garment over him, when he saw that 
every one that came by him stood still. 
13When he was removed out of the 
highway, all the people went on after 
Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of 
Bichri. 

14And he went through all the tribes 
of Israel unto Abel, and to Beth-
maacah, and all the Berites; and they 
were gathered together, and went in 
also after him. 15And they came and 
besieged him in Abel of Beth-maacah, 
and they cast up a mound against the 
city, and it stood in the moat; and all 
the people that were with Joab battered 
the wall, to throw it down. 

16Then cried a wise woman out of 
the city: ‘Hear, hear; say, I pray you, 
unto Joab: Come near hither, that I 
may speak with thee.’ 17And he came 
near unto her; and the woman said: 
‘Art thou Joab?’ And he answered: ‘I 
am.’ Then she said unto him: ‘Hear the 
words of thy handmaid.’ And he 
answered: ‘I do hear.’ 18Then she 
spoke, saying: ‘They were wont to 
speak in old time, saying: They shall 
surely ask counsel at Abel; and so they 
ended the matter. 19We are of them 
that are peaceable and faithful in 
Israel; seekest thou to destroy a city 
and a mother in Israel? why wilt thou 
swallow up the inheritance of the 
LORD?’ 20And Joab answered and said: 
‘Far be it, far be it from me, that I 
should swallow up or destroy. 21The 
matter is not so; but a man of the hill-
country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of 
Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand 
against the king, even against David; 
deliver him only, and I will depart 
from the city.’ And the woman said 
unto Joab: ‘Behold, his head shall be 
thrown to thee over the wall.’ 22Then 
the woman went unto all the people in 
her wisdom. And they cut off the head 
of Sheba the son of Bichri, and threw 
it out to Joab. And he blew the horn, 
and they were dispersed from the city, 
every man to his tent. And Joab 
returned to Jerusalem unto the king. 

23Now Joab was over all the host of 
Israel; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada 
was over the Cherethites and over the 
Pelethites; 24and Adoram was over the 
levy; and Jehoshaphat the son of 
Ahilud was the recorder; 25and Sheva 
was scribe; and Zadok and Abiathar 


were priests; 26and Ira also the Jairite 
was chief minister unto David. 

And there was a famine in the 
days of David three years, year 
after year; and David sought the face 
of the LORD. And the LORD said: ‘It is 
for Saul, and for his bloody house, 
because he put to death the 
Gibeonites.’ 2And the king called the 
Gibeonites, and said unto them—now 
the Gibeonites were not of the children 
of Israel, but of the remnant of the 
Amorites; and the children of Israel 
had sworn unto them; and Saul sought 
to slay them in his zeal for the children 
of Israel and Judah— 3and David said 
unto the Gibeonites: ‘What shall I do 
for you? and wherewith shall I make 
atonement, that ye may bless the 
inheritance of the LORD?’ 4And the 
Gibeonites said unto him: ‘It is no 
matter of silver or gold between us and 
Saul, or his house; neither is it for us 
to put any man to death in Israel.’ And 
he said: ‘What say ye that I should do 
for you?’ 5And they said unto the king: 
‘The man that consumed us, and that 
devised against us, so that we have 
been destroyed from remaining in any 
of the borders of Israel, 6let seven men 
of his sons be delivered unto us, and 
we will hang them up unto the LORD in 
Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of the 
LORD.’ And the king said: ‘I will 
deliver them.’ 

7But the king spared Mephibosheth, 
the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, 
because of the LORD’S oath that was 
between them, between David and 
Jonathan the son of Saul. 8But the king 
took the two sons of Rizpah the 
daughter of Aiah, whom she bore unto 
Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and 
the five sons of Michal the daughter of 
Saul, whom she bore to Adriel the son 
of Barzillai the Meholathite; 9and he 
delivered them into the hands of the 
Gibeonites, and they hanged them in 
the mountain before the LORD, and 
they fell all seven together; and they 
were put to death in the days of 
harvest, in the first days, at the 
beginning of barley harvest. 

10And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah 
took sackcloth, and spread it for her 
upon the rock, from the beginning of 
harvest until water was poured upon 
them from heaven; and she suffered 
neither the birds of the air to rest on 
them by day, nor the beasts of the field 
by night. 11And it was told David what 
Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the 
concubine of Saul, had done. 12And 
David went and took the bones of Saul 
and the bones of Jonathan his son from 
the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had 
stolen them from the broad place of 
Beth-shan, where the Philistines had 
hanged them, in the day that the 
Philistines slew Saul in Gilboa; 13and 
he brought up from thence the bones 
of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his 
son; and they gathered the bones of 
them that were hanged. 14And they 
buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan 
his son in the country of Benjamin in 
Zela, in the sepulchre of Kish his 
father; and they performed all that the 
21 




king commanded. And after that God 
was entreated for the land. 

15And the Philistines had war again 
with Israel; and David went down, and 
his servants with him, and fought 
against the Philistines; and David 
waxed faint. 16And Ishbibenob, who 
was of the sons of the giant, the weight 
of whose spear was three hundred 
shekels of brass in weight, he being 
girded with new armour, thought to 
have slain David. 17But Abishai the 
son of Zeruiah succoured him, and 
smote the Philistine, and killed him. 
Then the men of David swore unto 
him, saying: ‘Thou shalt go no more 
out with us to battle, that thou quench 
not the lamp of Israel.’ 

18And it came to pass after this, that 
there was again war with the 
Philistines at Gob; then Sibbecai the 
Hushathite slew Saph, who was of the 
sons of the giant. 19And there was 
again war with the Philistines at Gob; 
and Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim 
the Beth-lehemite slew Goliath the 
Gittite, the staff of whose spear was 
like a weaver’s beam. 20And there was 
again war at Gath, where was a 
champion, that had on every hand six 
fingers, and on every foot six toes, 
four and twenty in number; and he also 
was born to the giant. 21And when he 
taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of 
Shimea David’s brother slew him. 
22These four were born to the giant in 
Gath; and they fell by the hand of 
David, and by the hand of his servants. 

22 



And David spoke unto the 
LORD the words of this song in 
the day that the LORD delivered him 
out of the hand of all his enemies, and 
out of the hand of Saul; 2and he said: 

The LORD is my rock, and my 
fortress, and my deliverer; 

3The God who is my rock, in Him I 
take refuge; 

My shield, and my horn of 
salvation, my high tower, and my 
refuge; 

My saviour, Thou savest me from 
violence. 

4Praised, I cry, is the LORD, 

And I am saved from mine enemies. 

 

5For the waves of Death compassed 
me. 

The floods of aBelial assailed me. 

a That is, the nether-world. 

6The cords of Sheol surrounded me; 

The snares of Death confronted me. 

7In my distress I called upon the 
LORD, 

Yea, I called unto my God; 

And out of His temple He heard my 
voice, 

And my cry did enter into His ears. 

8Then the earth did shake and 
quake, 

The foundations of heaven did 
tremble; 

Tey were shaken, because He was 
wroth. 

9Smoke arose up in His nostrils, 

And fire out of His mouth did 
devour; 


Coals flamed forth from Him. 

10He bowed the heavens also, and 
came down; 

And thick darkness was under His 
feet. 

11And He rode upon a cherub, and 
did fly; 

Yea, He was seen upon the wings of 
the wind. 

12And He made darkness pavilions 
round about Him, 

Gathering of waters, thick clouds of 
the skies. 

13At the brightness before Him 

Coals of fire flamed forth. 

14The LORD thundered from heaven, 

And the Most High gave forth His 
voice. 

15And He sent out arrows, and 
scattered them; 

Lightning, and discomfited them. 

16And the channels of the sea 
appeared, 

The foundations of the world were 
laid bare 

By the rebuke of the LORD, 

At the blast of the breath of His 
nostrils. 

 

17He sent from on high, He took me; 

He drew me out of many waters; 

18He delivered me from mine enemy 
most strong, 

From them that hated me, for they 
were too mighty for me. 

19They confronted me in the day of 
my calamity; 

But the LORD was a stay unto me. 

20He brought me forth also into a 
large place; 

He delivered me, because He 
delighted in me. 

21The LORD rewarded me according 
to my righteousness; 

According to the cleanness of my 
hands hath He recompensed me. 

 

22For I have kept the ways of the 
LORD, 

And have not wickedly departed 
from my God. 

23For all His ordinances were before 
me; 

And as for His statutes, I did not 
depart from them. 

24And I was single-hearted toward 
Him, 

And I kept myself from mine 
iniquity. 

25Therefore hath the LORD 
recompensed me according to my 
righteousness, 

According to my cleanness in His 
eyes. 

 

26With the merciful Thou dost show 

Thyself merciful, 

With the upright man Thou dost 
show 

Thyself upright, 

27With the pure Thou dost show 
Thyself pure; 

And with the crooked Thou dost 
show 

Thyself subtle. 

28And the afflicted people Thou dost 
save; 


But Thine eyes are upon the 
haughty, that Thou mayest 
humble them. 

 

29For Thou art my lamp, O LORD; 

And the LORD doth lighten my 
darkness. 

30For by Thee I run upon a troop; 

By my God do I scale a wall. 

31As for God, His way is perfect; 

The word of the LORD is tried; 

He is a shield unto all them that take 
refuge in Him. 

 

32For who is God, save the LORD? 

And who is a Rock, save our God? 

33The God who is my strong 
fortress, 

And who letteth my way go forth 
straight; 

34Who maketh my feet like hinds’, 

And setteth me upon my high 
places; 

35Who traineth my hands for war, 

So that mine arms do bend a bow of 
brass. 

36Thou hast also given me Thy 
shield of salvation; 

And Thy condescension hath made 
me great. 

37Thou hast enlarged my steps under 
me, 

And my feet have not slipped. 

 

38I have pursued mine enemies, and 

 destroyed them; 

Neither did I turn back till they were 
consumed. 

39And I have consumed them, and 
smitten them through, that they 
cannot arise; 

Yea, they are fallen under my feet. 

40For Thou hast girded me with 
strength unto the battle; 

Thou hast subdued under me those 
that rose up against me. 

41Thou hast also made mine enemies 
turn their backs unto me; 

Yea, them that hate me, that I might 
cut them off. 

42They looked, but there was none to 
save; 

Even unto the LORD, but He 
answered them not. 

43Then did I beat them small as the 
dust of the earth, 

I did stamp them as the mire of the 
streets, and did tread them down. 

44Thou also hast delivered me from 
the contentions of my people; 

Thou hast kept me to be the head of 
the nations; 

A people whom I have not known 
serve me. 

45The sons of the stranger dwindle 
away before me; 

As soon as they hear of me, they 
obey me. 

46The sons of the stranger fade 
away, 

And come halting out of their close 
places. 

 

47The LORD liveth, and blessed be 
my Rock; 

And exalted be the God, my Rock of 
salvation; 


48Even the God that executeth 
vengeance for me, 

And bringeth down peoples under 
me, 

49And that bringeth me forth from 
mine enemies; 

Yea, Thou liftest me up above them 
that rise up against me; 

Thou deliverest me from the violent 
man. 

50Therefore I will give thanks unto 
Thee, O LORD, among the nations, 

And will sing praises unto Thy 
name. 

51A tower of salvation is He to His 
king; 

And showeth mercy to His anointed, 

To David and to his seed, for 
evermore. 

 

Now these are the last words 
of David: 

The saying of David the son of 
Jesse, 

And the saying of the man raised on 
high, 

The anointed of the God of Jacob, 

And the sweet singer of Israel: 

2The spirit of the LORD spoke by me, 

And His word was upon my tongue. 

 

3The God of Israel said, 

The Rock of Israel spoke to me: 

‘Ruler over men shall be 

The righteous, even he that ruleth in 
the fear of God, 

4And as the light of the morning, 
when the sun riseth, 

A morning without clouds; 

When through clear shining after 
rain, 

The tender grass springeth out of the 
earth.’ 

5For is not my house established 
with God? 

For an everlasting covenant He hath 
made with me, 

Ordered in all things, and sure; 

For all my salvation, and all my 
desire, 

Will he not make it to grow? 

6But the ungodly, they are as thorns 
thrust away, all of them, 

For they cannot be taken with the 
hand; 

7But the man that toucheth them 

Must be armed with iron and the 
staff of a spear; 

And they shall be utterly burned 
with fire in their place. 

 

8These are the names of the mighty 
men whom David had: Josheb-
basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief of 
the captains; the same was Adino the 
Eznite; [he lifted up his spear] against 
eight hundred, whom he slew at one 
time. 

9And after him was Eleazar the son 
of Dodo the son of an Ahohite, one of 
the three mighty men with David, 
when they jeoparded their lives against 
the Philistines that were there gathered 
together to battle, and the men of 
Israel were gone away; 10he stood 
firm, and smote the Philistines until his 
hand was weary, and his hand did 
cleave unto the sword; and the LORD 
23 




wrought a great victory that day; and 
the people returned after him only to 
strip the slain. 

11And after him was Shammah the 
son of Age the Ararite. And the 
Philistines were gathered together into 
a troop, where was a plot of ground 
full of lentils; and the people fled from 
the Philistines. 12But he stood in the 
midst of the plot, and defended it, and 
slew the Philistines; and the LORD 
wrought a great victory. 

13And three of the thirty chief went 
down, and came to David in the 
harvest time unto the cave of Adullam; 
and the troop of the Philistines were 
encamped in the valley of Rephaim. 
14And David was then in the 
stronghold, and the garrison of the 
Philistines was then in Beth-lehem. 
15And David longed, and said: ‘Oh that 
one would give me water to drink of 
the well of Beth-lehem, which is by 
the gate! ’ 16And the three mighty men 
broke through the host of the 
Philistines, and drew water out of the 
well of Beth-lehem, that was by the 
gate, and took it, and brought it to 
David; but he would not drink thereof, 
but poured it out unto the LORD. 17And 
he said: ‘Be it far from me, O LORD, 
that I should do this; shall I drink the 
blood of the men that went in jeopardy 
of their lives?’ therefore he would not 
drink it. These things did the three 
mighty men. 

18And Abishai, the brother of Joab, 
the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the 
three. And he lifted up his spear 
against three hundred and slew them, 
and had a name among the three. 19He 
was most honourable of the three; 
therefore he was made their captain; 
howbeit he attained not unto the first 
three. 

20And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, 
the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, 
who had done mighty deeds, he smote 
the two altar-hearths of Moab; he went 
down also and slew a lion in the midst 
of a pit in time of snow; 21and he slew 
an Egyptian, a goodly man; and the 
Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but 
he went down to him with a staff, and 
plucked the spear out of the Egyptian’s 
hand, and slew him with his own 
spear. 22These things did Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada, and had a name 
among the three mighty men. 23He was 
more honourable than the thirty, but he 
attained not to the first three. And 
David set him over his guard. 

24Asahel the brother of Joab was one 
of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo 
of Beth-lehem; 25Shammah the 
Harodite, Elika the Harodite; 26Helez 
the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the 
Tekoite; 27Abiezer the Anathothite, 
Mebunnai the Hushathite; 28Zalmon 
the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite; 
29Heleb the son of Baanah the 
Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai of 
Gibeah of the children of Benjamin; 
30Benaiah a Pirathonite, Hiddai of 
Nahale-gaash; 31Abi-albon the 
Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite; 
32Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons 
of Jashen, Jonathan; 33Shammah the 


Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the 
Ararite; 34Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, 
the son of the Maacathite, Eliam the 
son of Ahithophel the Gilonite; 
35Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the 
Arbite; 36Igal the son of Nathan of 
Zobah, Bani the Gadite; 37Zelek the 
Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, 
armour-bearer to Joab the son of 
Zeruiah; 38Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the 
Ithrite; 39Uriah the Hittite. Thirty and 
seven in all. 

And again the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against 
Israel, and He moved David against 
them, saying: ‘Go, number Israel and 
Judah.’ 2And the king said to Joab the 
captain of the host that was with him: 
‘Go now to and fro through all the 
tribes of Israel, from Dan even to 
Beer-sheba, and number ye the people, 
that I may know the sum of the 
people.’ 3And Joab said unto the king: 
‘Now the LORD thy God add unto the 
people, how many soever they may be, 
a hundredfold, and may the eyes of my 
lord the king see it; but why doth my 
lord the king delight in this thing?’ 
4Notwithstanding the king’s word 
prevailed against Joab, and against the 
captains of the host. And Joab and the 
captains of the host went out from the 
presence of the king, to number the 
people of Israel. 5And they passed over 
the Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on 
the right side of the city that is in the 
middle of the valley of Gad, and unto 
Jazer; 6then they came to Gilead, and 
to the land of Tahtim-hodshi; and they 
came to Dan-jaan, and round about to 
Zidon, 7and came to the stronghold of 
Tyre, and to all the cities of the 
Hivites, and of the Canaanites; and 
they went out to the south of Judah, at 
Beer-sheba. 8So when they had gone to 
and fro through all the land, they came 
to Jerusalem at the end of nine months 
and twenty days. 9And Joab gave up 
the sum of the numbering of the 
people unto the king; and there were in 
Israel eight hundred thousand valiant 
men that drew the sword; and the men 
of Judah were five hundred thousand 
men. 

10And David’s heart smote him after 
that he had numbered the people. And 
David said unto the LORD: ‘I have 
sinned greatly in what I have done; but 
now, O LORD, put away, I beseech 
Thee, the iniquity of Thy servant; for I 
have done very foolishly.’ 11And when 
David rose up in the morning, the 
word of the LORD came unto the 
prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying: 
12’Go and speak unto David: Thus 
saith the LORD: I lay upon thee three 
things; choose thee one of them, that I 
may do it unto thee.’ 13So Gad came to 
David, and told him, and said unto 
him: ‘Shall seven years of famine 
come unto thee in thy land? or wilt 
thou flee three months before thy foes 
while they pursue thee? or shall there 
be three days’pestilence in thy land? 
now advise thee, and consider what 
answer I shall return to Him that sent 
Me.’ 14And David said unto Gad: ‘I am 
in a great strait; let us fall now into the 
24 




hand of the LORD; for His mercies are 
great; and let me not fall into the hand 
of man.’ 

15So the LORD sent a pestilence upon 
Israel from the morning even to the 
time appointed; and there died of the 
people from Dan even to Beer-sheba 
seventy thousand men. 16And when the 
angel stretched out his hand toward 
Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD 
repented Him of the evil, and said to 
the angel that destroyed the people: ‘It 
is enough; now stay thy hand.’ And 
the angel of the LORD was by the 
threshing-floor of Araunah the 
Jebusite. 17And David spoke unto the 
LORD when he saw the angel that 
smote the people, and said: ‘Lo, I have 
sinned, and I have done iniquitously; 
but these sheep, what have they done? 
let Thy hand, I pray Thee, be against 
me, and against my father’s house.’ 

18And Gad came that day to David, 
and said unto him: ‘Go up, rear an 
altar unto the LORD in the threshing-
floor of Araunah the Jebusite.’ 19And 
David went up according to the saying 
of Gad, as the LORD commanded. 
20And Araunah looked forth, and saw 
the king and his servants coming on 
toward him; and Araunah went out, 
and bowed down before the king with 
his face to the ground. 21And Araunah 
said: ‘Wherefore is my lord the king 
come to his servant?’ And David said: 
‘To buy the threshing-floor of thee, to 
build an altar unto the LORD, that the 
plague may be stayed from the 
people.’ 22And Araunah said unto 
David: ‘Let my lord the king take and 
offer up what seemeth good unto him; 
behold the oxen for the burnt-offering, 
and the threshing-instruments and the 
furniture of the oxen for the wood.’ 
23All this did Araunah the king give 
unto the king. And Araunah said unto 
the king: ‘The LORD thy God accept 
thee.’ 24And the king said unto 
Araunah: ‘Nay; but I will verily buy it 
of thee at a price; neither will I offer 
burnt-offerings unto the LORD my God 
which cost me nothing.’ So David 
bought the threshing-floor and the 
oxen for fifty shekels of silver. 25And 
David built there an altar unto the 
LORD, and offered burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings. So the LORD was 
entreated for the land, and the plague 
was stayed from Israel. 




. ..... 

FIRST KINGS 

 

Now King David was old and 
stricken in years; and they 
covered him with clothes, but he could 
get no heat. 2Wherefore his servants 
said unto him: ‘Let there be sought for 
my lord the king a young virgin; and 
let her stand before the king, and be a 
companion unto him; and let her lie in 
thy bosom, that my lord the king may 
get heat.’ 3So they sought for a fair 
damsel throughout all the borders of 
Israel, and found Abishag the 
Shunammite, and brought her to the 
king. 4And the damsel was very fair; 
and she became a companion unto the 
king, and ministered to him; but the 
king knew her not. 

5Now Adonijah the son of Haggith 
exalted himself, saying: ‘I will be 
king’; and he prepared him chariots 
and horsemen, and fifty men to run 
before him. 6And his father had not 
grieved him all his life in saying: 
‘Why hast thou done so?’ and he was 
also a very goodly man; and he was 
born after Absalom. 7And he conferred 
with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with 
Abiathar the priest; and they following 
Adonijah helped him. 8But Zadok the 
priest, and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and 
Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men 
that belonged to David, were not with 
Adonijah. 9And Adonijah slew sheep 
and oxen and fatlings by the stone of 
Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel; 
and he called all his brethren the 
king’s sons, and all the men of Judah 
the king’s servants; 10but Nathan the 
prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty 
men, and Solomon his brother, he 
called not. 

11Then Nathan spoke unto Bath-
sheba the mother of Solomon, saying: 
‘Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the 
son of Haggith doth reign, and David 
our lord knoweth it not? 12Now 
therefore come, let me, I pray thee, 
give thee counsel, that thou mayest 
save thine own life, and the life of thy 
son Solomon. 13Go and get thee in 
unto king David, and say unto him: 
Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear 
unto thy handmaid, saying: Assuredly 
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, 
and he shall sit upon my throne? why 
then doth Adonijah reign? 14Behold, 
while thou yet talkest there with the 
king, I also will come in after thee, and 
confirm thy words.’ 

15And Bath-sheba went in unto the 
king into the chamber.—Now the king 
was very old; and Abishag the 
Shunammite ministered unto the 
king.—16And Bath-sheba bowed, and 
prostrated herself unto the king. And 
the king said: ‘What wouldest thou?’ 
17And she said unto him: ‘My lord, 
1 




thou didst swear by the LORD thy God 
unto thy handmaid: Assuredly 
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, 
and he shall sit upon my throne. 18And 
now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and 
thou, my lord the king, knowest it not. 
19And he hath slain oxen and fatlings 
and sheep in abundance, and hath 
called all the sons of the king, and 
Abiathar, the priest, and Joab the 
captain of the host; but Solomon thy 
servant hath he not called. 20And thou, 
my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel 
are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell 
them who shall sit on the throne of my 
lord the king after him. 21Otherwise it 
will come to pass, when my lord the 
king shall sleep with his fathers, that I 
and my son Solomon shall be counted 
offenders.’ 

22And, lo, while she yet talked with 
the king, Nathan the prophet came in. 
23And they told the king, saying: 
‘Behold Nathan the prophet.’ And 
when he was come in before the king, 
he bowed down before the king with 
his face to the ground. 24And Nathan 
said: ‘My lord, O king, hast thou said: 
Adonijah shall reign after me, and he 
shall sit upon my throne? 25For he is 
gone down this day, and hath slain 
oxen and fatlings and sheep in 
abundance, and hath called all the 
king’s sons, and the captains of the 
host, and Abiathar the priest; and, 
behold, they eat and drink before him, 
and say: Long live king Adonijah. 
26But me, even me thy servant, and 
Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son 
of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon 
hath he not called. 27Is this thing done 
by my lord the king, and thou hast not 
declared unto thy servant who should 
sit on the throne of my lord the king 
after him?’ 

28Then king David answered and 
said: ‘Call me Bath-sheba.’ And she 
came into the king’s presence, and 
stood before the king. 29And the king 
swore and said: ‘As the LORD liveth, 
who hath redeemed my soul out of all 
adversity, 30verily as I swore unto thee 
by the LORD, the God of Israel, saying: 
Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign 
after me, and he shall sit upon my 
throne in my stead; verily so will I do 
this day.’ 31Then Bath-sheba bowed 
with her face to the earth, and 
prostrated herself to the king, and said: 
‘Let my lord king David live for ever.’ 

32And king David said: ‘Call me 
Zadok the priest, and Nathan the 
prophet, and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada.’ And they came before the 
king. 33And the king said unto them: 
‘Take with you the servants of your 
lord, and cause Solomon my son to 
ride upon mine own mule, and bring 
him down to Gihon. 34And let Zadok 
the priest and Nathan the prophet 
anoint him there king over Israel; and 
blow ye with the horn, and say: Long 
live king Solomon. 35Then ye shall 
come up after him, and he shall come 
and sit upon my throne; for he shall be 
king in my stead; and I have appointed 
him to be prince over Israel and over 
Judah.’ 36And Benaiah the son of 


Jehoiada answered the king, and said: 
‘Amen; so say the LORD, the God of 
my lord the king. 37As the LORD hath 
been with my lord the king, even so be 
He with Solomon, and make his throne 
greater than the throne of my lord king 
David.’ 

38So Zadok the priest, and Nathan 
the prophet, and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the 
Pelethites, went down, and caused 
Solomon to ride upon king David’s 
mule, and brought him to Gihon. 
39And Zadok the priest took the horn 
of oil out of the Tent, and anointed 
Solomon. And they blew the ram’s 
horn; and all the people said: ‘Long 
live king Solomon.’ 40And all the 
people came up after him, and the 
people piped with pipes, and rejoiced 
with great joy, so that the earth rent 
with the sound of them. 

41And Adonijah and all the guests 
that were with him heard it as they had 
made an end of eating. And when Joab 
heard the sound of the horn, he said: 
‘Wherefore is this noise of the city 
being in an uproar?’ 42While he yet 
spoke, behold, Jonathan the son of 
Abiathar the priest came; and 
Adonijah said: ‘Come in; for thou art a 
worthy man, and bringest good 
tidings.’ 43And Jonathan answered and 
said to Adonijah: ‘Verily our lord king 
David hath made Solomon king. 44And 
the king hath sent with him Zadok the 
priest, and Nathan the prophet, and 
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the 
Cherethites and the Pelethites, and 
they have caused him to ride upon the 
king’s mule. 45And Zadok the priest 
and Nathan the prophet have anointed 
him king in Gihon; and they are come 
up from thence rejoicing, so that the 
city is in an uproar. This is the noise 
that ye have heard. 46And also 
Solomon sitteth on the throne of the 
kingdom. 47And moreover the king’s 
servants came to bless our lord king 
David, saying: God make the name of 
Solomon better than thy name, and 
make his throne greater than thy 
throne; and the king bowed down upon 
the bed. 48And also thus said the king: 
Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, 
who hath given one to sit on my throne 
this day, mine eyes even seeing it.’ 

49And all the guests of Adonijah 
were afraid, and rose up, and went 
every man his way. 50And Adonijah 
feared because of Solomon; and he 
arose, and went, and caught hold on 
the horns of the altar. 51And it was told 
Solomon, saying: ‘Behold, Adonijah 
feareth king Solomon; for, lo, he hath 
laid hold on the horns of the altar, 
saying: Let king Solomon swear unto 
me first of all that he will not slay his 
servant with the sword.’ 52And 
Solomon said: ‘If he shall show 
himself a worthy man, there shall not a 
hair of him fall to the earth; but if 
wickedness be found in him, he shall 
die.’ 53So king Solomon sent, and they 
brought him down from the altar. And 
he came and prostrated himself before 
king Solomon; and Solomon said unto 
him: ‘Go to thy house.’ 


Now the days of David drew nigh 
that he should die; and he charged 
Solomon his son, saying: 2’I go the 
way of all the earth; be thou strong 
therefore, and show thyself a man; 
3and keep the charge of the LORD thy 
God, to walk in His ways, to keep His 
statutes, and His commandments, and 
His ordinances, and His testimonies, 
according to that which is written in 
the law of Moses, that thou mayest 
prosper in all that thou doest, and 
whithersoever thou turnest thyself; 
4that the LORD may establish His word 
which He spoke concerning me, 
saying: If thy children take heed to 
their way, to walk before Me in truth 
with all their heart and with all their 
soul, there shall not fail thee, said He, 
a man on the throne of Israel. 
5Moreover thou knowest also what 
Joab the son of Zeruiah did unto me, 
even what he did to the two captains of 
the hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son 
of Ner and unto Amasa the son of 
Jether, whom he slew, and shed the 
blood of war in peace, and put the 
blood of war upon his girdle that was 
about his loins, and in his shoes that 
were on his feet. 6Do therefore 
according to thy wisdom, and let not 
his hoar head go down to the grave in 
peace. 7But show kindness unto the 
sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let 
them be of those that eat at thy table; 
for so they drew nigh unto me when I 
fled from Absalom thy brother. 8And, 
behold, there is with thee Shimei the 
son of Gera, the Benjamite, of 
Bahurim, who cursed me with a 
grievous curse in the day when I went 
to Mahanaim; but he came down to 
meet me at the Jordan, and I swore to 
him by the LORD, saying: I will not put 
thee to death with the sword. 9Now 
therefore hold him not guiltless, for 
thou art a wise man; and thou wilt 
know what thou oughtest to do unto 
him, and thou shalt bring his hoar head 
down to the grave with blood.’ 

10And David slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in the city of David. 
11And the days that David reigned over 
Israel were forty years: seven years 
reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and 
three years reigned he in Jerusalem. 
12And Solomon sat upon the throne of 
David his father; and his kingdom was 
established firmly. 

13Then Adonijah the son of Haggith 
came to Bath-sheba the mother of 
Solomon. And she said: ‘Comest thou 
peaceably?’ And he said: ‘Peaceably.’ 
14He said moreover: ‘I have somewhat 
to say unto thee.’ And she said: ‘Say 
on.’ 15And he said: ‘Thou knowest that 
the kingdom was mine, and that all 
Israel set their faces on me, that I 
should reign; howbeit the kingdom is 
turned about, and is become my 
brother’s; for it was his from the LORD. 
16And now I ask one petition of thee, 
deny me not.’ And she said unto him: 
‘Say on.’ 17And he said: ‘Speak, I pray 
thee, unto Solomon the king—for he 
will not say thee nay—that he give me 
Abishag the Shunammite to wife.’ 
2 




18And Bath-sheba said: ‘Well; I will 
speak for thee unto the king.’ 

19Bath-sheba therefore went unto 
king Solomon, to speak unto him for 
Adonijah. And the king rose up to 
meet her, and bowed down unto her, 
and sat down on his throne, and caused 
a throne to be set for the king’s 
mother; and she sat on his right hand. 
20Then she said: ‘I ask one small 
petition of thee; deny me not.’ And the 
king said unto her: ‘Ask on, my 
mother; for I will not deny thee.’ 
21And she said: ‘Let Abishag the 
Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy 
brother to wife.’ 22And king Solomon 
answered and said unto his mother: 
‘And why dost thou ask Abishag the 
Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him 
the kingdom also; for he is mine elder 
brother; even for him, and for Abiathar 
the priest, and for Joab the son of 
Zeruiah.’ 23Then king Solomon swore 
by the LORD, saying: ‘God do so to me, 
and more also, if Adonijah have not 
spoken this word against his own life. 
24Now therefore as the LORD liveth, 
who hath established me, and set me 
on the throne of David my father, and 
who hath made me a house, as He 
promised, surely Adonijah shall be put 
to death this day.’ 25And king Solomon 
sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada; and he fell upon him, so that 
he died. 

26And unto Abiathar the priest said 
the king: ‘Get thee to Anathoth, unto 
thine own fields; for thou art deserving 
of death; but I will not at this time put 
thee to death, because thou didst bear 
the ark of the Lord GOD before David 
my father, and because thou wast 
afflicted in all wherein my father was 
afflicted.’ 27So Solomon thrust out 
Abiathar from being priest unto the 
LORD; that the word of the LORD might 
be fulfilled, which He spoke 
concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh. 

28And the tidings came to Joab; for 
Joab had turned after Adonijah, though 
he turned not after Absalom. And Joab 
fled unto the Tent of the LORD, and 
caught hold on the horns of the altar. 
29And it was told king Solomon: ‘Joab 
is fled unto the Tent of the LORD, and, 
behold, he is by the altar.’ Then 
Solomon sent Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, saying: ‘Go, fall upon him.’ 
30And Benaiah came to the Tent of the 
LORD, and said unto him: ‘Thus saith 
the king: Come forth.’ And he said: 
‘Nay; but I will die here.’ And 
Benaiah brought back word unto the 
king, saying: ‘Thus said Joab, and thus 
he answered me.’ 31And the king said 
unto him: ‘Do as he hath said, and fall 
upon him, and bury him; that thou 
mayest take away the blood, which 
Joab shed without cause, from me and 
from my father’s house. 32And the 
LORD will return his blood upon his 
own head, because he fell upon two 
men more righteous and better than he, 
and slew them with the sword, and my 
father David knew it not: Abner the 
son of Ner, captain of the host of 
Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, 
captain of the host of Judah. 33So shall 


their blood return upon the head of 
Joab, and upon the head of his seed for 
ever; but unto David, and unto his 
seed, and unto his house, and unto his 
throne, shall there be peace for ever 
from the LORD.’ 34Then Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon 
him, and slew him; and he was buried 
in his own house in the wilderness. 
35And the king put Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada in his room over the host; and 
Zadok the priest did the king put in the 
room of Abiathar. 

36And the king sent and called for 
Shimei, and said unto him: Build thee 
a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, 
and go not forth thence any whither. 
37For on the day thou goest out, and 
passest over the brook Kidron, know 
thou for certain that thou shalt surely 
die; thy blood shall be upon thine own 
head.’ 38And Shimei said unto the 
king: ‘The saying is good; as my lord 
the king hath said, so will thy servant 
do.’ And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem 
many days. 

39And it came to pass at the end of 
three years, that two of the servants of 
Shimei ran away unto Achish, son of 
Maacah, king of Gath. And they told 
Shimei, saying: ‘Behold, thy servants 
are in Gath.’ 40And Shimei arose, and 
saddled his ass, and went to Gath to 
Achish, to seek his servants; and 
Shimei went, and brought his servants 
from Gath. 41And it was told Solomon 
that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem 
to Gath, and was come back. 42And the 
king sent and called for Shimei, and 
said unto him: ‘Did I not make thee to 
swear by the LORD, and forewarned 
thee, saying: Know for certain, that on 
the day thou goest out, and walkest 
abroad any whither, thou shalt surely 
die? and thou saidst unto me: The 
saying is good; I have heard it. 43Why 
then hast thou not kept the oath of the 
LORD, and the commandment that I 
have charged thee with?’ 44The king 
said moreover to Shimei: ‘Thou 
knowest all the wickedness which thy 
heart is privy to, that thou didst to 
David my father; therefore the LORD 
shall return thy wickedness upon thine 
own head. 45But king Solomon shall be 
blessed, and the throne of David shall 
be established before the LORD for 
ever.’ 46So the king commanded 
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he 
went out, and fell upon him, so that he 
died. 

And the kingdom was established in 

the hand of Solomon. 1And 
Solomon became allied to 
Pharaoh king of Egypt by marriage, 
and took Pharaoh’s daughter, and 
brought her into the city of David, 
until he had made an end of building 
his own house, and the house of the 
LORD, and the wall of Jerusalem round 
about. 2Only the people sacrificed in 
the high places, because there was no 
house built for the name of the LORD 
until those days. 3And Solomon loved 
the LORD, walking in the statutes of 
David his father; only he sacrificed 
and offered in the high places. 
3 




4And the king went to Gibeon to 
sacrifice there; for that was the great 
high place; a thousand burnt-offerings 
did Solomon offer upon that altar. 5In 
Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon 
in a dream by night; and God said: 
‘Ask what I shall give thee.’ 6And 
Solomon said: ‘Thou hast shown unto 
Thy servant David my father great 
kindness, according as he walked 
before Thee in truth, and in 
righteousness, and in uprightness of 
heart with Thee; and Thou hast kept 
for him this great kindness, that Thou 
hast given him a son to sit on his 
throne, as it is this day. 7And now, O 
LORD my God, Thou hast made Thy 
servant king instead of David my 
father; and I am but a little child; I 
know not how to go out or come in. 
8And Thy servant is in the midst of 
Thy people which Thou hast chosen, a 
great people, that cannot be numbered 
nor counted for multitude. 9Give Thy 
servant therefore an understanding 
heart to judge Thy people, that I may 
discern between good and evil; for 
who is able to judge this Thy great 
people?’ 10And the speech pleased the 
LORD, that Solomon had asked this 
thing. 11And God said unto him: 
‘Because thou hast asked this thing, 
and hast not asked for thyself long life; 
neither hast asked riches for thyself, 
nor hast asked the life of thine 
enemies; but hast asked for thyself 
understanding to discern justice; 
12behold, I have done according to thy 
word: lo, I have given thee a wise and 
an understanding heart; so that there 
hath been none like thee before thee, 
neither after thee shall any arise like 
unto thee. 13And I have also given thee 
that which thou hast not asked, both 
riches and honour—so that there hath 
not been any among the kings like 
unto thee—all thy days. 14And if thou 
wilt walk in My ways, to keep My 
statutes and My commandments, as 
thy father David did walk, then I will 
lengthen thy days.’ 15And Solomon 
awoke, and, behold, it was a dream; 
and he came to Jerusalem, and stood 
before the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD, and offered up burnt-offerings, 
and offered peace-offerings, and made 
a feast to all his servants. 

16Then came there two women, that 
were harlots, unto the king, and stood 
before him. 17And the one woman 
said: ‘Oh, my lord, I and this woman 
dwell in one house; and I was 
delivered of a child with her in the 
house. 18And it came to pass the third 
day after I was delivered, that this 
woman was delivered also; and we 
were together; there was no stranger 
with us in the house, save we two in 
the house. 19And this woman’s child 
died in the night; because she overlay 
it. 20And she arose at midnight, and 
took my son from beside me, while thy 
handmaid slept, and laid it in her 
bosom, and laid her dead child in my 
bosom. 21And when I rose in the 
morning to give my child suck, 
behold, it was dead; but when I had 
looked well at it in the morning, 


behold, it was not my son, whom I did 
bear.’ 22And the other woman said: 
‘Nay; but the living is my son, and the 
dead is thy son.’ And this said: ‘No; 
but the dead is thy son, and the living 
is my son.’ Thus they spoke before the 
king. 

23Then said the king: ‘The one saith: 
This is my son that liveth, and thy son 
is the dead; and the other saith: Nay; 
but thy son is the dead, and my son is 
the living.’ 24And the king said: ‘Fetch 
me a sword.’ And they brought a 
sword before the king. 25And the king 
said: ‘Divide the living child in two, 
and give half to the one, and half to the 
other.’ 26Then spoke the woman whose 
the living child was unto the king, for 
her heart yearned upon her son, and 
she said: ‘Oh, my lord, give her the 
living child, and in no wise slay it.’ 
But the other said: ‘It shall be neither 
mine nor thine; divide it.’ 27Then the 
king answered and said: ‘Give her the 
living child, and in no wise slay it: she 
is the mother thereof.’ 28And all Israel 
heard of the judgment which the king 
had judged; and they feared the king; 
for they saw that the wisdom of God 
was in him, to do justice. 

And king Solomon was king over 
all Israel. 2And these were the 
princes whom he had: Azariah the son 
of Zadok, the priest; 3Elihoreph and 
Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; 
Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the 
recorder; 4and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada was over the host; and Zadok 
and Abiathar were priests; 5and 
Azariah the son of Nathan was over 
the officers; and Zabud the son of 
Nathan was chief minister and the 
king’s friend; 6and Ahishar was over 
the household; and Adoniram the son 
of Abda was over the levy. 

7And Solomon had twelve officers 
over all Israel, who provided victuals 
for the king and his household: each 
man had to make provision for a 
month in the year. 8And these are their 
names: The son of Hur, in the hill-
country of Ephraim; 9the son of Deker, 
in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Beth-
shemesh, and Elon-beth-hanan; 10the 
son of Hesed, in Arubboth; to him 
pertained Socoh, and all the land of 
Hepher; 11the son of Abinadab, in all 
the region of Dor; he had Taphath the 
daughter of Solomon to wife; 12Baana 
the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and 
Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is 
beside Zarethan, beneath Jezreel, from 
Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as 
beyond Jokmeam; 13the son of Geber, 
in Ramoth-gilead; to him pertained the 
villages of Jair the son of Manasseh, 
which are in Gilead; even to him 
pertained the region of Argob, which 
is in Bashan, threescore great cities 
with walls and brazen bars; 
14Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in 
Mahanaim; 15Ahimaaz, in Naphtali; he 
also took Basemath the daughter of 
Solomon to wife; 16Baana the son of 
Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth; 
17Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in 
Issachar; 18Shimei the son of Ela, in 
Benjamin; 19Geber the son of Uri, in 
4 




the land of Gilead, the country of 
Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og 
king of Bashan; and one officer that 
was [over all the officers] in the land. 
20Judah and Israel were many, as the 
sand which is by the sea in multitude, 
eating and drinking and making merry. 

And Solomon ruled over all the 
kingdoms from the River unto the 
land of the Philistines, and unto the 
border of Egypt; they brought 
presents, and served Solomon all the 
days of his life. 

2And Solomon’s provision for one 
day was thirty measures of fine flour, 
and threescore measures of meal; 3ten 
fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the 
pastures, and a hundred sheep, beside 
harts, and gazelles, and roebucks, and 
fatted fowl. 4For he had dominion over 
all the region on this side the River, 
from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over all 
the kings on this side the River; and he 
had peace on all sides round about 
him. 2And Judah and Israel dwelt 
safely, every man under his vine and 
under his fig-tree, from Dan even to 
Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon. 

6And Solomon had forty thousand 
stalls of horses for his chariots, and 
twelve thousand horsemen. 2And those 
officers provided victual for king 
Solomon, and for all that came unto 
king Solomon’s table, every man in his 
month; they let nothing be lacking. 
8Barley also and straw for the horses 
and swift steeds brought they unto the 
place where it should be, every man 
according to his charge. 

9And God gave Solomon wisdom 
and understanding exceeding much, 
and largeness of heart, even as the 
sand that is on the sea-shore. 10And 
Solomon’s wisdom excelled the 
wisdom of all the children of the east, 
and all the wisdom of Egypt. 11For he 
was wiser than all men: than Ethan the 
Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and 
Darda, the sons of Mahol; and his 
fame was in all the nations round 
about. 12And he spoke three thousand 
proverbs; and his songs were a 
thousand and five. 13And he spoke of 
trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon 
even unto the hyssop that springeth out 
of the wall; he spoke also of beasts, 
and of fowl, and of creeping things, 
and of fishes. 14And there came of all 
peoples to hear the wisdom of 
Solomon, from all kings of the earth, 
who had heard of his wisdom. 

15And Hiram king of Tyre sent his 
servants unto Solomon; for he had 
heard that they had anointed him king 
in the room of his father; for Hiram 
was ever a lover of David. 16And 
Solomon sent to Hiram, saying: 
17‘Thou knowest how that David my 
father could not build a house for the 
name of the LORD his God for the wars 
which were about him on every side, 
until the LORD put them under the soles 
of my feet. 18But now the LORD my 
God hath given me rest on every side; 
there is neither adversary, nor evil 
occurrence. 19And, behold, I purpose 
to build a house for the name of the 
LORD my God, as the LORD spoke unto 
5 




David my father, saying: Thy son, 
whom I will set upon thy throne in thy 
room, he shall build the house for My 
name. 20Now therefore command thou 
that they hew me cedar-trees out of 
Lebanon; and my servants shall be 
with thy servants; and I will give thee 
hire for thy servants according to all 
that thou shalt say; for thou knowest 
that there is not among us any that 
hath skill to hew timber like unto the 
Zidonians.’ 

21And it came to pass, when Hiram 
heard the words of Solomon, that he 
rejoiced greatly, and said: ‘Blessed be 
the LORD this day, who hath given unto 
David a wise son over this great 
people.’ 22And Hiram sent to Solomon, 
saying: ‘I have heard that which thou 
hast sent unto me; I will do all thy 
desire concerning timber of cedar, and 
concerning timber of cypress. 23My 
servants shall bring them down from 
Lebanon unto the sea; and I will make 
them into rafts to go by sea unto the 
place that thou shalt appoint me, and 
will cause them to be broken up there, 
and thou shalt receive them; and thou 
shalt accomplish my desire, in giving 
food for my household.’ 24So aHiram 
gave Solomon timber of cedar and 
timber of cypress according to all his 
desire. 25And Solomon gave Hiram 
twenty thousand measures of wheat for 
food to his household, and twenty 
measures of beaten oil; thus gave 
Solomon to Hiram year by year. 26And 

a Heb. Hirom, and in verse 32. 

the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as He 
promised him; and there was peace 
between Hiram and Solomon; and they 
two made a league together. 

27And king Solomon raised a levy 
out of all Israel; and the levy was 
thirty thousand men. 28And he sent 
them to Lebanon, ten thousand a 
month by courses: a month they were 
in Lebanon, and two months at home; 
and Adoniram was over the levy. 
29And Solomon had threescore and ten 
thousand that bore burdens, and 
fourscore thousand that were hewers in 
the mountains; 30besides Solomon’s 
chief officers that were over the work, 
three thousand and three hundred, who 
bore rule over the people that wrought 
in the work. 31And the king 
commanded, and they quarried great 
stones, costly stones, to lay the 
foundation of the house with hewn 
stone. 32And Solomon’s builders and 
Hiram’s builders and the Gebalites did 
fashion them, and prepared the timber 
and the stones to build the house. 

And it came to pass in the four 
hundred and eightieth year after 
the children of Israel were come out of 
the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of 
Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the 
month Ziv, which is the second month, 
that he began to build the house of the 
LORD. 2And the house which king 
Solomon built for the LORD, the length 
thereof was threescore cubits, and the 
breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the 
height thereof thirty cubits. 3And the 
6 




porch before the atemple of the house, 
twenty cubits was the length thereof, 
according to the breadth of the house; 
and ten cubits was the breadth thereof 
before the house. 4And for the house 
he made windows broad within, and 
narrow without. 5And against the wall 
of the house he built a side-structure 
round about, against the walls of the 
house round about, both of the temple 
and of bthe sanctuary; and he made 
side-chambers round about; 6the 
nethermost story of the side-structure 
was five cubits broad, and the middle 
was six cubits broad, and the third was 
seven cubits broad; for on the outside 
he made rebatements in the wall of the 
house round about, that the beams 
should not have hold in the walls of 
the house.— 7For the house, when it 
was in building, was built of stone 
made ready at the quarry; and there 
was neither hammer nor axe nor any 
tool of iron heard in the house, while it 
was in building.— 8The door for the 
clowest row of chambers was in the 
right side of the house and they went 
up by winding stairs into the middle 
row, and out of the middle into the 
third. 9So he built the house, and 
finished it; and he covered in the house 
with planks of cedar over beams. 
10And he built the stories of the side-
structure against all the house, each 

a That is, the holy place. 

b Heb. debir, that is, the hindmost or 
innermost room, the most holy place. 

c Heb. middle. 

five cubits high; and they rested on the 
house with timber of cedar. 

11And the word of the LORD came to 
Solomon, saying: 12’As for this house 
which thou art building, if thou wilt 
walk in My statutes, and execute Mine 
ordinances, and keep all My 
commandments to walk in them; then 
will I establish My word with thee, 
which I spoke unto David thy father; 
13in that I will dwell therein among the 
children of Israel, and will not forsake 
My people Israel.’ 

14So Solomon built the house, and 
finished it. 15And he built the walls of 
the house within with boards of cedar; 
from the floor of the house unto the 
joists of the ceiling, he covered them 
on the inside with wood; and he 
covered the floor of the house with 
boards of cypress. 16And he built 
twenty cubits on the hinder part of the 
house with boards of cedar from the 
floor unto the joists; he even built 
them for himself within, for a 
Sanctuary, even for the most holy 
place. 17And the house, that is, the 
temple before [the Sanctuary], was 
forty cubits long. 18And the cedar on 
the house within was carved with 
knops and open flowers; all was cedar; 
there was no stone seen. 19And he 
prepared the Sanctuary in the midst of 
the house within, to set there the ark of 
the covenant of the LORD. 20And before 
the Sanctuary which was twenty cubits 
in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, 
and twenty cubits in the height thereof, 
overlaid with pure gold, he set an altar, 


which he covered with cedar. 21So 
Solomon overlaid athe house within 
with pure gold; and he drew chains of 
gold across the wall before the 
Sanctuary; and he overlaid it with 
gold. 22And the whole house he 
overlaid with gold, until all the house 
was finished; also the whole altar that 
belonged to the Sanctuary he overlaid 
with gold. 

a That is, the Sanctuary. 

23And in the Sanctuary he made two 
cherubim of olive-wood, each ten 
cubits high. 24And five cubits was the 
one wing of the cherub, and five cubits 
the other wing of the cherub; from the 
uttermost part of the one wing unto the 
uttermost part of the other were ten 
cubits. 25And the other cherub was ten 
cubits; both the cherubim were of one 
measure and one form. 26The height of 
the one cherub was ten cubits, and so 
was it of the other cherub. 27And he set 
the cherubim within the inner house; 
and the wings of the cherubim were 
stretched forth, so that the wing of the 
one touched the one wall, and the wing 
of the other cherub touched the other 
wall; and their wings touched one 
another in the midst of the house. 
28And he overlaid the cherubim with 
gold. 

29And he carved all the walls of the 
house round about with carved figures 
of cherubim and palm-trees and open 
flowers, within and without. 30And the 
floor of the house he overlaid with 
gold, within and without. 31And for the 

entrance of the Sanctuary he made 
doors of olive-wood, the door-posts 
within the frame having five angles. 
32And as for the two doors of olive-
wood, he carved upon them carvings 
of cherubim and palm-trees and open 
flowers, and overlaid them with gold; 
and he spread the gold upon the 
cherubim, and upon the palm-trees. 
33So also made he for the entrance of 
the temple door-posts of olive-wood, 
within a frame four-square; 34and two 
doors of cypress-wood; the two leaves 
of the one door were folding, and the 
two leaves of the other door were 
folding. 35And he carved thereon 
cherubim and palm-trees and open 
flowers; and he overlaid them with 
gold fitted upon the graven work. 
36And he built the inner court with 
three rows of hewn stone, and a row of 
cedar beams. 

37In the fourth year was the 
foundation of the house of the LORD 
laid, in the month Ziv. 38And in the 
eleventh year, in the month Bul, which 
is the eighth month, was the house 
finished throughout all the parts 
thereof, and according to all the 
fashion of it. So was he seven years in 
building it. 

 

And Solomon was building his 
own house thirteen years, and he 
finished all his house. 

2For he built the house of the forest 
of Lebanon: the length thereof was a 
hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof 
fifty cubits, and the height thereof 
7 




thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar 
pillars, with cedar beams upon the 
pillars. 3And it was covered with cedar 
above upon the side-chambers, that lay 
on forty and five pillars, fifteen in a 
row. 4And there were beams in three 
rows; and light was over against light 
in three ranks. 5And all the doors with 
their posts were square in the frame; 
and light was over against light in 
three ranks. 

6And he made the porch of pillars: 
the length thereof was fifty cubits, and 
the breadth thereof thirty cubits; and a 
porch before them; and pillars and 
thick beams before them. 

7And he made the porch of the 
throne where he might judge, even the 
porch of judgment; and it was covered 
with cedar from floor to floor. 

8And his house where he might 
dwell, in the other court, within the 
porch, was of the like work. He made 
also a house for Pharaoh’s daughter, 
whom Solomon had taken to wife, like 
unto this porch. 

9All these were of costly stones, 
according to the measures of hewn 
stones, sawed with saws, within and 
without, even from the foundation 
unto the coping, and so on the outside 
unto the great court. 10And the 
foundation was of costly stones, even 
great stones, stones of ten cubits, and 
stones of eight cubits. 11And above 
were costly stones, after the measure 
of hewn stones, and cedar-wood. 
12And the great court round about had 
three rows of hewn stone, and a row of 
cedar beams, like as the inner court of 
the house of the LORD, and the court of 
the porch of the house. 

13And king Solomon sent and 
fetched Hiram out of Tyre. 14He was 
the son of a widow of the tribe of 
Naphtali, and his father was a man of 
Tyre, a worker in brass; and he was 
filled with wisdom and understanding 
and skill, to work all works in brass. 
And he came to king Solomon, and 
wrought all his work. 

15Thus he fashioned the two pillars 
of brass, of eighteen cubits high each; 
and a line of twelve cubits did 
compass it about; [and so] the other 
pillar. 16And he made two capitals of 
molten brass, to set upon the tops of 
the pillars; the height of the one capital 
was five cubits, and the height of the 
other capital was five cubits. 17He also 
made nets of checker-work, and 
wreaths of chain-work, for the capitals 
which were upon the top of the pillars: 
seven for the one capital, and seven for 
the other capital. 18And he made the 
pillars; and there were two rows round 
about upon the one network, to cover 
the capitals that were upon the top of 
the pomegranates; and so did he for 
the other capital. 19And the capitals 
that were upon the top of the pillars in 
the porch were of lily-work, four 
cubits. 20And there were capitals above 
also upon the two pillars, close by the 
belly which was beside the network; 
and the pomegranates were two 
hundred, in rows round about upon 
each capital. 21And he set up the pillars 


at the porch of the temple; and he set 
up the right pillar, and called the name 
thereof Jachin; and he set up the left 
pillar, and called the name thereof 
Boaz. 22And upon the top of the pillars 
was lily-work; so was the work of the 
pillars finished. 

23And he made the molten sea of ten 
cubits from brim to brim, round in 
compass, and the height thereof was 
five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits 
did compass it round about. 24And 
under the brim of it round about there 
were knops which did compass it, for 
ten cubits, compassing the sea round 
about; the knops were in two rows, 
cast when it was cast. 25It stood upon 
twelve oxen, three looking toward the 
north, and three looking toward the 
west, and three looking toward the 
south, and three looking toward the 
east; and the sea was set upon them 
above, and all their hinder parts were 
inward. 26And it was a hand-breadth 
thick; and the brim thereof was 
wrought like the brim of a cup, like the 
flower of a lily; it held two thousand 
baths. 

27And he made the ten bases of 
brass; four cubits was the length of one 
base, and four cubits the breadth 
thereof, and three cubits the height of 
it. 28And the work of the bases was on 
this manner: they had borders; and 
there were borders between the stays; 
29and on the borders that were between 
the stays were lions, oxen, and 
cherubim; and upon the stays it was in 
like manner above; and beneath the 
lions and oxen were wreaths of 
hanging work. 30And every base had 
four brazen wheels, and axles of brass; 
and the four feet thereof had 
undersetters; beneath the laver were 
the undersetters molten, with wreaths 
at the side of each. 31And the mouth of 
it within the crown and above was a 
cubit high; and the mouth thereof was 
round after the work of a pedestal, a 
cubit and a half; and also upon the 
mouth of it were gravings; and their 
borders were foursquare, not round. 
32And the four wheels were underneath 
the borders; and the axletrees of the 
wheels were in the base; and the height 
of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit. 
33And the work of the wheels was like 
the work of a chariot wheel; their 
axletrees, and their felloes, and their 
spokes, and their naves, were all 
molten. 34And there were four 
undersetters at the four corners of each 
base; the undersetters thereof were of 
one piece with the base itself. 35And in 
the top of the base was there a round 
compass of half a cubit high; and on 
the top of the base the stays thereof 
and the borders thereof were of one 
piece therewith. 36And on the plates of 
the stays thereof, and on the borders 
thereof, he graved cherubim, lions, and 
palm-trees, according to the space of 
each, with wreaths round about. 
37After this manner he made the ten 
bases; all of them had one casting, one 
measure, and one form. 

38And he made ten lavers of brass: 
one laver contained forty baths; and 


every laver was four cubits; and upon 
every one of the ten bases one laver. 
39And he set the bases, five on the 
right side of the house, and five on the 
left side of the house; and he set the 
sea on the right side of the house 
eastward, toward the south. 

40And aHiram made the pots, and the 
shovels, and the basins. 

a Heb. Hirom. 

So Hiram made an end of doing all 
the work that he wrought for king 
Solomon in the house of the LORD: 
41the two pillars, and the two bowls of 
the capitals that were on the top of the 
pillars; and the two networks to cover 
the two bowls of the capitals that were 
on the top of the pillars; 42and the four 
hundred pomegranates for the two 
networks, two rows of pomegranates 
for each network, to cover the two 
bowls of the capitals that were upon 
the top of the pillars; 43and the ten 
bases, and the ten lavers on the bases; 
44and the one sea, and the twelve oxen 
under the sea; 45and the pots, and the 
shovels, and the basins; even all these 
vessels, which Hiram made for king 
Solomon, in the house of the LORD, 
were of burnished brass. 46In the plain 
of the Jordan did the king cast them, in 
the clay ground between Succoth and 
Zarethan. 47And Solomon left all the 
vessels unweighed, because they were 
exceeding many; the weight of the 
brass could not be found out. 48And 
Solomon made all the vessels that 
were in the house of the LORD: the 

golden altar, and the table whereupon 
the showbread was, of gold; 49and the 
candlesticks, five on the right side, and 
five on the left, before the Sanctuary, 
of pure gold; and the flowers, and the 
lamps, and the tongs, of gold; 50and the 
cups, and the snuffers, and the basins, 
and the pans, and the fire-pans, of pure 
gold; and the hinges, both for the 
doors of the inner house, the most holy 
place, and for the doors of the house, 
that is, of the temple, of gold. 

51Thus all the work that king 
Solomon wrought in the house of the 
LORD was finished. And Solomon 
brought in the things which David his 
father had dedicated, the silver, and 
the gold, and the vessels, and put them 
in the treasuries of the house of the 
LORD. 

Then Solomon assembled the 
elders of Israel, and all the heads 
of the tribes, the princes of the 
fathers’houses of the children of Israel, 
unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to 
bring up the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD out of the city of David, which is 
Zion. 2And all the men of Israel 
assembled themselves unto king 
Solomon at the feast, in the month 
Ethanim, which is the seventh month. 
3And all the elders of Israel came, and 
the priests took up the ark. 4And they 
brought up the ark of the LORD, and the 
tent of meeting, and all the holy 
vessels that were in the Tent; even 
these did the priests and the Levites 
bring up. 5And king Solomon and all 
the congregation of Israel, that were 
8 




assembled unto him, were with him 
before the ark, sacrificing sheep and 
oxen, that could not be told nor 
numbered for multitude. 6And the 
priests brought in the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD unto its place, 
into the Sanctuary of the house, to the 
most holy place, even under the wings 
of the cherubim. 7For the cherubim 
spread forth their wings over the place 
of the ark, and the cherubim covered 
the ark and the staves thereof above. 
8And the staves were so long that the 
ends of the staves were seen from the 
holy place, even before the Sanctuary; 
but they could not be seen without; 
and there they are unto this day. 9There 
was nothing in the ark save the two 
tables of stone which Moses put there 
at Horeb, when the LORD made a 
covenant with the children of Israel 
when they came out of the land of 
Egypt. 10And it came to pass, when the 
priests were come out of the holy 
place, that the cloud filled the house of 
the LORD, 11so that the priests could not 
stand to minister by reason of the 
cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled 
the house of the LORD. 

12Then spoke Solomon: 

The LORD hath said that He would 
dwell in the thick darkness. 

13I have surely built Thee a house of 

 habitation, 

A place for Thee to dwell in for 
ever. 

14And the king turned his face about, 
and blessed all the congregation of 
Israel; and all the congregation of 
Israel stood. 15And he said: ‘Blessed 
be the LORD, the God of Israel, who 
spoke with His mouth unto David my 
father, and hath with His hand fulfilled 
it, saying: 16Since the day that I 
brought forth My people Israel out of 
Egypt, I chose no city out of all the 
tribes of Israel to build a house, that 
My name might be there; but I chose 
David to be over My people Israel. 
17Now it was in the heart of David my 
father to build a house for the name of 
the LORD, the God of Israel. 18But the 
LORD said unto David my father: 
Whereas it was in thy heart to build a 
house for My name, thou didst well 
that it was in thy heart; 19nevertheless 
thou shalt not build the house; but thy 
son that shall come forth out of thy 
loins, he shall build the house for My 
name. 20And the LORD hath established 
His word that He spoke; for I am risen 
up in the room of David my father, and 
sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD 
promised, and have built the house for 
the name of the LORD, the God of 
Israel. 21And there have I set a place 
for the ark, wherein is the covenant of 
the LORD, which He made with our 
fathers, when He brought them out of 
the land of Egypt.’ 

22And Solomon stood before the 
altar of the LORD in the presence of all 
the congregation of Israel, and spread 
forth his hands toward heaven; 23and 
he said: ‘O LORD, the God of Israel, 
there is no God like Thee, in heaven 
above, or on earth beneath; who 
keepest covenant and mercy with Thy 


servants, that walk before Thee with 
all their heart; 24who hast kept with 
Thy servant David my father that 
which Thou didst promise him; yea, 
Thou spokest with Thy mouth, and 
hast fulfilled it with Thy hand, as it is 
this day. 25Now therefore, O LORD, the 
God of Israel, keep with Thy servant 
David my father that which Thou hast 
promised him saying: There shall not 
fail thee a man in My sight to sit on 
the throne of Israel, if only thy 
children take heed to their way, to 
walk before Me as thou hast walked 
before Me. 26Now therefore, O God of 
Israel, let Thy word, I pray Thee, be 
verified, which Thou didst speak unto 
Thy servant David my father. 

27But will God in very truth dwell 
on the earth? behold, heaven and the 
heaven of heavens cannot contain 
Thee; how much less this house that I 
have builded! 28Yet have Thou respect 
unto the prayer of Thy servant, and to 
his supplication, O LORD my God, to 
hearken unto the cry and to the prayer 
which Thy servant prayeth before 
Thee this day; 29that Thine eyes may 
be open toward this house night and 
day, even toward the place whereof 
Thou hast said: My name shall be 
there; to hearken unto the prayer 
which Thy servant shall pray toward 
this place. 30And hearken Thou to the 
supplication of Thy servant, and of 
Thy people Israel, when they shall 
pray toward this place; yea, hear Thou 
in heaven Thy dwelling-place; and 
when Thou hearest, forgive. 

31If a man sin against his neighbour, 
and an oath be exacted of him to cause 
him to swear, and he come and swear 
before Thine altar in this house; 32then 
hear Thou in heaven, and do, and 
judge Thy servants, condemning the 
wicked, to bring his way upon his own 
head; and justifying the righteous, to 
give him according to his 
righteousness. 

33When Thy people Israel are 
smitten down before the enemy, when 
they do sin against Thee, if they turn 
again to Thee, and confess Thy name, 
and pray and make supplication unto 
Thee in this house; 34then hear Thou in 
heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy 
people Israel, and bring them back 
unto the land which Thou gavest unto 
their fathers. 

35When heaven is shut up, and there 
is no rain, when they do sin against 
Thee; if they pray toward this place, 
and confess Thy name, and turn from 
their sin, when Thou dost afflict them; 
36then hear Thou in heaven, and 
forgive the sin of Thy servants, and of 
Thy people Israel, when Thou teachest 
them the good way wherein they 
should walk; and send rain upon Thy 
land, which Thou hast given to Thy 
people for an inheritance. 

37If there be in the land famine, if 
there be pestilence, if there be blasting 
or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their 
enemy besiege them in the land of 
their cities; whatsoever plague, 
whatsoever sickness there be; 38what 
prayer and supplication soever be 


made by any man of all Thy people 
Israel, who shall know every man the 
plague of his own heart, and spread 
forth his hands toward this house; 
39then hear Thou in heaven Thy 
dwelling-place, and forgive, and do, 
and render unto every man according 
to all his ways, whose heart Thou 
knowest—for Thou, even Thou only, 
knowest the hearts of all the children 
of men— 40that they may fear Thee all 
the days that they live in the land 
which Thou gavest unto our fathers. 

41Moreover concerning the stranger 
that is not of Thy people Israel, when 
he shall come out of a far country for 
Thy name’s sake— 42for they shall 
hear of Thy great name, and of Thy 
mighty hand, and of Thine 
outstretched arm—when he shall come 
and pray toward this house; 43hear 
Thou in heaven Thy dwelling-place, 
and do according to all that the 
stranger calleth to Thee for; that all the 
peoples of the earth may know Thy 
name, to fear Thee, as doth Thy people 
Israel, and that they may know that 
Thy name is called upon this house 
which I have built. 

44If Thy people go out to battle 
against their enemy, by whatsoever 
way Thou shalt send them, and they 
pray unto the LORD toward the city 
which Thou hast chosen, and toward 
the house which I have built for Thy 
name; 45then hear Thou in heaven their 
prayer and their supplication, and 
maintain their cause. 46If they sin 
against Thee—for there is no man that 
sinneth not—and Thou be angry with 
them, and deliver them to the enemy, 
so that they carry them away captive 
unto the land of the enemy, far off or 
near; 47yet if they shall bethink 
themselves in the land whither they are 
carried captive, and turn back, and 
make supplication unto Thee in the 
land of them that carried them captive, 
saying: We have sinned, and have 
done iniquitously, we have dealt 
wickedly; 48if they return unto Thee 
with all their heart and with all their 
soul in the land of their enemies, who 
carried them captive, and pray unto 
Thee toward their land, which Thou 
gavest unto their fathers, the city 
which Thou hast chosen, and the house 
which I have built for Thy name; 
49then hear Thou their prayer and their 
supplication in heaven Thy dwelling-
place, and maintain their cause; 50and 
forgive Thy people who have sinned 
against Thee, and all their 
transgressions wherein they have 
transgressed against Thee; and give 
them compassion before those who 
carried them captive, that they may 
have compassion on them; 51for they 
are Thy people, and Thine inheritance, 
which Thou broughtest forth out of 
Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of 
iron; 52that Thine eyes may be open 
unto the supplication of Thy servant, 
and unto the supplication of Thy 
people Israel, to hearken unto them 
whensoever they cry unto Thee. 53For 
Thou didst set them apart from among 
all the peoples of the earth, to be Thine 


inheritance, as Thou didst speak by the 
hand of Moses Thy servant, when 
Thou broughtest our fathers out of 
Egypt, O Lord GOD.’ 

54And it was so, that when Solomon 
had made an end of praying all this 
prayer and supplication unto the LORD, 
he arose from before the altar of the 
LORD, from kneeling on his knees with 
his hands spread forth toward heaven. 
55And he stood, and blessed all the 
congregation of Israel with a loud 
voice, saying: 56’Blessed be the LORD, 
that hath given rest unto His people 
Israel, according to all that He 
promised; there hath not failed one 
word of all His good promise, which 
He promised by the hand of Moses His 
servant. 57The LORD our God be with 
us, as He was with our fathers; let Him 
not leave us, nor forsake us; 58that He 
may incline our hearts unto Him, to 
walk in all His ways, and to keep His 
commandments, and His statutes, and 
His ordinances, which He commanded 
our fathers. 59And let these my words, 
wherewith I have made supplication 
before the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD 
our God day and night, that He 
maintain the cause of His servant, and 
the cause of His people Israel, as every 
day shall require; 60that all the peoples 
of the earth may know that the LORD, 
He is God; there is none else. 61Let 
your heart therefore be whole with the 
LORD our God, to walk in His statutes, 
and to keep His commandments, as at 
this day.’ 62And the king, and all Israel 
with him, offered sacrifice before the 
LORD. 63And Solomon offered for the 
sacrifice of peace-offerings, which he 
offered unto the LORD, two and twenty 
thousand oxen, and a hundred and 
twenty thousand sheep. So the king 
and all the children of Israel dedicated 
the house of the LORD. 64The same day 
did the king hallow the middle of the 
court that was before the house of the 
LORD; for there he offered the burnt-
offering, and the meal-offering, and 
the fat of the peace-offerings; because 
the brazen altar that was before the 
LORD was too little to receive the 
burnt-offering, and the meal-offering, 
and the fat of the peace-offerings. 

65So Solomon held the feast at that 
time, and all Israel with him, a great 
congregation, from the entrance 
Hamath unto the Brook of Egypt, 
before the LORD our God, seven days 
and seven days, even fourteen days. 
66On the eighth day he sent the people 
away, and they blessed the king, and 
went unto their tents joyful and glad of 
heart for all the goodness that the LORD 
had shown unto David His servant, 
and to Israel His people. 

And it came to pass, when 
Solomon had finished the 
building of the house of the LORD, and 
the king’s house, and all Solomon’s 
delight which he was pleased to do, 
2that the LORD appeared to Solomon 
the second time, as He had appeared 
unto him at Gibeon. 3And the LORD 
said unto him: ‘I have heard thy prayer 
and thy supplication, that thou hast 
made before Me: I have hallowed this 
9 




house, which thou hast built, to put My 
name there for ever; and Mine eyes 
and My heart shall be there 
perpetually. 4And as for thee, if thou 
wilt walk before Me, as David thy 
father walked, in integrity of heart, and 
in uprightness, to do according to all 
that I have commanded thee, and wilt 
keep My statutes and Mine ordinances; 
5then I will establish the throne of thy 
kingdom over Israel for ever; 
according as I promised to David thy 
father, saying: There shall not fail thee 
a man upon the throne of Israel. 6But if 
ye shall turn away from following Me, 
ye or your children, and not keep My 
commandments and My statutes which 
I have set before you, but shall go and 
serve other gods, and worship them; 
7then will I cut off Israel out of the 
land which I have given them; and this 
house, which I have hallowed for My 
name, will I cast out of My sight; and 
Israel shall be a proverb and a by word 
among all peoples; 8and this house 
which is so high [shall become 
desolate], and every one that passeth 
by it shall be astonished, and shall 
hiss; and when they shall say: Why 
hath the LORD done thus unto this land, 
and to this house? 9they shall be 
answered: Because they forsook the 
LORD their God, who brought forth 
their fathers out of the land of Egypt, 
and laid hold on other gods, and 
worshipped them, and served them; 
therefore hath the LORD brought all this 
evil upon them.’ 

10And it came to pass at the end of 
twenty years, wherein Solomon had 
built the two houses, the house of the 
LORD and the king’s house—11now 
Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished 
Solomon with cedar-trees and cypress-
trees, and with gold, according to all 
his desire—that then king Solomon 
gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of 
Galilee. 12And Hiram came out from 
Tyre to see the cities which Solomon 
had given him: and they pleased him 
not. 13And he said: ‘What cities are 
these which thou hast given me, my 
brother?’ And they were called the 
land of Cabul, unto this day. 14And 
Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents 
of gold. 15And this is the account of 
the levy which king Solomon raised; 
to build the house of the LORD, and his 
own house, and Millo, and the wall of 
Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, 
and Gezer. 16Pharaoh king of Egypt 
had gone up, and taken Gezer, and 
burnt it with fire, and slain the 
Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and 
given it for a portion unto his 
daughter, Solomon’s wife. 17And 
Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon 
the nether, 18and Baalath, and Tadmor 
in the wilderness, in the land, 19and all 
the store-cities that Solomon had, and 
the cities for his chariots, and the cities 
for his horsemen, and that which 
Solomon desired to build for his 
pleasure in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, 
and in all the land of his dominion. 
20All the people that were left of the 
Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, 


the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who 
were not of the children of Israel; 
21even their children that were left 
after them in the land, whom the 
children of Israel were not able utterly 
to destroy, of them did Solomon raise 
a levy of bondservants, unto this day. 
22But of the children of Israel did 
Solomon make no bondservants; but 
they were the men of war, and his 
servants, and his princes, and his 
captains, and rulers of his chariots and 
of his horsemen. 

23These were the chief officers that 
were over Solomon’s work, five 
hundred and fifty, who bore rule over 
the people that wrought in the work. 

24But Pharaoh’s daughter came up 
out of the city of David unto her house 
which [Solomon] had built for her; 
then did he build Millo. 

25And three times in a year did 
Solomon offer burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings upon the altar which 
he built unto the LORD, offering 
thereby, upon the altar that was before 
the LORD. So he finished the house. 
26And king Solomon made a navy of 
ships in Ezion-geber, which is beside 
Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in 
the land of Edom. 27And Hiram sent in 
the navy his servants, shipmen that had 
knowledge of the sea, with the 
servants of Solomon. 28And they came 
to Ophir, and fetched from thence 
gold, four hundred and twenty talents, 
and brought it to king Solomon. 

And when the queen of Sheba 
heard of the fame of Solomon 
because of the name of the LORD, she 
came to prove him with hard 
questions. 2And she came to Jerusalem 
with a very great train, with camels 
that bore spices and gold very much, 
and precious stones; and when she was 
come to Solomon, she spoke with him 
of all that was in her heart. 3And 
Solomon told her all her questions; 
there was not any thing hid from the 
king which he told her not. 4And when 
the queen of Sheba had seen all the 
wisdom of Solomon, and the house 
that he had built, 5and the food of his 
table, and the sitting of his servants, 
and the attendance of his ministers, 
and their apparel, and his cupbearers, 
and his burnt-offering which he 
offered in the house of the LORD, there 
was no more spirit in her. 6And she 
said to the king: ‘It was a true report 
that I heard in mine own land of thine 
acts, and of thy wisdom. 7Howbeit I 
believed not the words, until I came, 
and mine eyes had seen it; and, behold, 
the half was not told me; thou hast 
wisdom and prosperity exceeding the 
fame which I heard. 8Happy are thy 
men, happy are these thy servants, that 
stand continually before thee, and that 
hear thy wisdom. 9Blessed be the LORD 
thy God, who delighted in thee, to set 
thee on the throne of Israel; because 
the LORD loved Israel for ever, 
therefore made He thee king, to do 
justice and righteousness.’ 10And she 
gave the king a hundred and twenty 
talents of gold, and of spices very 
great store, and precious stones; there 10 




came no more such abundance of 
spices as these which the queen of 
Sheba gave to king Solomon. 11And 
the navy also of Hiram, that brought 
gold from Ophir, brought in from 
Ophir great plenty of sandal-wood and 
precious stones. 12And the king made 
of the sandal-wood pillars for the 
house of the LORD, and for the king’s 
house, harps also and psalteries for the 
singers; there came no such sandal-
wood, nor was seen, unto this day. 
13And king Solomon gave to the queen 
of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she 
asked, beside that which Solomon 
gave her of his royal bounty. So she 
turned, and went to her own land, she 
and her servants. 

14Now the weight of gold that came 
to Solomon in one year was six 
hundred threescore and six talents of 
gold, 15beside that which came of the 
merchants, and of the traffic of the 
traders, and of all the kings of the 
mingled people and of the governors 
of the country. 16And king Solomon 
made two hundred targets of beaten 
gold: six hundred shekels of gold went 
to one target. 17And he made three 
hundred shields of beaten gold: three 
pounds of gold went to one shield; and 
the king put them in the house of the 
forest of Lebanon. 

18Moreover the king made a great 
throne of ivory, and overlaid it with 
the finest gold. 19There were six steps 
to the throne, and the top of the throne 
was round behind; and there were 
arms on either side by the place of the 
seat, and two lions standing beside the 
arms. 20And twelve lions stood there 
on the one side and on the other upon 
the six steps; there was not the like 
made in any kingdom. 

21And all king Solomon’s drinking-
vessels were of gold, and all the 
vessels of the house of the forest of 
Lebanon were of pure gold; none were 
of silver; it was nothing accounted of 
in the days of Solomon. 22For the king 
had at sea a navy of Tarshish with the 
navy of Hiram; once every three years 
came the navy of Tarshish, bringing 
gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and 
peacocks. 

23So king Solomon exceeded all the 
kings of the earth in riches and in 
wisdom. 24And all the earth sought the 
presence of Solomon, to hear his 
wisdom, which God had put in his 
heart. 25And they brought every man 
his present, vessels of silver, and 
vessels of gold, and raiment, and 
armour, and spices, horses, and mules, 
a rate year by year. 

26And Solomon gathered together 
chariots and horsemen; and he had a 
thousand and four hundred chariots, 
and twelve thousand horsemen, that he 
bestowed in the chariot cities, and with 
the king at Jerusalem. 27And the king 
made silver to be in Jerusalem as 
stones, and cedars made he to be as the 
sycamore-trees that are in the 
Lowland, for abundance. 28And the 
horses which Solomon had were 
brought out of Egypt; also out of 
Keveh, the king’s merchants buying 


them of the men of Keveh at a price. 
29And a chariot came up and went out 
of Egypt for six hundred shekels of 
silver, and a horse for a hundred and 
fifty; and so for all the kings of the 
Hittites, and for the kings of Aram, did 
they bring them out by their means. 

11 



Now king Solomon loved 
many foreign women, besides 
the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the 
Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, 
Zidonians, and Hittites; 2of the nations 
concerning which the LORD said unto 
the children of Israel: ‘Ye shall not go 
among them, neither shall they come 
among you; for surely they will turn 
away your heart after their gods’; 
Solomon did cleave unto these in love. 
3And he had seven hundred wives, 
princesses, and three hundred 
concubines; and his wives turned away 
his heart. 4For it came to pass, when 
Solomon was old, that his wives 
turned away his heart after other gods; 
and his heart was not whole with the 
LORD his God, as was the heart of 
David his father. 5For Solomon went 
after Ashtoreth the goddess of the 
Zidonians, and after Milcom the 
detestation of the Ammonites. 6And 
Solomon did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, and went not fully 
after the LORD, as did David his father. 
7Then did Solomon build a high place 
for Chemosh the detestation of Moab, 
in the mount that is before Jerusalem, 
and for Molech the detestation of the 
children of Ammon. 8And so did he for 
all his foreign wives, who offered and 
sacrificed unto their gods. 

9And the LORD was angry with 
Solomon, because his heart was turned 
away from the LORD, the God of Israel, 
who had appeared unto him twice, 
10and had commanded him concerning 
this thing, that he should not go after 
other gods; but he kept not that which 
the LORD commanded. 11Wherefore the 
LORD said unto Solomon: ‘Forasmuch 
as this hath been in thy mind, and thou 
hast not kept My covenant and My 
statutes, which I have commanded 
thee, I will surely rend the kingdom 
from thee, and will give it to thy 
servant. 12Notwithstanding in thy days 
I will not do it, for David thy father’s 
sake; but I will rend it out of the hand 
of thy son. 13Howbeit I will not rend 
away all the kingdom; but I will give 
one tribe to thy son; for David My 
servant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s 
sake which I have chosen.’ 

14And the LORD raised up an 
adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the 
Edomite; he was of the king’s seed in 
Edom. 15For it came to pass, when 
David was in Edom, and Joab the 
captain of the host was gone up to 
bury the slain, and had smitten every 
male in Edom—16for Joab and all 
Israel remained there six months, until 
he had cut off every male in Edom—
17that aHadad fled, he and certain 
Edomites of his father’s servants with 
him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet 

a Heb. Adad. 


a little child. 18And they arose out of 
Midian, and came to Paran; and they 
took men with them out of Paran, and 
they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king 
of Egypt, who gave him a house, and 
appointed him victuals, and gave him 
land. 19And Hadad found great favour 
in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave 
him to wife the sister of his own wife, 
the sister of Tahpenes the queen. 
20And the sister of Tahpenes bore him 
Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes 
weaned in Pharaoh’s house; and 
Genubath was in Pharaoh’s house 
among the sons of Pharaoh. 21And 
when Hadad heard in Egypt that David 
slept with his fathers, and that Joab the 
captain of the host was dead, Hadad 
said to Pharaoh: ‘Let me depart, that I 
may go to mine own country.’ 22Then 
Pharaoh said unto him: ‘But what hast 
thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou 
seekest to go to thine own country?’ 
And he answered: ‘Nothing; howbeit 
let me depart in any wise.’ 

23And God raised up another 
adversary unto him, Rezon the son of 
Eliada, who had fled from his lord 
Hadadezer king of Zobah. 24And he 
gathered men unto him, and became 
captain over a troop, when David slew 
them [of Zobah]; and they went to 
Damascus, and dwelt therein, and 
reigned in Damascus. 25And he was an 
adversary to Israel all the days of 
Solomon, beside the mischief that 
Hadad did; and he abhorred Israel, and 
reigned over Aram. 

26And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
an Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of 
Solomon, whose mother’s name was 
Zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his 
hand against the king. 27And this was 
the cause that he lifted up his hand 
against the king: Solomon built Millo, 
and repaired the breach of the city of 
David his father. 28And the man 
Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour; 
and Solomon saw the young man that 
he was industrious, and he gave him 
charge over all the labour of the house 
of Joseph. 29And it came to pass at that 
time, when Jeroboam went out of 
Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the 
Shilonite found him in the way; now 
Ahijah had clad himself with a new 
garment; and they two were alone in 
the field. 30And Ahijah laid hold of the 
new garment that was on him, and rent 
it in twelve pieces. 31And he said to 
Jeroboam: ‘Take thee ten pieces; for 
thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 
Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of 
the hand of Solomon, and will give ten 
tribes to thee— 32but he shall have one 
tribe, for My servant David’s sake, and 
for Jerusalem’s sake, the city which I 
have chosen out of all the tribes of 
Israel— 33because that they have 
forsaken Me, and have worshipped 
Ashtoreth the goddess of the 
Zidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab, 
and Milcom the god of the children of 
Ammon; and they have not walked in 
My ways, to do that which is right in 
Mine eyes, and to keep My statutes 
and Mine ordinances, as did David his 


father. 34Howbeit I will not take the 
whole kingdom out of his hand; but I 
will make him prince all the days of 
his life, for David My servant’s sake, 
whom I chose, because he kept My 
commandments and My statutes; 35but 
I will take the kingdom out of his 
son’s hand, and will give it unto thee, 
even ten tribes. 36And unto his son will 
I give one tribe, that David My servant 
may have a lamp alway before Me in 
Jerusalem, the city which I have 
chosen Me to put My name there. 
37And I will take thee, and thou shalt 
reign over all that thy soul desireth, 
and shalt be king over Israel. 38And it 
shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all 
that I command thee, and wilt walk in 
My ways, and do that which is right in 
Mine eyes, to keep My statutes and 
My commandments, as David My 
servant did, that I will be with thee, 
and will build thee a sure house, as I 
built for David, and will give Israel 
unto thee. 39And I will for this afflict 
the seed of David, but not for ever.’ 

40Solomon sought therefore to kill 
Jeroboam; but Jeroboam arose, and 
fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of 
Egypt, and was in Egypt until the 
death of Solomon. 

41Now the rest of the acts of 
Solomon, and all that he did, and his 
wisdom, are they not written in the 
book of the acts of Solomon? 42And 
the time that Solomon reigned in 
Jerusalem over all Israel was forty 
years. 43And Solomon slept with his 
fathers, and was buried in the city of 
David his father; and Rehoboam his 
son reigned in his stead. 

And Rehoboam went to 
Shechem; for all Israel were 
come to Shechem to make him king. 
2And it came to pass, when Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat heard of it—for he 
was yet in Egypt, whither he had fled 
from the presence of king Solomon, 
and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt, 3and 
they sent and called him—that 
Jeroboam and all the congregation of 
Israel came, and spoke unto 
Rehoboam, saying: 4’Thy father made 
our yoke grievous; now therefore 
make thou the grievous service of thy 
father, and his heavy yoke which he 
put upon us, lighter, and we will serve 
thee.’ 5And he said unto them: ‘Depart 
yet for three days, then come again to 
me.’ And the people departed. 

6And king Rehoboam took counsel 
with the old men, that had stood before 
Solomon his father while he yet lived, 
saying: ‘What counsel give ye me to 
return answer to this people?’ 7And 
they spoke unto him, saying: ‘If thou 
wilt be a servant unto this people this 
day, and wilt serve them, and answer 
them, and speak good words to them, 
then they will be thy servants for 
ever.’ 8But he forsook the counsel of 
the old men which they had given him, 
and took counsel with the young men 
that were grown up with him, that 
stood before him. 9And he said unto 
them: ‘What counsel give ye, that we 
may return answer to this people, who 
have spoken to me, saying: Make the 
12 




yoke that thy father did put upon us 
lighter?’ 10And the young men that 
were grown up with him spoke unto 
him, saying: ‘Thus shalt thou say unto 
this people that spoke unto thee, 
saying: Thy father made our yoke 
heavy, but make thou it lighter unto 
us; thus shalt thou speak unto them: 
My little finger is thicker than my 
father’s loins. 11And now whereas my 
father did burden you with a heavy 
yoke, I will add to your yoke; my 
father chastised you with whips, but I 
will chastise you with scorpions.’ 

12So Jeroboam and all the people 
came to Rehoboam the third day, as 
the king bade, saying: ‘Come to me 
again the third day.’ 13And the king 
answered the people roughly, and 
forsook the counsel of the old men 
which they had given him; 14and spoke 
to them after the counsel of the young 
men, saying: ‘My father made your 
yoke heavy, but I will add to your 
yoke; my father chastised you with 
whips, but I will chastise you with 
scorpions.’ 15So the king hearkened 
not unto the people; for it was a thing 
brought about of the LORD, that He 
might establish His word, which the 
LORD spoke by the hand of Ahijah the 
Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat. 16And when all Israel saw that 
the king hearkened not unto them, the 
people answered the king, saying: 
‘What portion have we in David? 
neither have we inheritance in the son 
of Jesse; to your tents, O Israel; now 
see to thine own house, David.’ So 
Israel departed unto their tents. 17But 
as for the children of Israel that dwelt 
in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam 
reigned over them. 18Then king 
Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was 
over the levy; and all Israel stoned him 
with stones, so that he died. And king 
Rehoboam made speed to get him up 
to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem. 
19So Israel rebelled against the house 
of David, unto this day. 20And it came 
to pass, when all Israel heard that 
Jeroboam was returned, that they sent 
and called him unto the congregation, 
and made him king over all Israel; 
there was none that followed the house 
of David, but the tribe of Judah only. 
21And when Rehoboam was come to 
Jerusalem, be assembled all the house 
of Judah, and the tribe of Benjamin, a 
hundred and fourscore thousand 
chosen men that were warriors, to fight 
against the house of Israel, to bring the 
kingdom back to Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon. 22But the word of God came 
unto Shemaiah the man of God, 
saying: 23’Speak unto Rehoboam the 
son of Solomon, king of Judah, and 
unto all the house of Judah and 
Benjamin, and to the rest of the 
people, saying: 24Thus saith the LORD: 
Ye shall not go up, nor fight against 
your brethren the children of Israel; 
return every man to his house; for this 
thing is of Me.’ So they hearkened 
unto the word of the LORD, and 
returned and went their way, according 
to the word of the LORD. 


25Then Jeroboam built Shechem in 
the hill-country of Ephraim, and dwelt 
therein; and he went out from thence, 
and built Penuel. 26And Jeroboam said 
in his heart: ‘Now will the kingdom 
return to the house of David. 27If this 
people go up to offer sacrifices in the 
house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then 
will the heart of this people turn back 
unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam 
king of Judah; and they will kill me, 
and return to Rehoboam king of 
Judah.’ 28Whereupon the king took 
counsel, and made two calves of gold; 
and he said unto them: ‘Ye have gone 
up long enough to Jerusalem; behold 
thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee 
up out of the land of Egypt.’ 29And he 
set the one in Beth-el, and the other 
put he in Dan. 30And this thing became 
a sin; for the people went to worship 
before the one, even unto Dan. 31And 
he made houses of high places, and 
made priests from among all the 
people, that were not of the sons of 
Levi. 32And Jeroboam ordained a feast 
in the eighth month, on the fifteenth 
day of the month, like unto the feast 
that is in Judah, and he went up unto 
the altar; so did he in Beth-el, to 
sacrifice unto the calves that he had 
made; and he placed in Beth-el the 
priests of the high places that he had 
made. 33And he went up unto the altar 
which he had made in Beth-el on the 
fifteenth day in the eighth month, even 
in the month which he had devised of 
his own heart; and he ordained a feast 
for the children of Israel, and went up 
unto the altar, to offer. 

And, behold, there came a 
man of God out of Judah by 
the word of the LORD unto Beth-el; and 
Jeroboam was standing by the altar to 
offer. 2And he cried against the altar 
by the word of the LORD, and said: ‘O 
altar, altar, thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, a son shall be born unto the 
house of David, Josiah by name; and 
upon thee shall he sacrifice the priests 
of the high places that offer upon thee, 
and men’s bones shall they burn upon 
thee.’ 3And he gave a sign the same 
day saying: ‘This is the sign which the 
LORD hath spoken: Behold, the altar 
shall be rent, and the ashes that are 
upon it shall be poured out.’ 4And it 
came to pass, when the king heard the 
saying of the man of God, which he 
cried against the altar in Beth-el, that 
Jeroboam put forth his hand from the 
altar, saying: ‘Lay hold on him.’ And 
his hand, which he put forth against 
him, dried up, so that he could not 
draw it back to him. 5The altar also 
was rent, and the ashes poured out 
from the altar, according to the sign 
which the man of God had given by 
the word of the LORD. 6And the king 
answered and said unto the man of 
God: ‘Entreat now the favour of the 
LORD thy God, and pray for me, that 
my hand may be restored me.’ And the 
man of God entreated the LORD, and 
the king’s hand was restored him, and 
became as it was before. 7And the king 
said unto the man of God: ‘Come 
13 




home with me, and refresh thyself, and 
I will give thee a reward.’ 8And the 
man of God said unto the king: ‘If 
thou wilt give me half thy house, I will 
not go in with thee, neither will I eat 
bread nor drink water in this place. 
9For it so was charged me by the word 
of the LORD, saying: Thou shalt eat no 
bread, nor drink water, neither return 
by the way that thou camest.’ 10So he 
went another way, and returned not by 
the way that he came to Beth-el. 

11Now there dwelt an old prophet in 
Beth-el; and one of his sons came and 
told him all the works that the man of 
God had done that day in Beth-el, and 
the words which he had spoken unto 
the king, and they told them unto their 
father. 12And their father said unto 
them: ‘What way went he?’ For his 
sons had seen what way the man of 
God went, that came from Judah. 
13And he said unto his sons: ‘Saddle 
me the ass.’ So they saddled him the 
ass; and he rode thereon. 14And he 
went after the man of God, and found 
him sitting under a terebinth; and he 
said unto him: ‘Art thou the man of 
God that camest from Judah?’ And he 
said: ‘I am.’ 15Then he said unto him: 
‘Come home with me, and eat bread.’ 
16And he said: ‘I may not return with 
thee, nor go in with thee; neither will I 
eat bread nor drink water with thee in 
this place. 17For it was said to me by 
the word of the LORD: Thou shalt eat 
no bread nor drink water there, nor 
turn back to go by the way that thou 
camest.’ 18And he said unto him: ‘I 
also am a prophet as thou art; and an 
angel spoke unto me by the word of 
the LORD, saying: Bring him back with 
thee into thy house, that he may eat 
bread and drink water.’—He lied unto 
him.—19So he went back with him, 
and did eat bread in his house, and 
drank water. 

20And it came to pass, as they sat at 
the table, that the word of the LORD 
came unto the prophet that brought 
him back. 21And he cried unto the man 
of God that came from Judah, saying: 
‘Thus saith the LORD: Forasmuch as 
thou hast rebelled against the word of 
the LORD, and hast not kept the 
commandment which the LORD thy 
God commanded thee, 22but camest 
back, and hast eaten bread and drunk 
water in the place of which He said to 
thee: Eat no bread, and drink no water; 
thy carcass shall not come unto the 
sepulchre of thy fathers.’ 23And it 
came to pass, after he had eaten bread, 
and after he had drunk, that he saddled 
for him the ass, namely, for the 
prophet whom he had brought back. 
24And when he was gone, a lion met 
him by the way, and slew him; and his 
carcass was cast in the way, and the 
ass stood by it; the lion also stood by 
the carcass. 25And, behold, men passed 
by, and saw the carcass cast in the 
way, and the lion standing by the 
carcass; and they came and told it in 
the city where the old prophet dwelt. 

26And when the prophet that brought 
him back from the way heard thereof, 
he said: ‘It is the man of God, who 


rebelled against the word of the LORD; 
therefore the LORD hath delivered him 
unto the lion, which hath torn him, and 
slain him, according to the word of the 
LORD, which He spoke unto him.’ 
27And he spoke to his sons, saying: 
‘Saddle me the ass.’ And they saddled 
it. 28And he went and found his carcass 
cast in the way, and the ass and the 
lion standing by the carcass; the lion 
had not eaten the carcass, nor torn the 
ass. 29And the prophet took up the 
carcass of the man of God, and laid it 
upon the ass, and brought it back; and 
he came to the city of the old prophet, 
to lament, and to bury him. 30And he 
laid his carcass in his own grave; and 
they made lamentation for him: ‘Alas, 
my brother! ’ 31And it came to pass, 
after he had buried him, that he spoke 
to his sons, saying: ‘When I am dead, 
then bury me in the sepulchre wherein 
the man of God is buried; lay my 
bones beside his bones. 32For the 
saying which he cried by the word of 
the LORD against the altar in Beth-el, 
and against all the houses of the high 
places which are in the cities of 
Samaria, shall surely come to pass.’ 

33After this thing Jeroboam returned 
not from his evil way, but made again 
from among all the people priests of 
the high places; whosoever would, he 
consecrated him, that he might be one 
of the priests of the high places. 34And 
by this thing there was sin unto the 
house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, 
and to destroy it from off the face of 
the earth. 

At that time Abijah the son of 
Jeroboam fell sick. 2And 
Jeroboam said to his wife: ‘Arise, I 
pray thee, and disguise thyself, that 
thou be not known to be the wife of 
Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh; 
behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, 
who spoke concerning me that I 
should be king over this people. 3And 
take with thee ten loaves, and biscuits, 
and a cruse of honey, and go to him; 
he will tell thee what shall become of 
the child.’ 4And Jeroboam’s wife did 
so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and 
came to the house of Ahijah. Now 
Ahijah could not see; for his eyes were 
set by reason of his age. 5Now the 
LORD had said unto Ahijah: ‘Behold, 
the wife of Jeroboam cometh to 
inquire of thee concerning her son; for 
he is sick; thus and thus shalt thou say 
unto her; for it will be, when she 
cometh in, that she will feign herself to 
be another woman.’ 

6And it was so, when Ahijah heard 
the sound of her feet, as she came in at 
the door, that he said: ‘Come in, thou 
wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou 
thyself to be another? for I am sent to 
thee with heavy tidings. 7Go, tell 
Jeroboam: Thus saith the LORD, the 
God of Israel: Forasmuch as I exalted 
thee from among the people, and made 
thee prince over My people Israel, 
8and rent the kingdom away from the 
house of David, and gave it thee; and 
yet thou hast not been as My servant 
David, who kept My commandments, 
and who followed Me with all his 
14 




heart, to do that only which was right 
in Mine eyes; 9but hast done evil 
above all that were before thee, and 
hast gone and made thee other gods, 
and molten images, to provoke Me, 
and hast cast Me behind thy back; 
10therefore, behold, I will bring evil 
upon the house of Jeroboam, and will 
cut off from Jeroboam every man-
child, and him that is shut up and him 
that is left at large in Israel, and will 
utterly sweep away the house of 
Jeroboam, as a man sweepeth away 
dung, till it be all gone. 11Him that 
dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the 
dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field 
shall the fowls of the air eat; for the 
LORD hath spoken it. 12Arise thou 
therefore, get thee to thy house; and 
when thy feet enter into the city, the 
child shall die. 13And all Israel shall 
make lamentation for him, and bury 
him; for he only of Jeroboam shall 
come to the grave; because in him 
there is found some good thing toward 
the LORD, the God of Israel, in the 
house of Jeroboam. 14Moreover the 
LORD will raise Him up a king over 
Israel, who shall cut off the house of 
Jeroboam that day. But what is it even 
then? 15for the LORD will smite Israel, 
as a reed is shaken in the water; and 
He will root up Israel out of this good 
land, which He gave to their fathers, 
and will scatter them beyond the 
River; because they have made their 
Asherim, provoking the LORD. 16And 
He will give Israel up because of the 
sins of Jeroboam, which he hath 
sinned, and wherewith he hath made 
Israel to sin.’ 

17And Jeroboam’s wife arose, and 
departed, and came to Tirzah; and as 
she came to the threshold of the house, 
the child died. 18And all Israel buried 
him, and made lamentation for him; 
according to the word of the LORD, 
which He spoke by the hand of His 
servant Ahijah the prophet. 

19And the rest of the acts of 
Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he 
reigned, behold, they are written in the 
book of the chronicles of the kings of 
Israel. 20And the days which Jeroboam 
reigned were two and twenty years; 
and he slept with his fathers, and 
Nadab his son reigned in his stead. 

21And Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam 
was forty and one years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned 
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city 
which the LORD had chosen out of all 
the tribes of Israel, to put His name 
there; and his mother’s name was 
Naamah the Ammonitess. 22And Judah 
did that which was evil in the sight of 
the LORD; and they moved Him to 
jealousy with their sins which they 
committed, above all that their fathers 
had done. 23For they also built them 
high places, and pillars, and Asherim, 
on every high hill, and under every 
leafy tree; 24and there were also 
sodomites in the land; they did 
according to all the abominations of 
the nations which the LORD drove out 
before the children of Israel. 


25And it came to pass in the fifth 
year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak 
king of Egypt came up against 
Jerusalem; 26and he took away the 
treasures of the house of the LORD, and 
the treasures of the king’s house; he 
even took away all; and he took away 
all the shields of gold which Solomon 
had made. 27And king Rehoboam 
made in their stead shields of brass, 
and committed them to the hands of 
the captains of the guard, who kept the 
door of the king’s house. 28And it was 
so, that as oft as the king went into the 
house of the LORD, the guard bore 
them, and brought them back into the 
guard-chamber. 

29Now the rest of the acts of 
Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
30And there was war between 
Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. 
31And Rehoboam slept with his 
fathers, and was buried with his fathers 
in the city of David; and his mother’s 
name was Naamah the Ammonitess. 
And Abijam his son reigned in his 
stead. 

Now in the eighteenth year of 
king Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat began Abijam to reign over 
Judah. 2Three years reigned he in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Maacah the daughter of Abishalom. 
3And he walked in all the sins of his 
father, which he had done before him; 
and his heart was not whole with the 
LORD his God, as the heart of David his 
father. 4Nevertheless for David’s sake 
did the LORD his God give him a lamp 
in Jerusalem, to set up his son after 
him, and to establish Jerusalem; 
5because David did that which was 
right in the eyes of the LORD, and 
turned not aside from any thing that 
He commanded him all the days of his 
life, save only in the matter of Uriah 
the Hittite. 6Now there was war 
between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all 
the days of his life. 

7And the rest of the acts of Abijam, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Judah? And there was war 
between Abijam and Jeroboam. 8And 
Abijam slept with his fathers; and they 
buried him in the city of David; and 
Asa his son reigned in his stead. 

9And in the twentieth year of 
Jeroboam king of Israel began Asa to 
reign over Judah. 10And forty and one 
years reigned he in Jerusalem; and his 
mother’s name was Maacah the 
daughter of Abishalom. 11And Asa did 
that which was right in the eyes of the 
LORD, as did David his father. 12And he 
put away the sodomites out of the 
land, and removed all the idols that his 
fathers had made. 13And also Maacah 
his mother he removed from being 
queen, because she had made an 
abominable image for an Asherah; and 
Asa cut down her image, and burnt it 
at the brook Kidron. 14But the high 
places were not taken away; 
nevertheless the heart of Asa was 
whole with the LORD all his days. 
15 




15And he brought into the house of the 
LORD the things that his father had 
hallowed, and the things that himself 
had hallowed, silver, and gold, and 
vessels. 

16And there was war between Asa 
and Baasa king of Israel all their days. 
17And Baasa king of Israel went up 
against Judah, and built Ramah, that 
he might not suffer any to go out or 
come in to Asa king of Judah. 18Then 
Asa took all the silver and the gold 
that were left in the treasures of the 
house of the LORD, and the treasures of 
the king’s house, and delivered them 
into the hand of his servants; and king 
Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, the son 
of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king 
of Aram, that dwelt at Damascus, 
saying: 19’There is a league between 
me and thee, between my father and 
thy father; behold, I have sent unto 
thee a present of silver and gold; go, 
break thy league with Baasa king of 
Israel, that he may depart from me.’ 
20And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king 
Asa, and sent the captains of his 
armies against the cities of Israel, and 
smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-
maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all 
the land of Naphtali. 21And it came to 
pass, when Baasa heard thereof, that 
he left off building Ramah, and dwelt 
in Tirzah. 22Then king Asa made a 
proclamation unto all Judah; none was 
exempted; and they carried away the 
stones of Ramah, and the timber 
thereof, wherewith Baasa had builded; 
and king Asa built therewith Geba of 
Benjamin, and Mizpah. 

23Now the rest of all the acts of Asa, 
and all his might, and all that he did, 
and the cities which he built, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? But 
in the time of his old age he was 
diseased in his feet. 24And Asa slept 
with his fathers, and was buried with 
his fathers in the city of David his 
father; and Jehoshaphat his son 
reigned in his stead. 

25And Nadab the son of Jeroboam 
began to reign over Israel in the 
second year of Asa king of Judah, and 
he reigned over Israel two years. 26And 
he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the LORD, and walked in the way of 
his father, and in his sin wherewith he 
made Israel to sin. 27And Baasa the son 
of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, 
conspired against him; and Baasa 
smote him at Gibbethon, which 
belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab 
and all Israel were laying siege to 
Gibbethon. 28Even in the third year of 
Asa king of Judah did Baasa slay him, 
and reigned in his stead. 29And it came 
to pass that, as soon as he was king, he 
smote all the house of Jeroboam; he 
left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, 
until he had destroyed him; according 
unto the saying of the LORD, which He 
spoke by the hand of His servant 
Ahijah the Shilonite; 30for the sins of 
Jeroboam which he sinned, and 
wherewith he made Israel to sin; 
because of his provocation wherewith 


he provoked the LORD, the God of 
Israel. 

31Now the rest of the acts of Nadab 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 32And there was war 
between Asa and Baasa king of Israel 
all their days. 

33In the third year of Asa king of 
Judah began Baasa the son of Ahijah 
to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, and 
reigned twenty and four years. 34And 
he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the LORD, and walked in the way of 
Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he 
made Israel to sin. 

And the word of the LORD 
came to Jehu the son of 
Hanani against Baasa, saying: 
2’Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of 
the dust, and made thee prince over 
My people Israel; and thou hast 
walked in the way of Jeroboam, and 
hast made My people Israel to sin, to 
provoke Me with their sins; 3behold, I 
will utterly sweep away Baasa and his 
house; and I will make thy house like 
the house of Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat. 4Him that dieth of Baasa in the 
city shall the dogs eat; and him that 
dieth of his in the field shall the fowls 
of the air eat.’ 

5Now the rest of the acts of Baasa, 
and what he did, and his might, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 6And 
Baasa slept with his fathers, and was 
buried in Tirzah; and Elah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

7And moreover by the hand of the 
prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came 
the word of the LORD against Baasa, 
and against his house, both because of 
all the evil that he did in the sight of 
the LORD, to provoke Him with the 
work of his hands, in being like the 
house of Jeroboam, and because he 
smote him. 

8In the twenty and sixth year of Asa 
king of Judah began Elah the son of 
Baasa to reign over Israel in Tirzah, 
and reigned two years. 9And his 
servant Zimri, captain of half his 
chariots, conspired against him; now 
he was in Tirzah, drinking himself 
drunk in the house of Arza, who was 
over the household in Tirzah; 10and 
Zimri went in and smote him, and 
killed him, in the twenty and seventh 
year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned 
in his stead. 11And it came to pass, 
when he began to reign, as soon as he 
sat on his throne, that he smote all the 
house of Baasa; he left him not a 
single man-child, neither of his 
kinsfolks, nor of his friends. 12Thus did 
Zimri destroy all the house of Baasa, 
according to the word of the LORD, 
which He spoke against Baasa by Jehu 
the prophet, 13for all the sins of Baasa, 
and the sins of Elah his son, which 
they sinned, and wherewith they made 
Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD, the 
God of Israel, with their vanities. 

14Now the rest of the acts of Elah, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 
16 




15In the twenty and seventh year of 
Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign 
seven days in Tirzah. Now the people 
were encamped against Gibbethon, 
which belonged to the Philistines. 
16And the people that were encamped 
heard say: ‘Zimri hath conspired, and 
hath also smitten the king’; wherefore 
all Israel made Omri, the captain of the 
host, king over Israel that day in the 
camp. 17And Omri went up from 
Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and 
they besieged Tirzah. 18And it came to 
pass, when Zimri saw that the city was 
taken, that he went into the castle of 
the king’s house, and burnt the king’s 
house over him with fire, and died; 
19for his sins which he sinned in doing 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, in walking in the way of 
Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, 
to make Israel to sin. 

20Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, 
and his treason that he wrought, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 

21Then were the people of Israel 
divided into two parts: half of the 
people followed Tibni the son of 
Ginath, to make him king; and half 
followed Omri. 

22But the people that followed Omri 
prevailed against the people that 
followed Tibni the son of Ginath; so 
Tibni died, and Omri reigned. 23In the 
thirty and first year of Asa king of 
Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, 
and reigned twelve years; six years 
reigned he in Tirzah. 24And he bought 
the hill Samaria of Shemer for two 
talents of silver; and he built on the 
hill, and called the name of the city 
which he built, after the name of 
Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria. 
25And Omri did that which was evil in 
the sight of the LORD, and dealt 
wickedly above all that were before 
him. 26For he walked in all the way of 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his 
sins wherewith he made Israel to sin, 
to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, 
with their vanities. 

27Now the rest of the acts of Omri 
which he did, and his might that he 
showed, are they not written in the 
book of the chronicles of the kings of 
Israel? 28And Omri slept with his 
fathers, and was buried in Samaria; 
and Ahab his son reigned in his stead. 

29And in the thirty and eighth year 
of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the 
son of Omri to reign over Israel; and 
Ahab the son of Omri reigned over 
Israel in Samaria twenty and two 
years. 30And Ahab the son of Omri did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD above all that were before him. 
31And it came to pass, as if it had been 
a light thing for him to walk in the sins 
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he 
took to wife Jezebel the daughter of 
Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and 
went and served Baal, and worshipped 
him. 32And he reared up an altar for 
Baal in the house of Baal, which he 
had built in Samaria. 33And Ahab 
made the Asherah; and Ahab did yet 
more to provoke the LORD, the God of 


Israel, than all the kings of Israel that 
were before him. 

34In his days did Hiel the Bethelite 
build Jericho; with Abiram his first-
born he laid the foundation thereof, 
and with his youngest son Segub he set 
up the gates thereof; according to the 
word of the LORD, which He spoke by 
the hand of Joshua the son of Nun. 

And Elijah the Tishbite, who 
was of the settlers of Gilead, 
said unto Ahab: ‘As the LORD, the God 
of Israel, liveth, before whom I stand, 
there shall not be dew nor rain these 
years, but according to my word.’ 
2And the word of the LORD came unto 
him, saying: 3’Get thee hence, and turn 
thee eastward, and hide thyself by the 
brook Cherith, that is before the 
Jordan. 4And it shall be, that thou shalt 
drink of the brook; and I have 
commanded the ravens to feed thee 
there.’ 5So he went and did according 
unto the word of the LORD; for he went 
and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is 
before the Jordan. 6And the ravens 
brought him bread and flesh in the 
morning, and bread and flesh in the 
evening; and he drank of the brook. 
7And it came to pass after a while, that 
the brook dried up, because there was 
no rain in the land. 

8And the word of the LORD came 
unto him, saying: 9’Arise, get thee to 
Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, 
and dwell there; behold, I have 
commanded a widow there to sustain 
thee.’ 10So he arose and went to 
Zarephath; and when he came to the 
gate of the city, behold, a widow was 
there gathering sticks; and he called to 
her, and said: ‘Fetch me, I pray thee, a 
little water in a vessel, that I may 
drink.’ 11And as she was going to fetch 
it, he called to her, and said: ‘Bring 
me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in 
thy hand.’ 12And she said: ‘As the 
LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, 
only a handful of meal in the jar, and a 
little oil in the cruse; and, behold, I am 
gathering two sticks, that I may go in 
and dress it for me and my son, that 
we may eat it, and die.’ 13And Elijah 
said unto her: ‘Fear not; go and do as 
thou hast said; but make me thereof a 
little cake first, and bring it forth unto 
me, and afterward make for thee and 
for thy son. 14For thus saith the LORD, 
the God of Israel: The jar of meal shall 
not be spent, neither shall the cruse of 
oil fail, until the day that the LORD 
sendeth rain upon the land.’ 15And she 
went and did according to the saying 
of Elijah; and she, and he, and her 
house, did eat many days. 16The jar of 
meal was not spent, neither did the 
cruse of oil fail, according to the word 
of the LORD, which He spoke by Elijah. 

17And it came to pass after these 
things, that the son of the woman, the 
mistress of the house, fell sick; and his 
sickness was so sore, that there was no 
breath left in him. 18And she said unto 
Elijah: ‘What have I to do with thee, O 
thou man of God? art thou come unto 
me to bring my sin to remembrance, 
and to slay my son?’ 19And he said 
unto her: ‘Give me thy son.’ And he 
17 




took him out of her bosom, and carried 
him up into the upper chamber, where 
he abode, and laid him upon his own 
bed. 20And he cried unto the LORD, and 
said: ‘O LORD my God, hast Thou also 
brought evil upon the widow with 
whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?’ 
21And he stretched himself upon the 
child three times, and cried unto the 
LORD, and said: ‘O LORD my God, I 
pray thee, let this child’s soul come 
back into him.’ 22And the LORD 
hearkened unto the voice of Elijah; 
and the soul of the child came back 
into him, and he revived. 23And Elijah 
took the child, and brought him down 
out of the upper chamber into the 
house, and delivered him unto his 
mother; and Elijah said: ‘See, thy son 
liveth.’ 24And the woman said to 
Elijah: ‘Now I know that thou art a 
man of God, and that the word of the 
LORD in thy mouth is truth.’ 

And it came to pass after many 
days, that the word of the LORD 
came to Elijah, in the third year, 
saying: ‘Go, show thyself unto Ahab, 
and I will send rain upon the land.’ 
2And Elijah went to show himself unto 
Ahab. 

And the famine was sore in 
Samaria. 3And Ahab called Obadiah, 
who was over the household.—Now 
Obadiah feared the LORD greatly; 4for 
it was so, when Jezebel cut off the 
prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah 
took a hundred prophets, and hid them 
fifty in a cave, and fed them with 
bread and water.— 5And Ahab said 
unto Obadiah: ‘Go through the land, 
unto all the springs of water, and unto 
all the brooks; peradventure we may 
find grass and save the horses and 
mules alive, that we lose not all the 
beasts.’ 6So they divided the land 
between them to pass throughout it: 
Ahab went one way by himself, and 
Obadiah went another way by himself. 

7And as Obadiah was in the way, 
behold, Elijah met him; and he knew 
him, and fell on his face, and said: ‘Is 
it thou, my lord Elijah?’ 8And he 
answered him: ‘It is I; go, tell thy lord: 
Behold, Elijah is here.’ 9And he said: 
‘Wherein have I sinned, that thou 
wouldest deliver thy servant into the 
hand of Ahab, to slay me? 10As the 
LORD thy God liveth, there is no nation 
or kingdom, whither my lord hath not 
sent to seek thee; and when they said: 
He is not here, he took an oath of the 
kingdom and nation, that they found 
thee not. 11And now thou sayest: Go, 
tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah is here. 
12And it will come to pass, as soon as I 
am gone from thee, that the spirit of 
the LORD will carry thee whither I 
know not; and so when I come and tell 
Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he will 
slay me; but I thy servant fear the LORD 
from my youth. 13Was it not told my 
lord what I did when Jezebel slew the 
prophets of the LORD, how I hid a 
hundred men of the LORD’S prophets 
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with 
bread and water? 14And now thou 
sayest: Go, tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah 
is here; and he will slay me.’ 15And 
18 




Elijah said: ‘As the LORD of hosts 
liveth, before whom I stand, I will 
surely show myself unto him to-day.’ 

16So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, 
and told him; and Ahab went to meet 
Elijah. 17And it came to pass, when 
Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto 
him: ‘Is it thou, thou troubler of 
Israel?’ 18And be answered: ‘I have not 
troubled Israel; but thou, and thy 
father’s house, in that ye have forsaken 
the commandments of the LORD, and 
thou hast followed the Baalim. 19Now 
therefore send, and gather to me all 
Israel unto mount Carmel, and the 
prophets of Baal four hundred and 
fifty, and the prophets of the Asherah 
four hundred, that eat at Jezebel’s 
table.’ 

20And Ahab sent unto all the 
children of Israel, and gathered the 
prophets together unto mount Carmel. 
21And Elijah came near unto all the 
people, and said: ‘How long halt ye 
between two opinions? if the LORD be 
God, follow Him; but if Baal, follow 
him.’ And the people answered him 
not a word. 22Then said Elijah unto the 
people: ‘I, even I only, am left a 
prophet of the LORD; but Baal’s 
prophets are four hundred and fifty 
men. 23Let them therefore give us two 
bullocks; and let them choose one 
bullock for themselves, and cut it in 
pieces, and lay it on the wood, and put 
no fire under; and I will dress the other 
bullock, and lay it on the wood, and 
put no fire under. 24And call ye on the 
name of your god, and I will call on 
the name of the LORD; and the God that 
answereth by fire, let him be God.’ 
And all the people answered and said: 
‘It is well spoken.’ 

25And Elijah said unto the prophets 
of Baal: ‘Choose you one bullock for 
yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are 
many; and call on the name of your 
god, but put no fire under.’ 26And they 
took the bullock which was given 
them, and they dressed it, and called 
on the name of Baal from morning 
even until noon, saying: ‘O Baal, 
answer us.’ But there was no voice, 
nor any that answered. And they 
danced in halting wise about the altar 
which was made. 27And it came to pass 
at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and 
said: ‘Cry aloud; for he is a god; either 
he is musing, or he is gone aside, or he 
is in a journey, or peradventure he 
sleepeth, and must be awaked.’ 28And 
they cried aloud, and cut themselves 
after their manner with swords and 
lances, till the blood gushed out upon 
them. 29And it was so, when midday 
was past, that they prophesied until the 
time of the offering of the evening 
offering; but their was neither voice, 
nor any to answer, nor any that 
regarded. 

30And Elijah said unto all the 
people: ‘Come near unto me’; and all 
the people came near unto him. And 
he repaired the altar of the LORD that 
was thrown down. 31And Elijah took 
twelve stones, according to the number 
of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto 
whom the word of the LORD came, 


saying: ‘Israel shall be thy name.’ 
32And with the stones he built an altar 
in the name of the LORD; and he made 
a trench about the altar, as great as 
would contain two measures of seed. 
33And he put the wood in order, and 
cut the bullock in pieces, and laid it on 
the wood. 34And he said: ‘Fill four jars 
with water, and pour it on the burnt-
offering, and on the wood.’ And he 
said: ‘Do it the second time’; and they 
did it the second time. And he said: 
‘Do it the third time’; and they did it 
the third time. 35And the water ran 
round about the altar; and he filled the 
trench also with water. 36And it came 
to pass at the time of the offering of 
the evening offering, that Elijah the 
prophet came near, and said: ‘O LORD, 
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of 
Israel, let it be known this day that 
Thou art God in Israel, and that I am 
Thy servant, and that I have done all 
these things at Thy word. 37Hear me, O 
LORD, hear me, that this people may 
know that Thou, LORD, art God, for 
Thou didst turn their heart backward.’ 
38Then the fire of the LORD fell, and 
consumed the burnt-offering, and the 
wood, and the stones, and the dust, and 
licked up the water that was in the 
trench. 39And when all the people saw 
it, they fell on their faces; and they 
said: ‘The LORD, He is God; the LORD, 
He is God.’ 40And Elijah said unto 
them: ‘Take the prophets of Baal; let 
not one of them escape.’ And they 
took them; and Elijah brought them 
down to the brook Kishon, and slew 
them there. 

41And Elijah said unto Ahab: ‘Get 
thee up, eat and drink; for there is the 
sound of abundance of rain.’ 42So 
Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And 
Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; 
and he bowed himself down upon the 
earth, and put his face between his 
knees. 43And he said to his servant: 
‘Go up now, look toward the sea.’ And 
he went up, and looked, and said: 
‘There is nothing.’ And he said: ‘Go 
again seven times.’ 44And it came to 
pass at the seventh time, that he said: 
‘Behold, there ariseth a cloud out of 
the sea, as small as a man’s hand.’ 
And he said: ‘Go up, say unto Ahab: 
Make ready thy chariot, and get thee 
down, that the rain stop thee not.’ 
45And it came to pass in a little while, 
that the heaven grew black with clouds 
and wind, and there was a great rain. 
And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel. 
46And the hand of the LORD was on 
Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and 
ran before Ahab to the entrance of 
Jezreel. 

And Ahab told Jezebel all that 
Elijah had done, and withal 
how he had slain all the prophets with 
the sword. 2Then Jezebel sent a 
messenger unto Elijah, saying: ‘So let 
the gods do [to me], and more also, if I 
make not thy life as the life of one of 
them by to-morrow about this time.’ 
3And when he saw that, he arose, and 
went for his life, and came to Beer-
sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and 
19 




left his servant there. 4But he himself 
went a day’s journey into the 
wilderness, and came and sat down 
under a broom-tree; and he requested 
for himself that he might die; and said: 
‘It is enough; now, O LORD, take away 
my life; for I am not better than my 
fathers.’ 5And he lay down and slept 
under a broom-tree; and, behold, an 
angel touched him, and said unto him: 
‘Arise and eat.’ 6And he looked, and, 
behold, there was at his head a cake 
baked on the hot stones, and a cruse of 
water. And he did eat and drink, and 
laid him down again. 7And the angel of 
the LORD came again the second time, 
and touched him, and said: ‘Arise and 
eat; because the journey is too great 
for thee.’ 8And he arose, and did eat 
and drink, and went in the strength of 
that meal forty days and forty nights 
unto Horeb the mount of God. 

9And he came thither unto a cave, 
and lodged there; and, behold, the 
word of the LORD came to him, and He 
said unto him: ‘What doest thou here, 
Elijah?’ 10And he said: ‘I have been 
very jealous for the LORD, the God of 
hosts; for the children of Israel have 
forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down 
Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets 
with the sword; and I, even I only, am 
left; and they seek my life, to take it 
away.’ 11And He said: ‘Go forth, and 
stand upon the mount before the 
LORD.’ And, behold, the LORD passed 
by, and a great and strong wind rent 
the mountains, and broke in pieces the 
rocks before the LORD; but the LORD 
was not in the wind; and after the wind 
an earthquake; but the LORD was not in 
the earthquake; 12and after the 
earthquake a fire; but the LORD was not 
in the fire; and after the fire a still 
small voice. 13And it was so, when 
Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his 
face in his mantle, and went out, and 
stood in the entrance of the cave. And, 
behold, there came a voice unto him, 
and said: ‘What doest thou here, 
Elijah?’ 14And he said: ‘I have been 
very jealous for the LORD, the God of 
hosts; for the children of Israel have 
forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down 
Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets 
with the sword; and I, even I only, am 
left; and they seek my life, to take it 
away.’ 

15And the LORD said unto him: ‘Go, 
return on thy way to the wilderness of 
Damascus; and when thou comest, 
thou shalt anoint Hazael to be king 
over Aram; 16and Jehu the son of 
Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king 
over Israel; and Elisha the son of 
Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou 
anoint to be prophet in thy room. 
17And it shall come to pass, that him 
that escapeth from the sword of Hazael 
shall Jehu slay; and him that escapeth 
from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha 
slay. 18Yet will I leave seven thousand 
in Israel, all the knees which have not 
bowed unto Baal, and every mouth 
which hath not kissed him.’ 

19So he departed thence, and found 
Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was 
plowing, with twelve yoke of oxen 


before him, and he with the twelfth; 
and Elijah passed over unto him, and 
cast his mantle upon him. 20And he left 
the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said: 
‘Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father 
and my mother, and then I will follow 
thee.’ And he said unto him: ‘Go back; 
for what have I done to thee?’ 21And 
he returned from following him, and 
took the yoke of oxen, and slew them, 
and boiled their flesh with the 
instruments of the oxen, and gave unto 
the people, and they did eat. Then he 
arose, and went after Elijah, and 
ministered unto him. 

And Ben-hadad the king of 
Aram gathered all his host 
together; and there were thirty and two 
kings with him, and horses and 
chariots; and he went up and besieged 
Samaria, and fought against it. 2And he 
sent messengers to Ahab king of 
Israel, into the city, 3and said unto 
him: ‘Thus saith Ben-hadad: Thy 
silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives 
also and thy children, even the 
goodliest, are mine.’ 4And the king of 
Israel answered and said: ‘It is 
according to thy saying, my lord, O 
king: I am thine, and all that I have.’ 
5And the messengers came again, and 
said: ‘Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, 
saying: I sent indeed unto thee, saying: 
Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and 
thy gold, and thy wives, and thy 
children; 6but I will send my servants 
unto thee tomorrow about this time, 
and they shall search thy house, and 
the houses of thy servants; and it shall 
be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine 
eyes, they shall put it in their hand, 
and take it away.’ 

7Then the king of Israel called all 
the elders of the land, and said: ‘Mark, 
I pray you, and see how this man 
seeketh mischief; for he sent unto me 
for my wives, and for my children, and 
for my silver, and for my gold; and I 
denied him not.’ 8And all the elders 
and all the people said unto him: 
‘Hearken thou not, neither consent.’ 
9Wherefore he said unto the 
messengers of Ben-hadad: ‘Tell my 
lord the king: All that thou didst send 
for to thy servant at the first I will do; 
but this thing I may not do.’ And the 
messengers departed, and brought him 
back word. 10And Ben-hadad sent unto 
him, and said: ‘The gods do so unto 
me, and more also, if the dust of 
Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for 
all the people that follow me.’ 11And 
the king of Israel answered and said: 
‘Tell him: Let not him that girdeth on 
his armour boast himself as he that 
putteth it off.’ 12And it came to pass, 
when [Ben-hadad] heard this message, 
as he was drinking, he and the kings, 
in the booths, that he said unto his 
servants: ‘Set yourselves in array.’ 
And they set themselves in array 
against the city. 

13And, behold, a prophet came near 
unto Ahab king of Israel, and said: 
‘Thus saith the LORD: Hast thou seen 
all this great multitude? behold, I will 
deliver it into thy hand this day; and 
thou shalt know that I am the LORD.’ 
20 




14And Ahab said: ‘By whom?’ And he 
said: ‘Thus saith the LORD: By the 
young men of the princes of the 
provinces.’ Then he said: ‘Who shall 
begin the battle?’ And he answered: 
‘Thou.’ 15Then he numbered the young 
men of the princes of the provinces, 
and they were two hundred and thirty-
two; and after them he numbered all 
the people, even all the children of 
Israel, being seven thousand. 

16And they went out at noon. But 
Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk 
in the booths, he and the kings, the 
thirty and two kings that helped him. 
17And the young men of the princes of 
the provinces went out first; and Ben-
hadad sent out, and they told him, 
saying: ‘There are men come out from 
Samaria.’ 18And he said: ‘Whether 
they are come out for peace, take them 
alive; or whether they are come out for 
war, take them alive.’ 19So these went 
out of the city, the young men of the 
princes of the provinces, and the army 
which followed them. 20And they slew 
every one his man; and the Arameans 
fled, and Israel pursued them; and 
Ben-hadad the king of Aram escaped 
on a horse with horsemen. 21And the 
king of Israel went out, and smote the 
horses and chariots, and slew the 
Arameans with a great slaughter. 
22And the prophet came near to the 
king of Israel, and said unto him: ‘Go, 
strengthen thyself, and mark, and see 
what thou doest; for at the return of the 
year the king of Aram will come up 
against thee.’ 

23And the servants of the king of 
Aram said unto him: ‘Their God is a 
God of the hills; therefore they were 
stronger than we; but let us fight 
against them in the plain, and surely 
we shall be stronger than they. 24And 
do this thing: take the kings away, 
every man out of his place, and put 
governors in their room: 25and number 
thee an army, like the army that thou 
hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot 
for chariot; and we will fight against 
them in the plain, and surely we shall 
be stronger than they.’ And he 
hearkened unto their voice, and did so. 

26And it came to pass at the return of 
the year, that Ben-hadad mustered the 
Arameans, and went up to Aphek, to 
fight against Israel. 27And the children 
of Israel were mustered, and were 
victualled, and went against them; and 
the children of Israel encamped before 
them like two little flocks of kids; but 
the Arameans filled the country. 28And 
a man of God came near and spoke 
unto the king of Israel, and said: ‘Thus 
saith the LORD: Because the Arameans 
have said: The LORD is a God of the 
hills, but he is not a God of the 
valleys; therefore will I deliver all this 
great multitude into thy hand, and ye 
shall know that I am the LORD.’ 29And 
they encamped one over against the 
other seven days. And so it was, that in 
the seventh day the battle was joined; 
and the children of Israel slew of the 
Arameans a hundred thousand 
footmen in one day. 30But the rest fled 
to Aphek, into the city; and the wall 


fell upon twenty and seven thousand 
men that were left. And Ben-hadad 
fled, and came into the city, into an 
inner chamber. 

31And his servants said unto him: 
‘Behold now, we have heard that the 
kings of the house of Israel are 
merciful kings; let us, we pray thee, 
put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes 
upon our heads, and go out to the king 
of Israel; peradventure he will save thy 
life.’ 32So they girded sackcloth on 
their loins, and put ropes on their 
heads, and came to the king of Israel, 
and said: ‘Thy servant Ben-hadad 
saith: I pray thee, let me live.’ And he 
said: ‘Is he yet alive? he is my 
brother.’ 33Now the men took it for a 
sign, and hastened to catch it from 
him; and they said: ‘Thy brother Ben-
hadad.’ Then he said: ‘Go ye, bring 
him.’ Then Ben-hadad came forth to 
him; and he caused him to come up 
into his chariot. 34And [Ben-hadad] 
said unto him: ‘The cities which my 
father took from thy father I will 
restore; and thou shalt make streets for 
thee in Damascus, as my father made 
in Samaria.’ ’And I , said Ahab, will 
let thee go with this covenant.’ So he 
made a covenant with him, and let him 
go. 

35And a certain man of the sons of 
the prophets said unto his fellow by 
the word of the LORD: ‘Smite me, I 
pray thee.’ And the man refused to 
smite him. 36Then said he unto him: 
‘Because thou hast not heartened to 
the voice of the LORD, behold, as soon 
as thou art departed from me, a lion 
shall slay thee.’ And as soon as he was 
departed from him, a lion found him; 
and slew him. 37Then he found another 
man, and said: ‘Smite me, I pray thee.’ 
And the man smote him, smiting and 
wounding him. 38So the prophet 
departed, and waited for the king by 
the way, and disguised himself with 
his headband over his eyes. 39And as 
the king passed by, he cried unto the 
king; and he said: ‘Thy servant went 
out into the midst of the battle; and, 
behold, a man turned aside, and 
brought a man unto me, and said: 
Keep this man; if by any means he be 
missing, then shall thy life be for his 
life, or else thou shalt pay a talent of 
silver. 40And as thy servant was busy 
here and there, he was gone.’ And the 
king of Israel said unto him: ‘So shall 
thy judgment be; thyself hast decided 
it.’ 41And he hastened, and took the 
headband away from his eyes; and the 
king of Israel discerned him that he 
was of the prophets. 42And he said 
unto him: ‘Thus saith the LORD: 
Because thou hast let go out of thy 
hand the man whom I had devoted to 
destruction, therefore thy life shall go 
for his life, and thy people for his 
people.’ 43And the king of Israel went 
to his house sullen and displeased, and 
came to Samaria. 

And it came to pass after these 
things, that Naboth the 
Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in 
Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab, 
king of Samaria. 2And Ahab spoke 
21 




unto Naboth, saying: ‘Give me thy 
vineyard, that I may have it for a 
garden of herbs, because it is near unto 
my house; and I will give thee for it a 
better vineyard than it; or, if it seem 
good to thee, I will give thee the worth 
of it in money.’ 3And Naboth said to 
Ahab: ‘The LORD forbid it me, that I 
should give the inheritance of my 
fathers unto thee.’ 4And Ahab came 
into his house sullen and displeased 
because of the word which Naboth the 
Jezreelite had spoken to him; for he 
had said: ‘I will not give thee the 
inheritance of my fathers.’ And he laid 
him down upon his bed, and turned 
away his face, and would eat no bread. 

5But Jezebel his wife came to him, 
and said unto him: ‘Why is thy spirit 
so sullen, that thou eatest no bread?’ 
6And he said unto her: ‘Because I 
spoke unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and 
said unto him: Give me thy vineyard 
for money; or else, if it please thee, I 
will give thee another vineyard for it; 
and he answered: I will not give thee 
my vineyard.’ 7And Jezebel his wife 
said unto him: ‘Dost thou now govern 
the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat 
bread, and let thy heart be merry; I will 
give thee the vineyard of Naboth the 
Jezreelite.’ 8So she wrote letters in 
Ahab’s name, and sealed them with his 
seal, and sent the letters unto the elders 
and to the nobles that were in his city, 
and that dwelt with Naboth. 9And she 
wrote in the letters, saying: ‘Proclaim 
a fast, and set Naboth at the head of 
the people; 10and set two men, base 
fellows, before him, and let them bear 
witness against him, saying: Thou 
didst curse God and the king. And then 
carry him out, and stone him, that he 
die.’ 

11And the men of his city, even the 
elders and the nobles who dwelt in his 
city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, 
according as it was written in the 
letters which she had sent unto them. 
12They proclaimed a fast, and set 
Naboth at the head of the people. 
13And the two men, the base fellows, 
came in and sat before him; and the 
base fellows bore witness against him, 
even against Naboth, in the presence 
of the people, saying: ‘Naboth did 
curse God and the king.’ Then they 
carried him forth out of the city, and 
stoned him with stones, that he died. 
14Then they sent to Jezebel, saying: 
‘Naboth is stoned, and is dead.’ 15And 
it came to pass, when Jezebel heard 
that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, 
that Jezebel said to Ahab: ‘Arise, take 
possession of the vineyard of Naboth 
the Jezreelite, which he refused to give 
thee for money; for Naboth is not 
alive, but dead.’ 16And it came to pass, 
when Ahab heard that Naboth was 
dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to 
the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, 
to take possession of it. 

17And the word of the LORD came to 
Elijah the Tishbite, saying: 18’Arise, go 
down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who 
dwelleth in Samaria; behold, he is in 
the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is 
gone down to take possession of it. 


19And thou shalt speak unto him, 
saying: Thus saith the LORD: Hast thou 
killed, and also taken possessions? and 
thou shalt speak unto him, saying: 
Thus saith the LORD: In the place 
where dogs licked the blood of Naboth 
shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.’ 
20And Ahab said to Elijah: ‘Hast thou 
found me, O mine enemy?’ And he 
answered: ‘I have found thee; because 
thou hast given thyself over to do that 
which is evil in the sight of the LORD. 
21Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, 
and will utterly sweep thee away, and 
will cut off from Ahab every man-
child, and him that is shut up and him 
that is left at large in Israel. 22And I 
will make thy house like the house of 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like 
the house of Baasa the son of Ahijah, 
for the provocation wherewith thou 
hast provoked Me, and hast made 
Israel to sin. 23And of Jezebel also 
spoke the LORD, saying: The dogs shall 
eat Jezebel in the moat of Jezreel. 
24Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the 
dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in 
the field shall the fowls of the air eat.’ 
25But there was none like unto Ahab, 
who did give himself over to do that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, whom Jezebel his wife stirred 
up. 26And he did very abominably in 
following idols, according to all that 
the Amorites did, whom the LORD cast 
out before the children of Israel. 

27And it came to pass, when Ahab 
heard those words, that he rent his 
clothes, and put sackcloth upon his 
flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, 
and went softy. 28And the word of the 
LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, 
saying: 29’Seest thou how Ahab 
humbleth himself before Me? because 
he humbleth himself before Me, I will 
not bring the evil in his days; but in his 
son’s days will I bring the evil upon 
his house.’ 

And they continued three 
years without war between 
Aram and Israel. 2And it came to pass 
in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the 
king of Judah came down to the king 
of Israel. 3And the king of Israel said 
unto his servants: ‘Know ye that 
Ramoth-gilead is ours, and we are still, 
and take it not out of the hand of the 
king of Aram?’ 4And he said unto 
Jehoshaphat: ‘Wilt thou go with me to 
battle to Ramoth-gilead?’ And 
Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel: 
‘I am as thou art, my people as thy 
people, my horses as thy horses.’ 

5And Jehoshaphat said unto the king 
of Israel: ‘Inquire, I pray thee, at the 
word of the LORD today.’ 6Then the 
king of Israel gathered the prophets 
together, about four hundred men, and 
said unto them: ‘Shall I go against 
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I 
forbear?’ And they said: ‘Go up; for 
the LORD will deliver it into the hand of 
the king.’ 7But Jehoshaphat said: ‘Is 
there not here besides a prophet of the 
LORD, that we might inquire of him?’ 
8And the king of Israel said unto 
Jehoshaphat: ‘There is yet one man by 
whom we may inquire of the LORD, 
22 




Micaiah the son of Imlah; but I hate 
him; for he doth not prophesy good 
concerning me, but evil.’ And 
Jehoshaphat said: ‘Let not the king say 
so.’ 9Then the king of Israel called an 
officer, and said: ‘Fetch quickly 
Micaiah the son of Imlah.’ 10Now the 
king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king 
of Judah sat each on his throne, 
arrayed in their robes, in a threshing-
floor, at the entrance of the gate of 
Samaria; and all the prophets 
prophesied before them. 11And 
Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made 
him horns of iron, and said: ‘Thus 
saith the LORD: With these shalt thou 
gore the Arameans, until they be 
consumed.’ 12And all the prophets 
prophesied so, saying: ‘Go up to 
Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the 
LORD will deliver it into the hand of the 
king.’ 

13And the messenger that went to 
call Micaiah spoke unto him, saying: 
‘Behold now, the words of the 
prophets declare good unto the king 
with one mouth, let thy word, I pray 
thee, be like the word of one of them, 
and speak thou good.’ 14And Micaiah 
said: ‘As the LORD liveth, what the 
LORD saith unto me, that will I speak.’ 
15And when he was come to the king, 
the king said unto him: ‘Micaiah, shall 
we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or 
shall we forbear?’ And he answered 
him: ‘Go up, and prosper; and the 
LORD will deliver it into the hand of the 
king.’ 16And the king said unto him: 
‘How many times shall I adjure thee 
that thou speak unto me nothing but 
the truth in the name of the LORD?’ 
17And he said: ‘I saw all Israel 
scattered upon the mountains, as sheep 
that have no shepherd; and the LORD 
said: These have no master; let them 
return every man to his house in 
peace.’ 18And the king of Israel said to 
Jehoshaphat: ‘Did I not tell thee that 
he would not prophesy good 
concerning me, but evil?’ 19And he 
said: ‘Therefore hear thou the word of 
the LORD. I saw the LORD sitting on His 
throne, and all the host of heaven 
standing by Him on His right hand and 
on his left. 20And the LORD said: Who 
shall entice Ahab, that he may go up 
and fall at Ramoth-gilead. And one 
said: On this manner; and another said: 
On that manner. 21And there came 
forth the spirit, and stood before the 
LORD, and said: I will entice him. 
22And the LORD said unto him: 
Wherewith? And he said: I will go 
forth, and will be a lying spirit in the 
mouth of all his prophets. And He 
said: Thou shalt entice him, and shalt 
prevail also; go forth, and do so. 
23Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath 
put a lying spirit in the mouth of all 
these thy prophets; and the LORD hath 
spoken evil concerning thee.’ 

24Then Zedekiah the son of 
Chenaanah came near, and smote 
Micaiah on the check, and said: 
‘Which way went the spirit of the 
LORD from me to speak unto thee?’ 
25And Micaiah said: ‘Behold, thou 
shalt see on that day, when thou shalt 


go into an inner chamber to hide 
thyself.’ 26And the king of Israel said: 
‘Take Micaiah, and carry him back 
unto Amon the governor of the city, 
and to Joash the king’s son; 27and say: 
Thus saith the king: Put this fellow in 
the prison, and feed him with scant 
bread and with scant water, until I 
come in peace.’ 28And Micaiah said: 
‘If thou return at all in peace, the LORD 
hath not spoken by me.’ And he said: 
‘Hear, ye peoples, all of you.’ 

29So the king of Israel and 
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up 
to Ramoth-gilead. 30And the king of 
Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: ‘I will 
disguise myself, and go into the battle; 
but put thou on thy robes.’ And the 
king of Israel disguised himself, and 
went into the battle. 31Now the king of 
Aram had commanded the thirty and 
two captains of his chariots, saying: 
‘Fight neither with small nor great, 
save only with the king of Israel.’ 
32And it came to pass, when the 
captains of the chariots saw 
Jehoshaphat, that they said: ‘Surely it 
is the king of Israel’; and they turned 
aside to fight against him; and 
Jehoshaphat cried out. 33And it came 
to pass, when the captains of the 
chariots saw that it was not the king of 
Israel, that they turned back from 
pursuing him. 34And a certain man 
drew his bow at a venture, and smote 
the king of Israel between the lower 
armour and the breastplate; wherefore 
he said unto the driver of his chariot: 
‘Turn thy hand, and carry me out of 
the host; for I am sore wounded.’ 
35And the battle increased that day; 
and the king was stayed up in his 
chariot against the Arameans, and died 
at even; and the blood ran out of the 
wound into the bottom of the chariot. 
36And there went a cry throughout the 
host about the going down of the sun, 
saying: ‘Every man to his city, and 
every man to his country.’ 

37So the king died, and was brought 
to Samaria; and they buried the king in 
Samaria. 38And they washed the 
chariot by the pool of Samaria; and the 
dogs licked up his blood; the harlots 
also washed themselves there; 
according unto the word of the LORD 
which He spoke. 

39Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, 
and all that he did, and the ivory house 
which he built, and all the cities that he 
built, are they not written in the book 
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
40So Ahab slept with his fathers; and 
Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. 

41And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa 
began to reign over Judah in the fourth 
year of Ahab king of Israel. 
42Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years 
old when he began to reign; and he 
reigned twenty and five years in 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was 
Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 43And 
he walked in all the way of Asa his 
father; he turned not aside from it, 
doing that which was right in the eyes 
of the LORD; 44howbeit the high places 
were not taken away; the people still 
sacrificed and offered in the high 


places. 45And Jehoshaphat made peace 
with the king of Israel. 

46Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehoshaphat, and his might that he 
showed, and how he warred, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
47And the remnant of the sodomites 
that remained in the days of his father 
Asa, he put away out of the land. 48 
And there was no king in Edom: a 
deputy was king. 49 Jehoshaphat made 
ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for 
gold; but they went not; for the ships 
were broken at Ezion-geber. 50Then 
said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto 
Jehoshaphat: ‘Let my servants go with 
thy servants in the ships.’ But 
Jehoshaphat would not. 51And 
Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and 
was buried with his fathers in the city 
of David his father; and Jehoram his 
son reigned in his stead. 

52Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to 
reign over Israel in Samaria in the 
seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king 
of Judah, and he reigned two years 
over Israel. 53And he did that which 
was evil in the sight of the LORD, and 
walked in the way of his father, and in 
the way of his mother, and in the way 
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherein 
he made Israel to sin. 54And he served 
Baal, and worshipped him, and 
provoked the LORD, the God of Israel, 
according to all that his father had 
done. 




. ..... 

SECOND KINGS 

 

AND Moab rebelled against Israel 
after the death of Ahab. 

2And Ahaziah fell down through the 
lattice in his upper chamber that was in 
Samaria, and was sick; and he sent 
messengers, and said unto them: ‘Go, 
inquire of Baal-zebub the god of 
Ekron whether I shall recover of this 
sickness.’ 3But an angel of the LORD 
said to Elijah the Tishbite: ‘Arise, go 
up to meet the messengers of the king 
of Samaria, and say unto them: Is it 
because there is no God in Israel, that 
ye go to inquire of Baal-zebub the god 
of Ekron? 4Now therefore thus saith 
the LORD: Thou shalt not come down 
from the bed whither thou art gone up, 
but shalt surely die.’ And Elijah 
departed. 5And the messengers 
returned unto him, and he said unto 
them: ‘Why is it that ye are returned?’ 
6And they said unto him: ‘There came 
up a man to meet us, and said unto us: 
Go, return unto the king that sent you, 
and say unto him: Thus saith the LORD: 
Is it because there is no God in Israel, 
that thou sendest to inquire of Baal-
zebub the god of Ekron? therefore 
thou shalt not come down from the bed 
whither thou art gone up, but shalt 
surely die.’ 7And he said unto them: 
‘What manner of man was he that 
came up to meet you, and told you 
these words?’ 8And they answered 
him: ‘He was a hairy man, and girt 
with a girdle of leather about his 
loins.’ And he said: ‘It is Elijah the 
Tishbite.’ 

9Then the king sent unto him a 
captain of fifty with his fifty. And he 
went up to him; and, behold, he sat on 
the top of the hill. And he spoke unto 
him: ‘O man of God, the king hath 
said: Come down.’ 10And Elijah 
answered and said to the captain of 
fifty: ‘If I be a man of God, let fire 
come down from heaven, and consume 
thee and thy fifty.’ And there came 
down fire from heaven, and consumed 
him and his fifty. 11And again he sent 
unto him another captain of fifty with 
his fifty. And he answered and said 
unto him: ‘O man of God, thus hath 
the king said: Come down quickly.’ 
12And Elijah answered and said unto 
them: ‘If I be a man of God, let fire 
come down from heaven, and consume 
thee and thy fifty.’ And the fire of God 
came down from heaven, and 
consumed him and his fifty. 13And 
again he sent the captain of a third 
fifty with his fifty. And the third 
captain of fifty went up, and came and 
fell on his knees before Elijah, and 
besought him, and said unto him: ‘O 
man of God, I pray thee, let my life, 
and the life of these fifty thy servants, 
be precious in thy sight. 14Behold, 
1 




there came fire down from heaven, and 
consumed the two former captains of 
fifty with their fifties; but now let my 
life be precious in thy sight’15And the 
angel of the LORD said unto Elijah: ‘Go 
down with him; be not afraid of him.’ 
And he arose, and went down with 
him unto the king. 16And he said unto 
him: ‘Thus saith the LORD: Forasmuch 
as thou hast sent messengers to inquire 
of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron, is it 
because there is no God in Israel to 
inquire of His word? therefore thou 
shalt not come down from the bed 
whether thou art gone up, but shalt 
surely die.’ 

17So he died according to the word 
of the LORD which Elijah had spoken. 
And Jehoram began to reign in his 
stead in the second year of Jehoram 
the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; 
because he had no son. 18Now the rest 
of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, 
are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 

 

And it came to pass, when the 
LORD would take up Elijah by a 
whirlwind into heaven, that Elijah 
went with Elisha from Gilgal. 2And 
Elijah said unto Elisha: ‘Tarry here, I 
pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me as 
far as Beth-el.’ And Elisha said: ‘As 
the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, 
I will not leave thee.’ So they went 
down to Beth-el.— 3And the sons of 
the prophets that were at Beth-el came 
forth to Elisha, and said unto him: 
‘Knowest thou that the LORD will take 
away thy master from thy head to-
day?’ And he said: ‘Yea, I know it; 
hold ye your peace.’— 4And Elijah 
said unto him: ‘Elisha, tarry here, I 
pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me to 
Jericho.’ And he said: ‘As the LORD 
liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not 
leave thee.’ So they came to Jericho.— 
5And the sons of the prophets that 
were at Jericho came near to Elisha, 
and said unto him: ‘Knowest thou that 
the LORD will take away thy master 
from thy head to-day?’ And he 
answered: ‘Yea, I know it; hold ye 
your peace.’— 6And Elijah said unto 
him: ‘Tarry here, I pray thee; for the 
LORD hath sent me to the Jordan.’ And 
he said: ‘As the LORD liveth, and as thy 
soul liveth, I will not leave thee.’ And 
they two went on. 

7And fifty men of the sons of the 
prophets went, and stood over against 
them afar off; and they two stood by 
the Jordan. 8And Elijah took his 
mantle, and wrapped it together, and 
smote the waters, and they were 
divided hither and thither, so that they 
two went over on dry ground. 9And it 
came to pass, when they were gone 
over, that Elijah said unto Elisha: ‘Ask 
what I shall do for thee, before I am 
taken from thee.’ And Elisha said: ‘I 
pray thee, let a double portion of thy 
spirit be upon me.’ 10And he said: 
‘Thou hast asked a hard thing; 
nevertheless, if thou see me when I am 
taken from thee, it shall be so unto 
thee; but if not, it shall not be so.’ 
11And it came to pass, as they still 
2 




went on, and talked, that, behold, there 
appeared a chariot of fire, and horses 
of fire, which parted them both 
assunder; and Elijah went up by a 
whirlwind into heaven. 

12And Elisha saw it, and he cried: 
‘My father, my father, the chariots of 
Israel and the horsemen thereof! ’ And 
he saw him no more; and he took hold 
of his own clothes, and rent them in 
two pieces. 13He took up also the 
mantle of Elijah that fell from him, 
and went back, and stood by the bank 
of the Jordan. 14And he took the 
mantle of Elijah that fell from him, 
and smote the waters, and said: 
‘Where is the LORD, the God of 
Elijah?’ and when he also had smitten 
the waters, they were divided hither 
and thither; and Elisha went over. 

15And when the sons of the prophets 
that were at Jericho some way off saw 
him, they said: ‘The spirit of Elijah 
doth rest on Elisha.’ And they came to 
meet him, and bowed down to the 
ground before him. 16And they said 
unto him: ‘Behold now, there are with 
thy servants fifty strong men; let them 
go, we pray thee, and seek thy master; 
lest peradventure the spirit of the LORD 
hath taken him up, and cast him upon 
some mountain, or into some valley.’ 
And he said: ‘Ye shall not send.’ 
17And when they urged him till he was 
ashamed, he said: ‘Send.’ They sent 
therefore fifty men; and they sought 
three days, but found him not. 18And 
they came back to him, while he 
tarried at Jericho; and he said unto 
them: ‘Did I not say unto you: Go 
not?’ 

19And the men of the city said unto 
Elisha: ‘Behold, we pray thee, the 
situation of this city is pleasant, as my 
lord seeth; but the water is bad, and the 
land miscarrieth. 20And he said: ‘Bring 
me a new cruse, and put salt therein.’ 
And they brought it to him. 21And he 
went forth unto the spring of the 
waters, and cast salt therein, and said: 
‘Thus saith the LORD: I have healed 
these waters; there shall not be from 
thence any more death or 
miscarrying.’ 22So the waters were 
healed unto this day, according to the 
word of Elisha which he spoke. 

23And he went up from thence unto 
Beth-el; and as he was going up by the 
way, there came forth little children 
out of the city, and mocked him, and 
said unto him: ‘Go up, thou baldhead; 
go up, thou baldhead.’ 24And he 
looked behind him and saw them, and 
cursed them in the name of the LORD. 
And there came forth two she-bears 
out of the wood, and tore forty and two 
children of them. 25And he went from 
thence to mount Carmel, and from 
thence he returned to Samaria. 

Now Jehoram the son of Ahab 
began to reign over Israel in 
Samaria in the eighteenth year of 
Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and 
reigned twelve years. 2And he did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD; but not like his father, and like 
his mother; for he put away the pillar 
of Baal that his father had made. 
3 




3Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins 
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
wherewith he made Israel to sin; he 
departed not therefrom. 

4Now Mesha king of Moab was a 
sheep-master; and he rendered unto the 
king of Israel the wool of a hundred 
thousand lambs, and of a hundred 
thousand rams. 5But it came to pass, 
when Ahab was dead, that the king of 
Moab rebelled against the king of 
Israel. 6And king Jehoram went out of 
Samaria at that time, and mustered all 
Israel. 7And he went and sent to 
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying: 
‘The king of Moab hath rebelled 
against me; wilt thou go with me 
against Moab to battle?’ And he said: 
‘I will go up; I am as thou art, my 
people as thy people, my horses as thy 
horses.’ 8And he said: ‘Which way 
shall we go up?’ And he answered: 
‘The way of the wilderness of Edom.’ 
9So the king of Israel went, and the 
king of Judah, and the king of Edom; 
and they made a circuit of seven 
days’journey; and there was no water 
for the host, nor for the beasts that 
followed them. 10And the king of 
Israel said: ‘Alas! for the LORD hath 
called these three kings together to 
deliver them into the hand of Moab.’ 
11But Jehoshaphat said: ‘Is there not 
here a prophet of the LORD, that we 
may inquire of the LORD by him?’ And 
one of the king of Israel’s servants 
answered and said: ‘Elisha the son of 
Shaphat is here, who poured water on 
the hands of Elijah.’ 12And 
Jehoshaphat said: ‘The word of the 
LORD is with him.’ So the king of 
Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of 
Edom went down to him. 

13And Elisha said unto the king of 
Israel: ‘What have I to do with thee? 
get thee to the prophets of thy father, 
and to the prophets of thy mother.’ 
And the king of Israel said unto him: 
‘Nay; for the LORD hath called these 
three kings together to deliver them 
into the hand of Moab.’ 14And Elisha 
said: ‘As the LORD of hosts liveth, 
before whom I stand, surely, were it 
not that I regard the presence of 
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would 
not look toward thee, nor see thee. 
15But now bring me a minstrel.’ And it 
came to pass, when the minstrel 
played, that the hand of the LORD came 
upon him. 16And he said: ‘Thus saith 
the LORD: Make this valley full of 
trenches. 17For thus saith the LORD: Ye 
shall not see wind, neither shall ye see 
rain, yet that valley shall be filled with 
water; and ye shall drink, both ye and 
your cattle and your beasts. 18And this 
is but a light thing in the sight of the 
LORD; He will also deliver the 
Moabites into your hand. 19And ye 
shall smite every fortified city, and 
every choice city, and shall fell every 
good tree, and stop all fountains of 
water, and mar every good piece of 
land with stones.’ 20And it came to 
pass in the morning, about the time of 
making the offering, that, behold, there 
came water by the way of Edom, and 
the country was filled with water. 


21Now when all the Moabites heard 
that the kings were come up to fight 
against them, they gathered themselves 
together, all that were able to put on 
armour, and upward, and stood on the 
border. 22And they rose up early in the 
morning, and the sun shone upon the 
water, and the Moabites saw the water 
some way off as red as blood; 23and 
they said: ‘This is blood: the kings 
have surely fought together, and they 
have smitten each man his fellow; now 
therefore, Moab, to the spoil.’ 24And 
when they came to the camp of Israel, 
the Israelites rose up and smote the 
Moabites, so that they fled before 
them. And they smote the land, even 
Moab, mightily. 25And they beat down 
the cities; and on every good piece of 
land they cast every man his stone, and 
filled it; and they stopped all the 
fountains of water, and felled all the 
good trees; until there was left only 
Kir-hareseth with the stones of the 
wall thereof; so the slingers 
encompassed it, and smote it. 26And 
when the king of Moab saw that the 
battle was too sore for him, he took 
with him seven hundred men that drew 
sword, to break through unto the king 
of Edom; but they could not. 27Then he 
took his eldest son that should have 
reigned in his stead, and offered him 
for a burnt-offering upon the wall. And 
there came great wrath upon Israel; 
and they departed from him, and 
returned to their own land. 

Now there cried a certain woman 
of the wives of the sons of the 
prophets unto Elisha, saying: ‘Thy 
servant my husband is dead; and thou 
knowest that thy servant did fear the 
LORD; and the creditor is come to take 
unto him my two children to be 
bondmen.’ 2And Elisha said unto her: 
‘What shall I do for thee? tell me; 
what hast thou in the house?’ And she 
said: ‘Thy handmaid hath not any 
thing in the house, save a pot of oil.’ 
3Then he said: ‘Go, borrow thee 
vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, 
even empty vessels; borrow not a few. 
4And thou shalt go in, and shut the 
door upon thee and upon thy sons, and 
pour out into all those vessels; and 
thou shalt set aside that which is full.’ 
5So she went from him, and shut the 
door upon her and upon her sons; they 
brought the vessels to her, and she 
poured out. 6And it came to pass, when 
the vessels were full, that she said unto 
her son: ‘Bring me yet a vessel.’ And 
he said unto her: ‘There is not a vessel 
more.’ And the oil stayed. 7Then she 
came and told the man of God. And he 
said: ‘Go, sell the oil, and pay thy 
debt, and live thou and thy sons of the 
rest.’ 

8And it fell on a day, that Elisha 
passed to Shunem, where was a great 
woman; and she constrained him to eat 
bread. And so it was, that as oft as he 
passed by, he turned in thither to eat 
bread. 9And she said unto her husband: 
‘Behold now, I perceive that this is a 
holy man of God, that passeth by us 
continually. 10Let us make, I pray thee, 
a little chamber on the roof; and let us 4 




set for him there a bed, and a table, 
and a stool, and a candlestick; and it 
shall be, when he cometh to us, that he 
shall turn in thither.’ 11And it fell on a 
day, that he came thither, and he 
turned into the upper chamber and lay 
there. 12And he said to Gehazi his 
servant: ‘Call this Shunammite.’ And 
when he had called her, she stood 
before him. 13And he said unto him: 
‘Say now unto her: Behold, thou hast 
been careful for us with all this care; 
what is to be done for thee? wouldest 
thou be spoken for to the king, or to 
the captain of the host?’ And she 
answered: ‘I dwell among mine own 
people.’ 14And he said: ‘What then is 
to be done for her?’ And Gehazi 
answered: ‘Verily she hath no son, and 
her husband is old.’ 15And he said: 
‘Call her.’ And when he had called 
her, she stood in the door. 16And he 
said: ‘At this season, when the time 
cometh round, thou shalt embrace a 
son.’ And she said: ‘Nay, my lord, 
thou man of God, do not lie unto thy 
handmaid.’ 17And the woman 
conceived, and bore a son at that 
season, when the time came round, as 
Elisha had said unto her. 

18And when the child was grown, it 
fell on a day, that he went out to his 
father to the reapers. 19And he said 
unto his father: ‘My head, my head.’ 
And he said to his servant: ‘Carry him 
to his mother.’ 20And when he had 
taken him, and brought him to his 
mother, he sat on her knees till noon, 
and then died. 21And she went up, and 
laid him on the bed of the man of God, 
and shut the door upon him, and went 
out. 22And she called unto her 
husband, and said: ‘Send me, I pray 
thee, one of the servants, and one of 
the asses, that I may run to the man of 
God, and come back.’ 23And he said: 
Wherefore wilt thou go to him today? 
it is neither new moon nor sabbath.’ 
And she said: ‘It shall be well.’ 24Then 
she saddled an ass, and said to her 
servant: ‘Drive, and go forward; 
slacken me not the riding, except I bid 
thee.’ 25So she went, and came unto 
the man of God to mount Carmel. 

And it came to pass, when the man 
of God saw her afar off, that he said to 
Gehazi his servant: ‘Behold, yonder is 
that Shunammite. 26Run, I pray thee, 
now to meet her, and say unto her: Is it 
well with thee? is it well with thy 
husband? is it well with the child?’ 
And she answered: ‘It is well.’ 27And 
when she came to the man of God to 
the hill, she caught hold of his feet. 
And Gehazi came near to thrust her 
away; but the man of God said: ‘Let 
her alone; for her soul is bitter within 
her; and the LORD hath hid it from me, 
and hath not told Me.’ 28Then she said: 
‘Did I desire a son of my lord? did I 
not say: Do not deceive me?’ 29Then 
he said to Gehazi: ‘Gird up thy loins, 
and take my staff in thy hand, and go 
thy way; if thou meet any man, salute 
him not; and if any salute thee, answer 
him not; and lay my staff upon the 
face of the child.’ 30And the mother of 
the child said: ‘As the LORD liveth, and 


as thy soul liveth, I will not leave 
thee.’ And he arose, and followed her. 
31And Gehazi passed on before them, 
and laid the staff upon the face of the 
child; but there was neither voice, nor 
hearing. Wherefore he returned to 
meet him, and told him, saying: ‘The 
child is not awaked.’ 

32And when Elisha was come into 
the house, behold, the child was dead, 
and laid upon his bed. 33He went in 
therefore, and shut the door upon them 
twain, and prayed unto the LORD. 
34And he went up, and lay upon the 
child, and put his mouth upon his 
mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and 
his hands upon his hands; and he 
stretched himself upon him; and the 
flesh of the child waxed warm. 35Then 
he returned, and walked in the house 
once to and fro; and went up, and 
stretched himself upon him; and the 
child sneezed seven times, and the 
child opened his eyes. 36And he called 
Gehazi, and said: ‘Call this 
Shunammite.’ So he called her. And 
when she was come in unto him, he 
said: ‘Take up thy son.’ 37Then she 
went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed 
down to the ground; and she took up 
her son, and went out. 

38And Elisha came again to Gilgal; 
and there was a dearth in the land; and 
the sons of the prophets were sitting 
before him; and he said unto his 
servant: ‘Set on the great pot, and 
seethe pottage for the sons of the 
prophets.’ 39And one went out into the 
field to gather herbs, and found a wild 
vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds 
his lap full, and came and shred them 
into the pot of pottage; for they knew 
them not. 40So they poured out for the 
men to eat. And it came to pass, as 
they were eating of the pottage, that 
they cried out, and said: ‘O man of 
God, there is death in the pot.’ And 
they could not eat thereof. 41But he 
said: ‘Then bring meal.’ And he cast it 
into the pot; and he said: ‘Pour out for 
the people, that they may eat.’ And 
there was no harm in the pot. 

42And there came a man from Baal-
shalishah, and brought the man of God 
bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves 
of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his 
sack. And he said: ‘Give unto the 
people, that they may eat.’ 43And his 
servant said: ‘How should I set this 
before a hundred men?’ But he said: 
‘Give the people, that they may eat; 
for thus saith the LORD: They shall eat, 
and shall leave thereof.’ 44So he set it 
before them, and they did eat, and left 
thereof, according to the word of the 
LORD. 

Now Naaman, captain of the host 
of the king of Aram, was a great 
man with his master, and held in 
esteem, because by him the LORD had 
given victory unto Aram; he was also a 
mighty man of valour, but he was a 
leper. 2And the Arameans had gone 
out in bands, and had brought away 
captive out of the land of Israel a little 
maid; and she waited on Naaman’s 
wife. 3And she said unto her mistress: 
‘Would that my lord were with the 
5 




prophet that is in Samaria! then would 
he recover him of his leprosy.’ 4And 
he went in, and told his lord, saying: 
‘Thus and thus said the maid that is of 
the land of Israel.’ 5And the king of 
Aram said: ‘Go now, and I will send a 
letter unto the king of Israel.’ And he 
departed, and took with him ten talents 
of silver, and six thousand pieces of 
gold, and ten changes of raiment. 6And 
he brought the letter to the king of 
Israel, saying: ‘And now when this 
letter is come unto thee, behold, I have 
sent Naaman my servant to thee, that 
thou mayest recover him of his 
leprosy.’ 7And it came to pass, when 
the king of Israel had read the letter, 
that he rent his clothes, and said: ‘Am 
I God, to kill and to make alive, that 
this man doth send unto me to recover 
a man of his leprosy? but consider, I 
pray you, and see how he seeketh an 
occasion against me.’ 

8And it was so, when Elisha the man 
of God heard that the king of Israel 
had rent his clothes, that he sent to the 
king, saying: ‘Wherefore hast thou 
rent thy clothes? let him come now to 
me, and he shall know that there is a 
prophet in Israel.’ 9So Naaman came 
with his horses and with his chariots, 
and stood at the door of the house of 
Elisha. 10And Elisha sent a messenger 
unto him, saying: ‘Go and wash in the 
Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall 
come back to thee, and thou shalt be 
clean.’ 11But Naaman was wroth, and 
went away, and said: ‘Behold, I 
thought: He will surely come out to 
me, and stand, and call on the name of 
the LORD his God, and wave his hand 
over the place, and recover the leper. 
12Are not Amanah and Pharpar, the 
rivers of Damascus, better than all the 
waters of Israel? may I not wash in 
them, and be clean?’ So he turned, and 
went away in a rage. 13And his 
servants came near, and spoke unto 
him, and said: ‘My father, if the 
prophet had bid thee do some great 
thing, wouldest thou not have done it? 
how much rather then, when he saith 
to thee: Wash, and be clean?’ 14Then 
went he down, and dipped himself 
seven times in the Jordan, according to 
the saying of the man of God; and his 
flesh came back like unto the flesh of a 
little child, and he was clean. 

15And he returned to the man of 
God, he and all his company, and 
came, and stood before him; and he 
said: ‘Behold now, I know that there is 
no God in all the earth, but in Israel; 
now therefore, I pray thee, take a 
present of thy servant.’ 16But he said: 
‘As the LORD liveth, before whom I 
stand, I will receive none.’ And he 
urged him to take it; but he refused. 
17And Naaman said: ‘If not, yet I pray 
thee let there be given to thy servant 
two mules’burden of earth; for thy 
servant will henceforth offer neither 
burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other 
gods, but unto the LORD. 18In this thing 
the LORD pardon thy servant: when my 
master goeth into the house of 
Rimmon to worship there, and he 
leaneth on my hand, and I prostrate 


myself in the house of Rimmon, when 
I prostrate myself in the house of 
Rimmon, the LORD pardon thy servant 
in this thing.’ 19And he said unto him: 
‘Go in peace.’ So he departed from 
him some way. 

20But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha 
the man of God, said: ‘Behold, my 
master hath spared this Naaman the 
Aramean, in not receiving at his hands 
that which he brought; as the LORD 
liveth, I will surely run after him, and 
take somewhat of him.’ 21So Gehazi 
followed after Naaman. And when 
Naaman saw one running after him, he 
alighted from the chariot to meet him, 
and said: ‘Is all well?’ 22And he said: 
‘All is well. My master hath sent me, 
saying: Behold, even now there are 
come to me from the hill-country of 
Ephraim two young men of the sons of 
the prophets; give them, I pray thee, a 
talent of silver, and two changes of 
raiment.’ 23And Naaman said: ‘Be 
content, take two talents.’ And he 
urged him, and bound two talents of 
silver in two bags, with two changes of 
raiment, and laid them upon two of his 
servants; and they bore them before 
him. 24And when he came to the hill, 
he took them from their hand, and 
deposited them in the house; and he let 
the men go, and they departed. 25But 
he went in, and stood before his 
master. And Elisha said unto him: 
‘Whence comest thou, Gehazi?’ And 
he said: ‘Thy servant went no 
whither.’ 26And he said unto him: 
‘Went not my heart [with thee], when 
the man turned back from his chariot 
to meet thee? Is it a time to receive 
money, and to receive garments, and 
oliveyards and vineyards, and sheep 
and oxen, and men-servants and maid-
servants? 27The leprosy therefore of 
Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and 
unto thy seed for ever.’ And he went 
out from his presence a leper as white 
as snow. 

And the sons of the prophets said 
unto Elisha: ‘Behold now, the 
place where we dwell before thee is 
too strait for us. 2Let us go, we pray 
thee, unto the Jordan, and take thence 
every man a beam, and let us make us 
a place there, where we may dwell.’ 
And he answered: ‘Go ye.’ 3And one 
said: ‘Be content, I pray thee, and go 
with thy servants.’ And he answered: 
‘I will go.’ 4So he went with them. 
And when they came to the Jordan, 
they cut down wood. 5But as one was 
felling a beam, the axe-head fell into 
the water; and he cried, and said: 
‘Alas, my master! for it was 
borrowed.’ 6And the man of God said: 
‘Where fell it?’ And he showed him 
the place. And he cut down a stick, 
and cast it in thither, and made the iron 
to swim. 7And he said: ‘Take it up to 
thee.’ So he put out his hand, and took 
it. 

8Now the king of Aram warred 
against Israel; and he took counsel 
with his servants, saying: ‘In such and 
such a place shall be my camp.’ 9And 
the man of God sent unto the king of 
Israel, saying: ‘Beware that thou pass 
6 




not such a place; for thither the 
Arameans are coming down.’ 10And 
the king of Israel sent to the place 
which the man of God told him and 
warned him of; and he guarded 
himself there, not once nor twice. 
11And the heart of the king of Aram 
was sore troubled for this thing; and he 
called his servants, and said unto them: 
‘Will ye not tell me which of us is for 
the king of Israel?’ 12And one of his 
servants said: ‘Nay, my lord, O king; 
but Elisha, the prophet that is in Israel, 
telleth the king of Israel the words that 
thou speakest in thy bed-chamber.’ 
13And he said: ‘Go and see where he 
is, that I may send and fetch him.’ And 
it was told him, saying: ‘Behold, he is 
in Dothan.’ 

14Therefore sent he thither horses, 
and chariots, and a great host; and they 
came by night, and compassed the city 
about. 15And when the servant of the 
man of God was risen early, and gone 
forth, behold, a host with horses and 
chariots was round about the city. And 
his servant said unto him: ‘Alas, my 
master! how shall we do?’ 16And he 
answered: ‘Fear not: for they that are 
with us are more than they that are 
with them.’ 17And Elisha prayed, and 
said: ‘LORD, I pray Thee, open his 
eyes, that he may see.’ And the LORD 
opened the eyes of the young man; and 
he saw; and, behold, the mountain was 
full of horses and chariots of fire round 
about Elisha. 18And when they came 
down to him, Elisha prayed unto the 
LORD, and said: ‘Smite this people, I 
pray Thee, with blindness.’ And He 
smote them with blindness according 
to the word of Elisha. 19And Elisha 
said unto them: ‘This is not the way, 
neither is this the city; follow me, and 
I will bring you to the man whom ye 
seek.’ And he led them to Samaria. 

20And it came to pass, when they 
were come into Samaria, that Elisha 
said: ‘LORD, open the eyes of these 
men, that they may see.’ And the LORD 
opened their eyes, and they saw; and, 
behold, they were in the midst of 
Samaria. 21And the king of Israel said 
unto Elisha, when he saw them: ‘My 
father, shall I smite them? shall I smite 
them?’ 22And he answered: ‘Thou 
shalt not smite them; hast thou taken 
captive with thy sword and with thy 
bow those whom thou wouldest smite? 
set bread and water before them, that 
they may eat and drink, and go to their 
master.’ 23And he prepared great 
provision for them; and when they had 
eaten and drunk, he sent them away, 
and they went to their master. And the 
bands of Aram came no more into the 
land of Israel. 

24And it came to pass after this, that 
Ben-hadad king of Aram gathered all 
his host, and went up, and besieged 
Samaria. 25And there was a great 
famine in Samaria; and, behold, they 
besieged it, until an ass’s head was 
sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and 
the fourth part of a kab of dove’s dung 
for five pieces of silver. 26And as the 
king of Israel was passing by upon the 
wall, there cried a woman unto him, 


saying: ‘Help, my lord, O king.’ 27And 
he said: ‘If the LORD do not help thee, 
whence shall I help thee? out of the 
threshingfloor, or out of the 
winepress?’ 28And the king said unto 
her: ‘What aileth thee?’ And she 
answered: ‘This woman said unto me: 
Give thy son, that we may eat him to-
day, and we will eat my son to-
morrow. 29So we boiled my son, and 
did eat him; and I said unto her on the 
next day: Give thy son, that we may 
eat him; and she hath hid her son.’ 
30And it came to pass, when the king 
heard the words of the woman, that he 
rent his clothes—now he was passing 
by upon the wall—and the people 
looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth 
within upon his flesh. 31Then he said: 
‘God do so to me, and more also, if the 
head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall 
stand on him this day.’ 

32But Elisha sat in his house, and the 
elders sat with him; and the king sent a 
man from before him; but ere the 
messenger came to him, he said to the 
elders: ‘See ye how this son of a 
murderer hath sent to take away my 
head? look, when the messenger 
cometh, shut the door, and hold the 
door fast against him; is not the sound 
of his master’s feet behind him?’ 
33And while he yet talked with them, 
behold, the messenger came down 
unto him; and [the king] said: ‘Behold, 
this evil is of the LORD; why should I 
wait for the LORD any longer?’ 

And Elisha said: ‘Hear ye the 
word of the LORD; thus saith the 
LORD: To-morrow about this time shall 
a measure of fine flour be sold for a 
shekel, and two measures of barley for 
a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.’ 
2Then the captain on whose hand the 
king leaned answered the man of God, 
and said: ‘Behold, if the LORD should 
make windows in heaven, might this 
thing be?’ And he said: ‘Behold, thou 
shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt 
not eat thereof.’ 

3Now there were four leprous men 
at the entrance of the gate; and they 
said one to another: ‘Why sit we here 
until we die? 4If we say: We will enter 
into the city, then the famine is in the 
city, and we shall die there; and if we 
sit still here, we die also. Now 
therefore come, and let us fall unto the 
host of the Arameans; if they save us 
alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, 
we shall but die.’ 5And they rose up in 
the twilight, to go unto the camp of the 
Arameans; and when they were come 
to the outermost part of the camp of 
the Arameans, behold, there was no 
man there. 6For the Lord had made the 
host of the Arameans to hear a noise of 
chariots, and a noise of horses, even 
the noise of a great host; and they said 
one to another: ‘Lo, the king of Israel 
hath hired against us the kings of the 
Hittites, and the kings of the 
Egyptians, to come upon us.’ 
7Wherefore they arose and fled in the 
twilight, and left their tents, and their 
horses, and their asses, even the camp 
as it was, and fled for their life. 8And 
when these lepers came to the 7 




outermost part of the camp, they went 
into one tent, and did eat and drink, 
and carried thence silver, and gold, 
and raiment, and went and hid it; and 
they came back, and entered into 
another tent, and carried thence also, 
and went and hid it. 

9Then they said one to another: ‘We 
do not well; this day is a day of good 
tidings, and we hold our peace; if we 
tarry till the morning light, punishment 
will overtake us; now therefore come, 
let us go and tell the king’s 
household.’ 10So they came and called 
unto the porters of the city; and they 
told them, saying.’ We came to the 
camp of the Arameans, and, behold, 
there was no man there, neither voice 
of man, but the horses tied, and the 
asses tied, and the tents as they were.’ 
11And the porters called, and they told 
it to the king’s household within. 
12And the king arose in the night, and 
said unto his servants: ‘I will now tell 
you what the Arameans have done to 
us. They know that we are hungry; 
therefore are they gone out of the 
camp to hide themselves in the field, 
saying: When they come out of the 
city, we shall take them alive, and get 
into the city.’ 13And one of his servants 
answered and said: ‘Let some take, I 
pray thee, five of the horses that 
remain, which are left in the city— 
behold, they are as all the multitude of 
Israel that are left in it; behold, they 
are as all the multitude of Israel that 
are consumed—and let us send and 
see.’ 14They took therefore two 
chariots with horses; and the king sent 
after the host of the Arameans, saying: 
‘Go and see.’ 15And they went after 
them unto the Jordan; and, lo, all the 
way was full of garments and vessels, 
which the Arameans had cast away in 
their haste. And the messengers 
returned, and told the king. 

16And the people went out, and 
spoiled the camp of the Arameans. So 
a measure of fine flour was sold for a 
shekel, and two measures of barley for 
a shekel, according to the word of the 
LORD. 17And the king appointed the 
captain on whose hand he leaned to 
have the charge of the gate; and the 
people trod upon him in the gate, and 
he died as the man of God had said, 
who spoke when the king came down 
to him. 18And it came to pass, as the 
man of God had spoken to the king, 
saying: ‘Two measures of barley for a 
shekel, and a measure of fine flour for 
a shekel, shall be to-morrow about this 
time in the gate of Samaria’; 19and that 
captain answered the man of God, and 
said: ‘Now, behold, if the LORD should 
make windows in heaven, might such 
a thing be?’ and he said: ‘Behold, thou 
shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt 
not eat thereof’; 20it came to pass even 
so unto him; for the people trod upon 
him in the gate, and he died. 

Now Elisha had spoken unto the 
woman, whose son he had 
restored to life, saying: ‘Arise, and go 
thou and thy household, and sojourn 
wheresoever thou canst sojourn; for 
the LORD hath called for a famine; and 
8 




it shall also come upon the land seven 
years.’ 2And the woman arose, and did 
according to the word of the man of 
God; and she went with her household, 
and sojourned in the land of the 
Philistines seven years. 3And it came 
to pass at the seven years’end, that the 
woman returned out of the land of the 
Philistines; and she went forth to cry 
unto the king for her house and for her 
land. 4Now the king was talking with 
Gehazi the servant of the man of God, 
saying: ‘Tell me, I pray thee, all the 
great things that Elisha hath done.’ 
5And it came to pass, as he was telling 
the king how he had restored to life 
him that was dead, that, behold, the 
woman, whose son he had restored to 
life, cried to the king for her house and 
for her land. And Gehazi said: ‘My 
lord, O king, this is the woman, and 
this is her son, whom Elisha restored 
to life.’ 6And when the king asked the 
woman, she told him. So the king 
appointed unto her a certain officer, 
saying: ‘Restore all that was hers, and 
all the fruits of the field since the day 
that she left the land, even until now.’ 

7And Elisha came to Damascus; and 
Ben-hadad the king of Aram was sick; 
and it was told him, saying.’ The man 
of God is come hither.’ 8And the king 
said unto Hazael: ‘Take a present in 
thy hand, and go meet the man of God, 
and inquire of the LORD by him, 
saying: Shall I recover of this 
sickness?’ 9So Hazael went to meet 
him, and took a present with him, even 
of every good thing of Damascus, 
forty camels’burden, and came and 
stood before him, and said: ‘Thy son 
Ben-hadad king of Aram hath sent me 
to thee, saying: Shall I recover of this 
sickness?’ 10And Elisha said unto him: 
‘Go, say unto him: Thou shalt surely 
recover; howbeit the LORD hath shown 
me that he shall surely die.’ 11And he 
settled his countenance stedfastly upon 
him, until he was ashamed; and the 
man of God wept. 12And Hazael said: 
‘Why weepeth my lord?’ And he 
answered: ‘Because I know the evil 
that thou wilt do unto the children of 
Israel: their strongholds wilt thou set 
on fire, and their young men wilt thou 
slay with the sword, and wilt dash in 
pieces their little ones, and rip up their 
women with child.’ 13And Hazael said: 
‘But what is thy servant, who is but a 
dog, that he should do this great 
thing?’ And Elisha answered: ‘The 
LORD hath shown me that thou shalt be 
king over Aram.’ 14Then he departed 
from Elisha, and came to his master, 
who said to him: ‘What said Elisha to 
thee?’ And he answered: ‘He told me 
that thou wouldest surely recover.’ 
15And it came to pass on the morrow, 
that he took the coverlet, and dipped it 
in water, and spread it on his face, so 
that he died; and Hazael reigned in his 
stead. 

16And in the fifth year of Joram the 
son of Ahab king of Israel, 
Jehoshaphat being the king of Judah, 
Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king 
of Judah began to reign. 17Thirty and 
two years old was he when he began to 


reign; and he reigned eight years in 
Jerusalem. 18And he walked in the way 
of the kings of Israel, as did the house 
of Ahab; for he had the daughter of 
Ahab to wife; and he did that which 
was evil in the sight of the LORD. 
19Howbeit the LORD would not destroy 
Judah, for David His servant’s sake, as 
He promised him to give unto him a 
lamp and to his children alway. 

20In his days Edom revolted from 
under the hand of Judah, and made a 
king over themselves. 21Then Joram 
passed over to Zair, and all his chariots 
with him; and he rose up by night, and 
smote the Edomites that compassed 
him about, and the captains of the 
chariots; and the people fled to their 
tents. 22Yet Edom revolted from under 
the hand of Judah, unto this day. Then 
did Libnah revolt at the same time. 
23And the rest of the acts of Joram, and 
all that he did, are they not written in 
the book of the chronicles of the kings 
of Judah? 24And Joram slept with his 
fathers, and was buried with his fathers 
in the city of David; and Ahaziah his 
son reigned in his stead. 

25In the twelfth year of Joram the 
son of Ahab king of Israel did Ahaziah 
the son of Jehoram king of Judah 
begin to reign. 26Two and twenty years 
old was Ahaziah when he began to 
reign; and he reigned one year in 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was 
Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of 
Israel. 27And he walked in the way of 
the house of Ahab, and did that which 
was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did 
the house of Ahab; for he was the son-
in-law of the house of Ahab. 28And he 
went with Joram the son of Ahab to 
war against Hazael king of Aram at 
Ramoth-gilead; and the Arameans 
wounded Joram. 29And king Joram 
returned to be healed in Jezreel of the 
wounds which the Arameans had 
given him at Ramah, when he fought 
against Hazael king of Aram. And 
Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of 
Judah went down to see Joram the son 
of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was 
sick. 

 

And Elisha the prophet called one 
of the sons of the prophets, and 
said unto him: ‘Gird up thy loins, and 
take this vial of oil in thy hand, and go 
to Ramoth-gilead. 2And when thou 
comest thither, look out there Jehu the 
son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, 
and go in, and make him arise up from 
among his brethren, and carry him to 
an inner chamber. 3Then take the vial 
of oil, and pour it on his head, and say: 
Thus saith the LORD: I have anointed 
thee king over Israel. Then open the 
door, and flee, and tarry not.’ 4So the 
young man, even the young man the 
prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead. 5And 
when he came, behold, the captains of 
the host were sitting; and he said: ‘I 
have an errand to thee, O captain.’ 
And Jehu said: ‘Unto which of us all?’ 
And he said: ‘To thee, O captain.’ 
6And he arose, and went into the 
house; and he poured the oil on his 
head, and said unto him: ‘Thus saith 
9 




the LORD, the God of Israel: I have 
anointed thee king over the people of 
the LORD, even over Israel. 7And thou 
shalt smite the house of Ahab thy 
master, that I may avenge the blood of 
My servants the prophets, and the 
blood of all the servants of the LORD, at 
the hand of Jezebel. 8For the whole 
house of Ahab shall perish; and I will 
cut off from Ahab every man-child, 
and him that is shut up and him that is 
left at large in Israel. 9And I will make 
the house of Ahab like the house of 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like 
the house of Baasa the son of Ahijah. 
10And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the 
portion of Jezreel, and there shall be 
none to bury her.’ And he opened the 
door, and fled. 

11Then Jehu came forth to the 
servants of his lord; and one said unto 
him: ‘Is all well? wherefore came this 
mad fellow to thee?’ And he said unto 
them: ‘Ye know the man and what his 
talk was.’ 12And they said: ‘It is false; 
tell us now.’ And he said: ‘Thus and 
thus spoke he to me, saying: Thus 
saith the LORD: I have anointed thee 
king over Israel.’ 13Then they 
hastened, and took every man his 
garment, and put it under him on the 
top of the stairs, and blew the horn, 
saying: ‘Jehu is king.’ 

14So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the 
son of Nimshi conspired against 
Joram.—Now Joram had been 
guarding Ramoth-gilead, he and all 
Israel, because of Hazael king of 
Aram; 15but king aJoram was returned 
to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds 
which the Arameans had given him, 
when he fought with Hazael king of 
Aram.—And Jehu said: ‘If this be your 
mind, then let none escape and go 
forth out of the city, to go to tell it in 
Jezreel.’ 16So Jehu rode in a chariot, 
and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay 
there. And Ahaziah king of Judah was 
come down to see Joram. 

a Heb. Jehoram, and in verses 17, 21, 
22, 23, 24. 

17Now the watchman stood on the 
tower in Jezreel, and he spied the 
company of Jehu as he came, and said: 
‘I see a company.’ And Joram said: 
‘Take a horseman, and send to meet 
them, and let him say: Is it peace?’ 
18So there went one on horseback to 
meet him, and said: ‘Thus saith the 
king: Is it peace?’ And Jehu said: 
‘What hast thou to do with peace? turn 
thee behind me.’ And the watchman 
told, saying: ‘The messenger came to 
them, but he cometh not back.’ 19Then 
he sent out a second on horseback, 
who came to them, and said: ‘Thus 
saith the king: Is it peace?’ And Jehu 
answered: ‘What hast thou to do with 
peace? turn thee behind me.’ 20And the 
watchman told, saying: ‘He came even 
unto them, and cometh not back; and 
the driving is like the driving of Jehu 
the son of Nimshi; for he driveth 
furiously.’ 

21And Joram said: ‘Make ready.’ 
And they made ready his chariot. And 


Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king 
of Judah went out, each in his chariot, 
and they went out to meet Jehu, and 
found him in the portion of Naboth the 
Jezreelite. 22And it came to pass, when 
Joram saw Jehu, that he said: ‘Is it 
peace, Jehu?’ And he answered: ‘What 
peace, so long as the harlotries of thy 
mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are 
so many?’ 23And Joram turned his 
hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah: 
‘There is treachery, O Ahaziah.’ 24And 
Jehu drew his bow with his full 
strength, and smote Joram between his 
arms, and the arrow went out at his 
heart, and he sunk down in his chariot. 
25Then said [Jehu] to Bidkar his 
captain: ‘Take up, and cast him in the 
portion of the field of Naboth the 
Jezreelite; for remember how that, 
when I and thou rode together after 
Ahab his father, the LORD pronounced 
this burden against him: 26Surely I 
have seen yesterday the blood of 
Naboth, and the blood of his sons, 
saith the LORD; and I will requite thee 
in this plot, saith the LORD. Now 
therefore take and cast him into the 
plot of ground, according to the word 
of the LORD.’ 

27But when Ahaziah the king of 
Judah saw this, he fled by the way of 
the garden-house. And Jehu followed 
after him, and said: ‘Smite him also in 
the chariot’; [and they smote him] at 
the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam. 
And he fled to Megiddo, and died 
there. 28And his servants carried him in 
a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him 
in his sepulchre with his fathers in the 
city of David. 

29And in the eleventh year of Joram 
the son of Ahab began Ahaziah to 
reign over Judah. 

30And when Jehu was come to 
Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she 
painted her eyes, and attired her head, 
and looked out at the window. 31And 
as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said: 
‘Is it peace, thou Zimri, thy master’s 
murderer?’ 32And he lifted up his face 
to the window, and said: ‘Who is on 
my side? who?’ And there looked out 
to him two or three officers. 33And he 
said: ‘Throw her down.’ So they threw 
her down; and some of her blood was 
sprinkled on the wall, and on the 
horses; and she was trodden under 
foot. 34And when he was come in, he 
did eat and drink; and he said: ‘Look 
now after this cursed woman, and bury 
her; for she is a king’s daughter.’ 
35And they went to bury her; but they 
found no more of her than the skull, 
and the feet, and the palms of her 
hands. 36Wherefore they came back, 
and told him. And he said: ‘This is the 
word of the LORD, which He spoke by 
His servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying: 
In the portion of Jezreel shall the dogs 
eat the flesh of Jezebel; 37and the 
carcass of Jezebel shall be as dung 
upon the face of the field in the portion 
of Jezreel; so that they shall not say: 
This is Jezebel.’ 

Now Ahab had seventy sons in 
Samaria. And Jehu wrote 
letters, and sent to Samaria, unto the 
10 




rulers of Jezreel, even the elders, and 
unto them that brought up [the sons 
of]Ahab, saying: 2’And now as soon as 
this letter cometh to you, seeing your 
master’s sons are with you, and there 
are with you chariots and horses, 
fortified cities also, and armour; 3look 
ye out the best and meetest of your 
master’s sons, and set him on his 
father’s throne, and fight for your 
master’s house.’ 4But they were 
exceedingly afraid, and said: ‘Behold, 
the two kings stood not before him; 
how then shall we stand?’ 5And he that 
was over the household, and he that 
was over the city, the elders also, and 
they that brought up the children, sent 
to Jehu, saying: ‘We are thy servants, 
and will do all that thou shalt bid us; 
we will not make any man king; do 
thou that which is good in thine eyes.’ 
6Then he wrote a letter the second time 
to them, saying: ‘If ye be on my side, 
and if ye will hearken unto my voice, 
take ye the heads of the men your 
master’s sons, and come to me to 
Jezreel by to-morrow this time.’ Now 
the king’s sons, being seventy persons, 
were with the great men of the city, 
who brought them up. 7And it came to 
pass, when the letter came to them, 
that they took the king’s sons, and 
slew them, even seventy persons, and 
put their heads in baskets, and sent 
them unto him to Jezreel. 8And there 
came a messenger, and told him, 
saying: ‘They have brought the heads 
of the king’s sons.’ And he said: ‘Lay 
ye them in two heaps at the entrance of 
the gate until the morning.’ 9And it 
came to pass in the morning, that he 
went out, and stood, and said to all the 
people: ‘Ye are righteous; behold, I 
conspired against my master, and slew 
him; but who smote all these? 10Know 
now that there shall fall unto the earth 
nothing of the word of the LORD, which 
the LORD spoke concerning the house 
of Ahab; for the LORD hath done that 
which He spoke by His servant Elijah.’ 
11So Jehu smote all that remained of 
the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all 
his great men, and his familiar friends, 
and his priests, until there was left him 
none remaining. 

12And he arose and departed, and 
went to Samaria. And as he was at the 
shearing-house of the shepherds in the 
way, 13Jehu met with the brethren of 
Ahaziah king of Judah, and said: ‘Who 
are ye?’ And they answered: ‘We are 
the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go 
down to salute the children of the king 
and the children of the queen.’ 14And 
he said: ‘Take them alive.’ And they 
took them alive, and slew them at the 
pit of the shearing-house, even two 
and forty men; neither left he any of 
them. 

15And when he was departed thence, 
he lighted on Jehonadab the son of 
Rechab coming to meet him; and he 
saluted him, and said to him: ‘Is thy 
heart right, as my heart is with thy 
heart?’ And Jehonadab answered: ‘It 
is.’ ’If it be, [said Jehu,] give me thy 
hand.’ And he gave him his hand; and 
he took him up to him into the chariot. 


16And he said: ‘Come with me, and see 
my zeal for the LORD.’ So they made 
him ride in his chariot. 17And when he 
came to Samaria, he smote all that 
remained unto Ahab in Samaria, till he 
had destroyed him, according to the 
word of the LORD, which He spoke to 
Elijah. 

18And Jehu gathered all the people 
together, and said unto them: ‘Ahab 
served Baal a little; but Jehu will serve 
him much. 19Now therefore call unto 
me all the prophets of Baal, all his 
worshippers, and all his priests, let 
none be wanting; for I have a great 
sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever 
shall be wanting, he shall not live.’ But 
Jehu did it in subtlety, to the intent that 
he might destroy the worshippers of 
Baal. 20And Jehu said: ‘Sanctify a 
solemn assembly for Baal.’ And they 
proclaimed it. 21And Jehu sent through 
all Israel; and all the worshippers of 
Baal came, so that there was not a man 
left that came not. And they came into 
the house of Baal; and the house of 
Baal was filled from one end to 
another. 22And he said unto him that 
was over the vestry: ‘Bring forth 
vestments for all the worshippers of 
Baal.’ And he brought them forth 
vestments. 23And Jehu went, and 
Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the 
house of Baal; and he said unto the 
worshippers of Baal: ‘Search, and look 
that there be here with you none of the 
servants of the LORD, but the 
worshippers of Baal only.’ 24And they 
went in to offer sacrifices and burnt-
offerings. Now Jehu had appointed 
him fourscore men without, and said: 
‘If any of the men whom I bring into 
your hands escape, his life shall be for 
the life of him.’ 

25And it came to pass, as soon as he 
had made an end of offering the burnt-
offering, that Jehu said to the guard 
and to the captains: ‘Go in, and slay 
them; let none come forth.’ And they 
smote them with the edge of the 
sword; and the guard and the captains 
cast them out, and went to the city of 
the house of Baal. 26And they brought 
forth the pillars that were in the house 
of Baal, and burned them. 27And they 
broke down the pillar of Baal, and 
broke down the house of Baal, and 
made it a draught-house, unto this day. 

28Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of 
Israel. 29Howbeit from the sins of 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith 
he made Israel to sin, Jehu departed 
not from after them, the golden calves 
that were in Beth-el, and that were in 
Dan. 30And the LORD said unto Jehu: 
‘Because thou hast done well in 
executing that which is right in Mine 
eyes, and hast done unto the house of 
Ahab according to all that was in My 
heart, thy sons of the fourth generation 
shall sit on the throne of Israel.’ 31But 
Jehu took no heed to walk in the law 
of the LORD, the God of Israel, with all 
his heart; he departed not from the sins 
of Jeroboam, wherewith he made 
Israel to sin. 

32In those days the LORD began to 
cut Israel short; and Hazael smote 


them in all the borders of Israel: 33from 
the Jordan eastward, all the land of 
Gilead, the Gadites, and the 
Reubenites, and the Manassites, from 
Aroer, which is by the valley of 
Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan. 
34Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and 
all that he did, and all his might, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 35And 
Jehu slept with his fathers; and they 
buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz 
his son reigned in his stead. 36And the 
time that Jehu reigned over Israel in 
Samaria was twenty and eight years. 

Now when Athaliah the 
mother of Ahaziah saw that 
her son was dead, she arose and 
destroyed all the seed royal. 2But 
Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, 
sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son 
of Ahaziah, and stole him away from 
among the king’s sons that were slain, 
even him and his nurse, and put them 
in the bed-chamber; and they hid him 
from Athaliah, so that he was not slain. 
3And he was with her hid in the house 
of the LORD six years; and Athaliah 
reigned over the land. 

4And in the seventh year Jehoiada 
sent and fetched the captains over 
hundreds, of the Carites and of the 
guard, and brought them to him into 
the house of the LORD; and he made a 
covenant with them, and took an oath 
of them in the house of the LORD, and 
showed them the king’s son. 5And he 
commanded them, saying: ‘This is the 
thing that ye shall do: a third part of 
you, that come in on the sabbath, and 
that keep the watch of the king’s 
house— 6now another third part was at 
the gate Sur, and another third part at 
the gate behind the guard—shall keep 
the watch of the house, and be a 
barrier. 7And the other two parts of 
you, even all that go forth on the 
sabbath, shall keep the watch of the 
house of the LORD about the king. 8And 
ye shall compass the king round about, 
every man with his weapons in his 
hand; and he that cometh within the 
ranks, let him be slain; and be ye with 
the king when he goeth out, and when 
he cometh in.’ 

9And the captains over hundreds did 
according to all that Jehoiada the priest 
commanded; and they took every man 
his men, those that were to come in on 
the sabbath, with those that were to go 
out on the sabbath, and came to 
Jehoiada the priest. 10And the priest 
delivered to the captains over hundreds 
the spear and shields that had been 
king David’s, which were in the house 
of the LORD. 11And the guard stood, 
every man with his weapons in his 
hand, from the right side of the house 
to the left side of the house, along by 
the altar and the house, by the king 
round about. 12Then he brought out the 
king’s son, and put upon him the 
crown and the insignia; and they made 
him king, and anointed him; and they 
clapped their hands, and said: ‘Long 
live the king.’ 

13And when Athaliah heard the 
noise of the guard and of the people, 
11 




she came to the people into the house 
of the LORD. 14And she looked, and, 
behold, the king stood on the platform, 
as the manner was, and the captains 
and the trumpets by the king; and all 
the people of the land rejoiced, and 
blew with trumpets. Then Athaliah 
rent her clothes, and cried: ‘Treason, 
treason.’ 15And Jehoiada the priest 
commanded the captains of hundreds, 
the officers of the host, and said unto 
them: ‘Have her forth between the 
ranks; and him that followeth her slay 
with the sword’; for the priest said: 
‘Let her not be slain in the house of the 
LORD.’ 16So they made way for her; 
and she went by the way of the 
horses’entry to the king’s house; and 
there was she slain. 

17And Jehoiada made a covenant 
between the LORD and the king and the 
people, that they should be the LORD’S 
people; between the king also and the 
people. 18And all the people of the land 
went to the house of Baal, and broke it 
down; his altars and his images broke 
they in pieces thoroughly, and slew 
Mattan the priest of Baal before the 
altars. And the priest appointed 
officers over the house of the LORD. 
19And he took the captains over 
hundreds, and the Carites, and the 
guard, and all the people of the land; 
and they brought down the king from 
the house of the LORD, and came by the 
way of the gate of the guard unto the 
king’s house. And he sat on the throne 
of the kings. 20So all the people of the 
land rejoiced, and the city was quiet; 
and they slew Athaliah with the sword 
at the king’s house. 

Jehoash was seven years old 
when he began to reign. 2In the 
seventh year of Jehu began Jehoash to 
reign; and he reigned forty years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Zibiah of Beer-sheba. 3And Jehoash 
did that which was right in the eyes of 
the LORD all his days wherein Jehoiada 
the priest instructed him. 4Howbeit the 
high places were not taken away; the 
people still sacrificed and offered in 
the high places. 

5And Jehoash said to the priests: 
‘All the money of the hallowed things 
that is brought into the house of the 
LORD, in current money, the money of 
the persons for whom each man is 
rated, all the money that cometh into 
any man’s heart to bring into the house 
of the LORD, 6let the priests take it to 
them, every man from him that 
bestoweth it upon him; and they shall 
repair the breaches of the house, 
wheresoever any breach shall be 
found.’ 7But it was so, that in the three 
and twentieth year of king Jehoash the 
priests had not repaired the breaches of 
the house. 8Then king Jehoash called 
for Jehoiada the priest, and for the 
other priests, and said unto them: 
‘Why repair ye not the breaches of the 
house? now therefore take no longer 
money from them that bestow it upon 
you, but deliver it for the breaches of 
the house.’ 9And the priests consented 
that they should take no longer money 
12 




from the people, neither repair the 
breaches of the house. 

10And Jehoiada the priest took a 
chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, 
and set it beside the altar, on the right 
side as one cometh into the house of 
the LORD; and the priests that kept the 
threshold put therein all the money 
that was brought into the house of the 
LORD. 11And it was so, when they saw 
that there was much money in the 
chest, that the king’s scribe and the 
high priest came up, and they put up in 
bags and counted the money that was 
found in the house of the LORD. 12And 
they gave the money that was weighed 
out into the hands of them that did the 
work, that had the oversight of the 
house of the LORD; and they paid it out 
to the carpenters and the builders, that 
wrought upon the house of the LORD, 
13and to the masons and the hewers of 
stone, and for buying timber and hewn 
stone to repair the breaches of the 
house of the LORD, and for all that was 
laid out for the house to repair it. 14But 
there were not made for the house of 
the LORD cups of silver, snuffers, 
basins, trumpets, any vessels of gold, 
or vessels of silver, of the money that 
was brought into the house of the 
LORD; 15for they gave that to them that 
did the work, and repaired therewith 
the house of the LORD. 16Moreover they 
reckoned not with the men, into whose 
hand they delivered the money to give 
to them that did the work; for they 
dealt faithfully. 17The forfeit money, 
and the sin money, was not brought 
into the house of the LORD; it was the 
priests. 

18Then Hazael king of Aram went 
up, and fought against Gath, and took 
it; and Hazael set his face to go up to 
Jerusalem. 19And Jehoash king Judah 
took all the hallowed things that 
Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and 
Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, 
had dedicated, and his own hallowed 
things, and all the gold that was found 
in the treasures of the house of the 
LORD, and of the king’s house, and sent 
it to Hazael king of Aram; and he went 
away from Jerusalem. 

20Now the rest of the acts of Joash, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Judah? 21And his servants 
arose, and made a conspiracy, and 
smote Joash at Beth-millo, on the way 
that goeth down to Silla. 22 For Jozacar 
the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad 
the son of Shomer, his servants, smote 
him, and he died; and they buried him 
with his fathers in the city of David; 
and Amaziah his son reigned in his 
stead. 

In the three and twentieth year 
of Joash the son of Ahaziah, 
king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of 
Jehu began to reign over Israel in 
Samaria, and reigned seventeen years. 
2And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, and followed the 
sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
wherewith he made Israel to sin; he 
departed not therefrom. 3And the anger 
of the LORD was kindled against Israel, 
13 




and He delivered them into the hand of 
Hazael king of Aram, and into the 
hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael, 
continually. 4And Jehoahaz besought 
the LORD, and the LORD hearkened unto 
him; for He saw the oppression of 
Israel, how that the king of Aram 
oppressed them.— 5And the LORD gave 
Israel a deliverer, so that they went out 
from under the hand of the Arameans; 
and the children of Israel dwelt in their 
tents, as beforetime. 6Nevertheless 
they departed not from the sins of the 
house of Jeroboam, wherewith he 
made Israel to sin, but walked therein; 
and there remained the Asherah also in 
Samaria.— 7For there was not left to 
Jehoahaz of the people save fifty 
horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten 
thousand footmen; for the king of 
Aram destroyed them, and made them 
like the dust in threshing. 8Now the 
rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all 
that he did, and his might, are they not 
written in the book of the chronicles of 
the kings of Israel? 9And Jehoahaz 
slept with his fathers; and they buried 
him in Samaria; and Joash his son 
reigned in his stead. 

10In the thirty and seventh year of 
Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the 
son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in 
Samaria, and reigned sixteen years. 
11And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD; he departed not from 
all the sins of Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to 
sin; but he walked therein. 12Now the 
rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he 
did, and his might wherewith he 
fought against Amaziah king of Judah, 
are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 13And 
Joash slept with his fathers; and 
Jeroboam sat upon his throne; and 
Joash was buried in Samaria with the 
kings of Israel. 

14Now Elisha was fallen sick of his 
sickness whereof he was to die; and 
Joash the king of Israel came down 
unto him, and wept over him, and said: 
‘My father, my father, the chariots of 
Israel and the horsemen thereof! ’ 
15And Elisha said unto him: ‘Take bow 
and arrows’; and he took unto him 
bow and arrows. 16And he said to the 
king of Israel: ‘Put thy hand upon the 
bow’; and he put his hand upon it. And 
Elisha laid his hands upon the king’s 
hands. 17And he said: ‘Open the 
window eastward’; and he opened it. 
Then Elisha said: ‘Shoot’; and he shot. 
And he said: ‘The LORD’S arrow of 
victory, even the arrow of victory 
against Aram; for thou shalt smite the 
Arameans in Aphek, till thou have 
consumed them.’ 18And he said: ‘Take 
the arrows’; and he took them. And he 
said unto the king of Israel: ‘Smite 
upon the ground’; and he smote thrice, 
and stayed. 19And the man of God was 
wroth with him, and said: ‘Thou 
shouldest have smitten five or six 
times; then hadst thou smitten Aram 
till thou hadst consumed it; whereas 
now thou shalt smite Aram but thrice.’ 

20And Elisha died, and they buried 
him. Now the bands of the Moabites 


used to invade the land at the coming 
in of the year. 21And it came to pass, as 
they were burying a man, that, behold, 
they spied a band; and they cast the 
man into the sepulchre of Elisha; and 
as soon as the man touched the bones 
of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on 
his feet. 

22And Hazael king of Aram 
oppressed Israel all the days of 
Jehoahaz. 23But the LORD was gracious 
unto them, and had compassion on 
them, and had respect unto them, 
because of His covenant with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would 
not destroy them, neither hath He cast 
them from His presence until now. 
24And Hazael king of Aram died; and 
Ben-hadad his son reigned in his stead. 
25And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz 
took again out of the hand of Ben-
hadad the son of Hazael the cities 
which he had taken out of the hand of 
Jehoahaz his father by war. Three 
times did Joash smite him, and 
recovered the cities of Israel. 

In the second year of Joash 
son of Joahaz king of Israel 
began Amaziah the son of Joash king 
of Judah to reign. 2He was twenty and 
five years old when he began to reign; 
and he reigned twenty and nine years 
in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name 
was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 3And he 
did that which was right in the eyes of 
the LORD, yet not like David his father; 
he did according to all that Joash his 
father had done. 4Howbeit the high 
places were not taken away; the people 
still sacrificed and offered in the high 
places. 5And it came to pass, as soon 
as the kingdom was established in his 
hand, that he slew his servants who 
had slain the king his father; 6but the 
children of the murderers he put not to 
death; according to that which is 
written in the book of the law of 
Moses, as the LORD commanded 
saying: ‘The fathers shall not be put to 
death for the children, nor the children 
be put to death for the fathers; but 
every man shall be put to death for his 
own sin.’ 7He slew of Edom in the 
Valley of Salt ten thousand, and took 
Sela by war, and called the name of it 
Joktheel, unto this day. 

8Then Amaziah sent messengers to 
Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of 
Jehu, king of Israel, saying: ‘Come, let 
us look one another in the face.’ 9And 
Jehoash the king of Israel sent to 
Amaziah king of Judah, saying: ‘The 
thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the 
cedar that was in Lebanon, saying: 
Give thy daughter to my son to wife; 
and there passed by the wild beasts 
that were in Lebanon, and trod down 
the thistle. 10Thou hast indeed smitten 
Edom, and will thy heart lift thee up? 
glory therein, and remain at home; for 
why shouldest thou meddle with evil, 
that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and 
Judah with thee? 11But Amaziah would 
not hear. So Jehoash king of Israel 
went up; and he and Amaziah king of 
Judah looked one another in the face at 
Beth-shemesh, which belongeth to 
Judah. 12And Judah was put to the 
14 




worse before Israel; and they fled 
every man to his tent. 13And Jehoash 
king of Israel took Amaziah king of 
Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of 
Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and came 
to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall 
of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim 
unto the corner gate, four hundred 
cubits. 14And he took all the gold and 
silver, and all the vessels that were 
found in the house of the LORD, and in 
the treasures of the king’s house, the 
hostages also, and returned to Samaria. 

15Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash 
which he did, and his might, and how 
he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, 
are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 16And 
Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was 
buried in Samaria with the kings of 
Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in 
his stead. 

17And Amaziah the son of Joash 
king of Judah lived after the death of 
Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel 
fifteen years. 18Now the rest of the acts 
of Amaziah, are they not written in the 
book of the chronicles of the kings of 
Judah? 19And they made a conspiracy 
against him in Jerusalem; and he fled 
to Lachish; but they sent after him to 
Lachish, and slew him there. 20And 
they brought him upon horses; and he 
was buried at Jerusalem with his 
fathers in the city of David. 21And all 
the people of Judah took Azariah, who 
was sixteen years old, and made him 
king in the room of his father 
Amaziah. 22He built Elath, and 
restored it to Judah, after that the king 
slept with his fathers. 

23In the fifteenth year of Amaziah 
the son of Joash king of Judah 
Jeroboam the son of Joash king of 
Israel began to reign in Samaria, and 
reigned forty and one years. 24And he 
did that which was evil in the sight of 
the LORD; he departed not from all the 
sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
wherewith he made Israel to sin. 25He 
restored the border of Israel from the 
entrance of Hamath unto the sea of the 
Arabah, according to the word of the 
LORD, the God of Israel, which He 
spoke by the hand of His servant Jonah 
the son of Amittai, the prophet, who 
was of Gath-hepher. 26For the LORD 
saw the affliction of Israel, that it was 
very bitter; for there was none shut up 
nor left at large, neither was there any 
helper for Israel. 27And the LORD said 
not that He would blot out the name of 
Israel from under heaven; but He 
saved them by the hand of Jeroboam 
the son of Joash. 

28Now the rest of the acts of 
Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his 
might, how he warred, and how he 
recovered Damascus, and Hamath, for 
Judah in Israel, are they not written in 
the book of the chronicles of the kings 
of Israel? 29And Jeroboam slept with 
his fathers, even with the kings of 
Israel; and Zechariah his son reigned 
in his stead. 

In the twenty and seventh year 
of Jeroboam king of Israel 15 




began aAzariah son of Amaziah king 
of Judah to reign. 2Sixteen years old 
was he when he began to reign; and he 
reigned two and fifty years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 3And he did that 
which was right in the eyes of the 
LORD, according to all that his father 
Amaziah had done. 4Howbeit the high 
places were not taken away; the people 
still sacrificed and offered in the high 
places. 5And the LORD smote the king, 
so that he was a leper unto the day of 
his death, and dwelt in a house set 
apart. And Jotham the king’s son was 
over the household, judging the people 
of the land. 6Now the rest of the acts of 
Azariah, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 7And 
Azariah slept with his fathers; and they 
buried him with his fathers in the city 
of David; and Jotham his son reigned 
in his stead. 

a In verses 13, 30, &c., Uzziah. 

8In the thirty and eighth year of 
Azariah king of Judah did Zechariah 
the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel 
in Samaria six months. 9And he did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, as his fathers had done; he 
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, wherewith he made 
Israel to sin. 10And Shallum the son of 
Jabesh conspired against him, and 
smote him before the people, and slew 
him, and reigned in his stead. 11Now 
the rest of the acts of Zechariah, 

behold, they are written in the book of 
the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
12This was the word of the LORD which 
He spoke unto Jehu, saying: ‘Thy sons 
to the fourth generation shall sit upon 
the throne of Israel.’ And so it came to 
pass. 

13Shallum the son of Jabesh began 
to reign in the nine and thirtieth year 
of Uzziah king of Judah; and he 
reigned the space of a month in 
Samaria. 14And Menahem the son of 
Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came 
to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son 
of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him, 
and reigned in his stead. 15Now the rest 
of the acts of Shallum, and his 
conspiracy which he made, behold, 
they are written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
16Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and 
all that were therein, and the borders 
thereof, from Tirzah; because they 
opened not to him, therefore he smote 
it; and all the women therein that were 
with child he ripped up. 

17In the nine and thirtieth year of 
Azariah king of Judah began 
Menahem the son of Gadi to reign 
over Israel, and reigned ten years in 
Samaria. 18And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD; he 
departed not all his days from the sins 
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
wherewith he made Israel to sin. 
19There came against the land Pul the 
king of Assyria; and Menahem gave 
Pul a thousand talents of silver, that 
his hand might be with him to confirm 


the kingdom in his hand. 20And 
Menahem exacted the money of Israel, 
even of all the mighty men of wealth, 
of each man fifty shekels of silver, to 
give to the king of Assyria. So the king 
of Assyria turned back, and stayed not 
there in the land. 21Now the rest of the 
acts of Menahem, and all that he did, 
are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 22And 
Menahem slept with his fathers; and 
Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead. 

23In the fiftieth year of Azariah king 
of Judah Pekahiah the son of 
Menahem began to reign over Israel in 
Samaria, and reigned two years. 24And 
he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the LORD; he departed not from the 
sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
wherewith he made Israel to sin. 25And 
Pekah the son of Remaliah, his 
captain, conspired against him, and 
smote him in Samaria, in the castle of 
the king’s house, by Argob and by 
Arieh; and with him were fifty men of 
the Gileadites; and he slew him, and 
reigned in his stead. 26Now the rest of 
the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he 
did, behold, they are written in the 
book of the chronicles of the kings of 
Israel. 27In the two and fiftieth year of 
Azariah king of Judah Pekah the son 
of Remaliah began to reign over Israel 
in Samaria, and reigned twenty years. 
28And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD; he departed not from 
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
wherewith he made Israel to sin. 29In 
the days of Pekah king of Israel came 
Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and 
took Ijon, and Abel-beth-maacah, and 
Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and 
Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of 
Naphtali; and he carried them captive 
to Assyria. 30And Hoshea the son of 
Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah 
the son of Remaliah, and smote him, 
and slew him, and reigned in his stead, 
in the twentieth year of Jotham the son 
of Uzziah. 31Now the rest of the acts of 
Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they 
are written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel. 

32In the second year of Pekah the 
son of Remaliah king of Israel began 
Jotham the son of Uzziah king of 
Judah to reign. 33Five and twenty years 
old was he when he began to reign; 
and he reigned sixteen years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Jerusha the daughter of Zadok. 34And 
he did that which was right in the eyes 
of the LORD; he did according to all 
that his father Uzziah had done. 
35Howbeit the high places were not 
taken away; the people still sacrificed 
and offered in the high places. He built 
the upper gate of the house of the 
LORD. 36Now the rest of the acts of 
Jotham, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 37In 
those days the LORD began to send 
against Judah Rezin the king of Aram, 
and Pekah the son of Remaliah. 38And 
Jotham slept with his fathers, and was 
buried with his fathers in the city of 


David his father; and Ahaz his son 
reigned in his stead. 

In the seventeenth year of 
Pekah the son of Remaliah 
Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah 
began to reign. 2Twenty years old was 
Ahaz when he began to reign; and he 
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and 
he did not that which was right in the 
eyes of the LORD his God, like David 
his father. 3But he walked in the way 
of the kings of Israel, yea, and made 
his son to pass through the fire, 
according to the abominations of the 
heathen, whom the LORD cast out from 
before the children of Israel. 4And he 
sacrificed and offered in the high 
places, and on the hills, and under 
every leafy tree. 

5Then Rezin king of Aram and 
Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel 
came up to Jerusalem to war; and they 
besieged Ahaz, but could not 
overcome him. 6At that time Rezin 
king of Aram recovered Elath to 
Aram, and drove the Jews from aElath; 
and the Edomites came to Elath, and 
dwelt there, unto this day. 

a Heb. Eloth. 

7So Ahaz sent messengers to 
Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying: 
‘I am thy servant and thy son; come 
up, and save me out of the hand of the 
king of Aram, and out of the hand of 
the king of Israel, who rise up against 
me.’ 8And Ahaz took the silver and 
gold that was found in the house of the 
LORD, and in the treasures of the king’s 

house, and sent it for a present to the 
king of Assyria. 9And the king of 
Assyria hearkened unto him; and the 
king of Assyria went up against 
Damascus, and took it, and carried the 
people of it captive to Kir, and slew 
Rezin. 

10And king Ahaz went to Damascus 
to meet Tiglath-pileser king of 
Assyria, and saw the altar that was at 
Damascus; and king Ahaz sent to 
Urijah the priest the fashion of the 
altar, and the pattern of it, according to 
all the workmanship thereof. 11And 
Urijah the priest built an altar; 
according to all that king Ahaz had 
sent from Damascus, so did Urijah the 
priest make it against the coming of 
king Ahaz from Damascus. 12And 
when the king was come from 
Damascus, the king saw the altar; and 
the king drew near unto the altar, and 
offered thereon. 13And he offered his 
burnt-offering and his meal-offering, 
and poured his drink-offering, and 
dashed the blood of his peace-
offerings against the altar. 14And the 
brazen altar, which was before the 
LORD, he brought from the forefront of 
the house, from between his altar and 
the house of the LORD, and put it on the 
north side of his altar. 15And king 
Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, 
saying: ‘Upon the great altar offer the 
morning burnt-offering, and the 
evening meal-offering, and the king’s 
burnt-offering, and his meal-offering, 
with the burnt-offering of all the 
people of the land, and their meal-
16 




offering, and their drink-offerings; and 
dash against it all the blood of the 
burnt-offering, and all the blood of the 
sacrifice; but the brazen altar shall be 
for me to look to.’ 16Thus did Urijah 
the priest, according to all that king 
Ahaz commanded. 

17And king Ahaz cut off the borders 
of the bases, and removed the laver 
from off them; and took down the sea 
from off the brazen oxen that were 
under it, and put it upon a pavement of 
stone. 18And the covered place for the 
sabbath that they had built in the 
house, and the king’s entry without, 
turned he unto the house of the LORD, 
because of the king of Assyria. 19Now 
the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he 
did, are they not written in the book of 
the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
20And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and 
was buried with his fathers in the city 
of David; and Hezekiah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

In the twelfth year of Ahaz 
king of Judah began Hoshea 
the son of Elah to reign in Samaria 
over Israel, and reigned nine years. 
2And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, yet not as the kings 
of Israel that were before him. 
3Against him came up Shalmaneser 
king of Assyria; and Hoshea became 
his servant, and brought him presents. 
4And the king of Assyria found 
conspiracy in Hoshea; for he had sent 
messengers to So king of Egypt, and 
offered no present to the king of 
Assyria, as he had done year by year; 
therefore the king of Assyria shut him 
up, and bound him in prison. 5Then the 
king of Assyria came up throughout all 
the land, and went up to Samaria, and 
besieged it three years. 6In the ninth 
year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria 
took Samaria, and carried Israel away 
unto Assyria, and placed them in 
Halah, and in Habor, on the river of 
Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes. 

7And it was so, because the children 
of Israel had sinned against the LORD 
their God, who brought them up out of 
the land of Egypt from under the hand 
of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had 
feared other gods, 8and walked in the 
statutes of the nations, whom the LORD 
cast out from before the children of 
Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which 
they practised; 9and the children of 
Israel did impute things that were not 
right unto the LORD their God, and they 
built them high places in all their 
cities, from the tower of the watchmen 
to the fortified city; 10and they set 
them up pillars and Asherim upon 
every high hill, and under every leafy 
tree; 11and there they offered in all the 
high places, as did the nations whom 
the LORD carried away before them; 
and wrought wicked things to provoke 
the LORD; 12and they served idols, 
whereof the LORD had said unto them: 
‘Ye shall not do this thing’; 13yet the 
LORD forewarned Israel, and Judah, by 
the hand of every prophet, and of 
every seer, saying: ‘Turn ye from your 
evil ways, and keep My 
commandments and My statutes, 
17 




according to all the law which I 
commanded your fathers, and which I 
sent to you by the hand of My servants 
the prophets’; 14notwithstanding they 
would not hear, but hardened their 
neck, like to the neck of their fathers, 
who believed not in the LORD their 
God; 15and they rejected His statutes, 
and His covenant that He made with 
their fathers, and His testimonies 
wherewith He testified against them; 
and they went after things of nought, 
and became nought, and after the 
nations that were round about them, 
concerning whom the LORD had 
charged them that they should not do 
like them; 16and they forsook all the 
commandments of the LORD their God, 
and made them molten images, even 
two calves, and made an Asherah, and 
worshipped all the host of heaven, and 
served Baal; 17and they caused their 
sons and their daughters to pass 
through the fire, and used divination 
and enchantments, and gave 
themselves over to do that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD, to 
provoke Him; 18that the LORD was very 
angry with Israel, and removed them 
out of His sight; there was none left 
but the tribe of Judah only. 19Also 
Judah kept not the commandments of 
the LORD their God, but walked in the 
statutes of Israel which they practised. 
20And the LORD rejected all the seed of 
Israel, and afflicted them, and 
delivered them into the hand of 
spoilers, until He had cast them out of 
His sight. 21For He rent Israel from the 
house of David; and they made 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat king; and 
Jeroboam drew Israel away from 
following the LORD, and made them sin 
a great sin. 22And the children of Israel 
walked in all the sins of Jeroboam 
which he did; they departed not from 
them; 23until the LORD removed Israel 
out of His sight, as He spoke by the 
hand of all His servants the prophets. 
So Israel was carried away out of their 
own land to Assyria, unto this day. 

24And the king of Assyria brought 
men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, 
and from Avva, and from Hamath and 
Sepharvaim, and placed them in the 
cities of Samaria instead of the 
children of Israel; and they possessed 
Samaria, and dwelt in the cities 
thereof. 25And so it was, at the 
beginning of their dwelling there, that 
they feared not the LORD; therefore the 
LORD sent lions among them, which 
killed some of them. 26Wherefore they 
spoke to the king of Assyria, saying: 
‘The nations which thou hast carried 
away, and placed in the cities of 
Samaria, know not the manner of the 
God of the land; therefore He hath sent 
lions among them, and, behold, they 
slay them, because they know not the 
manner of the God of the land.’ 

27Then the king of Assyria 
commanded, saying: ‘Carry thither one 
of the priests whom ye brought from 
thence; and let them go and dwell 
there, and let him teach them the 
manner of the God of the land.’ 28So 
one of the priests whom they had 


carried away from Samaria came and 
dwelt in Beth-el, and taught them how 
they should fear the LORD. 29Howbeit 
every nation made gods of their own, 
and put them in the houses of the high 
places which the Samaritans had 
made, every nation in their cities 
wherein they dwelt. 30And the men of 
Babylon made Succoth-benoth, and 
the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the 
men of Hamath made Ashima, 31and 
the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, 
and the Sepharvites burnt their 
children in the fire to Adrammelech 
and Anammelech, the gods of 
Sepharvaim. 32So they feared the LORD, 
and made unto them from among 
themselves priests of the high places, 
who sacrificed for them in the houses 
of the high places. 33They feared the 
LORD, and served their own gods, after 
the manner of the nations from among 
whom they had been carried away. 

34Unto this day they do after the 
former manners: they fear not the 
LORD, neither do they after their 
statutes, or after their ordinances, or 
after the law or after the 
commandment which the LORD 
commanded the children of Jacob, 
whom He named Israel; 35with whom 
the LORD had made a covenant, and 
charged them, saying: ‘Ye shall not 
fear other gods, nor bow down to 
them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to 
them; 36but the LORD, who brought you 
up out of the land of Egypt with great 
power and with an outstretched arm, 
Him shall ye fear, and Him shall ye 
worship, and to Him shall ye sacrifice; 
37and the statutes and the ordinances, 
and the law and the commandment, 
which He wrote for you, ye shall 
observe to do for evermore; and ye 
shall not fear other gods; 38and the 
covenant that I have made with you ye 
shall not forget; neither shall ye fear 
other gods; 39but the LORD your God 
shall ye fear; and He will deliver you 
out of the hand of all your enemies.’ 
40Howbeit they did not hearken, but 
they did after their former manner. 
41So these nations feared the LORD, and 
served their graven images; their 
children likewise, and their children’s 
children, as did their fathers, so do 
they unto this day. 

18 



Now it came to pass in the 
third year of Hoshea son of 
Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah the 
son of Ahaz king of Judah began to 
reign. 2Twenty and five years old was 
he when he began to reign; and he 
reigned twenty and nine years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Abi the daughter of Zechariah. 3And 
he did that which was right in the eyes 
of the LORD, according to all that 
David his father had done. 4He 
removed the high places, and broke the 
pillars, and cut down the Asherah; and 
he broke in pieces the brazen serpent 
that Moses had made; for unto those 
days the children of Israel did offer to 
it; and it was called aNehushtan. 5He 
trusted in the LORD, the God of Israel; 

a That is, A thing of brass. 


so that after him was none like him 
among all the kings of Judah, nor 
among them that were before him. 
6For he cleaved to the LORD, he 
departed not from following Him, but 
kept His commandments, which the 
LORD commanded Moses. 7And the 
LORD was with him: whithersoever he 
went forth he prospered; and he 
rebelled against the king of Assyria, 
and served him not. 8He smote the 
Philistines unto Gaza and the borders 
thereof, from the tower of the 
watchmen to the fortified city. 9And it 
came to pass in the fourth year of king 
Hezekiah, which was the seventh year 
of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, 
that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came 
up against Samaria, and besieged it. 
10And at the end of three years they 
took it; even in the sixth year of 
Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of 
Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was 
taken. 11And the king of Assyria 
carried Israel away unto Assyria, and 
put them in Halah, and in Habor, on 
the river of Gozan, and in the cities of 
the Medes; 12because they hearkened 
not to the voice of the LORD their God, 
but transgressed His covenant, even all 
that Moses the servant of the LORD 
commanded, and would not hear it, 
nor do it. 

13Now in the fourteenth year of king 
Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of 
Assyria come up against all the 
fortified cities of Judah, and took 
them. 14And Hezekiah king of Judah 
sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, 
saying: ‘I have offended; return from 
me; that which thou puttest on me will 
I bear.’ And the king of Assyria 
appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah 
three hundred talents of silver and 
thirty talents of gold. 15And Hezekiah 
gave him all the silver that was found 
in the house of the LORD, and in the 
treasures of the king’s house. 16At that 
time did Hezekiah cut off the gold 
from the doors of the temple of the 
LORD, and from the door-posts which 
Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, 
and gave it to the king of Assyria. 

17And the king of Assyria sent 
aTartan and bRab-saris and cRab-
shakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah 
with a great army unto Jerusalem. And 
they went up and came to Jerusalem. 
And when they were come up, they 
came and stood by the conduit of the 
upper pool, which is in the highway of 
the fullers’field. 18And when they had 
called to the king, there came out to 
them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who 
was over the household, and Shebnah 
the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph 
the recorder. 

a That is, commander-in-chief. 

b That is, chief of the eunuchs. 

c That is, chief butler. 

19And Rab-shakeh said unto them: 
‘Say ye now to Hezekiah: Thus saith 
the great king, the king of Assyria: 
What confidence is this wherein thou 
trustest? 20Sayest thou that a mere 
word of the lips is counsel and strength 
for the war? Now on whom dost thou 


trust, that thou hast rebelled against 
me? 21Now, behold, thou trustest upon 
the staff of this bruised reed, even 
upon Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it 
will go into his hand, and pierce it; so 
is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all that 
trust on him. 22But if ye say unto me: 
We trust in the LORD our God; is not 
that He, whose high places and whose 
altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and 
hath said to Judah and to Jerusalem: 
Ye shall worship before this altar in 
Jerusalem? 23Now therefore, I pray 
thee, make a wager with my master the 
king of Assyria, and I will give thee 
two thousand horses, if thou be able on 
thy part to set riders upon them. 24How 
then canst thou turn away the face of 
one captain, even of the least of my 
masters servants? and yet thou puttest 
thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for 
horsemen! 25Am I now come up 
without the LORD against this place to 
destroy it? The LORD said unto me: Go 
up against this land, destroy it.’ 

26Then said Eliakim the son of 
Hilkiah, and Shebnah, and Joah, unto 
Rab-shakeh: ‘Speak, I pray thee, to thy 
servants in the Aramean language; for 
we understand it; and speak not with 
us in the Jews’language, in the ears of 
the people that are on the wall.’ 27But 
Rab-shakeh said unto them: ‘Hath my 
master sent me to thy master, and to 
thee, to speak these words? hath he not 
sent me to the men that sit on the wall, 
to eat their own dung, and to drink 
their own water with you?’ 28Then 
Rab-shakeh stood, and cried with a 
loud voice in the Jews’language, and 
spoke, saying: ‘Hear ye the word of 
the great king, the king of Assyria. 
29Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah 
beguile you; for he will not be able to 
deliver you out of his hand; 30neither 
let Hezekiah make you trust in the 
LORD, saying: The LORD will surely 
deliver us, and this city shall not be 
given into the hand of the king of 
Assyria. 31Hearken not to Hezekiah; 
for thus saith the king of Assyria: 
Make your peace with me, and come 
out to me; and eat ye every one of his 
vine, and every one of his fig-tree, and 
drink ye every one the waters of his 
own cistern; 32until I come and take 
you away to a land like your own land, 
a land of corn and wine, a land of 
bread and vineyards, a land of olive-
trees and of honey, that ye may live, 
and not die; and hearken not unto 
Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, 
saying: The LORD will deliver us. 
33Hath any of the gods of the nations 
ever delivered his land out of the hand 
of the king of Assyria? 34Where are the 
gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? where 
are the gods of Sepharvaim, of Hena, 
and Ivvah? have they delivered 
Samaria out of my hand? 35Who are 
they among all the gods of the 
countries, that have delivered their 
country out of my hand, that the LORD 
should deliver Jerusalem out of my 
hand?’ 

36But the people held their peace, 
and answered him not a word; for the 
king’s commandment was, saying: 


‘Answer him not.’ 37Then came 
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was 
over the household, and Shebna the 
scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the 
recorder, to Hezekiah with their 
clothes rent, and told him the words of 
Rab-shakeh. 

And it came to pass, when 
king Hezekiah heard it, that he 
rent his clothes, and covered himself 
with sackcloth, and went into the 
house of the LORD. 2And he sent 
Eliakim, who was over the household, 
and Shebna the scribe, and the elders 
of the priests, covered with sackcloth, 
unto Isaiah the prophet the son of 
Amoz. 3And they said unto him: ‘Thus 
saith Hezekiah: This day is a day of 
trouble, and of rebuke, and of 
contumely; for the children are come 
to the birth, and there is not strength to 
bring forth. 4It may be the LORD thy 
God will hear all the words of Rab-
shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his 
master hath sent to taunt the living 
God, and will rebuke the words which 
the LORD thy God hath heard; 
wherefore make prayer for the remnant 
that is left.’ 5So the servants of king 
Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 6And Isaiah 
said unto them: ‘Thus shall ye say to 
your master: Thus saith the LORD: Be 
not afraid of the words that thou hast 
heard, wherewith the servants of the 
king of Assyria have blasphemed Me. 
7Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and 
he shall hear a rumour, and shall return 
to his own land; and I will cause him 
to fall by the sword in his own land.’ 

8So Rab-shakeh returned, and found 
the king of Assyria warring against 
Libnah; for he had heard that he was 
departed from Lachish. 9And when he 
heard say of Tirhakah king of 
Ethiopia: ‘Behold, he is come out to 
fight against thee’; he sent messengers 
again unto Hezekiah, saying: 10’Thus 
shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of 
Judah, saying: Let not thy God in 
whom thou trustest beguile thee, 
saying: Jerusalem shall not be given 
into the hand of the king of Assyria. 
11Behold, thou hast heard what the 
kings of Assyria have done to all 
lands, by destroying them utterly; and 
shalt thou be delivered? 12Have the 
gods of the nations delivered them, 
which my fathers have destroyed, 
Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and 
the children of Eden that were in 
Telassar? 13Where is the king of 
Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and 
the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of 
Hena, and Ivvah?’ 

14And Hezekiah received the letter 
from the hand of the messengers, and 
read it; and Hezekiah went up unto the 
house of the LORD, and spread it before 
the LORD. 15And Hezekiah prayed 
before the LORD, and said: ‘O LORD, the 
God of Israel, that sittest upon the 
cherubim, Thou art the God, even 
Thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the 
earth; Thou hast made heaven and 
earth. 16Incline Thine ear, O LORD, and 
hear; open Thine eyes, O LORD, and 
see; and hear the words of 
Sennacherib, wherewith he hath sent 
19 




him to taunt the living God. 17Of a 
truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have 
laid waste the nations and their lands, 
18and have cast their gods into the fire; 
for they were no gods, but the work of 
men’s hands, wood and stone; 
therefore they have destroyed them. 
19Now therefore, O LORD our God, 
save Thou us, I beseech Thee, out of 
his hand, that all the kingdoms of the 
earth may know that Thou art the LORD 
God, even Thou only.’ 

20Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent 
to Hezekiah, saying: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel: Whereas thou 
hast prayed to Me against Sennacherib 
king of Assyria, I have heard thee. 
21This is the word that the LORD hath 
spoken concerning him: 

The virgin daughter of Zion 

Hath despised thee and laughed thee 
to scorn; 

The daughter of Jerusalem 

Hath shaken her head at thee. 

22Whom hast thou taunted and 

Blasphemed? 

And against whom hast thou exalted 
thy voice? 

Yea, thou hast lifted up thine eyes 
on high, 

Even against the Holy One of Israel! 

23By the messengers thou hast 
taunted the Lord, 

And hast said: With the multitude of 
my chariots 

Am I come up to the height of the 
mountains, 

To the innermost parts of Lebanon; 

And I have cut down the tall cedars 

 thereof, 

And the choice cypresses thereof; 
and I have entered into his 
farthest lodge, 

The forest of his fruitful field. 

24I have digged and drunk 

Strange waters, 

And with the sole of my feet have I 
dried up 

All the rivers of Egypt. 

 

25Hast thou not heard? 

Long ago I made it, 

In ancient times I fashioned it; 

Now have I brought it to pass, 

Yea, it is done; that fortified cities 

Should be laid waste into ruinous 
heaps. 

26Therefore their inhabitants were of 
small power, 

They were dismayed and 
confounded; 

They were as the grass of the field, 

And as the green herb, 

As the grass on the housetops, 

And as corn blasted before it is 
grown up. 

 

27But I know thy sitting down, and 
thy going out, and thy coming in, 

And thy raging against Me. 

28Because of thy raging against Me, 

And for that thy tumult is come up 
into 

Mine ears, 

Therefore will I put My hook in thy 
nose, 

And My bridle in thy lips, 

And I will turn thee back by the way 


By which thou camest. 

29And this shall be the sign unto 
thee: ye shall eat this year that which 
groweth of itself, and in the second 
year that which springeth of the same; 
and in the third year sow ye, and reap, 
and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit 
thereof. 30And the remnant that is 
escaped of the house of Judah shall 
again take root downward, and bear 
fruit upward. 31For out of Jerusalem 
shall go forth a remnant, and out of 
mount Zion they that shall escape; the 
zeal of the LORD of hosts shall perform 
this. 32Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning the king of Assyria: He 
shall not come unto this city, nor shoot 
an arrow there, neither shall he come 
before it with shield, nor cast a mound 
against it. 33By the way that he came, 
by the same shall he return, and he 
shall not come unto this city, saith the 
LORD. 34For I will defend this city to 
save it, for Mine own sake, and for My 
servant David’s sake.’ 

35And it came to pass that night, that 
the angel of the LORD went forth, and 
smote in the camp of the Assyrians a 
hundred fourscore and five thousand; 
and when men arose early in the 
morning, behold, they were all dead 
corpses. 36So Sennacherib king of 
Assyria departed, and went and 
returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. 37And 
it came to pass, as he was worshipping 
in the house of Nisroch his god, that 
Adrammelech and Sarezer his sons 
smote him with the sword; and they 
escaped into the land of Ararat. And 
Esarhaddon his son reigned in his 
stead. 

In those days was Hezekiah 
sick unto death. And Isaiah the 
prophet the son of Amoz came to him, 
and said unto him: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD: Set thy house in order; for thou 
shalt die, and not live.’ 2Then he 
turned his face to the wall, and prayed 
unto the LORD, saying: 3’Remember 
now, O LORD, I beseech Thee, how I 
have walked before Thee in truth and 
with a whole heart, and have done that 
which is good in Thy sight.’ And 
Hezekiah wept sore. 4And it came to 
pass, before Isaiah was gone out of the 
inner court of the city, that the word of 
the LORD came to him, saying: 
5’Return, and say to Hezekiah the 
prince of My people: Thus saith the 
LORD, the God of David thy father: I 
have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy 
tears; behold, I will heal thee; on the 
third day thou shalt go up unto the 
house of the LORD. 6And I will add 
unto thy days fifteen years; and I will 
deliver thee and this city out of the 
hand of the king of Assyria; and I will 
defend this city for Mine own sake, 
and for My servant David’s sake.’ 
7And Isaiah said: ‘Take a cake of figs.’ 
And they took and laid it on the boil, 
and he recovered. 

8And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah: 
‘What shall be the sign that the LORD 
will heal me, and that I shall go up 
unto the house of the LORD the third 
day?’ 9And Isaiah said: ‘This shall be 
the sign unto thee from the LORD, that 
20 




the LORD will do the thing that He hath 
spoken: shall the shadow go forward 
ten degrees, or go back ten degrees? 
10And Hezekiah answered: ‘It is a light 
thing for the shadow to decline ten 
degrees; nay, but let the shadow return 
backward ten degrees.’ 11And Isaiah 
the prophet cried unto the LORD; and 
he brought the shadow ten degrees 
backward, by which it had gone down 
on the dial of Ahaz. 

12At that time Berodach-baladan the 
son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent 
a letter and a present unto Hezekiah; 
for he had heard that Hezekiah had 
been sick. 13And Hezekiah hearkened 
unto them, and showed them all his 
treasure-house, the silver, and the 
gold, and the spices, and the precious 
oil, and the house of his armour, and 
all that was found in his treasures; 
there was nothing in his house, nor in 
all his dominion, that Hezekiah 
showed them not. 14Then came Isaiah 
the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and 
said unto him: ‘What said these men? 
and from whence came they unto 
thee?’ And Hezekiah said: ‘They are 
come from a far country, even from 
Babylon.’ 15And he said: ‘What have 
they seen in thy house?’ And Hezekiah 
answered: ‘All that is in my house 
have they seen; there is nothing among 
my treasures that I have not shown 
them.’ 

16And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah: 
‘Hear the word of the LORD. 17Behold, 
the days come, that all that is in thy 
house, and that which thy fathers have 
laid up in store unto this day, shall be 
carried to Babylon; nothing shall be 
left, saith the LORD. 18And of thy sons 
that shall issue from thee, whom thou 
shalt beget, shall they take away; and 
they shall be officers in the palace of 
the king of Babylon.’ 19Then said 
Hezekiah unto Isaiah: ‘Good is the 
word of the LORD which thou hast 
spoken.’ He said moreover: ‘Is it not 
so, if peace and truth shall be in my 
days?’ 

20Now the rest of the acts of 
Hezekiah, and all his might, and how 
he made the pool, and the conduit, and 
brought water into the city, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
21And Hezekiah slept with his fathers; 
and Manasseh his son reigned in his 
stead. 

 

Manasseh was twelve years 
old when he began to reign; 
and he reigned five and fifty years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Hephzi-bah. 2And he did that which 
was evil in the sight of the LORD, after 
the abominations of the nations, whom 
the LORD cast out before the children 
of Israel. 3For he built again the high 
places which Hezekiah his father had 
destroyed; and he reared up altars for 
Baal, and made an Asherah, as did 
Ahab king of Israel, and worshipped 
all the host of heaven, and served 
them. 4And he built altars in the house 
of the LORD, whereof the LORD said: ‘In 
Jerusalem will I put My name.’ 5And 
21 




he built altars for all the host of heaven 
in the two courts of the house of the 
LORD. 6And he made his son to pass 
through the fire, and practised 
soothsaying, and used enchantments, 
and appointed them that divined by a 
ghost or a familiar spirit: he wrought 
much evil in the sight of the LORD, to 
provoke Him. 7And he set the graven 
image of Asherah, that he had made, in 
the house of which the LORD said to 
David and to Solomon his son: ‘In this 
house, and in Jerusalem, which I have 
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, 
will I put My name for ever; 8neither 
will I cause the feet of Israel to wander 
any more out of the land which I gave 
their fathers; if only they will observe 
to do according to all that I have 
commanded them, and according to all 
the law that My servant Moses 
commanded them.’ 9But they 
hearkened not; and Manasseh seduced 
them to do that which is evil more than 
did the nations, whom the LORD 
destroyed before the children of Israel. 

10And the LORD spoke by His 
servants the prophets, saying: 
11’Because Manasseh king of Judah 
hath done these abominations, and 
hath done wickedly above all that the 
Amorites did, that were before him, 
and hath made Judah also to sin with 
his idols; 12therefore thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel: Behold, I 
bring such evil upon Jerusalem and 
Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, 
both his ears shall tingle. 13And I will 
stretch over Jerusalem the line of 
Samaria, and the plummet of the house 
of Ahab; and I will wipe Jerusalem as 
a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and 
turning it upside down. 14And I will 
cast off the remnant of Mine 
inheritance, and deliver them into the 
hand of their enemies; and they shall 
become a prey and a spoil to all their 
enemies; 15because they have done that 
which is evil in My sight, and have 
provoked Me, since the day their 
fathers came forth out of Egypt, even 
unto this day.’ 

16Moreover Manasseh shed innocent 
blood very much, till he had filled 
Jerusalem from one end to another; 
beside his sin wherewith he made 
Judah to sin, in doing that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD. 17Now the 
rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all 
that he did, and his sin that he sinned, 
are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
18And Manasseh slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in the garden of his 
own house, in the garden of Uzza; and 
Amon his son reigned in his stead. 

19Amon was twenty and two years 
old when he began to reign; and he 
reigned two years in Jerusalem; and 
his mother’s name was Meshullemeth 
the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah. 20And 
he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the LORD, as did Manasseh his 
father. 21And he walked in all the way 
that his father walked in, and served 
the idols that his father served, and 
worshipped them. 22And he forsook 
the LORD, the God of his fathers, and 


walked not in the way of the LORD. 
23And the servants of Amon conspired 
against him, and put the king to death 
in his own house. 24But the people of 
the land slew all them that had 
conspired against king Amon; and the 
people of the land made Josiah his son 
king in his stead. 25Now the rest of the 
acts of Amon which he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
26And he was buried in his sepulchre 
in the garden of Uzza; and Josiah his 
son reigned in his stead. 

Josiah was eight years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned thirty and one years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of 
Bozkath. 2And he did that which was 
right in the eyes of the LORD, and 
walked in all the way of David his 
father, and turned not aside to the right 
hand or to the left. 

3And it came to pass in the 
eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the 
king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, 
the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to 
the house of the LORD, saying. 4’Go up 
to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may 
sum the money which is brought into 
the house of the LORD, which the 
keepers of the door have gathered of 
the people; 5and let them deliver it into 
the hand of the workmen that have the 
oversight of the house of the LORD; and 
let them give it to the workmen that 
are in the house of the LORD, to repair 
the breaches of the house; 6unto the 
carpenters, and to the builders, and to 
the masons; and for buying timber and 
hewn stone to repair the house.’— 
7Howbeit there was no reckoning 
made with them of the money that was 
delivered into their hand; for they dealt 
faithfully. 

8And Hilkiah the high priest said 
unto Shaphan the scribe: ‘I have found 
the book of the Law in the house of the 
LORD.’ And Hilkiah delivered the book 
to Shaphan, and he read it. 9And 
Shaphan the scribe came to the king, 
and brought back word unto the king, 
and said: ‘Thy servants have poured 
out the money that was found in the 
house, and have delivered it into the 
hand of the workmen that have the 
oversight of the house of the LORD.’ 
10And Shaphan the scribe told the 
king, saying: ‘Hilkiah the priest hath 
delivered me a book.’ And Shaphan 
read it before the king. 11And it came 
to pass, when the king had heard the 
words of the book of the Law, that he 
rent his clothes. 12And the king 
commanded Hilkiah the priest, and 
Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and 
Achbor the son of Micaiah, and 
Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the 
king’s servant, saying: 13’Go ye, 
inquire of the LORD for me, and for the 
people, and for all Judah, concerning 
the words of this book that is found; 
for great is the wrath of the LORD that 
is kindled against us, because our 
fathers have not hearkened unto the 
words of this book, to do according 
22 




unto all that which is written 
concerning us.’ 

14So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, 
and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asaiah, 
went unto Huldah the prophetess, the 
wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the 
son of Harhas, keeper of the 
wardrobe—now she dwelt in 
Jerusalem in the second quarter—and 
they spoke with her. 15And she said 
unto them: ‘Thus saith the LORD, the 
God of Israel: Tell ye the man that sent 
you unto me: 16Thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, I will bring evil upon this 
place, and upon the inhabitants 
thereof, even all the words of the book 
which the king of Judah hath read; 
17because they have forsaken Me, and 
have offered unto other gods, that they 
might provoke Me with all the work of 
their hands; therefore My wrath shall 
be kindled against this place, and it 
shall not be quenched. 18But unto the 
king of Judah, who sent you to inquire 
of the LORD, thus shall ye say to him: 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 
As touching the words which thou hast 
heard, 19because thy heart was tender, 
and thou didst humble thyself before 
the LORD, when thou heardest what I 
spoke against this place, and against 
the inhabitants thereof, that they 
should become an astonishment and a 
curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and 
wept before Me, I also have heard 
thee, saith the LORD. 20Therefore, 
behold, I will gather thee to thy 
fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to 
thy grave in peace, neither shall thine 
eyes see all the evil which I will bring 
upon this place.’ And they brought 
back word unto the king. 

And the king sent, and they 
gathered unto him all the 
elders of Judah and of Jerusalem. 2And 
the king went up to the house of the 
LORD, and all the men of Judah and all 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, 
and the priests, and the prophets, and 
all the people, both small and great; 
and he read in their ears all the words 
of the book of the covenant which was 
found in the house of the LORD. 3And 
the king stood on the platform, and 
made a covenant before the LORD, to 
walk after the LORD, and to keep His 
commandments, and His testimonies, 
and His statutes, with all his heart, and 
all his soul, to confirm the words of 
this covenant that were written in this 
book; and all the people stood to the 
covenant. 

4And the king commanded Hilkiah 
the high priest, and the priests of the 
second order, and the keepers of the 
door, to bring forth out of the temple 
of the LORD all the vessels that were 
made for Baal, and for the Asherah, 
and for all the host of heaven; and he 
burned them without Jerusalem in the 
fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes 
of them unto Beth-el. 5And he put 
down the idolatrous priests, whom the 
kings of Judah had ordained to offer in 
the high places in the cities of Judah, 
and in the places round about 
Jerusalem; them also that offered unto 
Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and 
23 




to the constellations, and to all the host 
of heaven. 6And he brought out the 
Asherah from the house of the LORD, 
without Jerusalem, unto the brook 
Kidron, and burned it at the brook 
Kidron, and stamped it small to 
powder, and cast the powder thereof 
upon the graves of the common 
people. 7And he broke down the 
houses of the sodomites, that were in 
the house of the LORD, where the 
women wove coverings for the 
Asherah. 8And he brought all the 
priests out of the cities of Judah, and 
defiled the high places where the 
priests had made offerings, from Geba 
to Beer-sheba; and he broke down the 
high places of the gates that were at 
the entrance of the gate of Joshua the 
governor of the city, which were on a 
man’s left hand as he entered the gate 
of the city. 9Nevertheless the priests of 
the high places came not up to the altar 
of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they did 
eat unleavened bread among their 
brethren. 10And he defiled Topheth, 
which is in the valley of the son of 
Hinnom, that no man might make his 
son or his daughter to pass through the 
fire to Molech. 11And he took away the 
horses that the kings of Judah had 
given to the sun, at the entrance of the 
house of the LORD, by the chamber of 
Nethan-melech the officer, which was 
in the precincts; and he burned the 
chariots of the sun with fire. 12And the 
altars that were on the roof of the 
upper chamber of Ahaz, which the 
kings of Judah had made, and the 
altars which Manasseh had made in 
the two courts of the house of the 
LORD, did the king break down, and 
beat them down from thence, and cast 
the dust of them into the brook Kidron. 
13And the high places that were before 
Jerusalem, which were on the right 
hand of the mount of corruption, 
which Solomon the king of Israel had 
builded for Ashtoreth the detestation 
of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the 
detestation of Moab, and for Milcom 
the abomination of the children of 
Ammon, did the king defile. 14And he 
broke in pieces the pillars, and cut 
down the Asherim, and filled their 
places with the bones of men. 

15Moreover the altar that was at 
Beth-el, and the high place which 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made 
Israel to sin, had made, even that altar 
and the high place he broke down; and 
he burned the high place and stamped 
it small to powder, and burned the 
Asherah. 16And as Josiah turned 
himself, he spied the sepulchres that 
were there in the mount; and he sent, 
and took the bones out of the 
sepulchres, and burned them upon the 
altar, and defiled it, according to the 
word of the LORD which the man of 
God proclaimed, who proclaimed 
these things. 17Then he said: ‘What 
monument is that which I see’And the 
men of the city told him: ‘It is the 
sepulchre of the man of God, who 
came from Judah, and proclaimed 
these things that thou hast done against 
the altar of Beth-el.’ 18And he said: 


‘Let him be; let no man move his 
bones.’ So they let his bones alone, 
with the bones of the prophet that 
came out of Samaria. 19And all the 
houses also of the high places that 
were in the cities of Samaria, which 
the kings of Israel had made to 
provoke [the LORD], Josiah took away, 
and did to them according to all the 
acts that he had done in Beth-el. 20And 
he slew all the priests of the high 
places that were there, upon the altars, 
and burned men’s bones upon them; 
and he returned to Jerusalem. 

21And the king commanded all the 
people, saying: ‘Keep the passover 
unto the LORD your God, as it is 
written in this book of the covenant.’ 
22For there was not kept such a 
passover from the days of the judges 
that judged Israel, nor in all the days of 
the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of 
Judah; 23but in the eighteenth year of 
king Josiah was this passover kept to 
the LORD in Jerusalem. 24Moreover 
them that divined by a ghost or a 
familiar spirit, and the teraphim, and 
the idols, and all the detestable things 
that were spied in the land of Judah 
and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, 
that he might confirm the words of the 
law which were written in the book 
that Hilkiah the priest found in the 
house of the LORD. 25And like unto him 
was there no king before him, that 
turned to the LORD with all his heart, 
and with all his soul, and with all his 
might, according to all the law of 
Moses; neither after him arose there 
any like him. 

26Notwithstanding the LORD turned 
not from the fierceness of His great 
wrath, wherewith His anger was 
kindled against Judah, because of all 
the provocations wherewith Manasseh 
had provoked Him. 27And the LORD 
said: ‘I will remove Judah also out of 
My sight, as I have removed Israel, 
and I will cast off this city which I 
have chosen, even Jerusalem, and the 
house of which I said: My name shall 
be there.’ 

28Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, 
and all that he did, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Judah? 29In his days Pharaoh-
necoh king of Egypt went up against 
the king of Assyria to the river 
Euphrates; and king Josiah went 
against him; and he slew him at 
Megiddo, when he had seen him. 
30And his servants carried him in a 
chariot dead from Megiddo, and 
brought him to Jerusalem, and buried 
him in his own sepulchre. And the 
people of the land took Jehoahaz the 
son of Josiah, and anointed him, and 
made him king in his father’s stead. 

31Jehoahaz was twenty and three 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned three months in Jerusalem; 
and his mother’s name was Hamutal 
the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
32And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, according to all that 
his fathers had done. 33And Pharaoh-
necoh put him in bands at Riblah in 


the land of Hamath, that he might not 
reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to 
a fine of a hundred talents of silver, 
and a talent of gold. 34And Pharaoh-
necoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah 
king in the room of Josiah his father, 
and changed his name to Jehoiakim; 
but he took Jehoahaz away; and he 
came to Egypt, and died there. 35And 
Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold 
to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to 
give the money according to the 
commandment of Pharaoh; he exacted 
the silver and the gold of the people of 
the land, of every one according to his 
taxation, to give it unto Pharaoh-
necoh. 

36Jehoiakim was twenty and five 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; 
and his mother’s name was Zebudah 
the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 
37And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, according to all that 
his fathers had done. 

In his days Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon came up, and 
Jehoiakim became his servant three 
years; then he turned and rebelled 
against him. 2And the LORD sent 
against him bands of the Chaldeans, 
and bands of the Arameans, and bands 
of the Moabites, and bands of the 
children of Ammon, and sent them 
against Judah to destroy it, according 
to the word of the LORD, which He 
spoke by the hand of His servants the 
prophets. 3Surely at the commandment 
of the LORD came this upon Judah, to 
remove them out of His sight, for the 
sins of Manasseh, according to all that 
he did; 4and also for the innocent 
blood that he shed; for he filled 
Jerusalem with innocent blood; and the 
LORD would not pardon. 

5Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 6So 
Jehoiakim slept with his fathers; and 
Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead. 
7And the king of Egypt came not again 
any more out of his land; for the king 
of Babylon had taken, from the Brook 
of Egypt unto the river Euphrates, all 
that pertained to the king of Egypt. 

8Jehoiachin was eighteen years old 
when he began to reign; and he 
reigned in Jerusalem three months; and 
his mother’s name was Nehushta the 
daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 
9And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, according to all that 
his father had done. 10At that time the 
servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the 
city was besieged. 11And 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
came unto the city, while his servants 
were besieging it. 12And Jehoiachin the 
king of Judah went out to the king of 
Babylon, he, and his mother, and his 
servants, and his princes, and his 
officers; and the king of Babylon took 
him in the eighth year of his reign. 
13And he carried out thence all the 
treasures of the house of the LORD, and 
the treasures of the king’s house, and 
24 




cut in pieces all the vessels of gold 
which Solomon king of Israel had 
made in the temple of the LORD, as the 
LORD had said. 14And he carried away 
all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and 
all the mighty men of valour, even ten 
thousand captives, and all the 
craftsmen and the smiths; none 
remained, save the poorest sort of the 
people of the land. 15And he carried 
away Jehoiachin to Babylon; and the 
king’s mother, and the king’s wives, 
and his officers, and the chief men of 
the land, carried he into captivity from 
Jerusalem to Babylon. 16And all the 
men of might, even seven thousand, 
and the craftsmen and the smiths a 
thousand, all of them strong and apt 
for war, even them the king of 
Babylon brought captive to Babylon. 
17And the king of Babylon made 
Mattaniah his father’s brother king in 
his stead, and changed his name to 
Zedekiah. 

18Zedekiah was twenty and one 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; 
and his mother’s name was Hamutal 
the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
19And he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, according to all that 
Jehoiakim had done. 20For through the 
anger of the LORD did it come to pass 
in Jerusalem and Judah, until He had 
cast them out from His presence. 

And Zedekiah rebelled against the 

king of Babylon. 1And it came 
to pass in the ninth year of his 
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth 
day of the month, that 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
came, he and all his army, against 
Jerusalem, and encamped against it; 
and they built forts against it round 
about. 2So the city was besieged unto 
the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 
3On the ninth day of the [fourth] 
month the famine was sore in the city, 
so that there was no bread for the 
people of the land. 4Then a breach was 
made in the city, and all the men of 
war [fled] by night by the way of the 
gate between the two walls, which was 
by the king’s garden—now the 
Chaldeans were against the city round 
about—and the king went by the way 
of the Arabah. 5But the army of the 
Chaldeans pursued after the king, and 
overtook him in the plains of Jericho; 
and all his army was scattered from 
him. 6Then they took the king, and 
carried him up unto the king of 
Babylon to Riblah; and they gave 
judgment upon him. 7And they slew 
the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, 
and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and 
bound him in fetters, and carried him 
to Babylon. 

8Now in the fifth month, on the 
seventh day of the month, which was 
the nineteenth year of king 
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, 
came Nebuzaradan the captain of the 
guard, a servant of the king of 
Babylon, unto Jerusalem. 9And he 
burnt the house of the LORD, and the 
king’s house; and all the houses of 
Jerusalem, even every great man’s 
25 




house, burnt he with fire. 10And all the 
army of the Chaldeans, that were with 
the captain of the guard, broke down 
the walls of Jerusalem round about. 
11And the residue of the people that 
were left in the city, and those that fell 
away, that fell to the king of Babylon, 
and the residue of the multitude, did 
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard 
carry away captive. 12But the captain 
of the guard left of the poorest of the 
land to be vinedressers and 
husbandmen. 

13And the pillars of brass that were 
in the house of the LORD, and the bases 
and the brazen sea that were in the 
house of the LORD, did the Chaldeans 
break in pieces, and carried the brass 
of them to Babylon. 14And the pots, 
and the shovels, and the snuffers, and 
the pans, and all the vessels of brass 
wherewith they ministered, took they 
away. 15And the fire-pans, and the 
basins, that which was of gold, in gold, 
and that which was of silver, in silver, 
the captain of the guard took away. 
16The two pillars, the one sea, and the 
bases, which Solomon had made for 
the house of the LORD; the brass of all 
these vessels was without weight. 
17The height of the one pillar was 
eighteen cubits, and a capital of brass 
was upon it; and the height of the 
capital was three cubits; with network 
and pomegranates upon the capital 
round about, all of brass; and like unto 
these had the second pillar with 
network. 

18And the captain of the guard took 
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah 
the second priest, and the three keepers 
of the door; 19and out of the city he 
took an officer that was set over the 
men of war; and five men of them that 
saw the king’s face, who were found 
in the city; and the scribe of the 
captain of the host, who mustered the 
people of the land; and threescore men 
of the people of the land, that were 
found in the city. 20And Nebuzaradan 
the captain of the guard took them, and 
brought them to the king of Babylon to 
Riblah. 21And the king of Babylon 
smote them, and put them to death at 
Riblah in the land of Hamath. So 
Judah was carried away captive out of 
his land. 22And as for the people that 
were left in the land of Judah, whom 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had 
left, even over them he made Gedaliah 
the son of Ahikam, the son of 
Shaphan, governor. 

23Now when all the captains of the 
forces, they and their men, heard that 
the king of Babylon had made 
Gedaliah governor, they came to 
Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son 
of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of 
Tanhumeth the Netophathite and 
Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite, 
they and their men. 24And Gedaliah 
swore to them and to their men, and 
said unto them: ‘Fear not because of 
the servants of the Chaldeans; dwell in 
the land, and serve the king of 
Babylon, and it shall be well with 


you.’ 25But it came to pass in the 
seventh month, that Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the 
seed royal, came, and ten men with 
him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, 
and the Jews and the Chaldeans that 
were with him at Mizpah. 26And all the 
people, both small and great, and the 
captains of the forces, arose, and came 
to Egypt; for they were afraid of the 
Chaldeans. 

27And it came to pass in the seven 
and thirtieth year of the captivity of 
Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the 
twelfth month, on the seven and 
twentieth day of the month, that Evil-
merodach king of Babylon, in the year 
that he began to reign, did lift up the 
head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out 
of prison. 28And he spoke kindly to 
him, and set his throne above the 
throne of the kings that were with him 
in Babylon. 29And he changed his 
prison garments, and did eat bread 
before him continually all the days of 
his life. 30And for his allowance, there 
was a continual allowance given him 
of the king, every day a portion, all the 
days of his life. 




..... 

ISAIAH 

 

The Vision of Isaiah the son of 
Amoz, which he saw concerning 
Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of 
Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, 
kings of Judah. 

 

2Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O 
earth, 

For the LORD hath spoken: 

Children I have reared, and brought 
up, 

And they have rebelled against Me. 

3The ox knoweth his owner, 

And the ass his master’s crib; 

But Israel doth not know, 

My people doth not consider. 

 

4Ah sinful nation, 

A people laden with iniquity, 

A seed of evil-doers, 

Children that deal corruptly; 

They have forsaken the LORD, 

They have contemned the Holy One 
of 

Israel, 

They are turned away backward. 

5On what part will ye yet be 
stricken, 

Seeing ye stray away more and 
more? 

The whole head is sick, 

And the whole heart faint; 

6From the sole of the foot even unto 
the head 

There is no soundness in it; 

But wounds, and bruises, and 
festering sores: 

They have not been pressed, neither 
bound up, 

Neither mollified with oil. 

7Your country is desolate; 

Your cities are burned with fire; 

Your land, strangers devour it in 
your presence, 

And it is desolate, as overthrown by 

 floods. 

8And the daughter of Zion is left 

As a booth in a vineyard, 

As a lodge in a garden of 
cucumbers, 

As a besieged city. 

9Except the LORD of hosts 

Had left unto us a very small 
remnant, 

We should have been as Sodom, 

We should have been like unto 
Gomorrah. 

 

10Hear the word of the LORD, 

Ye rulers of Sodom; 

Give ear unto the law of our God, 

Ye people of Gomorrah. 

11To what purpose is the multitude 
of your sacrifices unto Me? 

Saith the LORD; 

I am full of the burnt-offerings of 
rams, 

And the fat of fed beasts; 
1 




And I delight not in the blood 

Of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-
goats. 

12When ye come to appear before 
Me, 

Who hath required this at your hand, 

To trample My courts? 

13Bring no more vain oblations; 

It is an offering of abomination unto 
Me; 

New moon and sabbath, the holding 
of convocations— 

I cannot endure iniquity along with 
the solemn assembly. 

14Your new moons and your 
appointed seasons 

My soul hateth; 

They are a burden unto Me; 

I am weary to bear them. 

15And when ye spread forth your 
hands, 

I will hide Mine eyes from you; 

Yea, when ye make many prayers, 

I will not hear; 

Your hands are full of blood. 

16Wash you, make you clean, 

Put away the evil of your doings 

From before Mine eyes, 

Cease to do evil; 

17Learn to do well; 

Seek justice, relieve the oppressed, 

Judge the fatherless, plead for the 
widow. 

 

18Come now, and let us reason 
together, 

Saith the LORD; 

Though your sins be as scarlet, 

They shall be as white as snow; 

Though they be red like crimson, 

They shall be as wool. 

19If ye be willing and obedient, 

Ye shall eat the good of the land; 

20But if ye refuse and rebel, 

Ye shall be devoured with the 
sword; 

For the mouth of the LORD hath 
spoken. 

 

21How is the faithful city 

Become a harlot! 

She that was full of justice, 

Righteousness lodged in her, 

But now murderers. 

22Thy silver is become dross, 

Thy wine mixed with water. 

23Thy princes are rebellious, 

And companions of thieves; 

Every one loveth bribes, 

And followeth after rewards; 

They judge not the fatherless, 

Neither doth the cause of the widow 
come unto them. 

 

24Therefore saith the Lord, the LORD 
of hosts, 

The Mighty One of Israel: 

Ah, I will ease Me of Mine 
adversaries, 

And avenge Me of Mine enemies; 

25And I will turn My hand upon 
thee, 

And purge away thy dross as with 
lye, 

And will take away all thine alloy; 

26And I will restore thy judges as at 
the first, 


And thy counsellors as at the 
beginning; 

Afterward thou shalt be called The 
city of righteousness, 

The faithful city. 

27Zion shall be redeemed with 
justice, 

And they that return of her with 

 righteousness. 

28But the destruction of the 
transgressors and the sinners shall 
be together, 

And they that forsake the LORD shall 
be consumed. 

29For they shall be ashamed of the 

 terebinths which ye have desired, 

And ye shall be confounded for the 
gardens that ye have chosen. 

30For ye shall be as a terebinth 
whose leaf fadeth, 

And as a garden that hath no water. 

31And the strong shall be as tow, 

And his work as a spark; 

And they shall both burn together, 

And none shall quench them. 

 

The word that Isaiah the son of 
Amoz saw concerning Judah and 
Jerusalem. 

 

2And it shall come to pass in the end 
of days, 

That the mountain of the LORD’S 
house 

Shall be established as the top of the 
mountains, 

And shall be exalted above the hills; 

And all nations shall flow unto it. 

3And many peoples shall go and 
say: 

‘Come ye, and let us go up to the 
mountain of the LORD, 

To the house of the God of Jacob; 

And He will teach us of His ways, 

And we will walk in His paths.’ 

For out of Zion shall go forth the 
law, 

And the word of the LORD from 
Jerusalem. 

4And He shall judge between the 
nations, 

And shall decide for many peoples; 

And they shall beat their swords into 

 plowshares, 

And their spears into pruninghooks; 

Nation shall not lift up sword 
against nation, 

Neither shall they learn war any 
more. 

 

5O house of Jacob, come ye, and let 
us walk 

In the light of the LORD. 

6For Thou hast forsaken Thy people 
the house of Jacob; 

For they are replenished from the 
east, 

And with soothsayers like the 
Philistines, 

And they please themselves in the 
brood of aliens. 

7Their land also is full of silver and 
gold, 

Neither is there any end of their 
treasures; 

Their land also is full of horses, 
2 




Neither is there any end of their 
chariots. 

8Their land also is full of idols; 

Every one worshippeth the work of 
his own hands, 

That which his own fingers have 
made. 

9And man boweth down, 

And man lowereth himself; 

And Thou canst not bear with them. 

10Enter into the rock, 

And hide thee in the dust, 

From before the terror of the LORD, 

And from the glory of His majesty. 

11The lofty looks of man shall be 
brought low, 

And the haughtiness of men shall be 
bowed down, 

And the LORD alone shall be exalted 
in that day. 

 

12For the LORD of hosts hath a day 

Upon all that is proud and lofty, 

And upon all that is lifted up, and it 
shall be brought low; 

13And upon all the cedars of 
Lebanon 

That are high and lifted up, 

And upon all the oaks of Bashan; 

14And upon all the high mountains, 

And upon all the hills that are lifted 
up; 15And upon every lofty tower, 

And upon every fortified wall; 

16And upon all the ships of Tarshish, 

And upon all delightful imagery. 

17And the loftiness of man shall be 
bowed down, 

And the haughtiness of men shall be 
brought low; 

And the LORD alone shall be exalted 
in that day. 

 

18And the idols shall utterly pass 
away. 

19And men shall go into the caves of 
the rocks, 

And into the holes of the earth, 

From before the terror of the LORD, 

And from the glory of His majesty, 

When He ariseth to shake mightily 
the earth. 

20In that day a man shall cast away 

His idols of silver, and his idols of 
gold, 

Which they made for themselves to 
worship, 

To the moles and to the bats; 

21To go into the clefts of the rocks, 

And into the crevices of the crags, 

From before the terror of the LORD, 

And from the glory of His majesty, 

When he ariseth to shake mightily 
the earth. 

 

22Cease ye from man, in whose 
nostrils is a breath; 

For how little is he to be accounted! 

 

For, behold, the Lord, the LORD of 
hosts, 

Doth take away from Jerusalem and 
from Judah 

Stay and staff, 

Every stay of bread, and every stay 
of water; 

2The mighty man, and the man of 
war; 

The judge, and the prophet, 
3 




And the diviner, and the elder; 

3The captain of fifty, and the man of 
rank, 

And the counsellor, and the cunning 
charmer, and the skilful 
enchanter. 

4And I will give children to be their 
princes, 

And babes shall rule over them. 

5And the people shall oppress one 
another, 

Every man his fellow, and every 
man his neighbour; 

The child shall behave insolently 
against the aged, 

And the base against the 
honourable, 

6For a man shall take hold of his 
brother of the house of his father: 

‘Thou hast a mantle, 

Be thou our ruler, 

And let this ruin be under thy hand.’ 

7In that day shall he swear, saying: 

‘I will not be a healer; 

For in my house is neither bread nor 
a mantle; 

Ye shall not make me ruler of a 
people.’ 

8For Jerusalem is ruined, 

And Judah is fallen; 

Because their tongue and their 
doings are against the LORD, 

To provoke the eyes of His glory. 

 

9The show of their countenance doth 
witness against them; 

And they declare their sin as 
Sodom, they hide it not. 

Woe unto their soul! 

For they have wrought evil unto 
themselves. 

10Say ye of the righteous, that it 
shall be well with him; 

For they shall eat the fruit of their 
doings. 

11Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill 
with him; 

For the work of his hands shall be 
done to him. 

12As for My people, a babe is their 
master, 

And women rule over them. 

O My people, they that lead thee 
cause thee to err, 

And destroy the way of thy paths. 

 

13The LORD standeth up to plead, 

And standeth to judge the peoples. 

14The LORD will enter into judgment 

With the elders of His people, and 
the princes thereof: 

‘It is ye that have eaten up the 
vineyard; The spoil of the poor is 
in your houses; 

15What mean ye that ye crush My 
people, 

And grind the face of the poor?’ 

Saith the Lord, the GOD of hosts. 

16Moreover the LORD said: 

Because the daughters of Zion are 
haughty, 

And walk with stretched-forth necks 

And wanton eyes, 

Walking and mincing as they go, 

And making a tinkling with their 
feet; 

17Therefore the Lord will smite with 
a scab 


The crown of the head of the 
daughters of Zion, 

And the LORD will lay bare their 
secret parts. 

18In that day the Lord will take away 
the bravery of their anklets, and the 
fillets, and the crescents; 19the 
pendants, and the bracelets, and the 
veils; 20the headtires, and the armlets, 
and the sashes, and the corselets, and 
the amulets; 21the rings, and the nose-
jewels; 22the aprons, and the mantelets, 
and the cloaks, and the girdles; 23and 
the gauze robes, and the fine linen, and 
the turbans, and the mantles. 24And it 
shall come to pass, that 

Instead of sweet spices there shall 
be rottenness; 

And instead of a girdle rags; 

And instead of curled hair baldness; 

And instead of a stomacher a 
girding of sackcloth; 

Branding instead of beauty. 

25Thy men shall fall by the sword, 

And thy mighty in the war. 

26And her gates shall lament and 
mourn; 

And utterly bereft she shall sit upon 
the ground. 

 

And seven women shall take hold 
of one man in that day, saying: 
‘We will eat our own bread, and wear 
our own apparel; only let us be called 
by thy name; take thou away our 
reproach.’ 

2In that day shall the growth of the 
LORD be beautiful and glorious, 

And the fruit of the land excellent 
and comely 

For them that are escaped of Israel. 

3And it shall come to pass, that he 
that is left in Zion, and he that 
remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called 
holy, even every one that is written 
unto life in Jerusalem; 4when the Lord 
shall have washed away the filth of the 
daughters of Zion, and shall have 
purged the blood of Jerusalem from 
the midst thereof, by the spirit of 
judgment, and by the spirit of 
destruction. 5And the LORD will create 
over the whole habitation of mount 
Zion, and over her assemblies, a cloud 
and smoke by day, and the shining of a 
flaming fire by night; for over all the 
glory shall be a canopy. 6And there 
shall be a pavilion for a shadow in the 
day-time from the heat, and for a 
refuge and for a covert from storm and 
from rain. 

 

Let me sing of my well-beloved, 

A song of my beloved touching 
his vineyard. 

My well-beloved had a vineyard 

In a very fruitful hill; 

2And he digged it, and cleared it of 
stones, 

And planted it with the choicest 
vine, 

And built a tower in the midst of it, 

And also hewed out a vat therein; 

And he looked that it should bring 
forth grapes, 

And it brought forth wild grapes. 

 
4 

5 




3And now, O inhabitants of 
Jerusalem and men of Judah, 

Judge, I pray you, betwixt me and 
my vineyard. 

4What could have been done more 
to my vineyard, 

That I have not done in it? 

Wherefore, when I looked that it 
should bring forth grapes, 

Brought it forth wild grapes? 

 

5And now come, I will tell you 

What I will do to my vineyard: 

I will take away the hedge thereof, 

And it shall be eaten up; 

I will break down the fence thereof, 

And it shall be trodden down; 

6And I will lay it waste: 

It shall not be pruned nor hoed, 

But there shall come up briers and 
thorns; 

I will also command the clouds 

That they rain no rain upon it. 

 

7For the vineyard of the LORD of 
hosts is the house of Israel, 

And the men of Judah the plant of 
His delight; 

And He looked for justice, but 
behold violence; 

For righteousness, but behold a cry. 

 

8Woe unto them that join house to 
house, 

That lay field to field, 

Till there be no room, and ye be 
made to dwell 

Alone in the midst of the land! 

9In mine ears said the LORD of hosts: 

Of a truth many houses shall be 
desolate, 

Even great and fair, without 
inhabitant. 

10For ten acres of vineyard shall 
yield one bath, 

And the seed of a homer shall yield 
an ephah. 

 

11Woe unto them that rise up early 
in the morning, 

That they may follow strong drink; 

That tarry late into the night, 

Till wine inflame them! 

12And the harp and the psaltery, the 
tabret and the pipe, 

And wine, are in their feasts; 

But they regard not the work of the 
LORD, 

Neither have they considered the 
operation of His hands. 

13Therefore My people are gone into 
captivity, 

For want of knowledge; 

And their honourable men are 
famished, 

And their multitude are parched 
with thirst. 

14Therefore the nether-world hath 
enlarged her desire, 

And opened her mouth without 
measure; 

And down goeth their glory, and 
their tumult, and their uproar, 

And he that rejoiceth among them. 

15And man is bowed down, 

And man is humbled, 

And the eyes of the lofty are 
humbled; 


16But the LORD of hosts is exalted 
through justice, 

And God the Holy One is sanctified 
through righteousness. 

17Then shall the lambs feed as in 
their pasture, 

And the waste places of the fat ones 
shall wanderers eat. 

 

18Woe unto them that draw iniquity 
with cords of vanity, 

And sin as it were with a cart rope, 

19That say: ‘Let Him make speed, let 
Him hasten His work, 

That we may see it; 

And let the counsel of the Holy One 
of Israel draw nigh and come, 

That we may know it! ’ 

 

20Woe unto them that call evil good, 

And good evil; 

That change darkness into light, 

And light into darkness; 

That change bitter into sweet, 

And sweet into bitter! 

 

21Woe unto them that are wise in 
their own eyes, 

And prudent in their own sight! 

 

22Woe unto them that are mighty to 
drink wine, 

And men of strength to mingle 
strong drink; 

23That justify the wicked for a 
reward, 

And take away the righteousness of 
the righteous from him! 

24Therefore as the tongue of fire 
devoureth the stubble, 

And as the chaff is consumed in the 
flame, 

So their root shall be as rottenness, 

And their blossom shall go up as 
dust; 

Because they have rejected the law 
of the LORD of hosts, 

And contemned the word of the 
Holy One of Israel. 

 

25Therefore is the anger of the LORD 
kindled against His people, 

And He hath stretched forth His 
hand against them, and hath 
smitten them, 

And the hills did tremble, 

And their carcasses were as refuse 
in the midst of the streets. 

For all this His anger is not turned 
away, 

But His hand is stretched out still. 

 

26And He will lift up an ensign to 
the nations from far, 

And will hiss unto them from the 
end of the earth; 

And, behold, they shall come with 
speed swiftly; 

27None shall be weary nor stumble 
among them; 

None shall slumber nor sleep; 

Neither shall the girdle of their loins 
be loosed, 

Nor the latchet of their shoes be 
broken; 28Whose arrows are 
sharp, 

And all their bows bent; 


Their horses’hoofs shall be counted 
like flint, 

And their wheels like a whirlwind; 

29Their roaring shall be like a lion, 

They shall roar like young lions, 
yea, they shall roar, 

And lay hold of the prey, and carry 
it away safe, 

And there shall be none to deliver. 

30And they shall roar against them in 
that day 

Like the roaring of the sea; 

And if one look unto the land, 

Behold darkness and distress, 

And the light is darkened in the 
skies thereof. 

 

In the year that king Uzziah died I 
saw the Lord sitting upon a throne 
high and lifted up, and His train filled 
the temple. 2Above Him stood the 
seraphim; each one had six wings: 
with twain he covered his face and 
with twain he covered his feet, and 
with twain he did fly. 3And one called 
unto another, and said: 

Holy, holy, holy, is the LORD of 
hosts; 

The whole earth is full of His glory. 

4And the posts of the door were 
moved at the voice of them that called, 
and the house was filled with smoke. 
5Then said I: 

Woe is me! for I am undone; 

Because I am a man of unclean lips, 

And I dwell in the midst of a people 
of 

unclean lips; 

For mine eyes have seen the King, 

The LORD of hosts. 

6Then flew unto me one of the 
seraphim, with a glowing stone in his 
hand, which he had taken with the 
tongs from off the altar; 7and he 
touched my mouth with it, and said: 

Lo, this hath touched thy lips; 

And thine iniquity is taken away, 

And thy sin expiated. 

8And I heard the voice of the Lord, 
saying: 

Whom shall I send, 

And who will go for us? 

Then I said: ‘Here am I; send me.’ 
9And He said: ‘Go, and tell this 
people: 

Hear ye indeed, but understand not; 

And see ye indeed, but perceive not. 

10Make the heart of this people fat, 

And make their ears heavy, 

And shut their eyes; 

Lest they, seeing with their eyes, 

And hearing with their ears, 

And understanding with their heart, 

Rreturn, and be healed.’ 

11Then said I: ‘Lord, how long?’ 
And He answered: 

‘Until cities be waste without 
inhabitant, 

And houses without man, 

And the land become utterly waste, 

12And the LORD have removed men 
far away, 

And the forsaken places be many in 
the midst of the land. 

13And if there be yet a tenth in it, it 
shall again be eaten up; as a terebinth, 
and as an oak, whose stock remaineth, 
6 




when they cast their leaves, so the holy 
seed shall be the stock thereof.’ 

 

7 



And it came to pass in the days of 
Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son 
of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin 
the king of Aram, and Pekah the son of 
Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to 
Jerusalem to war against it; but could 
not prevail against it. 2And it was told 
the house of David, saying: ‘Aram is 
confederate with Ephraim.’ And his 
heart was moved, and the heart of his 
people, as the trees of the forest are 
moved with the wind. 

3Then said the LORD unto Isaiah: 
‘Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and 
aShear-jashub thy son, at the end of the 
conduit of the upper pool, in the 
highway of the fullers’field; 4and say 
unto him: Keep calm, and be quiet; 
fear not, neither let thy heart be faint, 
because of these two tails of smoking 
firebrands, for the fierce anger of 
Rezin and Aram, and of the son of 
Remaliah. 5Because Aram hath 
counselled evil against thee, Ephraim 
also, and the son of Remaliah, saying: 
6Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, 
and let us make a breach therein for us, 
and set up a king in the midst of it, 
even the son of Tabeel; 7thus saith the 
Lord GOD: 

a That is, A remnant shall return. 

It shall not stand, neither shall it 
come to pass. 

8For the head of Aram is Damascus, 

And the head of Damascus is Rezin; 

And within threescore and five 
years 

Shall Ephraim be broken, that it be 
not a people; 

9And the head of Ephraim is 
Samaria, 

And the head of Samaria is 
Remaliah’s son. 

If ye will not have faith, surely ye 
shall not be established.’ 

 

10And the LORD spoke again unto 
Ahaz, saying: 11’Ask thee a sign of the 
LORD thy God: ask it either in the 
depth, or in the height above.’ 12But 
Ahaz said: ‘I will not ask, neither will 
I try the LORD.’ 13And he said: ‘Hear ye 
now, O house of David: Is it a small 
thing for you to weary men, that ye 
will weary my God also? 14Therefore 
the Lord Himself shall give you a sign: 
behold, the young woman shall 
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call 
his name bImmanuel. 15Curd and 
honey shall he eat, when he knoweth 
to refuse the evil, and choose the good. 
16Yea, before the child shall know to 
refuse the evil, and choose the good, 
the land whose two kings thou hast a 
horror of shall be forsaken. 17The LORD 
shall bring upon thee, and upon thy 
people, and upon thy father’s house, 
days that have not come, from the day 
that Ephraim departed from Judah; 
even the king of Assyria.’ 

b That is, God is with us. 

18And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 


That the LORD shall hiss for the fly 

That is in the uttermost part of the 
rivers of Egypt, 

And for the bee that is in the land of 

Assyria. 

19And they shall come, and shall rest 
all of them 

In the rugged valleys, and in the 
holes of the rocks, 

And upon all thorns, and upon all 
brambles. 

20In that day shall the Lord shave 
with a razor that is hired in the parts 
beyond the River, even with the king 
of Assyria, the head and the hair of the 
feet; and it shall also sweep away the 
beard. 

21And it shall come to pass in that 
day, that a man shall rear a young cow, 
and two sheep; 22and it shall come to 
pass, for the abundance of milk that 
they shall give, he shall eat curd; for 
curd and honey shall every one eat that 
is left in the midst of the land. 

23And it shall come to pass in that 
day, that every place, where there were 
a thousand vines at a thousand 
silverlings, shall even be for briers and 
thorns. 24With arrows and with bow 
shall one come thither; because all the 
land shall become briers and thorns. 
25And all the hills that were digged 
with the mattock, thou shalt not come 
thither for fear of briers and thorns, but 
it shall be for the sending forth of 
oxen, and for the treading of sheep. 

 

8 



And the LORD said unto me: ‘Take 
thee a great tablet, and write upon 
it in common script: The spoil 
speedeth, the prey hasteth; 2and I will 
take unto Me faithful witnesses to 
record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah 
the son of Jeberechiah.’ 3And I went 
unto the prophetess; and she 
conceived, and bore a son. Then said 
the LORD unto me: ‘Call his name 
aMaher-shalal-hashbaz. 4For before the 
child shall have knowledge to cry: My 
father, and: My mother, the riches of 
Damascus and the spoil of Samaria 
shall be carried away before the king 
of Assyria.’ 

a That is, The spoil speedeth, the 
prey hasteth. 

5And the LORD spoke unto me yet 
again, saying: 

6Forasmuch as this people hath 
refused 

The waters of Shiloah that go softly, 

And rejoiceth with Rezin and 
Remaliah’s son; 

7Now therefore, behold, the Lord 
bringeth up upon them 

The waters of the River, mighty and 
many, 

Even the king of Assyria and all his 
glory; 

And he shall come up over all his 

 channels, 

And go over all his banks; 

8And he shall sweep through Judah 

Overflowing as he passeth through 

He shall reach even to the neck; 

And the stretching out of his wings 

Shall fill the breadth of thy land, O 
Immanuel. 


 

9Make an uproar, O ye peoples, and 
ye shall be broken in pieces; 

And give ear, all ye of far countries; 

Gird yourselves, and ye shall be 
broken in pieces; 

Gird yourselves, and ye shall be 
broken in pieces. 

10Take counsel together, and it shall 
be brought to nought; 

Speak the word, and it shall not 
stand; 

For God is with us. 

11For the LORD spoke thus to me 
with a strong hand, admonishing me 
that I should not walk in the way of 
this people, saying: 12’Say ye not: A 
conspiracy, concerning all whereof 
this people do say: A conspiracy; 
neither fear ye their fear, nor account it 
dreadful. 13The LORD of hosts, Him 
shall ye sanctify; and let Him be your 
fear, and let Him be your dread. 14And 
He shall be for a sanctuary; but for a 
stone of stumbling and for a rock of 
offence to both the houses of Israel, 
for a gin and for a snare to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15And many 
among them shall stumble, and fall, 
and be broken, and be snared, and be 
taken.’ 

16’Bind up the testimony, seal the 
instruction among My disciples.’ 
17And I will wait for the LORD, that 
hideth His face from the house of 
Jacob, and I will look for Him. 
18Behold, I and the children whom the 
LORD hath given me shall be for signs 
and for wonders in Israel from the 
LORD of hosts, who dwelleth in mount 
Zion. 19And when they shall say unto 
you: ‘Seek unto the ghosts and the 
familiar spirits, that chirp and that 
mutter; should not a people seek unto 
their God? on behalf of the living unto 
the dead 20for instruction and for 
testimony?’—Surely they will speak 
according to this word, wherein there 
is no light.— 21And they shall pass this 
way that are sore bestead and hungry; 
and it shall come to pass that, when 
they shall be hungry, they shall fret 
themselves, and curse by their king 
and by their God, and, whether they 
turn their faces upward, 22or look unto 
the earth, behold distress and darkness, 
the gloom of anguish, and outspread 
thick darkness. 23For is there no gloom 
to her that was stedfast? Now the 
former hath lightly afflicted the land of 
Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but 
the latter hath dealt a more grievous 
blow by the way of the sea, beyond the 
Jordan, in the district of the nations. 

 

The people that walked in 
darkness Have seen a great light; 

They that dwelt in the land of the 
shadow of death, 

Upon them hath the light shined. 

2Thou hast multiplied the nation, 

Thou hast increased their joy; 

They joy before Thee according to 
the joy in harvest, 

As men rejoice when they divide the 
spoil. 

3For the yoke of his burden, 

And the staff of his shoulder, 
9 




The rod of his oppressor, 

Thou hast broken as in the day of 
Midian. 

For every boot stamped with 
fierceness, 

And every cloak rolled in blood, 

Shall even be for burning, for fuel of 
fire. 

5For a child is born unto us, 

A son is given unto us; 

And the government is upon his 
shoulder; 

And his name is called 

aPele-joez-el-gibbor- 

a That is, Wonderful in counsel is 
God, the Mighty, the Everlasting 
Father, the Ruler of peace. 

Abi-ad-sar-shalom; 

6That the government may be 
increased, And of peace there be 
no end, 

Upon the throne of David, and upon 
his kingdom, 

To establish it, and to uphold it 

Through justice and through 
righteousness From henceforth 
even for ever. 

The zeal of the LORD of hosts doth 
perform this. 

 

7The Lord sent a word into Jacob, 

And it hath lighted upon Israel. 

8And all the people shall know, 

Even Ephraim and the inhabitant of 
Samaria, 

That say in pride and in arrogancy 
of heart: 

9‘The bricks are fallen, but we will 
build with hewn stones; 

The sycamores are cut down, but 
cedars will we put in their place.’ 

10Therefore the LORD doth set upon 
high the adversaries of Rezin 
against him, 

And spur his enemies; 

11The Arameans on the east, and the 
Philistines on the west; 

And they devour Israel with open 
mouth. 

For all this His anger is not turned 
away, 

But His hand is stretched out still. 

 

12Yet the people turneth not unto 
Him that smiteth them, 

Neither do they seek the LORD of 
hosts. 

13Therefore the LORD doth cut off 
from Israel head and tail, 

Palm-branch and rush, in one day. 

14The elder and the man of rank, he 
is the head; 

And the prophet that teacheth lies, 
he is the tail. 

15For they that lead this people 
cause them to err; 

And they that are led of them are 
destroyed. 

16Therefore the Lord shall have no 
joy in their young men, 

Neither shall He have compassion 
on their fatherless and widows; 

For every one is ungodly and an 
evil-doer, 

And every mouth speaketh 
wantonness. 


For all this His anger is not turned 
away, 

But His hand is stretched out still. 

 

17 For wickedness burneth as the 
fire; 

It devoureth the briers and thorns; 

Yea, it kindleth in the thickets of the 
forest, 

And they roll upward in thick clouds 
of smoke. 

18Through the wrath of the LORD of 
hosts is the land burnt up; 

The people also are as the fuel of 
fire; 

No man spareth his brother. 

19And one snatcheth on the right 
hand, and is hungry; 

And he eateth on the left hand, and 
is not satisfied; 

They eat every man the flesh of his 
own arm: 

20Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, 
Manasseh; 

And they together are against Judah. 

For all this His anger is not turned 
away, 

But His hand is stretched out still. 

 

Woe unto them that decree 
unrighteous decrees, 

And to the writers that write 
iniquity; 

2To turn aside the needy from 
judgment, 

And to take away the right of the 
poor of My people, 

That widows may be their spoil, 

And that they may make the 
fatherless their prey! 

3And what will ye do in the day of 
visitation, 

And in the ruin which shall come 
from far? 

To whom will ye flee for help? 

And where will ye leave your glory? 

4They can do nought except crouch 
under the captives, 

And fall under the slain. 

For all this His anger is not turned 
away, 

But His hand is stretched out still. 

 

5O Asshur, the rod of Mine anger, 

In whose hand as a staff is Mine 
indignation! 

6I do send him against an ungodly 
nation, And against the people of My 
wrath do I give him a charge, 

To take the spoil, and to take the 
prey, 

And to tread them down like the 
mire of the streets. 

7Howbeit he meaneth not so, 

Neither doth his heart think so; 

But it is in his heart to destroy, 

And to cut off nations not a few. 

8For he saith: ‘Are not my princes 
all of them kings? 

9Is not Calno as Carchemish? 

Is not Hamath as Arpad? 

Is not Samaria as Damascus? 

10As my hand hath reached the 
kingdoms of the idols, 

Whose graven images did exceed 
them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; 

11Shall I not, as I have done unto 
10 




Samaria and her idols, 

So do to Jerusalem and her idols?’ 
12Wherefore it shall come to pass, that 
when the Lord hath performed His 
whole work upon mount Zion and on 
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the 
arrogant heart of the king of Assyria, 
and the glory of his haughty looks. 
13For he hath said: 

By the strength of my hand I have 
done it, 

And by my wisdom, for I am 
prudent; 

In that I have removed the bounds 
of the peoples, 

And have robbed their treasures, 

And have brought down as one 
mighty the inhabitants; 

14And my hand hath found as a nest 
the riches of the peoples; 

And as one gathereth eggs that are 
forsaken, 

Have I gathered all the earth; 

And there was none that moved the 
wing, Or that opened mouth, or 
chirped. 

 

15Should the axe boast itself against 
him that heweth therewith? 

Should the saw magnify itself 
against him that moveth it? 

As if a rod should move them that 
lift it up, 

Or as if a staff should lift up him 
that is not wood. 

16Therefore will the Lord, the LORD 
of hosts, 

Send among his fat ones leanness; 

And under his glory there shall be 
kindled 

A burning like the burning of fire. 

17And the light of Israel shall be for 
a fire, 

And his Holy One for a flame; 

And it shall burn and devour his 
thorns 

And his briers in one day. 

18And the glory of his forest and of 
his fruitful field, 

He will consume both soul and 
body; 

And it shall be as when a sick man 
wasteth away. 

19And the remnant of the trees of his 
forest shall be few, 

That a child may write them down. 

 

20And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the remnant of Israel, 

And they that are escaped of the 
house of Jacob, 

Shall no more again stay upon him 
that smote them; 

But shall stay upon the LORD, the 
Holy One of Israel, in truth. 

21 aA remnant shall return, even the 
remnant of Jacob, 

a Heb. shear jashub. 

Unto God the Mighty. 

22For though thy people, O Israel, be 
as the sand of the sea, 

Only a remnant of them shall return; 

An extermination is determined, 
overflowing with righteousness. 


23For an extermination wholly 
determined 

Shall the Lord, the GOD of hosts, 
make in the midst of all the earth. 

 

24Therefore thus saith the Lord, the 
GOD of hosts: O My people that 
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of 
Asshur, though he smite thee with the 
rod, and lift up his staff against thee, 
after the manner of Egypt. 25For yet a 
very little while, and the indignation 
shall be accomplished, and Mine anger 
shall be to their destruction. 26And the 
LORD of hosts shall stir up against him 
a scourge, as in the slaughter of 
Midian at the Rock of Oreb; and as 
His rod was over the sea, so shall He 
lift it up after the manner of Egypt. 
27And it shall come to pass in that day, 
that 

His burden shall depart from off thy 
shoulder, 

And his yoke from off thy neck, 

And the yoke shall be destroyed by 
reason of fatness. 

28He is come to Aiath, 

He is passed through Migron; 

At Michmas he layeth up his 
baggage; 

29They are gone over the pass; 

They have taken up their lodging at 
Geba; Ramah trembleth; 

Gibeath-shaul is fled. 

30Cry thou with a shrill voice, O 
daughter of Gallim! 

Hearken, O Laish! O thou poor 
Anathoth! 

31Madmenah is in mad flight; 

The inhabitants of Gebim flee to 
cover. 

32This very day shall he halt at Nob, 

Shaking his hand at the mount of the 
daughter of Zion, 

The hill of Jerusalem. 

 

33Behold, the Lord, the LORD of 
hosts, 

Shall lop the boughs with terror; 

And the high ones of stature shall be 
hewn down, 

And the lofty shall be laid low. 

34And He shall cut down the 
thickets of the forest with iron, 

And Lebanon shall fall by a mighty 
one. 

 

And there shall come forth a 
shoot out of the stock of 
Jesse, 

And a twig shall grow forth out of 
his roots. 

2And the spirit of the LORD shall rest 
upon him, 

The spirit of wisdom and 
understanding, 

The spirit of counsel and might, 

The spirit of knowledge and of the 
fear of the LORD. 

3And his delight shall be in the fear 
of the LORD; 

And he shall not judge after the 
sight of his eyes, 

Neither decide after the hearing of 
his ears; 

4But with righteousness shall he 
judge the poor, 
11 




And decide with equity for the meek 
of the land; 

And he shall smite the land with the 
rod of his mouth, 

And with the breath of his lips shall 
he slay the wicked. 

5And righteousness shall be the 
girdle of his loins, 

And faithfulness the girdle of his 
reins. 

6And the wolf shall dwell with the 
lamb, 

And the leopard shall lie down with 
the kid; 

And the calf and the young lion and 
the fatling together; 

And a little child shall lead them. 

7And the cow and the bear feed; 

Their young ones shall lie down 
together; 

And the lion shall eat straw like the 
ox. 

8And the sucking child shall play on 
the hole of the asp, 

And the weaned child shall put his 
hand on the basilisk’s den. 

9They shall not hurt nor destroy 

In all My holy mountain; 

For the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the LORD, 

As the waters cover the sea. 

 

10And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the root of Jesse, that standeth 
for an ensign of the peoples, 

Unto him shall the nations seek; 

And his resting-place shall be 
glorious. 

 

11And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the Lord will set His hand 
again the second time 

To recover the remnant of His 
people, 

That shall remain from Assyria, and 
from Egypt, 

And from Pathros, and from Cush, 
and from Elam, 

And from Shinar, and from Hamath, 
and from the islands of the sea. 

12And He will set up an ensign for 
the nations, 

And will assemble the dispersed of 
Israel, 

And gather together the scattered of 
Judah 

From the four corners of the earth. 

13The envy also of Ephraim shall 
depart, 

And they that harass Judah shall be 
cut off; 

Ephraim shall not envy Judah, 

And Judah shall not vex Ephraim. 

14And they shall fly down upon the 
shoulder of the Philistines on the 
west; 

Together shall they spoil the 
children of the east; 

They shall put forth their hand upon 
Edom and Moab; 

And the children of Ammon shall 
obey them. 

15And the LORD will utterly destroy 
the tongue of the Egyptian sea; 


And with His scorching wind will 
He shake His hand over the 
River, 

And will smite it into seven streams, 

And cause men to march over dry-
shod. 

16And there shall be a highway for 
the remnant of His people, 

That shall remain from Assyria, 

Like as there was for Israel 

In the day that he came up out of the 
land of Egypt. 

 

And in that day thou shalt say: 

‘I will give thanks unto Thee, 
O LORD; 

For though Thou was angry with 
me, 

Thine anger is turned away, and 
Thou comfortest me. 

2Behold, God is my salvation; 

I will trust, and will not be afraid; 

For GOD the LORD is my strength and 
song; 

And He is become my salvation.’ 

3Therefore with joy shall ye draw 
water 

Out of the wells of salvation. 

4And in that day shall ye say: 

‘Give thanks unto the LORD, 
proclaim His name, 

Declare His doings among the 
peoples, 

Make mention that His name is 
exalted. 

5Sing unto the LORD; for He hath 
done gloriously; 

This is made known in all the earth. 

6Cry aloud and shout, thou 
inhabitant of Zion, 

For great is the Holy One of Israel 
in the midst of thee.’ 

 

The burden of Babylon, which 
Isaiah the son of Amoz did 
see. 

 

2Set ye up an ensign upon the high 
mountain, 

Lift up the voice unto them, 

Wave the hand, that they may go 

Into the gates of the nobles. 

3I have commanded My consecrated 
ones, 

Yea, I have called My mighty ones 
for mine anger, 

Even My proudly exulting ones. 

4Hark, a tumult in the mountains, 

Like as of a great people! 

Hark, the uproar of the kingdoms 

Of the nations gathered together! 

The LORD of hosts mustereth 

The host of the battle. 

 

5They come from a far country, 

From the end of heaven, 

Even the LORD, and the weapons of 
His indignation, 

To destroy the whole earth. 

6Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is 
at hand; 

As destruction from the Almighty 
shall it come. 

7Therefore shall all hands be slack, 

And every heart of man shall melt. 

8And they shall be affrighted; 
12 

13 




Pangs and throes shall take hold of 
them; 

They shall be in pain as a woman in 
travail; 

They shall look aghast one at 
another; 

Their faces shall be faces of flame. 

 

9Behold, the day of the LORD 
cometh, 

Cruel, and full of wrath and fierce 
anger; 

To make the earth a desolation, 

And to destroy the sinners thereof 
out of it, 

10For the stars of heaven and the 
constellations thereof 

Shall not give their light; 

The sun shall be darkened in his 
going forth, 

And the moon shall not cause her 
light to shine. 

11And I will visit upon the world 
their evil, 

And upon the wicked their iniquity; 

And I will cause the arrogancy of 
the proud to cease, 

And will lay low the haughtiness of 
the tyrants. 

12I will make man more rare than 
fine gold, 

Even man than the pure gold of 
Ophir. 

 

13Therefore I will make the heavens 
to tremble, 

And the earth shall be shaken out of 
her place, 

For the wrath of the LORD of hosts, 

And for the day of His fierce anger. 

14And it shall come to pass, that as 
the chased gazelle, 

And as sheep that no man gathereth, 

They shall turn every man to his 
own people, 

And shall flee every man to his own 
land. 

15Every one that is found shall be 
thrust through; 

And every one that is caught shall 
fall by the sword. 

16Their babes also shall be dashed in 
pieces before their eyes; 

Their houses shall be spoiled, 

And their wives ravished. 

 

17Behold, I will stir up the Medes 
against them, 

Who shall not regard silver, 

And as for gold, they shall not 
delight in it. 

18And their bows shall dash the 
young men in pieces; 

And they shall have no pity on the 
fruit of the womb; 

Their eye shall not spare children. 

19And Babylon, the glory of 
kingdoms, 

The beauty of the Chaldeans’pride, 

Shall be as when God overthrew 
Sodom and Gomorrah. 

 

20It shall never be inhabited, 

Neither shall it be dwelt in from 
generation to generation; 

Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent 
there; 


Neither shall the shepherds make 
their fold there. 

21But wild-cats shall lie there; 

And their houses shall be full of 
ferrets; 

And ostriches shall dwell there, 

And satyrs shall dance there. 

22And jackals shall howl in their 
castles, 

And wild-dogs in the pleasant 
palaces; 

And her time is near to come, 

And her days shall not be 
prolonged. 

 

For the LORD will have 
compassion on Jacob, and will 
yet choose Israel, and set them in their 
own land; and the stranger shall join 
himself with them, and they shall 
cleave to the house of Jacob. 2And the 
peoples shall take them, and bring 
them to their place; and the house of 
Israel shall possess them in the land of 
the LORD for servants and for 
handmaids; and they shall take them 
captive, whose captives they were; and 
they shall rule over their oppressors. 

3And it shall come to pass in the day 
that the LORD shall give thee rest from 
thy travail, and from thy trouble, and 
from the hard service wherein thou 
wast made to serve, 4that thou shalt 
take up this parable against the king of 
Babylon, and say: 

How hath the oppressor ceased! 

The exactress of gold ceased! 

5The LORD hath broken the staff of 
the wicked, 

The sceptre of the rulers, 

6That smote the peoples in wrath 

With an incessant stroke, 

That ruled the nations in anger, 

With a persecution that none 
restrained. 

7The whole earth is at rest, and is 
quiet; 

They break forth into singing. 

8Yea, the cypresses rejoice at thee, 

And the cedars of Lebanon: 

‘Since thou art laid down, 

No feller is come up against us.’ 

 

9The nether-world from beneath is 
moved for thee 

To meet thee at thy coming; 

The shades are stirred up for thee, 

Even all the chief ones of the earth; 

All the kings of the nations 

Are raised up from their thrones. 

10All they do answer 

And say unto thee: 

‘Art thou also become weak as we? 

Art thou become like unto us? 

11Thy pomp is brought down to the 
nether-world, 

And the noise of thy psalteries; 

The maggot is spread under thee, 

And the worms cover thee.’ 

 

12How art thou fallen from heaven, 

O day-star, son of the morning! 

How art thou cut down to the 
ground, 

That didst cast lots over the nations! 

13And thou saidst in thy heart: 

‘I will ascend into heaven, 

Above the stars of God 
14 




Will I exalt my throne, 

And I will sit upon the mount of 
meeting, 

In the uttermost parts of the north; 

14I will ascend above the heights of 
the clouds; 

I will be like the Most High.’ 

15Yet thou shalt be brought down to 
the nether-world, 

To the uttermost parts of the pit. 

 

16They that saw thee do narrowly 
look upon thee, 

They gaze earnestly at thee: 

‘Is this the man that made the earth 
to tremble, 

That did shake kingdoms; 

17That made the world as a 
wilderness, 

And destroyed the cities thereof; 

That opened not the house of his 
prisoners?’ 

18All the kings of the nations, 

All of them, sleep in glory, 

Every one in his own house. 

19But thou art cast forth away from 
thy grave 

Like an abhorred offshoot, 

In the raiment of the slain, that are 
thrust through with the sword, 

That go down to the pavement of 
the pit, 

As a carcass trodden under foot. 

20Thou shalt not be joined with them 
in burial, 

Bbecause thou hast destroyed thy 
land, 

Thou hast slain thy people; 

The seed of evil-doers shall not 

Be named for ever. 

21Prepare ye slaughter for his 
children 

For the iniquity of their fathers; 

That they rise not up, and possess 
the earth, 

And fill the face of the world with 
cities. 

22And I will rise up against them, 
saith the LORD of hosts, and cut off 
from Babylon name and remnant, and 
offshoot and offspring, saith the LORD. 
23I will also make it a possession for 
the bittern, and pools of water; and I 
will sweep it with the besom of 
destruction, saith the LORD of hosts. 

 

24The LORD of hosts hath sworn, 
saying: 

Surely as I have thought, so shall it 
come to pass; 

And as I have purposed, so shall it 
stand, 

25That I will break Asshur in My 
land, 

And upon My mountains tread him 
under foot; 

Then shall his yoke depart from off 
them, 

And his burden depart from off their 
shoulder. 

26This is the purpose that is 
purposed upon the whole earth; 

And this is the hand that is stretched 
out upon all the nations. 

27For the LORD of hosts hath 
purposed, 

And who shall disannul it? 

And His hand is stretched out, 


And who shall turn it back? 

 

28In the year that king Ahaz died 
was this burden. 

 

29Rejoice not, O Philistia, all of thee, 

Because the rod that smote thee is 
broken: 

For out of the serpent’s root shall 
come forth a basilisk, 

And his fruit shall be a flying 
serpent. 

30And the first-born of the poor shall 
feed, 

And the needy shall lie down in 
safety; 

And I will kill thy root with famine, 

And thy remnant shall be slain 

31Howl, O gate; cry, O city; 

Melt away, O Philistia, all of thee; 

For there cometh a smoke out of the 
north, 

And there is no straggler in his 
ranks. 

32What then shall one answer the 
messengers of the nation? 

That the LORD hath founded Zion, 

And in her shall the afflicted of His 
people take refuge. 

 

The burden of Moab. 

 

For in the night that Ar of Moab is 
laid waste, 

He is brought to ruin; 

For in the night that Kir of Moab is 
laid waste, 

He is brought to ruin. 

2He is gone up to Baith, and to 
Dibon, 

Tto the high places, to weep; 

Upon Nebo, and upon Medeba, 
Moab howleth; 

On all their heads is baldness, 

Every beard is shaven. 

3In their streets they gird themselves 
with sackcloth; 

On their housetops, and in their 
broad places, 

Every one howleth, weeping 
profusely. 

4And Heshbon crieth out, and 
Elealeh; 

Their voice is heard even unto 
Jahaz; 

Therefore the armed men of Moab 
cry aloud; 

His soul is faint within him. 

5My heart crieth out for Moab; 

Her fugitives reach unto Zoar, 

A heifer of three years old; 

For by the ascent of Luhith 

With weeping they go up; 

For in the way of Horonaim 

They raise up a cry of destruction. 

6For the Waters of Nimrim shall be 
desolate; 

For the grass is withered away, the 
herbage faileth, 

There is no green thing. 

7Therefore the abundance they have 
gotten, 

And that which they have laid up, 

Shall they carry away to the brook 
of the willows. 

8For the cry is gone round about 

The borders of Moab; 
15 




The howling thereof unto Eglaim, 

And the howling thereof unto Beer-
elim. 

9For the waters of Dimon are full of 
blood; 

For I will bring yet more upon 
Dimon, 

A lion upon him that escapeth of 
Moab, 

And upon the remnant of the land. 

 

Send ye the lambs for the ruler 
of the land 

From the crags that are toward the 
wilderness, 

Unto the mount of the daughter of 
Zion. 

2For it shall be that, as wandering 
birds, 

As a scattered nest, 

So shall the daughters of Moab be 

At the fords of Arnon. 

3’Give counsel, execute justice; 

Make thy shadow as the night in the 
midst of the noonday; 

Hide the outcasts; betray not the 
fugitive. 

4Let mine outcasts dwell with thee; 

As for Moab, be thou a covert to 
him from the face of the spoiler.’ 

For the extortion is at an end, 
spoiling ceaseth, 

They that trampled down are 
consumed out of the land; 

5And a throne is established through 
mercy, 

And there sitteth thereon in truth, in 
the tent of David, 

One that judgeth, and seeketh 
justice, and is ready in 
righteousness. 

 

6We have heard of the pride of 
Moab; 

He is very proud; 

Even of his haughtiness, and his 
pride, and his arrogancy, 

His ill-founded boastings. 

7Therefore shall Moab wail for 
Moab, 

Every one shall wail; for the sweet 
cakes of Kir-hareseth shall ye 
mourn, 

Sorely stricken. 

8For the fields of Heshbon languish, 

And the vine of Sibmah, 

Whose choice plants did overcome 

The lords of nations; 

They reached even unto Jazer, 

They wandered into the wilderness; 

Her branches were spread abroad, 

They passed over the sea. 

9Therefore I will weep with the 
weeping of Jazer 

For the vine of Sibmah; 

I will water thee with my tears, 

O Heshbon, and Elealeh; 

For upon thy summer fruits and 
upon thy harvest 

The battle shout is fallen. 

10And gladness and joy are taken 
away 

Out of the fruitful field; 

And in the vineyards there shall be 
no singing, 

Neither shall there be shouting; 
16 




No treader shall tread out wine in 
the presses; 

I have made the vintage shout to 
cease. 

11Wherefore my heart moaneth like 
a harp for Moab, 

And mine inward parts for Kir-
heres. 

12And it shall come to pass, when it 
is seen that Moab hath wearied himself 
upon the high place, that he shall come 
to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall 
not prevail 

13This is the word that the LORD 
spoke concerning Moab in time past. 
14But now the LORD hath spoken, 
saying: ‘Within three years, as the 
years of a hireling, and the glory of 
Moab shall wax contemptible for all 
his great multitude; and the remnant 
shall be very small and without 
strength.’ 

 

The burden of Damascus. 

 

Behold, Damascus is taken away 
from being a city, 

And it shall be a ruinous heap. 

2The cities of Aroer are forsaken; 

They shall be for flocks, 

Which shall lie down, and none 
shall make them afraid. 

3The fortress also shall cease from 
Ephraim, 

And the kingdom from Damascus; 

And the remnant of Aram shall be 
as the glory of the children of 
Israel, 

Sith the LORD of hosts. 

 

4And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the glory of Jacob shall be 
made thin, 

And the fatness of his flesh shall 
wax lean. 

5And it shall be as when the 
harvestman gathereth the standing 
corn, 

And reapeth the ears with his arm; 

Yea, it shall be as when one 
gleaneth ears 

In the valley of Rephaim. 

6Yet there shall be left therein 
gleanings, 

As at the beating of an olive-tree, 

Two or three berries 

In the top of the uppermost bough, 

Four or five in the branches of the 
fruitful tree, 

Saith the LORD, the God of Israel. 

 

7In that day shall a man regard his 
Maker, 

And his eyes shall look to the Holy 
One of Israel. 

8And he shall not regard the altars, 

The work of his hands, 

Neither shall he look to that which 
his fingers have made, 

Either the Asherim, or the sun-
images. 

 

9In that day shall his strong cities be 
as the forsaken places, which were 
forsaken from before the children of 
Israel, after the manner of woods and 
17 




lofty forests; and it shall be a 
desolation. 

10For thou hast forgotten the God of 
thy salvation, 

And thou hast not been mindful of 
the Rock of thy stronghold; 

Therefore thou didst plant plants of 
pleasantness, 

And didst set it with slips of a 
stranger; 

11In the day of thy planting thou 
didst make it to grow, 

And in the morning thou didst make 
thy seed to blossom— 

A heap of boughs in the day of grief 

And of desperate pain. 

 

12Ah, the uproar of many peoples, 

That roar like the roaring of the 
seas; 

And the rushing of nations, that rush 
like the rushing of mighty waters! 

13The nations shall rush like the 
rushing of many waters; 

But He shall rebuke them, and they 
shall flee far off, 

And shall be chased as the chaff of 
the mountains before the wind, 

And like the whirling dust before 
the storm. 

14At eventide behold terror; 

And before the morning they are 
not. 

This is the portion of them that spoil 
us, 

And the lot of them that rob us. 

 

Ah, land of the buzzing of 
wings, 

Which is beyond the rivers of 
Ethiopia; 

2That sendeth ambassadors by the 
sea, 

Even in vessels of papyrus upon the 
waters! 

Go, ye swift messengers, 

To a nation tall and of glossy skin, 

To a people terrible from their 
beginning onward; 

A nation that is sturdy and treadeth 
down, 

Whose land the rivers divide! 

3All ye inhabitants of the world, and 
ye dwellers on the earth, 

When an ensign is lifted up on the 
mountains, see ye; 

And when the horn is blown, hear 
ye. 

 

4For thus hath the LORD said unto 
me: 

I will hold Me still, and I will look 
on in My dwelling-place, 

Like clear heat in sunshine, 

Like a cloud of dew in the heat of 
harvest. 

5For before the harvest, when the 
blossom is over, 

And the bud becometh a ripening 
grape, 

He will cut off the sprigs with 
pruning-hooks, 

And the shoots will He take away 
and lop off. 

6They shall be left together unto the 
ravenous birds of the mountains, 

And to the beasts of the earth; 18 




And the ravenous birds shall 
summer upon them, 

And all the beasts of the earth shall 
winter upon them. 

7In that time shall a present be 
brought unto the LORD of hosts of 
a people tall and of glossy skin, 
and from a people terrible from 
their beginning onward; a nation 
that is sturdy and treadeth down, 
whose land the rivers divide, to 
the place of the name of the LORD 
of hosts, the mount Zion. 

 

The burden of Egypt. 

 

Behold, the LORD rideth upon a swift 
cloud, 

And cometh unto Egypt; 

And the idols of Egypt shall be 
moved at His presence, 

And the heart of Egypt shall melt 
within it. 

2And I will spur Egypt against 
Egypt; 

And they shall fight every one 
against his brother, 

And everyone against his neighbour; 

City against city, and kingdom 
against kingdom. 

3And the spirit of Egypt shall be 
made empty within it; 

And I will make void the counsel 
thereof; 

And they shall seek unto the idols, 
and to the whisperers, 

And to the ghosts, and to the 
familiar spirits. 

4And I will give over the Egyptians 

Iinto the hand of a cruel lord; 

And a fierce king shall rule over 
them, 

Saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts. 

 

5And the waters shall fail from the 
sea, 

And the river shall be drained dry, 

6And the rivers shall become foul; 

The streams of Egypt shall be 
minished and dried up; 

The reeds and flags shall wither. 

7The mosses by the Nile, by the 
brink of the Nile, 

And all that is sown by the Nile, 

Shall become dry, be driven away, 
and be no more. 

8The fishers also shall lament, 

And all they that cast angle into the 
Nile shall mourn, 

And they that spread nets upon the 
waters shall languish. 

9Moreover they that work in 
combed flax, 

And they that weave cotton, shall 
be ashamed. 

10And her foundations shall be 
crushed, 

All they that make dams shall be 
grieved in soul. 

 

11The princes of Zoan are utter 
fools; 

The wisest counsellors of Pharaoh 
are a senseless counsel; 

How can ye say unto Pharaoh: ‘I 
am the son of the wise, 

The son of ancient kings’? 
19 




12Where are they, then, thy wise 
men? 

And let them tell thee now; 

And let them know what the LORD 
of hosts 

Hath purposed concerning Egypt. 

13The princes of Zoan are become 
fools, 

The princes of Noph are deceived; 

They have caused Egypt to go 
astray, 

That are the corner-stone of her 
tribes. 

14The LORD hath mingled within 
her 

A spirit of dizziness; 

And they have caused Egypt to 
stagger in every work thereof, 

As a drunken man staggereth in his 
vomit. 

15Neither shall there be for Egypt 
any work, 

Which head or tail, palm-branch or 
rush, may do. 

16In that day shall Egypt be like unto 
women; and it shall tremble and fear 
because of the shaking of the hand of 
the LORD of hosts, which He shaketh 
over it. 17And the land of Judah shall 
become a terror unto Egypt, 
whensoever one maketh mention 
thereof to it; it shall be afraid, because 
of the purpose of the LORD of hosts, 
which He purposeth against it. 

18In that day there shall be five cities 
in the land of Egypt that speak the 
language of Canaan, and swear to the 
LORD of hosts; one shall be called The 
city of destruction. 19In that day shall 
there be an altar to the LORD in the 
midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar 
at the border thereof to the LORD. 
20And it shall be for a sign and for a 
witness unto the LORD of hosts in the 
land of Egypt; for they shall cry unto 
the LORD because of the oppressors, 
and He will send them a saviour, and a 
defender, who will deliver them. 21And 
the LORD shall make Himself known to 
Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know 
the LORD in that day; yea, they shall 
worship with sacrifice and offering, 
and shall vow a vow unto the LORD, 
and shall perform it. 

22And the LORD will smite Egypt, 
smiting and healing; and they shall 
return unto the LORD, and He will be 
entreated of them, and will heal them. 
23In that day shall there be a highway 
out of Egypt to Assyria, and the 
Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and 
the Egyptian into Assyria; and the 
Egyptians shall worship with the 
Assyrians. 

24In that day shall Israel be the third 
with Egypt and with Assyria, a 
blessing in the midst of the earth; 25for 
that the LORD of hosts hath blessed 
him, saying: ‘Blessed be Egypt My 
people and Assyria the work of My 
hands, and Israel Mine inheritance.’ 

 

In the year that Tartan came 
into Ashdod, when Sargon the 
king of Assyria sent him, and he 
fought against Ashdod and took it; 2at 
that time the LORD spoke by Isaiah the 
son of Amoz, saying: ‘Go, and loose 
20 




the sackcloth from off thy loins, and 
put thy shoe from off thy foot.’ And he 
did so, walking naked and barefoot. 

3And the LORD said: ‘Like as My 
servant Isaiah hath walked naked and 
barefoot to be for three years a sign 
and a wonder upon Egypt and upon 
Ethiopia, 4so shall the king of Assyria 
lead away the captives of Egypt, and 
the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, 
naked and barefoot, and with buttocks 
uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. 
5And they shall be dismayed and 
ashamed, because of Ethiopia their 
expectation, and of Egypt their glory. 
6And the inhabitant of this coast-land 
shall say in that day: Behold, such is 
our expectation, whither we fled for 
help to be delivered from the king of 
Assyria; and how shall we escape?’ 

 

The burden of the wilderness 
of the sea. 

 

As whirlwinds in the South 
sweeping on, 

It cometh from the wilderness, from 
a dreadful land. 

2A grievous vision is declared unto 
me: 

‘The treacherous dealer dealeth 
treacherously, and the spoiler 
spoileth. 

Go up, O Elam! besiege, O Media! 

All the sighing thereof have I made 
to cease.’ 

3Therefore are my loins filled with 
convulsion; 

Pangs have taken hold upon me, as 
the pangs of a woman in travail; 

I am bent so that I cannot hear; 

I am affrighted so that I cannot see. 

4My heart is bewildered, terror hath 
overwhelmed me; 

The twilight that I longed for hath 
been turned for me into 
trembling. 

5They prepare the table, they light 
the lamps, they eat, they drink— 

’Rise up, ye princes, anoint the 
shield.’ 

 

6For thus hath the Lord said unto 
me: 

Go, set a watchman; let him declare 
what he seeth! 

7And when he seeth a troop, 
horsemen by pairs, 

A troop of asses, a troop of camels, 

He shall hearken diligently with 
much heed. 

8And he cried as a lion: ‘Upon the 
watch-tower, O Lord, 

I stand continually in the daytime, 

And I am set in my ward all the 
nights.’ 

9And, behold, there came a troop of 
men, horsemen by pairs. 

And he spoke and said: 

‘Fallen, fallen is Babylon; 

And all the graven images of her 
gods are broken unto the ground.’ 

10O thou my threshing, and the 
winnowing of my floor, 

That which I have heard from the 
LORD of hosts, 
21 




The God of Israel, have I declared 
unto you. 

 

11The burden of Dumah. 

 

One calleth unto me out of Seir: 

‘Watchman, what of the night? 

Watchman, what of the night?’ 

12The watchman said: 

‘The morning cometh, and also the 
night— 

If ye will inquire, inquire ye; return, 
come.’ 

 

13The burden upon Arabia. 

 

In the thickets in Arabia shall ye 
lodge, O ye caravans of 
Dedanites. 

14Unto him that is thirsty bring ye 
water! 

The inhabitants of the land of Tema 
did meet the fugitive with his 
bread. 

15For they fled away from the 
swords, from the drawn sword, 

And from the bent bow, and from 
the grievousness of war. 

16For thus hath the Lord said unto me: 
‘Within a year, according to the years 
of a hireling, and all the glory of Kedar 
shall fail; 17and the residue of the 
number of the archers, the mighty men 
of the children of Kedar, shall be 
diminished; for the LORD, the God of 
Israel, hath spoken it.’ 

 

The burden concerning the 
Valley of Vision. 

 

What aileth thee now, that thou art 
wholly gone up to the housetops, 

2Thou that art full of uproar, a 
tumultuous city, a joyous town? 

Thy slain are not slain with the 
sword, nor dead in battle. 

3All thy rulers are fled together, 

Without the bow they are bound; 

All that are found of thee are bound 
together, they are fled afar off. 

4Therefore said I: ‘Look away from 
me, I will weep bitterly; 

Strain not to comfort me, for the 
destruction of the daughter of my 
people.’ 

5For it is a day of trouble, and of 
trampling, and of perplexity, 

From the Lord, the GOD of hosts, in 
the Valley of Vision; 

Kir shouting, and Shoa at the mount. 

6And Elam bore the quiver, with 
troops of men, even horsemen; 

And Kir uncovered the shield. 

7And it came to pass, when thy 
choicest valleys were full of 
chariots, 

And the horsemen set themselves in 
array at the gate, 

8And the covering of Judah was laid 
bare, 

that thou didst look in that day to the 
armour in the house of the forest. 9And 
ye saw the breaches of the city of 
David, that they were many; and ye 
gathered together the waters of the 
lower pool. 10And ye numbered the 
houses of Jerusalem, and ye broke 
down the houses to fortify the wall; 22 




11ye made also a basin between the 
two walls for the water of the old 
pool— 

But ye looked not unto Him that had 
done this, 

Neither had ye respect unto Him 
that fashioned it long ago. 

12And in that day did the Lord, the 
GOD of hosts, call 

To weeping, and to lamentation, and 
to baldness, and to girding with 
sackcloth; 

13And behold joy and gladness, 

Slaying oxen and killing sheep, 

Eating flesh and drinking wine— 

’Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow 
we shall die! ’ 

14And the LORD of hosts revealed 
Himself in mine ears: 

Surely this iniquity shall not be 
expiated by you till ye die, 

Saith the Lord, the GOD of hosts. 

 

15Thus saith the Lord, the GOD of 
hosts: 

Go, get thee unto this steward, 

Even unto Shebna, who is over the 
house: 

16What hast thou here, and whom 
hast thou here, 

That thou hast hewed thee out here a 
sepulchre, 

Thou that hewest thee out a 
sepulchre on high, 

And gravest a habitation for thyself 
in the rock? 

17Behold, the LORD will hurl thee up 
and down with a man’s throw; 

Yea, He will wind thee round and 
round; 

18He will violently roll and toss 
thee like a ball into a large 
country; 

There shalt thou die, and there shall 
be the chariots of thy glory, 

Thou shame of the lord’s house. 

19And I will thrust thee from thy 
post, 

And from thy station shalt thou be 
pulled down. 

20And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That I will call my servant Eliakim 
the son of Hilkiah; 

21And I will clothe him with thy 
robe, 

And bind him with thy girdle, 

And I will commit thy government 
into his hand; 

And he shall be a father to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to 
the house of Judah. 

22And the key of the house of 
David will I lay upon his 
shoulder; 

And he shall open, and none shall 
shut; 

And he shall shut, and none shall 
open. 

23And I will fasten him as a peg in 
a sure place; 

And he shall be for a throne of 
honour to his father’s house. 

24And they shall hang upon him all the 
glory of his father’s house, the 
offspring and the issue, all vessels of 
small quantity, from the vessels of 


cups even to all the vessels of flagons. 
25In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, 
shall the peg that was fastened in a 
sure place give way; and it shall be 
hewn down, and fall, and the burden 
that was upon it shall be cut off; for 
the LORD hath spoken it. 

 

The burden of Tyre. 

 

Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, 

For it is laid waste, so that there is 
no house, no entering in; 

From the land of Kittim it is 
revealed to them. 

2Be still, ye inhabitants of the coast-
land; 

Thou whom the merchants of Zidon, 
that pass over the sea, have 
replenished. 

3And on great waters the seed of 
Shihor, 

The harvest of the Nile, was her 
revenue; 

And she was the mart of nations. 

4Be thou ashamed, O Zidon; for the 
sea hath spoken, 

The stronghold of the sea, saying: 

‘I have not travailed, nor brought 
forth, 

Neither have I reared young men, 
nor brought up virgins.’ 

5When the report cometh to Egypt, 

They shall be sorely pained at the 
report of Tyre. 

 

6Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye 
inhabitants of the coast-land. 

7Is this your joyous city, 

Whose feet in antiquity, 

In ancient days, 

Carried her afar off to sojourn? 

8Who hath devised this against Tyre, 
the crowning city, 

Whose merchants are princes, 

Whose traffickers are the 
honourable of the earth? 

9The LORD of hosts hath devised it, 

To pollute the pride of all glory, 

To bring into contempt all the 
honourable of the earth. 

10Overflow thy land as the Nile, 

O daughter of Tarshish! there is no 
girdle any more. 

11He hath stretched out His hand 
over the sea, 

He hath shaken the kingdoms; 

The LORD hath given commandment 
concerning Canaan, 

To destroy the strongholds thereof; 

12And He said: ‘Thou shalt no more 
rejoice.’ 

O thou oppressed virgin daughter of 
Zidon, 

Arise, pass over to Kittim; 

Even there shalt thou have no rest. 

13Behold, the land of the 
Chaldeans—this is the people that was 
not, when Asshur founded it for 
shipmen—they set up their towers, 
they overthrew the palaces thereof; it 
is made a ruin. 

14Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, 

For your stronghold is laid waste. 

 

15And it shall come to pass in that 
day, that Tyre shall be forgotten 
seventy years, according to the days of 
23 




one king; after the end of seventy 
years it shall fare with Tyre as in the 
song of the harlot: 

16Take a harp, 

Go about the city, 

Thou harlot long forgotten; 

Make sweet melody, 

Sing many songs, 

That thou mayest be remembered. 

17And it shall come to pass after the 
end of seventy years, that the LORD 
will remember Tyre, and she shall 
return to her hire, and shall have 
commerce with all the kingdoms of the 
world upon the face of the earth. 18And 
her gain and her hire shall be holiness 
to the LORD; it shall not be treasured 
nor laid up; for her gain shall be for 
them that dwell before the LORD, to eat 
their fill, and for stately clothing. 

 

Behold, the LORD maketh the 
earth empty and maketh it 
waste, 

And turneth it upside down, and 
scattereth abroad the inhabitants 
thereof. 

2And it shall be, as with the people, 
so with the priest; 

As with the servant, so with his 
master; 

As with the maid, so with her 
mistress; 

As with the buyer, so with the seller; 

As with the lender, so with the 
borrower; 

As with the creditor, so with the 
debtor. 

3The earth shall be utterly emptied, 
and clean despoiled; 

For the LORD hath spoken this word. 

4The earth fainteth and fadeth away, 

The world faileth and fadeth away, 

The lofty people of the earth do fail. 

5The earth also is defiled under the 
inhabitants thereof; 

Because they have transgressed the 
laws, violated the statute, 

Broken the everlasting covenant. 

6Therefore hath a curse devoured 
the earth, 

And they that dwell therein are 
found guilty; 

Therefore the inhabitants of the 
earth waste away, 

And men are left few. 

7The new wine faileth, the vine 
fadeth; 

All the merry-hearted do sigh. 

8The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, 

The noise of them that rejoice 
endeth, 

The joy of the harp ceaseth. 

9They drink not wine with a song; 

Strong drink is bitter to them that 
drink it. 

10Broken down is the city of 
wasteness; 

Every house is shut up, that none 
may come in. 

11There is a crying in the streets 
amidst the wine; 

All joy is darkened, 

The mirth of the land is gone. 

12In the city is left desolation, 

And the gate is smitten unto ruin. 
24 




13For thus shall it be in the midst of 
the earth, among the peoples, 

As at the beating of an olive-tree, 

As at the gleanings when the vintage 
is done. 

14Those yonder lift up their voice, 
they sing for joy; 

For the majesty of the LORD they 
shout from the sea: 

15’Therefore glorify ye the LORD in 
the regions of light, 

Even the name of the LORD, the God 
of Israel, in the isles of the sea.’ 

 

16From the uttermost part of the 
earth have we heard songs: ‘Glory 
to the righteous.’ 

But I say: I waste away, I waste 
away, woe is me! 

The treacherous deal treacherously; 

Yea, the treacherous deal very 
treacherously. 

17Terror, and the pit, and the trap, 
are upon thee, O inhabitant of the 
earth. 

18And it shall come to pass, that he 
who fleeth from the noise of the 
terror shall fall into the pit; 

And he that cometh up out of the 
midst of the pit shall be taken in 
the trap; 

For the windows on high are 
opened, 

And the foundations of the earth do 
shake; 

19The earth is broken, broken down, 

The earth is crumbled in pieces, 

The earth trembleth and tottereth; 

20The earth reeleth to and fro like a 
drunken man, 

And swayeth to and fro as a lodge; 

And the transgression thereof is 
heavy upon it, 

And it shall fall, and not rise again. 

21And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the LORD will punish the host 
of the high heaven on high, 

And the kings of the earth upon the 
earth. 

22And they shall be gathered 
together, as prisoners are gathered 
in the dungeon, 

And shall be shut up in the prison, 

And after many days shall they be 
punished. 

23Then the moon shall be 
confounded, and the sun 
ashamed; 

For the LORD of hosts will reign in 
mount Zion, 

And in Jerusalem, and before His 
elders shall be Glory. 

 

O LORD, Thou art my God, 

I will exalt Thee, I will praise 
Thy name, 

For Thou hast done wonderful 
things; 

Even counsels of old, in faithfulness 
and truth. 

2For Thou hast made of a city a 
heap, 

Of a fortified city a ruin; 

A castle of strangers to be no city, 

It shall never be built. 
25 




3Therefore shall the strong people 
glorify Thee, 

The city of the terrible nations shall 
fear Thee. 

4For Thou hast been a stronghold to 
the poor, 

A stronghold to the needy in his 
distress, 

A refuge from the storm, a shadow 
from the heat; 

For the blast of the terrible ones was 
as a storm against the wall. 

5As the heat in a dry place, Thou 
didst subdue the noise of 
strangers; 

As the heat by the shadow of a 
cloud, the song of the terrible 
ones was brought low. 

 

6And in this mountain will the LORD 
of hosts make unto all peoples 

A feast of fat things, a feast of wines 
on the lees, 

Of fat things full of marrow, of 
wines on the lees well refined. 

7And He will destroy in this 
mountain 

The face of the covering that is cast 
over all peoples, 

And the veil that is spread over all 
nations. 

8He will swallow up death for ever; 

And the Lord GOD will wipe away 
tears from off all faces; 

And the reproach of His people will 
He take away from off all the 
earth; 

For the LORD hath spoken it. 

 

9And it shall be said in that day: 

‘Lo, this is our God, 

For whom we waited, that He might 
save us; 

This is the LORD, for whom we 
waited, 

We will be glad and rejoice in His 
salvation.’ 

10For in this mountain will the hand 
of the LORD rest, 

And Moab shall be trodden down in 
his place, 

Even as straw is trodden down in 
the dunghill. 

11And when he shall spread forth his 
hands in the midst thereof, 

As he that swimmeth spreadeth 
forth his hands to swim, 

His pride shall be brought down 
together with the cunning of his 
hands. 

12And the high fortress of thy walls 
will He bring down, lay low, 

And bring to the ground, even to the 
dust. 

 

In that day shall this song be 
sung in the land of Judah: 

We have a strong city; 

Walls and bulwarks doth He appoint 
for salvation. 

2Open ye the gates, 

That the righteous nation that 
keepeth faithfulness may enter in. 

3The mind stayed on Thee Thou 
keepest in perfect peace; 

Because it trusteth in Thee. 

4Trust ye in the LORD for ever, 
26 




For the LORD is GOD, an everlasting 
Rock. 

5For He hath brought down them 
that dwell on high, 

The lofty city, laying it low, laying 
it low even to the ground, 

Bringing it even to the dust. 

6The foot shall tread it down, 

Even the feet of the poor, and the 
steps of the needy. 

 

7The way of the just is straight; 

Thou, Most Upright, makest plain 
the path of the just. 

8Yea, in the way of Thy judgments, 

O LORD, have we waited for Thee; 

To Thy name and to Thy memorial 
is the desire of our soul. 

9With my soul have I desired Thee 
in the night; 

Yea, with my spirit within me have I 
sought Thee earnestly; 

For when Thy judgments are in the 
earth, 

The inhabitants of the world learn 
righteousness. 

10Let favour be shown to the 
wicked, yet will he not learn 
righteousness; 

In the land of uprightness will he 
deal wrongfully, 

And will not behold the majesty of 
the LORD. 

 

11LORD, Thy hand was lifted up, yet 
they see not; 

They shall see with shame Thy zeal 
for the people; 

Yea, fire shall devour Thine 
adversaries. 

12LORD, Thou wilt establish peace 
for us; 

For Thou hast indeed wrought all 
our works for us. 

13O LORD our God, other lords 
beside Thee have had dominion 
over us; 

But by Thee only do we make 
mention of Thy name. 

14The dead live not, the shades rise 
not; 

To that end hast Thou punished and 
destroyed them, 

And made all their memory to 
perish. 

15Thou hast gotten Thee honour with 
the nations, O LORD, 

Yea, exceeding great honour with 
the nations; 

Thou art honoured unto the farthest 
ends of the earth. 

 

16LORD, in trouble have they sought 
Thee, 

Silently they poured out a prayer 
when Thy chastening was upon 
them. 

17Like as a woman with child, that 
draweth near the time of her 
delivery, 

Is in pain and crieth out in her 
pangs; 

So have we been at Thy presence, O 
LORD. 

18We have been with child, we have 
been in pain, 


We have as it were brought forth 
wind; 

We have not wrought any 
deliverance in the land; 

Neither are the inhabitants of the 
world come to life. 

19Thy dead shall live, my dead 
bodies shall arise— 

Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the 
dust— 

For Thy dew is as the dew of light, 

And the earth shall bring to life the 
shades. 

 

20Come, my people, enter thou into 
thy chambers, 

And shut thy doors about thee; 

Hide thyself for a little moment, 

Until the indignation be overpast. 

21For, behold, the LORD cometh forth 
out of His place 

To visit upon the inhabitants of the 
earth their iniquity; 

The earth also shall disclose her 
blood, 

And shall no more cover her slain. 

In that day the LORD with His 
sore and great and strong 
sword will punish leviathan the slant 
serpent, and leviathan the tortuous 
serpent; and He will slay the dragon 
that is in the sea. 

2In that day sing ye of her: 

‘A vineyard of foaming wine! ’ 

3I the LORD do guard it, 

I water it every moment; 

Lest Mine anger visit it, 

I guard it night and day. 

4Fury is not in Me; 

Would that I were as the briers and 
thorns in flame! 

I would with one step burn it 
altogether. 

5Or else let him take hold of My 
strength, 

That he may make peace with Me; 
yea, let him make peace with Me. 

6In days to come shall Jacob take 
root, 

Israel shall blossom and bud; 

And the face of the world shall be 
filled with fruitage. 

 

7Hath He smitten him as He smote 
those that smote him? 

Or is he slain according to the 
slaughter of them that were slain 
by Him? 

8In full measure, when Thou sendest 
her away, Thou dost contend with 
her; 

He hath removed her with His rough 
blast in the day of the east wind. 

9Therefore by this shall the iniquity 
of Jacob be expiated, 

And this is all the fruit of taking 
away his sin: 

When he maketh all the stones of 
the altar as chalkstones that are 
beaten in pieces, 

So that the Asherim and the sun-
images shall rise no more. 

10For the fortified city is solitary, 

A habitation abandoned and 
forsaken, like the wilderness; 

There shall the calf feed, and there 
shall he lie down, 

And consume the branches thereof 
27 




11When the boughs thereof are 
withered, 

They shall be broken off; 

The women shall come, and set 
them on fire; 

For it is a people of no 
understanding; 

Therefore He that made them will 
not have compassion upon them, 

And He that formed them will not 
be gracious unto them. 

 

12And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the LORD will beat off [His 
fruit] 

From the flood of the River unto the 
Brook of Egypt, 

And ye shall be gathered one by 
one, O ye children of Israel. 

 

13And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That a great horn shall be blown; 

And they shall come that were lost 
in the land of Assyria, 

And they that were dispersed in the 
land of Egypt; 

And they shall worship the LORD in 
the holy mountain at Jerusalem. 

 

Woe to the crown of pride of 
the drunkards of Ephraim, 

And to the fading flower of his 
glorious beauty, 

Which is on the head of the fat 
valley of them that are smitten 
down with wine! 

2Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and 
strong one, 

As a storm of hail, a tempest of 
destruction, 

As a storm of mighty waters 
overflowing, 

That casteth down to the earth with 
violence. 

3The crown of pride of the 
drunkards of Ephraim 

Shall be trodden under foot; 

4And the fading flower of his 
glorious beauty, 

Which is on the head of the fat 
valley, 

Shall be as the first-ripe fig before 
the summer, 

Which when one looketh upon it, 

While it is yet in his hand he eateth 
it up. 

 

5In that day shall the LORD of hosts 
be 

For a crown of glory, and for a 
diadem of beauty, 

Unto the residue of His people; 

6And for a spirit of judgment to him 
that sitteth in judgment, 

And for strength to them that turn 
back the battle at the gate. 

 

7But these also reel through wine, 

And stagger through strong drink; 

The priest and the prophet reel 
through strong drink, 

They are confused because of wine, 

They stagger because of strong 
drink; 
28 




They reel in vision, they totter in 
judgment. 

8For all tables are full of filthy 
vomit, and no place is clean. 

 

9Whom shall one teach knowledge? 

And whom shall one make to 
understand the message? 

Them that are weaned from the 
milk, 

Them that are drawn from the 
breasts? 

10For it is precept by precept, 
precept by precept, 

Line by line, line by line; 

Here a little, there a little. 

11For with stammering lips and with 
a strange tongue 

Shall it be spoken to this people; 

12To whom it was said: ‘This is the 
rest, 

Give ye rest to the weary; 

And this is the refreshing’; 

Yet they would not hear. 

13And so the word of the LORD is 
unto them 

Precept by precept, precept by 
precept, 

Line by line, line by line; 

Here a little, there a little; 

That they may go, and fall 
backward, and be broken, 

And snared, and taken. 

 

14Wherefore hear the word of the 
LORD, ye scoffers, 

The ballad-mongers of this people 
which is in Jerusalem: 

15Because ye have said: ‘We have 
made a covenant with death, 

And with the nether-world are we at 
agreement; 

When the scouring scourge shall 
pass through, 

It shall not come unto us; 

For we have made lies our refuge, 

And in falsehood have we hid 
ourselves’; 

16Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 

Behold, I lay in Zion for a 
foundation a stone, 

A tried stone, a costly corner-stone 
of sure foundation; 

He that believeth shall not make 
haste. 

17And I will make justice the line, 

And righteousness the plummet; 

And the hail shall sweep away the 
refuge of lies, 

And the waters shall overflow the 
hiding-place. 

18And your covenant with death 
shall be disannulled 

And your agreement with the 
nether-world shall not stand; 

When the scouring scourge shall 
pass through, 

Then ye shall be trodden down by it, 

19As often as it passeth through, it 
shall take you; 

For morning by morning shall it 
pass through, 

By day and by night; 

And it shall be sheer terror to 
understand the message. 

20For the bed is too short for a man 
to stretch himself; 


And the covering too narrow when 
he gathereth himself up. 

21For the LORD will rise up as in 
mount Perazim, 

He will be wroth as in the valley of 
Gibeon; 

That He may do His work, strange is 
His work, 

And bring to pass His act, strange is 
His act. 

22Now therefore be ye not scoffers, 

Lest your bands be made strong; 

For an extermination wholly 
determined have I heard from the 
Lord, the GOD of hosts, 

Upon the whole land. 

 

23Give ye ear, and hear my voice; 
attend, and hear my speech. 

24Is the plowman never done with 
plowing to sow, 

With the opening and harrowing of 
his ground? 

25When he hath made plain the face 
thereof, 

Doth he not cast abroad the black 
cummin, and scatter the cummin, 

And put in the wheat in rows and 
the barley in the appointed place 

And the spelt in the border thereof? 

26For He doth instruct him aright; 

His God doth teach him. 

27For the black cummin is not 
threshed with a threshing-sledge, 

Neither is a cart-wheel turned about 
upon the cummin; 

But the black cummin is beaten out 
with a staff, 

And the cummin with a rod. 

28Is bread corn crushed? 

Nay, he will not ever be threshing it; 

And though the roller of his wagon 
and its sharp edges move noisily, 

He doth not crush it. 

29This also cometh forth from the 
LORD of hosts: 

Wonderful is His counsel, and great 
His wisdom. 

 

29 



Ah, aAriel, Ariel, the city 
where David encamped! 

a That is, The hearth of God. 

Add ye year to year, 

Let the feasts come round! 

2Then will I distress Ariel, 

And there shall be mourning and 
moaning; and she shall be unto 
Me as a hearth of God. 

3And I will encamp against thee 
round about, 

And will lay siege against thee with 
a mound, 

And I will raise siege works against 
thee. 

4And brought down thou shalt 
speak out of the ground, 

And thy speech shall be low out of 
the dust; 

And thy voice shall be as of a ghost 
out of the ground, 

And thy speech shall chirp out of 
the dust. 

5But the multitude of thy foes shall 
be like small dust, 

And the multitude of the terrible 
ones as chaff that passeth away; 


Yea, it shall be at an instant 
suddenly— 

6There shall be a visitation from the 
LORD of hosts 

With thunder, and with earthquake, 
and great noise, 

With whirlwind and tempest, and 
the flame of a devouring fire. 

7And the multitude of all the 
nations that war against Ariel, 

Even all that war against her, and 
the bulwarks about her, and they 
that distress her, 

Shall be as a dream, a vision of the 
night. 

8And it shall be as when a hungry 
man dreameth, and, behold, he 
eateth, 

But he awaketh, and his soul is 
empty; 

Or as when a thirsty man dreameth, 
and, behold, he drinketh, 

But he awaketh, and, behold, he is 
faint, and his soul hath 
appetite— 

So shall the multitude of all the 
nations be, that fight against 
mount Zion. 

 

9Stupefy yourselves, and be stupid! 

Blind yourselves, and be blind! 

Ye that are drunken, but not with 
wine, 

That stagger, but not with strong 
drink. 

10For the LORD hath poured out 
upon you the spirit of deep 
sleep, 

And hath closed your eyes; 

The prophets, and your heads, the 
seers, hath He covered. 

11And the vision of all this is 
become unto you as the words of a 
writing that is sealed, which men 
deliver to one that is learned, saying: 
‘Read this, I pray thee’; and he saith: ‘I 
cannot, for it is sealed’; 12and the 
writing is delivered to him that is not 
learned, saying: ‘Read this, I pray 
thee’; and he saith: ‘I am not learned.’ 

 

13And the Lord said: Forasmuch as 
this people draw near, 

And with their mouth and with 
their lips do honour Me, 

But have removed their heart far 
from Me, 

And their fear of Me is a 
command-ment of men learned 
by rote; 

14Therefore, behold, I will again do 
a marvellous work among this 
people, 

Even a marvellous work and a 
wonder; 

And the wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish, 

And the prudence of their prudent 
men shall be hid. 

 

15Woe unto them that seek deep to 
hide their counsel from the 
LORD, 

And their works are in the dark, 

And they say: ‘Who seeth us? and 
who knoweth us?’ 

16O your perversity! 


Shall the potter be esteemed as 
clay; 

That the thing made should say of 
him that made it: ‘He made me 
not’; 

Or the thing framed say of him that 
framed it: ‘He hath no 
understanding?’ 

17Is it not yet a very little while, 

And Lebanon shall be turned into a 
fruitful field, 

And the fruitful field shall be 
esteemed as a forest? 

18And in that day shall the deaf hear 
the words of a book, 

And the eyes of the blind shall see 
out of obscurity and out of 
darkness. 

19The humble also shall increase 
their joy in the LORD, 

And the neediest among men shall 
exult in the Holy One of Israel. 

20For the terrible one is brought to 
nought, 

And the scorner ceaseth, 

And all they that watch for iniquity 
are cut off; 

21That make a man an offender by 
words, 

And lay a snare for him that 
reproveth in the gate, 

And turn aside the just with a thing 
of nought. 

22Therefore thus saith the LORD, who 
redeemed Abraham, concerning the 
house of Jacob: 

Jacob shall not now be ashamed, 

Neither shall his face now wax 
pale; 

23When he seeth his children, the 
work of My hands, in the midst 
of him, 

That they sanctify My name; 

Yea, they shall sanctify the Holy 
One of Jacob, 

And shall stand in awe of the God 
of Israel. 

24They also that err in spirit shall 
come to understanding, 

And they that murmur shall learn 
instruction. 

 

Woe to the rebellious children, 
saith the LORD, 

That take counsel, but not of Me; 

And that form projects, but not of 
My spirit, 

That they may add sin to sin; 

2That walk to go down into Egypt, 

And have not asked at My mouth; 

To take refuge in the stronghold of 
Pharaoh, 

And to take shelter in the shadow 
of Egypt! 

3Therefore shall the stronghold of 
Pharaoh turn to your shame, 

And the shelter in the shadow of 
Egypt to your confusion. 

4For his princes are at Zoan, 

And his ambassadors are come to 
Hanes. 

5They shall all be ashamed of a 
people that cannot profit them, 

That are not a help nor profit, 

But a shame, and also a reproach. 

 

6The burden of the beasts of the 
South. 
30 




 

Through the land of trouble and 
anguish, 

From whence come the lioness and 
the lion, 

The viper and flying serpent, 

They carry their riches upon the 
shoulders of young asses, 

And their treasures upon the humps 
of camels, 

To a people that shall not profit 
them. 

7For Egypt helpeth in vain, and to 
no purpose; 

Therefore have I called her 
arrogancy that sitteth still. 

8Now go, write it before them on a 
tablet, 

And inscribe it in a book, 

That it may be for the time to come 

For ever and ever. 

9For it is a rebellious people, 

Lying children, 

Children that refuse to hear the 
teaching of the LORD; 

10That say to the seers: ‘See not’, 

And to the prophets: ‘Prophesy not 
unto us right things, 

Speak unto us smooth things, 
prophesy delusions; 

11Get you out of the way, 

Turn aside out of the path, 

Cause the Holy One of Israel 

To cease from before us.’ 

12Wherefore thus saith the Holy 
One of Israel: 

Because ye despise this word, 

And trust in oppression and 
perverseness, 

And stay thereon; 

13Therefore this iniquity shall be to 
you 

As a breach ready to fall, swelling 
out in a high wall, 

Whose breaking cometh suddenly 
at an instant. 

14And He shall break it as a potter’s 
vessel is broken, 

Breaking it in pieces without 
sparing; 

So that there shall not be found 
among the pieces thereof a 
sherd 

To take fire from the hearth, 

Or to take water out of the cistern. 

 

15For thus said the Lord GOD, the 
Holy One of Israel: 

In sitting still and rest shall ye be 
saved, 

In quietness and in confidence shall 
be your strength; 

And ye would not. 

16But ye said: ‘No, for we will flee 
upon horses’; 

Therefore shall ye flee; 

And: ‘We will ride upon the swift’; 

Therefore shall they that pursue 
you be swift. 

17One thousand shall flee at the 
rebuke of one, 

At the rebuke of five shall ye flee; 

Till ye be left as a beacon upon the 
top of a mountain, 

And as an ensign on a hill. 

18And therefore will the LORD wait, 
that He may be gracious unto 
you, 


And therefore will He be exalted, 
that He may have compassion 
upon you; 

For the LORD is a God of justice, 

Happy are all they that wait for 
Him. 

 

19For, O people that dwellest in 
Zion at Jerusalem, 

Thou shalt weep no more; 

He will surely be gracious unto 
thee at the voice of thy cry, 

When He shall hear, He will 
answer thee. 

20And though the Lord give you 
sparing bread and scant water, 

Yet shall not thy Teacher hide 
Himself any more, 

But thine eyes shall see thy 
Teacher; 

21And thine ears shall hear a word 
behind thee, saying: 

‘This is the way, walk ye in it, 

When ye turn to the right hand, and 
when ye turn to the left.’ 

22And ye shall defile thy graven 
images overlaid with silver, 

And thy molten images covered 
with gold; 

Thou shalt put them far away as 
one unclean; 

Thou shalt say unto it: ‘Get thee 
hence.’ 

23And He will give the rain for thy 
seed, wherewith thou sowest the 
ground, 

And bread of the increase of the 
ground, and it shall be fat and 
plenteous; 

In that day shall thy cattle feed in 
large pastures. 

24The oxen likewise and the young 
asses that till the ground 

Shall eat savoury provender, 

Wwhich hath been winnowed with 
the shovel and with the fan. 

25And there shall be upon every 
lofty mountain, and upon every 
high hill 

Streams and watercourses, 

In the day of the great slaughter, 
when the towers fall. 

26Moreover the light of the moon 
shall be as the light of the sun, 

And the light of the sun shall be 
sevenfold, as the light of the 
seven days, 

In the day that the LORD bindeth up 
the bruise of His people, 

And healeth the stroke of their 
wound. 

 

27Behold, the name of the LORD 
cometh from far, 

With His anger burning, and in 
thick uplifting of smoke; 

His lips are full of indignation, 

And His tongue is as a devouring 
fire; 

28And His breath is as an 
overflowing stream, 

That divideth even unto the neck, 

To sift the nations with the sieve of 
destruction; 

And a bridle that causeth to err 
shall be in the jaws of the 
peoples. 

29Ye shall have a song 


As in the night when a feast is 
hallowed; 

And gladness of heart, as when one 
goeth with the pipe 

To come into the mountain of the 
LORD, to the Rock of Israel. 

30And the LORD will cause His 
glorious voice to be heard, 

And will show the lighting down of 
His arm, 

With furious anger, and the flame 
of a devouring fire, 

With a bursting of clouds, and a 
storm of rain, and hailstones. 

31For through the voice of the LORD 
shall Asshur be dismayed, 

The rod with which He smote. 

32And in every place where the 
appointed staff shall pass, 

Which the LORD shall lay upon him, 

It shall be with tabrets and harps; 

And in battles of wielding will He 
fight with them. 

33For a hearth is ordered of old; 

Yea, for the king it is prepared, 

Deep and large; 

The pile thereof is fire and much 
wood; 

The breath of the LORD, like a 
stream of brimstone, doth kindle 
it. 

 

Woe to them that go down to 
Egypt for help, 

And rely on horses, 

And trust in chariots, because they 
are many, 

And in horsemen, because they are 
exceeding mighty; 

But they look not unto the Holy One 
of Israel, 

Neither seek the LORD! 

2Yet He also is wise, 

And bringeth evil, 

And doth not call back His words; 

But will arise against the house of 
the evil-doers, 

And against the help of them that 
work iniquity. 

3Now the Egyptians are men, and 
not God, 

And their horses flesh, and not 
spirit; 

So when the LORD shall stretch out 
His hand, 

Both he that helpeth shall stumble, 
and he that is helped shall fall, 

And they all shall perish together. 

 

4For thus saith the LORD unto me: 

Like as the lion, or the young lion, 
growling over his prey, 

Though a multitude of shepherds be 
called forth against him, 

Will not be dismayed at their voice, 

Nor abase himself for the noise of 
them; 

So will the LORD of hosts come 
down 

To fight upon mount Zion, and upon 
the hill thereof. 

5As birds hovering, 

So will the LORD of hosts protect 
Jerusalem; 

He will deliver it as He protecteth it, 

He will rescue it as He passeth over. 

6Turn ye unto Him 
31 




Against whom ye have deeply 
rebelled, O children of Israel. 

7For in that day they shall cast away 
every man his idols of silver, and 
his idols of gold, 

Which your own hands have made 
unto you for a sin. 

8Then shall Asshur fall with the 
sword, not of man, 

And the sword, not of men, shall 
devour him; 

And he shall flee from the sword, 

And his young men shall become 
tributary. 

9And his rock shall pass away by 
reason of terror, 

And his princes shall be dismayed at 
the ensign, 

Saith the LORD, whose fire is in 
Zion, 

And His furnace in Jerusalem. 

 

Behold, a king shall reign in 
righteousness, 

And as for princes, they shall rule in 
justice. 

2And a man shall be as in a hiding-
place from the wind, 

And a covert from the tempest; 

As by the watercourses in a dry 
place, 

As in the shadow of a great rock in a 
weary land. 

3And the eyes of them that see shall 
not be closed, 

And the ears of them that hear shall 
attend. 

4The heart also of the rash shall 
understand knowledge, 

And the tongue of the stammerers 
shall be ready to speak plainly. 

5The vile person shall be no more 
called liberal, 

Nor the churl said to be noble. 

6For the vile person will speak 
villainy, 

And his heart will work iniquity, 

To practise ungodliness, and to utter 
wickedness against the LORD, 

To make empty the soul of the 
hungry, 

And to cause the drink of the thirsty 
to fail. 

7The instruments also of the churl 
are evil; 

He deviseth wicked devices 

To destroy the poor with lying 
words, 

And the needy when he speaketh 
right. 

8But the liberal deviseth liberal 
things; 

And by liberal things shall he stand. 

 

9Rise up, ye women that are at ease, 
and hear my voice; 

Ye confident daughters, give ear 
unto my speech. 

10After a year and days shall ye be 
troubled, ye confident women; 

For the vintage shall fail, the 
ingathering shall not come. 

11Tremble, ye women that are at 
ease; 

Be troubled, ye confident ones; 

Strip you, and make you bare, 

And gird sackcloth upon your loins, 

12Smiting upon the breasts 
32 




For the pleasant fields, for the 
fruitful vine; 

13For the land of my people 

Whereon thorns and briers come up; 

Yea, for all the houses of joy 

And the joyous city. 

14For the palace shall be forsaken; 

The city with its stir shall be 
deserted; 

The mound and the tower shall be 
for dens for ever, 

A joy of wild asses, a pasture of 
flocks; 

15Until the spirit be poured upon us 
from on high, 

And the wilderness become a 
fruitful field, 

And the fruitful field be counted for 
a forest. 

16Then justice shall dwell in the 
wilderness, 

And righteousness shall abide in the 
fruitful field. 

17And the work of righteousness 
shall be peace; 

And the effect of righteousness 
quietness and confidence for ever. 

18And my people shall abide in a 
peaceable habitation, 

And in secure dwellings, and in 
quiet resting-places. 

19And it shall hail, in the downfall of 
the forest; 

But the city shall descend into the 
valley. 

20Happy are ye that sow beside all 
waters, 

That send forth freely the feet of the 
ox and the ass. 

 

Woe to thee that spoilest, and 
thou wast not spoiled; 

And dealest treacherously, and they 
dealt not treacherously with thee! 

When thou hast ceased to spoil, thou 
shalt be spoiled; 

And when thou art weary with 
dealing treacherously, they shall 
deal treacherously with thee. 

 

2O LORD, be gracious unto us; 

We have waited for Thee; 

Be Thou their arm every morning, 

Our salvation also in the time of 
trouble. 

3At the noise of the tumult the 
peoples are fled; 

At the lifting up of Thyself the 
nations are scattered. 

4And your spoil is gathered as the 
caterpillar gathereth; 

As locusts leap do they leap upon it. 

5The LORD is exalted, for He 
dwelleth on high; 

He hath filled Zion with justice and 
righteousness. 

6And the stability of thy times shall 
be 

A hoard of salvation—wisdom and 
knowledge, 

And the fear of the LORD which is 
His treasure. 

 

7Behold, their valiant ones cry 
without; 

The ambassadors of peace weep 
bitterly. 

8The highways lie waste, 
33 




The wayfaring man ceaseth; 

He hath broken the covenant, 

He hath despised the cities, 

He regardeth not man. 

9The land mourneth and 
languisheth; 

Lebanon is ashamed, it withereth; 

Sharon is like a wilderness; 

And Bashan and Carmel are clean 
bare. 

 

10Now will I arise, saith the LORD; 

Now will I be exalted; 

Now will I lift Myself up. 

11Ye conceive chaff, ye shall bring 
forth stubble; 

Your breath is a fire that shall 
devour you. 

12And the peoples shall be as the 
burnings of lime; 

As thorns cut down, that are burned 
in the fire. 

 

13Hear, ye that are far off, what I 
have done; 

And, ye that are near, acknowledge 
My might. 

14The sinners in Zion are afraid; 

Trembling hath seized the ungodly: 

‘Who among us shall dwell with the 
devouring fire? 

Who among us shall dwell with 
everlasting burnings?’ 

15He that walketh righteously, and 
speaketh uprightly; 

He that despiseth the gain of 
oppressions, 

That shaketh his hands from holding 
of bribes, 

That stoppeth his ears from hearing 
of blood, 

And shutteth his eyes from looking 
upon evil; 

16He shall dwell on high; 

His place of defence shall be the 
munitions of rocks; 

His bread shall be given, his waters 
shall be sure. 

 

17Thine eyes shall see the king in his 
beauty; 

They shall behold a land stretching 
afar. 

18Thy heart shall muse on the terror: 

‘Where is he that counted, where is 
he that weighed? 

Where is he that counted the 
towers?’ 

19Thou shalt not see the fierce 
people; 

A people of a deep speech that thou 
canst not perceive, 

Of a stammering tongue that thou 
canst not understand. 

20Look upon Zion, the city of our 
solemn gatherings; 

Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a 
peaceful habitation, 

A tent that shall not be removed, 

The stakes whereof shall never be 
plucked up, 

Neither shall any of the cords 
thereof be broken. 

21But there the LORD will be with us 
in majesty, 

In a place of broad rivers and 
streams; 


Wherein shall go no galley with 
oars, 

Neither shall gallant ship pass 
thereby. 

22For the LORD is our Judge, 

The LORD is our Lawgiver, 

The LORD is our King; 

He will save us. 

23Thy tacklings are loosed; 

They do not hold the stand of their 
mast, 

They do not spread the sail; 

Then is the prey of a great spoil 
divided; 

The lame take the prey. 

24And the inhabitant shall not say: ‘I 
am sick’; 

The people that dwell therein shall 
be forgiven their iniquity. 

 

Come near, ye nations, to hear, 
And attend, ye peoples; 

Let the earth hear, and the fulness 
thereof, 

The world, and all things that come 
forth of it. 

2For the LORD hath indignation 
against all the nations, 

And fury against all their host; 

He hath utterly destroyed them, 

He hath delivered them to the 
slaughter. 

3Their slain also shall be cast out, 

And the stench of their carcasses 
shall come up, 

And the mountains shall be melted 
with their blood. 

4And all the host of heaven shall 
moulder away, 

And the heavens shall be rolled 
together as a scroll; 

And all their host shall fall down, 

As the leaf falleth off from the vine, 

And as a falling fig from the fig-
tree. 

5For My sword hath drunk its fill in 
heaven; 

Behold, it shall come down upon 
Edom, 

And upon the people of My ban, to 
judgment. 

6The sword of the LORD is filled with 
blood, 

It is made fat with fatness, 

With the blood of lambs and goats, 

With the fat of the kidneys of rams; 

For the LORD hath a sacrifice in 
Bozrah, 

And a great slaughter in the land of 
Edom. 

7And the wild-oxen shall come 
down with them, 

And the bullocks with the bulls; 

And their land shall be drunken with 
blood, 

And their dust made fat with 
fatness. 

8For the LORD hath a day of 
vengeance, 

A year of recompense for the 
controversy of Zion. 

9And the streams thereof shall be 
turned into pitch, 

And the dust thereof into brimstone, 

And the land thereof shall become 
burning pitch. 

10It shall not be quenched night nor 
day, 
34 




The smoke thereof shall go up for 
ever; 

From generation to generation it 
shall lie waste: 

None shall pass through it for ever 
and ever. 

11But the pelican and the bittern 
shall possess it, 

And the owl and the raven shall 
dwell therein; 

And He shall stretch over it 

The line of confusion, and the 
plummet of emptiness. 

12As for her nobles, none shall be 
there to be called to the kingdom; 

And all her princes shall be nothing. 

13And thorns shall come up in her 
palaces, 

Nettles and thistles in the fortresses 
thereof; 

And it shall be a habitation of wild-
dogs, 

An enclosure for ostriches. 

14And the wild-cats shall meet with 
the jackals, 

And the satyr shall cry to his fellow; 

Yea, the night-monster shall repose 
there, 

And shall find her a place of rest. 

15There shall the arrowsnake make 
her nest, and lay, 

And hatch, and brood under her 
shadow; 

Yea, there shall the kites be 
gathered, 

Every one with her mate. 

16Seek ye out of the book of the 
LORD, and read; 

No one of these shall be missing, 

None shall want her mate; 

For My mouth it hath commanded, 

And the breath thereof it hath 
gathered them. 

17And He hath cast the lot for them, 

And His hand hath divided it unto 
them by line; 

They shall possess it for ever, 

From generation to generation shall 
they dwell therein. 

 

The wilderness and the 
parched land shall be glad; 

And the desert shall rejoice, and 
blossom as the rose. 

2It shall blossom abundantly, and 
rejoice, 

Even with joy and singing; 

The glory of Lebanon shall be given 
unto it, 

The excellency of Carmel and 
Sharon; 

They shall see the glory of the LORD, 

The excellency of our God. 

3Strengthen ye the weak hands, 

And make firm the tottering knees. 

4Say to them that are of a fearful 
heart: ‘Be strong, fear not’; 

Behold, your God will come with 
vengeance, 

With the recompense of God He 
will come and save you. 

 

5Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened, 

And the ears of the deaf shall be 
unstopped. 

6Then shall the lame man leap as a 
hart, 
35 




And the tongue of the dumb shall 
sing; 

For in the wilderness shall waters 
break out, 

And streams in the desert. 

7And the parched land shall become 
a pool, 

And the thirsty ground springs of 
water; 

In the habitation of jackals herds 
shall lie down, 

It shall be an enclosure for reeds and 
rushes. 

8And a highway shall be there, and a 
way, 

And it shall be called The way of 
holiness; 

The unclean shall not pass over it; 
but it shall be for those; 

The wayfaring men, yea fools, shall 
not err therein. 

9No lion shall be there, 

Nor shall any ravenous beast go up 
thereon, 

They shall not be found there; 

But the redeemed shall walk there; 

10And the ransomed of the LORD 
shall return, 

And come with singing unto Zion, 

And everlasting joy shall be upon 
their heads; 

They shall obtain gladness and joy, 

And sorrow and sighing shall flee 
away. 

 

Now it came to pass in the 
fourteenth year of king 
Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of 
Assyria came up against all the 
fortified cities of Judah, and took 
them. 2And the king of Assyria sent 
Rab-shakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem 
unto king Hezekiah with a great army. 
And he stood by the conduit of the 
upper pool in the highway of the 
fullers’field. 3Then came forth unto 
him Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that 
was over the household, and Shebna 
the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph 
the recorder. 4And Rab-shakeh said 
unto them: ‘Say ye now to Hezekiah: 
Thus saith the great king, the king of 
Assyria: What confidence is this 
wherein thou trustest? 5I said: It is but 
vain words; for counsel and strength 
are for the war. Now on whom dost 
thou trust, that thou hast rebelled 
against me? 6Behold, thou trustest 
upon the staff of this bruised reed, 
even upon Egypt; whereon if a man 
lean, it will go into his hand, and 
pierce it; so is Pharaoh king of Egypt 
to all that trust on him. 7But if thou say 
unto me: We trust in the LORD our 
God; is not that He, whose high places 
and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken 
away, and hath said to Judah and to 
Jerusalem: Ye shall worship before 
this altar? 8Now therefore, I pray thee, 
make a wager with my master, the 
king of Assyria, and I will give thee 
two thousand horses, if thou be able on 
thy part to set riders upon them. 9How 
then canst thou turn away the face of 
one captain, even of the least of my 
master’s servants? yet thou puttest thy 
trust on Egypt for chariots and for 
horsemen! 10And am I now come up 
36 




without the LORD against this land to 
destroy it? The LORD said unto me: Go 
up against this land, and destroy it.’ 

11Then said Eliakim and Shebna and 
Joah unto Rab-shakeh: ‘Speak, I pray 
thee, unto thy servants in the Aramean 
language, for we understand it; and 
speak not to us in the Jews’language, 
in the ears of the people that are on the 
wall.’ 12But Rab-shakeh said: ‘Hath 
my master sent me to thy master, and 
to thee, to speak these words? hath he 
not sent me to the men that sit upon 
the wall, to eat their own dung, and to 
drink their own water with you?’ 
13Then Rab-shakeh stood, and cried 
with a loud voice in the 
Jews’language, and said: ‘Hear ye the 
words of the great king, the king of 
Assyria. 14Thus saith the king: Let not 
Hezekiah beguile you, for he will not 
be able to deliver you; 15neither let 
Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, 
saying: The LORD will surely deliver 
us; this city shall not be given into the 
hand of the king of Assyria. 16Hearken 
not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king 
of Assyria: Make your peace with me, 
and come out to me; and eat ye every 
one of his vine, and every one of his 
fig-tree, and drink ye every one the 
waters of his own cistern; 17until I 
come and take you away to a land like 
your own land, a land of corn and 
wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 
18Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, 
saying: The LORD will deliver us. Hath 
any of the gods of the nations 
delivered his land out of the hand of 
the king of Assyria? 19Where are the 
gods of Hamath and Arpad? where are 
the gods of Sepharvaim? and have 
they delivered Samaria out of my 
hand? 20Who are they among all the 
gods of these countries, that have 
delivered their country out of my hand, 
that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem 
out of my hand?’ 

21But they held their peace, and 
answered him not a word; for the 
king’s commandment was, saying: 
‘Answer him not.’ 22Then came 
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that was 
over the household, and Shebna the 
scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the 
recorder, to Hezekiah with their 
clothes rent, and told him the words of 
Rab-shakeh. 

And it came to pass, when 
king Hezekiah heard it, that he 
rent his clothes, and covered himself 
with sackcloth, and went into the 
house of the LORD. 2And he sent 
Eliakim, who was over the household, 
and Shebna the scribe, and the elders 
of the priests, covered with sackcloth, 
unto Isaiah the prophet the son of 
Amoz. 3And they said unto him: ‘Thus 
saith Hezekiah: This day is a day of 
trouble, and of rebuke, and of 
contumely; for the children are come 
to the birth, and there is not strength to 
bring forth. 4It may be the LORD thy 
God will hear the words of Rab-
shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his 
master hath sent to taunt the living 
God, and will rebuke the words which 
the LORD thy God hath heard; 
37 




wherefore make prayer for the remnant 
that is left.’ 5So the servants of king 
Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 6And Isaiah 
said unto them: ‘Thus shall ye say to 
your master: Thus saith the LORD: Be 
not afraid of the words that thou hast 
heard, wherewith the servants of the 
king of Assyria have blasphemed Me. 
7Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and 
he shall hear a rumour, and shall return 
unto his own land; and I will cause 
him to fall by the sword in his own 
land.’ 

8So Rab-shakeh returned, and found 
the king of Assyria warring against 
Libnah; for he had heard that he was 
departed from Lachish. 9And he heard 
say concerning Tirhakah king of 
Ethiopia: ‘He is come out to fight 
against thee.’ And when he heard it, he 
sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying: 
10’Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah 
king of Judah, saying: Let not thy God 
in whom thou trustest beguile thee, 
saying: Jerusalem shall not be given 
into the hand of the king of Assyria. 
11Behold, thou hast heard what the 
kings of Assyria have done to all 
lands, by destroying them utterly; and 
shalt thou be delivered? 12Have the 
gods of the nations delivered them, 
which my fathers have destroyed, 
Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and 
the children of Eden that were in 
Telassar? 13Where is the king of 
Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and 
the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of 
Hena, and Ivvah?’ 

14And Hezekiah received the letter 
from the hand of the messengers, and 
read it; and Hezekiah went up unto the 
house of the LORD, and spread it before 
the LORD. 15And Hezekiah prayed unto 
the LORD, saying: 16’O LORD of hosts, 
the God of Israel, that sittest upon the 
cherubim, Thou art the God, even 
Thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the 
earth; Thou hast made heaven and 
earth. 17Incline Thine ear, O LORD, and 
hear; open Thine eyes, O LORD, and 
see; and hear all the words of 
Sennacherib, who hath sent to taunt 
the living God. 18Of a truth, LORD, the 
kings of Assyria have laid waste all the 
countries, and their land, 19and have 
cast their gods into the fire; for they 
were no gods, but the work of men’s 
hands, wood and stone; therefore they 
have destroyed them. 20Now therefore, 
O LORD our God, save us from his 
hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth 
may know that Thou art the LORD, 
even Thou only.’ 

21Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent 
unto Hezekiah, saying: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel: Whereas thou 
hast prayed to Me against Sennacherib 
king of Assyria, 22this is the word 
which the LORD hath spoken 
concerning him: 

The virgin daughter of Zion 

Hath despised thee and laughed thee 
to scorn; 

The daughter of Jerusalem 

Hath shaken her head at thee. 

23Whom hast thou taunted and 
blasphemed? 


And against whom hast thou exalted 
thy voice? 

Yea, thou hast lifted up thine eyes 
on high, 

Even against the Holy One of Israel! 

24By thy servants hast thou taunted 
the Lord, 

And hast said: With the multitude of 
my chariots 

Am I come up to the height of the 
mountains, 

To the innermost parts of Lebanon; 

And I have cut down the tall cedars 
thereof, 

And the choice cypress-trees 
thereof; 

And I have entered into his farthest 
height, 

The forest of his fruitful field. 

25I have digged and drunk water, 

And with the sole of my feet have I 
dried up 

All the rivers of Egypt. 

26Hast thou not heard? 

Long ago I made it, 

In ancient times I fashioned it; 

Now have I brought it to pass, 

Yea, it is done; that fortified cities 

Should be laid waste into ruinous 
heaps. 

27Therefore their inhabitants were of 
small power, 

They were dismayed and 
confounded; 

They were as the grass of the field, 

And as the green herb, 

As the grass on the housetops, 

And as a field of corn before it is 
grown up. 

 

28But I know thy sitting down, and 
thy going out, and thy coming in, 

And thy raging against Me. 

29Because of thy raging against Me, 

And for that thine uproar is come up 
into Mine ears, 

Therefore will I put My hook in thy 
nose, 

And My bridle in thy lips, 

And I will turn thee back by the way 

By which thou camest. 

30And this shall be the sign unto thee: 
ye shall eat this year that which 
groweth of itself, and in the second 
year that which springeth of the same; 
and in the third year sow ye, and reap, 
and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit 
thereof. 31And the remnant that is 
escaped of the house of Judah shall 
again take root downward, and bear 
fruit upward. 32For out of Jerusalem 
shall go forth a remnant, and out of 
mount Zion they that shall escape; the 
zeal of the LORD of hosts shall perform 
this. 33Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning the king of Assyria: He 
shall not come unto this city, nor shoot 
an arrow there, neither shall he come 
before it with shield, nor cast a mound 
against it. 34By the way that he came, 
by the same shall he return, and he 
shall not come unto this city, saith the 
LORD. 35For I will defend this city to 
save it, for Mine own sake, and for My 
servant David’s sake.’ 36And the angel 
of the LORD went forth, and smote in 
the camp of the Assyrians a hundred 
and fourscore and five thousand; and 


when men arose early in the morning, 
behold, they were all dead corpses. 
37So Sennacherib king of Assyria 
departed, and went, and returned, and 
dwelt at Nineveh. 38And it came to 
pass, as he was worshipping in the 
house of Nisroch his god, that 
Adrammelech and Sarezer his sons 
smote him with the sword; and they 
escaped into the land of Ararat. And 
Esarhaddon his son reigned in his 
stead. 

In those days was Hezekiah 
sick unto death. And Isaiah the 
prophet the son of Amoz came to him, 
and said unto him: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD: Set thy house in order; for thou 
shalt die, and not live.’ 2Then 
Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, 
and prayed unto the LORD, 3and said: 
‘Remember now, O LORD, I beseech 
Thee, how I have walked before Thee 
in truth and with a whole heart, and 
have done that which is good in Thy 
sight.’ And Hezekiah wept sore. 4Then 
came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, 
saying: 5’Go, and say to Hezekiah: 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of David 
thy father: I have heard thy prayer, I 
have seen thy tears; behold, I will add 
unto thy days fifteen years. 6And I will 
deliver thee and this city out of the 
hand of the king of Assyria; and I will 
defend this city. 7And this shall be the 
sign unto thee from the LORD, that the 
LORD will do this thing that He hath 
spoken: 8behold, I will cause the 
shadow of the dial, which is gone 
down on the sun-dial of Ahaz, to 
return backward ten degrees.’ So the 
sun returned ten degrees, by which 
degrees it was gone down. 

 

9The writing of Hezekiah king of 
Judah, when he had been sick, and was 
recovered of his sickness. 

10I said: In the noontide of my days I 
shall go, 

Even to the gates of the nether-
world; 

I am deprived of the residue of my 
years. 

11I said: I shall not see the LORD, 

Even the LORD in the land of the 
living; 

I shall behold man no more with the 
inhabitants of the world. 

12My habitation is plucked up and 
carried away from me 

As a shepherd’s tent; 

I have rolled up like a weaver my 
life; 

He will cut me off from the thrum; 

From day even to night wilt Thou 
make an end of me. 

13The more I make myself like unto 
a lion until morning, 

The more it breaketh all my bones; 

From day even to night wilt Thou 
make an end of me. 

14Like a swallow or a crane, so do I 
chatter, 

I do moan as a dove; 

Mine eyes fail with looking upward. 

O LORD, I am oppressed, be Thou 
my surety. 

 
38 




15What shall I say? He hath both 
spoken unto me, 

And Himself hath done it; 

I shall go softly all my years for the 
bitterness of my soul. 

16O Lord, by these things men live, 

And altogether therein is the life of 
my spirit; 

Wherefore recover Thou me, and 
make me to live. 

17Behold, for my peace I had great 
bitterness; 

But Thou hast in love to my soul 
delivered it 

From the pit of corruption; 

For Thou hast cast all my sins 
behind Thy back. 

 

18For the nether-world cannot praise 
Thee, 

Death cannot celebrate Thee; 

They that go down into the pit 
cannot hope for Thy truth. 

19The living, the living, he shall 
praise Thee, 

As I do this day; 

The father to the children shall make 
known Thy truth. 

20The LORD is ready to save me; 

Therefore we will sing songs to the 
stringed instruments 

All the days of our life in the house 
of the LORD. 

 

21And Isaiah said: ‘Let them take a 
cake of figs, and lay it for a plaster 
upon the boil, and he shall recover.’ 
22And Hezekiah said.’ What is the sign 
that I shall go up to the house of the 
LORD?’ 

At that time Merodach-
baladan the son of Baladan, 
king of Babylon, sent a letter and a 
present to Hezekiah; for he heard that 
he had been sick, and was recovered. 
2And Hezekiah was glad of them, and 
showed them his treasure-house, the 
silver, and the gold, and the spices, 
and the precious oil, and all the house 
of his armour, and all that was found 
in his treasures; there was nothing in 
his house, nor in all his dominion, that 
Hezekiah showed them not. 3Then 
came Isaiah the prophet unto king 
Hezekiah, and said unto him: ‘What 
said these men? and from whence 
came they unto thee?’ And Hezekiah 
said: ‘They are come from a far 
country unto me, even from Babylon.’ 
4Then said he: ‘What have they seen in 
thy house?’ And Hezekiah answered: 
‘All that is in my house have they 
seen; there is nothing among my 
treasures that I have not shown them.’ 
5Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah: ‘Hear 
the word of the LORD of hosts: 
6Behold, the days come, that all that is 
in thy house, and that which thy 
fathers have laid up in store until this 
day, shall be carried to Babylon; 
nothing shall be left, saith the LORD. 
7And of thy sons that shall issue from 
thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they 
take away; and they shall be officers in 
the palace of the king of Babylon.’ 
8Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah: 
‘Good is the word of the LORD which 
39 




thou hast spoken.’ He said moreover: 
‘If but there shall be peace and truth in 
my days.’ 

 

Comfort ye, comfort ye My 
people, 

Saith your God. 

2Bid Jerusalem take heart, 

And proclaim unto her, 

That her time of service is 
accomplished, 

That her guilt is paid off; 

That she hath received of the 
LORD’S hand 

Double for all her sins. 

 

3Hark! one calleth: 

‘Clear ye in the wilderness the way 
of the LORD, 

Make plain in the desert 

A highway for our God. 

4Every valley shall be lifted up, 

And every mountain and hill shall 
be made low; 

And the rugged shall be made level, 

And the rough places a plain; 

5And the glory of the LORD shall be 
revealed, 

And all flesh shall see it together; 

For the mouth of the LORD hath 
spoken it.’ 

 

6Hark! one saith: ‘Proclaim! ’ 

And he saith: ‘What shall I 
proclaim?’ 

’All flesh is grass, 

And all the goodliness thereof is as 
the flower of the field; 

7The grass withereth, the flower 
fadeth; 

Because the breath of the LORD 
bloweth upon it— 

Surely the people is grass. 

8The grass withereth, the flower 
fadeth; 

But the word of our God shall stand 
for ever.’ 

 

9O thou that tellest good tidings to 
Zion, 

Get thee up into the high mountain; 

O thou that tellest good tidings to 
Jerusalem, 

Lift up thy voice with strength; 

Lift it up, be not afraid; 

Say unto the cities of Judah: 

‘Behold your God! ’ 

10Behold, the Lord GOD will come as 
a Mighty One, 

And His arm will rule for Him; 

Behold, His reward is with Him, 

And His recompense before Him. 

11Even as a shepherd that feedeth his 
flock, 

That gathereth the lambs in his arm, 

And carrieth them in his bosom, 

And gently leadeth those that give 
suck. 

 

12Who hath measured the waters in 
the hollow of his hand, 

And meted out heaven with the 
span, 

And comprehended the dust of the 
earth in a measure, 

And weighed the mountains in 
scales, 
40 




And the hills in a balance? 

13Who hath meted out the spirit of 
the LORD? 

Or who was His counsellor that he 
might instruct Him? 

14With whom took He counsel, and 
who instructed Him, 

And taught Him in the path of right, 

And taught Him knowledge, 

And made Him to know the way of 
discernment? 

15Behold, the nations are as a drop 
of a bucket, 

And are counted as the small dust of 
the balance; 

Behold the isles are as a mote in 
weight. 

16And Lebanon is not sufficient fuel, 

Nor the beasts thereof sufficient for 
burnt-offerings. 

17All the nations are as nothing 
before Him; 

They are accounted by Him as 
things of nought, and vanity. 

18To whom then will ye liken God? 

Or what likeness will ye compare 
unto Him? 

19The image perchance, which the 
craftsman hath melted, 

And the goldsmith spread over with 
gold, 

The silversmith casting silver 
chains? 

20A holm-oak is set apart, 

He chooseth a tree that will not rot; 

He seeketh unto him a cunning 
craftsman 

To set up an image, that shall not be 
moved. 

 

21Know ye not? hear ye not? 

Hath it not been told you from the 
beginning? 

Have ye not understood the 
foundations of the earth? 

22It is He that sitteth above the circle 
of the earth, 

And the inhabitants thereof are as 
grasshoppers; 

That stretcheth out the heavens as a 
curtain, 

And spreadeth them out as a tent to 
dwell in; 

23That bringeth princes to nothing; 

He maketh the judges of the earth as 
a thing of nought. 

24Scarce are they planted, 

Scarce are they sown, 

Scarce hath their stock taken root in 
the earth; 

When He bloweth upon them, they 
wither, 

And the whirlwind taketh them 
away as stubble. 

25To whom then will ye liken Me, 
that I should be equal? 

Saith the Holy One. 

26Lift up your eyes on high, 

And see: who hath created these? 

He that bringeth out their host by 
number, 

He calleth them all by name; 

By the greatness of His might, and 
for that He is strong in power, 

Not one faileth. 

 

27Why sayest thou, O Jacob, 

And speakest, O Israel: 


‘My way is hid from the LORD, 

And my right is passed over from 
my God’? 

28Hast thou not known? hast thou 
not heard 

That the everlasting God, the LORD, 

The Creator of the ends of the earth, 

Fainteth not, neither is weary? 

His discernment is past searching 
out. 

29He giveth power to the faint; 

And to him that hath no might He 
increaseth strength. 

30Even the youths shall faint and be 
weary, 

And the young men shall utterly 
fall; 

31But they that wait for the LORD 
shall renew their strength; 

They shall mount up with wings as 
eagles; 

They shall run, and not be weary; 

They shall walk, and not faint. 

 

Keep silence before Me, O 
islands, 

And let the peoples renew their 
strength; 

Let them draw near, then let them 
speak; 

Let us come near together to 
judgment. 

2Who hath raised up one from the 
east, 

At whose steps victory attendeth? 

He giveth nations before him, 

And maketh him rule over kings; 

His sword maketh them as the dust, 

His bow as the driven stubble. 

3He pursueth them, and passeth on 
safely; 

The way with his feet he treadeth 
not. 

4Who hath wrought and done it? 

He that called the generations from 
the beginning. 

I, the LORD, who am the first, 

And with the last am the same. 

5The isles saw, and feared; 

The ends of the earth trembled; 

They drew near, and came. 

 

6They helped every one his 
neighbour; 

And every one said to his brother: 

‘Be of good courage.’ 

7So the carpenter encouraged the 
goldsmith, 

And he that smootheth with the 
hammer him that smiteth the 
anvil, 

Saying of the soldering: ‘It is good’; 

And he fastened it with nails, that it 
should not be moved. 

 

8But thou, Israel, My servant, 

Jacob whom I have chosen, 

The seed of Abraham My friend; 

9Thou whom I have taken hold of 
from the ends of the earth, 

And called thee from the uttermost 
parts thereof, 

And said unto thee: ‘Thou art My 
servant, 

I have chosen thee and not cast thee 
away’; 

10Fear thou not, for I am with thee, 

Be not dismayed, for I am thy God; 
41 




I strengthen thee, yea, I help thee; 

Yea, I uphold thee with My 
victorious right hand. 

11Behold, all they that were incensed 
against thee 

Shall be ashamed and confounded; 

They that strove with thee 

Shall be as nothing, and shall perish. 

12Thou shalt seek them, and shalt 
not find them, 

Even them that contended with thee; 

They that warred against thee 

Shall be as nothing, and as a thing 
of nought. 

13For I the LORD thy God 

Hold thy right hand, 

Who say unto thee: ‘Fear not, 

I help thee.’ 

 

14Fear not, thou worm Jacob, 

And ye men of Israel; 

I help thee, saith the LORD, 

And thy Redeemer, the Holy One of 
Israel. 

15Behold, I make thee a new 
threshing-sledge 

Having sharp teeth; 

Thou shalt thresh the mountains, 
and beat them small, 

And shalt make the hills as chaff. 

16Thou shalt fan them, and the wind 
shall carry them away, 

And the whirlwind shall scatter 
them; 

And thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, 

Thou shalt glory in the Holy One of 
Israel. 

 

17The poor and needy seek water 
and there is none, 

And their tongue faileth for thirst; 

I the LORD will answer them, 

I the God of Israel will not forsake 
them. 

18I will open rivers on the high hills, 

And fountains in the midst of the 
valleys; 

I will make the wilderness a pool of 
water, 

And the dry land springs of water. 

19I will plant in the wilderness the 
cedar, the acacia-tree, 

And the myrtle, and the oil-tree; 

I will set in the desert the cypress, 
the plane-tree, and the larch 
together; 

20That they may see, and know, 

And consider, and understand 
together, 

That the hand of the LORD hath done 
this, 

And the Holy One of Israel hath 
created it. 

 

21Produce your cause, saith the 
LORD; 

Bring forth your reasons, saith the 
King of Jacob. 

22Let them bring them forth, and 
declare unto us 

The things that shall happen; 

The former things, what are they? 

Declare ye, that we may consider, 

And know the end of them; 

Or announce to us things to come. 

23Declare the things that are to come 
hereafter, 


That we may know that ye are gods; 

Yea, do good, or do evil, 

That we may be dismayed, and 
behold it together. 

24Behold, ye are nothing, 

And your work a thing of nought; 

An abomination is he that chooseth 
you. 

 

25I have roused up one from the 
north, and he is come, 

From the rising of the sun one that 
calleth upon My name; 

And he shall come upon rulers as 
upon mortar, 

And as the potter treadeth clay. 

26Who hath declared from the 
beginning, that we may know? 

And beforetime, that we may say 
that he is right? 

Yea, there is none that declareth, 

Yea, there is none that announceth, 

Yea, there is none that heareth your 
utterances. 

27A harbinger unto Zion will I give: 
‘Behold, behold them’, 

And to Jerusalem a messenger of 
good tidings. 

28And I look, but there is no man; 

Even among them, but there is no 
counsellor, 

That, when I ask of them, can give 
an answer. 

29Behold, all of them, 

Their works are vanity and nought; 

Their molten images are wind and 
confusion. 

 

Behold My servant, whom I 
uphold; 

Mine elect, in whom My soul 
delighteth; 

I have put My spirit upon him, 

He shall make the right to go forth 
to the nations. 

2He shall not cry, nor lift up, 

Nor cause his voice to be heard in 
the street. 

3A bruised reed shall he not break, 

And the dimly burning wick shall he 
not quench; 

He shall make the right to go forth 
according to the truth. 

4He shall not fail nor be crushed, 

Till he have set the right in the 
earth; 

And the isles shall wait for his 
teaching. 

5Thus saith God the LORD, 

He that created the heavens, and 
stretched them forth, 

He that spread forth the earth and 
that which cometh out of it, 

He that giveth breath unto the 
people upon it, 

And spirit to them that walk therein: 

6I the LORD have called thee in 
righteousness, 

And have taken hold of thy hand, 

And kept thee, and set thee for a 
covenant of the people, 

For a light of the nations; 

7To open the blind eyes, 

To bring out the prisoners from the 
dungeon, 

And them that sit in darkness out of 
the prison-house. 
42 




8I am the LORD, that is My name; 

And My glory will I not give to 
another, 

Neither My praise to graven images. 

9Behold, the former things are come 
to pass, 

And new things do I declare; 

Before they spring forth I tell you of 
them. 

10Sing unto the LORD a new song, 

And His praise from the end of the 
earth; 

Ye that go down to the sea, and all 
that is therein, 

The isles, and the inhabitants 
thereof. 

11Let the wilderness and the cities 
thereof lift up their voice, 

The villages that Kedar doth inhabit; 

Let the inhabitants of Sela exult, 

Let them shout from the top of the 
mountains. 

12Let them give glory unto the LORD, 

And declare His praise in the 
islands. 

13The LORD will go forth as a mighty 
man, 

He will stir up jealousy like a man 
of war; 

He will cry, yea, He will shout 
aloud, 

He will prove Himself mighty 
against His enemies. 

 

14I have long time held My peace, 

I have been still, and refrained 
Myself; 

Now will I cry like a travailing 
woman, 

Gasping and panting at once. 

15I will make waste mountains and 
hills, 

And dry up all their herbs; 

And I will make the rivers islands, 

And will dry up the pools. 

16And I will bring the blind by a 
way that they knew not, 

In paths that they knew not will I 
lead them; 

I will make darkness light before 
them, and rugged places plain. 

These things will I do, 

And I will not leave them undone. 

17They shall be turned back, greatly 
ashamed, 

That trust in graven images, 

That say unto molten images: 

‘Ye are our gods.’ 

 

18Hear, ye deaf, 

And look, ye blind, that ye may see. 

19Who is blind, but My servant? 

Or deaf, as My messenger that I 
send? 

Who is blind as he that is 
wholehearted, 

And blind as the LORD’S servant? 

20Seeing many things, thou 
observest not; 

Opening the ears, he heareth not. 

21The LORD was pleased, for His 
righteousness’sake, 

To make the teaching great and 
glorious. 

22But this is a people robbed and 
spoiled, 

They are all of them snared in holes, 

And they are hid in prison-houses; 


They are for a prey, and none 
delivereth, 

For a spoil, and none saith: 
‘Restore.’ 

23Who among you will give ear to 
this? Who will hearken and hear 
for the time to come? 

24Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and 
Israel to the robbers? 

Did not the LORD? 

He against whom we have sinned, 

And in whose ways they would not 
walk, 

Neither were they obedient unto His 
law. 

25Therefore He poured upon him the 
fury of His anger, 

And the strength of battle; 

And it set him on fire round about, 
yet he knew not, 

And it burned him, yet he laid it not 
to heart. 

 

But now thus saith the LORD 
that created thee, O Jacob, 

And He that formed thee, O Israel: 

Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, 

I have called thee by thy name, thou 
art Mine. 

2When thou passest through the 
waters, I will be with thee, 

And through the rivers, they shall 
not overflow thee; 

When thou walkest through the fire, 
thou shalt not be burned, 

Neither shall the flame kindle upon 
thee. 

3For I am the LORD thy God, 

The Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour; 

I have given Egypt as thy ransom, 

Ethiopia and Seba for thee. 

4Since thou art precious in My sight, 
and honourable, 

And I have loved thee; 

Therefore will I give men for thee, 

And peoples for thy life. 

5Fear not, for I am with thee; 

I will bring thy seed from the east, 

And gather thee from the west; 

6I will say to the north: ‘Give up’, 

And to the south: ‘Keep not back, 

Bring My sons from far, 

And My daughters from the end of 
the earth; 

7Every one that is called by My 
name, 

And whom I have created for My 
glory, 

I have formed him, yea, I have made 
him.’ 

8The blind people that have eyes 
shall be brought forth, 

And the deaf that have ears. 

9All the nations are gathered 
together, 

And the peoples are assembled; 

Who among them can declare this, 

And announce to us former things? 

Let them bring their witnesses, that 
they may be justified; 

And let them hear, and say: ‘It is 
truth.’ 

10Ye are My witnesses, saith the 
LORD, 

And My servant whom I have 
chosen; 

That ye may know and believe Me, 
and understand 
43 




That I am He; 

Before Me there was no God 
formed, 

Neither shall any be after Me. 

 

11I, even I, am the LORD; 

And beside Me there is no saviour. 

12I have declared, and I have saved, 

And I have announced, 

And there was no strange god 
among you; 

Therefore ye are My witnesses, saith 
the LORD, and I am God. 

13Yea, since the day was I am He, 

And there is none that can deliver 
out of My hand; 

I will work, and who can reverse it? 

 

14Thus saith the LORD, your 
Redeemer, 

The Holy One of Israel: 

For your sake I have sent to 
Babylon, 

And I will bring down all of them as 
fugitives, 

Even the Chaldeans, in the ships of 
their shouting. 

15I am the LORD, your Holy One, 

The Creator of Israel, your King. 

 

16Thus saith the LORD, who maketh a 
way in the sea, 

And a path in the mighty waters; 

17Who bringeth forth the chariot and 
horse, 

The army and the power— 

They lie down together, they shall 
not rise, 

They are extinct, they are quenched 
as a wick: 

18Remember ye not the former 
things, 

Neither consider the things of old. 

19Behold, I will do a new thing; 

Now shall it spring forth; shall ye 
not know it? 

I will even make a way in the 
wilderness, 

And rivers in the desert. 

20The beasts of the field shall 
honour Me, 

The jackals and the ostriches; 

Because I give waters in the 
wilderness, 

And rivers in the desert, 

To give drink to My people, Mine 
elect; 

21The people which I formed for 
Myself, 

That they might tell of My praise. 

 

22Yet thou hast not called upon Me, 
O Jacob, 

Neither hast thou wearied thyself 
about Me, O Israel. 

23Thou hast not brought Me the 
small cattle of thy burnt-
offerings; 

Neither hast thou honoured Me with 
thy sacrifices. 

I have not burdened thee with a 
meal-offering, 

Nor wearied thee with frankincense. 

24Thou hast bought Me no sweet 
cane with money, 

Neither hast thou satisfied Me with 
the fat of thy sacrifices; 


But thou hast burdened Me with thy 
sins, 

Thou hast wearied Me with thine 
iniquities. 

25I, even I, am He that blotteth out 
thy transgressions for Mine own 
sake; 

And thy sins I will not remember. 

26Put Me in remembrance, let us 
plead together; 

Declare thou, that thou mayest be 
justified. 

27Thy first father sinned, 

And thine intercessors have 
transgressed against Me. 

28Therefore I have profaned the 
princes of the sanctuary, 

And I have given Jacob to 
condemnation, 

And Israel to reviling. 

 

Yet now hear, O Jacob My 
servant, 

And Israel, whom I have chosen; 

2Thus saith the LORD that made thee, 

And formed thee from the womb, 
who will help thee: 

Fear not, O Jacob My servant, 

And thou, Jeshurun, whom I have 
chosen. 

3For I will pour water upon the 
thirsty land, 

And streams upon the dry ground; 

I will pour My spirit upon thy seed, 

And My blessing upon thine 
offspring; 

4And they shall spring up among the 
grass, 

As willows by the watercourses. 

5One shall say: ‘I am the LORD’S’; 

And another shall call himself by 
the name of Jacob; 

And another shall subscribe with his 
hand unto the LORD, 

And surname himself by the name 
of Israel. 

 

6Thus saith the LORD, the King of 
Israel, 

And his Redeemer the LORD of 
hosts: 

I am the first, and I am the last, 

And beside Me there is no God. 

7And who, as I, can proclaim— 

Let him declare it, and set it in order 
for Me— 

Since I appointed the ancient 
people? 

And the things that are coming, and 
that shall come to pass, let them 
declare. 

8Fear ye not, neither be afraid; 

Have I not announced unto thee of 
old, and declared it? 

And ye are My witnesses. 

Is there a God beside Me? 

Yea, there is no Rock; I know not 
any. 

 

9They that fashion a graven image 
are all of them vanity, 

And their delectable things shall not 
profit; 

And their own witnesses see not, 
nor know; 

That they may be ashamed. 

10Who hath fashioned a god, or 
molten an image 
44 




That is profitable for nothing? 

11Behold, all the fellows thereof 
shall be ashamed; 

And the craftsmen skilled above 
men; 

Let them all be gathered together, 
let them stand up; 

They shall fear, they shall be 
ashamed together. 

 

12The smith maketh an axe, 

And worketh in the coals, and 
fashioneth it with hammers, 

And worketh it with his strong arm; 

Yea, he is hungry, and his strength 
faileth; 

He drinketh no water, and is faint. 

13The carpenter stretcheth out a line; 

He marketh it out with a pencil; 

He fitteth it with planes, 

And he marketh it out with the 
compasses, 

And maketh it after the figure of a 
man, 

According to the beauty of a man, to 
dwell in the house. 

14He heweth him down cedars, 

And taketh the ilex and the oak, 

And strengtheneth for himself one 
among the trees of the forest; 

He planteth a bay-tree, and the rain 
doth nourish it. 

15Then a man useth it for fuel; 

And he taketh thereof, and warmeth 
himself; 

Yea, he kindleth it, and baketh 
bread; 

Yea, he maketh a god, and 
worshippeth it; 

He maketh it a graven image, and 
falleth down thereto. 

16He burneth the half thereof in the 
fire; 

With the half thereof he eateth flesh; 

He roasteth roast, and is satisfied; 

Yea, he warmeth himself, and saith: 
‘Aha, 

I am warm, I have seen the fire’; 

17And the residue thereof he maketh 
a god, even his graven image; 

He falleth down unto it and 
worshippeth, and prayeth unto it, 

And saith: ‘Deliver me, for thou art 
my god.’ 

 

18They know not, neither do they 
understand; 

For their eyes are bedaubed, that 
they cannot see, 

And their hearts, that they cannot 
understand. 

19And none considereth in his heart, 

Neither is there knowledge nor 
understanding to say: 

‘I have burned the half of it in the 
fire; 

Yea, also I have baked bread upon 
the coals thereof; 

I have roasted flesh and eaten it; 

And shall I make the residue thereof 
an abomination? 

Shall I fall down to the stock of a 
tree?’ 

20He striveth after ashes, 

A deceived heart hath turned him 
aside, 

That he cannot deliver his soul, nor 
say: 


‘Is there not a lie in my right hand?’ 

 

21Remember these things, O Jacob, 

And Israel, for thou art My servant; 

I have formed thee, thou art Mine 
own servant; 

O Israel, thou shouldest not forget 
Me. 

22I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, 
thy transgressions, 

And, as a cloud, thy sins; 

Return unto Me, for I have 
redeemed thee. 

23Sing, O ye heavens, for the LORD 
hath done it; 

Shout, ye lowest parts of the earth; 

Break forth into singing, ye 
mountains, 

O forest, and every tree therein; 

For the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, 

And doth glorify Himself in Israel. 

 

24Thus saith the LORD, thy 
Redeemer, 

And He that formed thee from the 
womb: 

I am the LORD, that maketh all 
things; 

That stretched forth the heavens 
alone; 

That spread abroad the earth by 
Myself; 

25That frustrateth the tokens of the 
imposters, 

And maketh diviners mad; 

That turneth wise men backward, 

And maketh their knowledge 
foolish; 

26That confirmeth the word of His 
servant, 

And performeth the counsel of His 
messengers; 

That saith of Jerusalem: ‘She shall 
be inhabited’; 

And of the cities of Judah: ‘They 
shall be built, 

And I will raise up the waste places 
thereof’; 

27That saith to the deep: ‘Be dry, 
and I will dry up thy rivers’; 

28That saith of Cyrus: ‘He is My 
shepherd, 

And shall perform all My pleasure’; 

Even saying of Jerusalem: ‘She 
shall be built’; 

And to the temple: ‘My foundation 
shall be laid.’ 

 

Thus saith the LORD to His 
anointed, 

To Cyrus, whose right hand I have 
holden, 

To subdue nations before him, 

And to loose the loins of kings; 

To open the doors before him, 

And that the gates may not be shut: 

2I will go before thee, 

And make the crooked places 
straight; 

I will break in pieces the doors of 
brass, 

And cut in sunder the bars of iron; 

3And I will give thee the treasures of 
darkness, 

And hidden riches of secret places, 

That thou mayest know that I am the 
LORD, 
45 




Who call thee by thy name, even the 
God of Israel. 

4For the sake of Jacob My servant, 

And Israel Mine elect, 

I have called thee by thy name, 

I have surnamed thee, though thou 
hast not known Me. 

5I am the LORD, and there is none 
else, 

Beside Me there is no God; 

I have girded thee, though thou hast 
not known Me; 

6That they may know from the 
rising of the sun, and from the 
west, 

That there is none beside Me; 

I am the LORD; and there is none 
else; 

7I form the light, and create 
darkness; 

I make peace, and create evil; 

I am the LORD, that doeth all these 
things. 

 

8Drop down, ye heavens, from 
above, 

And let the skies pour down 
righteousness; 

Let the earth open, that they may 
bring forth salvation, 

And let her cause righteousness to 
spring up together; 

I the LORD have created it. 

 

9Woe unto him that striveth with his 
Maker, 

As a potsherd with the potsherds of 
the earth! 

Shall the clay say to him that 
fashioned it: ‘What makest thou?’ 

Or: ‘Thy work, it hath no hands’? 

10Woe unto him that saith unto his 
father.’ Wherefore begettest 
thou?’ 

Or to a woman: ‘Wherefore 
travailest thou?’ 

 

11Thus saith the LORD, 

The Holy One of Israel, and his 
Maker: 

Ask Me of the things that are to 
come; 

Concerning My sons, and 
concerning the work of My 
hands, command ye Me. 

12I, even I, have made the earth, 

And created man upon it; 

I, even My hands, have stretched out 
the heavens, 

And all their host have I 
commanded. 

13I have roused him up in victory, 

And I make level all his ways; 

He shall build My city, 

And he shall let Mine exiles go free, 

Not for price nor reward, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

 

14Thus saith the LORD: 

The labour of Egypt, and the 
merchandise of Ethiopia, 

And of the Sabeans, men of stature, 

Shall come over unto thee, and they 
shall be thine; 

They shall go after thee, in chains 
they shall come over; 

And they shall fall down unto thee, 


They shall make supplication unto 
thee: 

Surely God is in thee, and there is 
none else, 

There is no other God. 

15Verily Thou art a God that hidest 
Thyself, 

O God of Israel, the Saviour. 

16They shall be ashamed, yea, 
confounded, all of them; 

They shall go in confusion together 
that are makers of idols. 

17O Israel, that art saved by the LORD 
with an everlasting salvation; 

Ye shall not be ashamed nor 
confounded world without end. 

 

18For thus saith the LORD that created 
the heavens, 

He is God; 

That formed the earth and made it, 

He established it, 

He created it not a waste, He formed 
it to be inhabited: 

I am the LORD, and there is none 
else. 

19I have not spoken in secret, 

In a place of the land of darkness; 

I said not unto the seed of Jacob: 

‘Seek ye Me in vain’; 

I the LORD speak righteousness, 

I declare things that are right. 

20Assemble yourselves and come, 
draw near together, 

Ye that are escaped of the nations; 

They have no knowledge that carry 
the wood of their graven image, 

And pray unto a god that cannot 
save. 

21Declare ye, and bring them near, 

Yea, let them take counsel together: 

Who hath announced this from 
ancient time, 

And declared it of old? 

Have not I the LORD? 

And there is no God else beside Me, 

A just God and a Saviour; 

There is none beside Me. 

22Look unto Me, and be ye saved, 

All the ends of the earth; 

For I am God, and there is none 
else. 

23By Myself have I sworn, 

The word is gone forth from My 
mouth in righteousness, 

And shall not come back, 

That unto Me every knee shall bow, 

Every tongue shall swear. 

24Only in the LORD, shall one say of 
Me, is victory and strength; 

Even to Him shall men come in 
confusion, 

All they that were incensed against 
Him. 

25In the LORD shall all the seed of 
Israel 

Be justified, and shall glory. 

 

Bel boweth down, Nebo 
stoopeth; 

Their idols are upon the beasts, and 
upon the cattle; 

The things that ye carried about are 
made a load, 

A burden to the weary beast. 

2They stoop, they bow down 
together, 

They could not deliver the burden; 
46 




And themselves are gone into 
captivity. 

3Hearken unto Me, O house of 
Jacob, 

And all the remnant of the house of 
Israel, 

That are borne [by Me] from the 
birth, 

That are carried from the womb: 

4Even to old age I am the same, 

And even to hoar hairs will I carry 
you; 

I have made, and I will bear; 

Yea, I will carry, and will deliver. 

 

5To whom will ye liken Me, and 
make Me equal, 

And compare Me, that we may be 
like? 

6Ye that lavish gold out of the bag, 

And weigh silver in the balance; 

Ye that hire a goldsmith, that he 
make it a god, 

To fall down thereto, yea, to 
worship. 

7He is borne upon the shoulder, he is 
carried, 

And set in his place, and he 
standeth, 

From his place he doth not remove; 

Yea, though one cry unto him, he 
cannot answer, 

Nor save him out of his trouble. 

 

8Remember this, and stand fast; 

Bring it to mind, O ye transgressors. 

9Remember the former things of 
old: 

That I am God, and there is none 
else; 

I am God, and there is none like Me; 

10Declaring the end from the 
beginning, 

And from ancient times things that 
are not yet done; 

Saying: ‘My counsel shall stand, 

And all My pleasure will I do’; 

11Calling a bird of prey from the 
east, 

The man of My counsel from a far 
country; 

Yea, I have spoken, I will also bring 
it to pass, 

I have purposed, I will also do it. 

 

12Hearken unto Me, ye stout-
hearted, 

That are far from righteousness: 

13I bring near My righteousness, it 
shall not be far off, 

And My salvation shall not tarry; 

And I will place salvation in Zion 

For Israel My glory. 

 

Come down, and sit in the 
dust, 

O virgin daughter of Babylon, 

Sit on the ground without a throne, 

O daughter of the Chaldeans; 

For thou shalt no more be called 

Tender and delicate. 

2Take the millstones, and grind 
meal; 

Remove thy veil, 

Strip off the train, uncover the leg, 

Pass through the rivers. 

3Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, 
47 




Yea, thy shame shall be seen; 

I will take vengeance, 

And will let no man intercede. 

4Our Redeemer, the LORD of hosts is 
His name, 

The Holy One of Israel. 

5Sit thou silent, and get thee into 
darkness, 

O daughter of the Chaldeans; 

For thou shalt no more be called 

The mistress of kingdoms. 

6I was wroth with My people, 

I profaned Mine inheritance, 

And gave them into thy hand; 

Thou didst show them no mercy; 

Upon the aged hast thou very 
heavily 

Laid thy yoke. 

7And thou saidst: 

‘For ever shall I be mistress’; 

So that thou didst not lay these 
things to thy heart, 

Neither didst remember the end 
thereof. 

 

8Now therefore hear this, thou that 
art given to pleasures, 

That sittest securely, 

That sayest in thy heart: 

‘I am, and there is none else beside 
me; 

I shall not sit as a widow, 

Neither shall I know the loss of 
children’; 

9But these two things shall come to 
thee in a moment 

In one day, the loss of children, and 
widow-hood; 

In their full measure shall they come 
upon thee, 

For the multitude of thy sorceries, 

And the great abundance of thine 
enchantments. 

 

10And thou hast been secure in thy 
wickedness, 

Thou hast said: ‘None seeth me’; 

Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, 

It hath perverted thee; 

And thou hast said in thy heart. 

’I am, and there is none else beside 
me.’ 

11Yet shall evil came upon thee; 

Thou shalt not know how to charm 
it away; 

And calamity shall fall upon thee; 

Thou shalt not be able to put it 
away; 

And ruin shall come upon thee 
suddenly, 

Before thou knowest. 

 

12Stand now with thine 
enchantments, 

And with the multitude of thy 
sorceries, 

Wherein thou hast laboured from 
thy youth; 

If so be thou shalt be able to profit, 

If so be thou mayest prevail. 

13Thou art wearied in the multitude 
of thy counsels; 

Let now the astrologers, the 
stargazers, 

The monthly prognosticators, 

Stand up, and save thee 


From the things that shall come 
upon thee. 

14Behold, they shall be as stubble; 

The fire shall burn them; 

They shall not deliver themselves 

From the power of the flame; 

It shall not be a coal to warm at, 

Nor a fire to sit before. 

15Thus shall they be unto thee 

With whom thou hast laboured; 

They that have trafficked with thee 
from thy youth 

Shall wander every one to his 
quarter; 

There shall be none to save thee. 

 

Hear ye this, O house of 
Jacob, 

Who are called by the name of 
Israel, 

And are come forth out of the 
fountain of Judah; 

Who swear by the name of the 
LORD, 

And make mention of the God of 
Israel, 

But not in truth, nor in 
righteousness. 

2For they call themselves of the holy 
city, 

And stay themselves upon the God 
of Israel, 

The LORD of hosts is His name. 

3I have declared the former things 
from of old; 

Yea, they went forth out of My 
mouth, and I announced them; 

Suddenly I did them, and they came 
to pass. 

4Because I knew that thou art 
obstinate, 

And thy neck is an iron sinew, and 
thy brow brass; 

5Therefore I have declared it to thee 
from of old; 

Before it came to pass I announced 
it to thee; 

Lest thou shouldest say: ‘Mine idol 
hath done them, 

And my graven image, and my 
molten image, hath commanded 
them.’ 

6Thou hast heard, see, all this; 

And ye, will ye not declare it? 

I have announced unto thee new 
things from this time, 

Even hidden things, which thou hast 
not known. 

7They are created now, and not from 
of old, 

And before this day thou heardest 
them not; 

Lest thou shouldest say: ‘Behold, I 
knew them.’ 

8Yea, thou heardest not; 

Yea, thou knewest not; 

Yea, from of old thine ear was not 
opened; 

For I knew that thou wouldest deal 
very treacherously, 

And wast called a transgressor from 
the womb. 

9For My name’s sake will I defer 
Mine anger, 

And for My praise will I refrain for 
thee, that I cut thee not off. 

10Behold, I have refined thee, but 
not as silver; 
48 




I have tried thee in the furnace of 
affliction. 

11For Mine own sake, for Mine own 
sake, will I do it; 

For how should it be profaned? 

And My glory will I not give to 
another. 

 

12Hearken unto Me, O Jacob, 

And Israel My called: 

I am He; I am the first, 

I also am the last. 

13Yea, My hand hath laid the 
foundation of the earth, 

And My right hand hath spread out 
the heavens; 

When I call unto them, 

They stand up together. 

14Assemble yourselves, all ye, and 
hear; 

Which among them hath declared 
these things? 

He whom the LORD loveth shall 
perform His pleasure on Babylon, 

And show His arm on the 
Chaldeans. 

15I, even I, have spoken, yea, I have 
called him; 

I have brought him, and he shall 
make his way prosperous. 

 

16Come ye near unto Me, hear ye 
this: 

From the beginning I have not 
spoken in secret; 

From the time that it was, there am 
I; 

And now the Lord GOD hath sent 
me, and His spirit. 

 

17Thus saith the LORD, thy 
Redeemer, 

The Holy One of Israel: 

I am the LORD thy God, 

Who teacheth thee for thy profit, 

Who leadeth thee by the way that 
thou shouldest go. 

18Oh that thou wouldest hearken to 
My commandments! 

Then would thy peace be as a river, 

And thy righteousness as the waves 
of the sea; 

19Thy seed also would be as the 
sand, 

And the offspring of thy body like 
the grains thereof; 

His name would not be cut off 

Nor destroyed from before Me. 

 

20Go ye forth from Babylon, 

Flee ye from the Chaldeans; 

With a voice of singing 

Declare ye, tell this, 

Utter it even to the end of the earth; 

Say ye: ‘The LORD hath redeemed 
His servant Jacob. 

21And they thirsted not 

When He led them through the 
deserts; 

He caused the waters to flow out of 
the rock for them; 

He cleaved the rock also, and the 
waters gushed out.’ 

22There is no peace, 

Saith the LORD concerning the 
wicked. 

 


Listen, O isles, unto me, 

And hearken, ye peoples, from 
far: 

The LORD hath called me from the 
womb, 

From the bowels of my mother hath 
He made mention of my name; 

2And He hath made my mouth like a 
sharp sword, 

In the shadow of His hand hath He 
hid me; 

And He hath made me a polished 
shaft, 

In His quiver hath He concealed me; 

3And He said unto me: ‘Thou art 
My servant, 

Israel, in whom I will be glorified.’ 

4But I said: ‘I have laboured in vain, 

I have spent my strength for nought 
and vanity; 

Yet surely my right is with the 
LORD, 

And my recompense with my God.’ 

5And now saith the LORD 

That formed me from the womb to 
be His servant, 

To bring Jacob back to Him, 

And that Israel be gathered unto 
Him— 

For I am honourable in the eyes of 
the LORD, 

And my God is become my 
strength— 

6Yea, He saith: ‘It is too light a 
thing that thou shouldest be My 
servant 

To raise up the tribes of Jacob, 

And to restore the offspring of 
Israel; 

I will also give thee for a light of the 
nations, 

That My salvation may be unto the 
end of the earth.’ 

 

7Thus saith the LORD, 

The Redeemer of Israel, his Holy 
One, 

To him who is despised of men, 

To him who is abhorred of nations, 

To a servant of rulers: 

Kings shall see and arise, 

Princes, and they shall prostrate 
themselves; 

Because of the LORD that is faithful, 

Even the Holy One of Israel, who 
hath chosen thee. 

 

8Thus saith the LORD: 

In an acceptable time have I 
answered thee, 

And in a day of salvation have I 
helped thee; 

And I will preserve thee, and give 
thee 

For a covenant of the people, 

To raise up the land, 

To cause to inherit the desolate 
heritages; 

9Saying to the prisoners: ‘Go forth’; 

To them that are in darkness: ‘Show 
yourselves’; 

They shall feed in the ways, 

And in all high hills shall be their 
pasture; 

10They shall not hunger nor thirst, 

Neither shall the heat nor sun smite 
them; 
49 




For He that hath compassion on 
them will lead them, 

Even by the springs of water will He 
guide them. 

11And I will make all My mountains 
a way, 

And My highways shall be raised on 
high. 

12Behold, these shall come from far; 

And, lo, these from the north and 
from the west, 

And these from the land of Sinim. 

 

13Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O 
earth, 

And break forth into singing, O 
mountains; 

For the LORD hath comforted His 
people, 

And hath compassion upon His 
afflicted. 

 

14But Zion said: ‘The LORD hath 
forsaken me, 

And the Lord hath forgotten me.’ 

15Can a woman forget her sucking 
child, 

That she should not have 
compassion on the son of her 
womb? 

Yea, these may forget, 

Yet will not I forget thee. 

16Behold, I have graven thee upon 
the palms of My hands; 

Thy walls are continually before 
Me. 

17Thy children make haste; 

Thy destroyers and they that made 
thee waste shall go forth from 
thee. 

18Lift up thine eyes round about, and 
behold: 

All these gather themselves 
together, and come to thee. 

As I live, saith the LORD, 

Thou shalt surely clothe thee with 
them all as with an ornament, 

And gird thyself with them, like a 
bride. 

19For thy waste and thy desolate 
places 

And thy land that hath been 
destroyed— 

Surely now shalt thou be too strait 
for the inhabitants, 

And they that swallowed thee up 
shall be far away. 

20The children of thy bereavement 

Shall yet say in thine ears: 

‘The place is too strait for me; 

Give place to me that I may dwell.’ 

21Then shalt thou say in thy heart: 

‘Who hath begotten me these, 

Seeing I have been bereaved of my 
children, and am solitary, 

An exile, and wandering to and fro? 

And who hath brought up these? 

Behold, I was left alone; 

These, where were they?’ 

 

22Thus saith the Lord GOD: 

Behold, I will lift up My hand to the 
nations, 

And set up Mine ensign to the 
peoples, 


And they shall bring thy sons in 
their bosom, 

And thy daughters shall be carried 
upon their shoulders. 

23And kings shall be thy foster-
fathers, 

And their queens thy nursing 
mothers; 

They shall bow down to thee with 
their face to the earth, 

And lick the dust of thy feet; 

And thou shalt know that I am the 
LORD, 

For they shall not be ashamed that 
wait for Me. 

 

24Shall the prey be taken from the 
mighty, 

Or the captives of the victorious be 
delivered? 

25But thus saith the LORD: 

Even the captives of the mighty 
shall be taken away, 

And the prey of the terrible shall be 
delivered; 

And I will contend with him that 
contendeth with thee, 

And I will save thy children. 

26And I will feed them that oppress 
thee with their own flesh; 

And they shall be drunken with their 
own blood, as with sweet wine; 

And all flesh shall know that I the 
LORD am thy Saviour, 

And thy Redeemer, the Mighty One 
of Jacob. 

 

Thus saith the LORD: 

Where is the bill of your 
mother’s divorcement, 

Wherewith I have put her away? 

Or which of My creditors is it 

To whom I have sold you? 

Behold, for your iniquities were ye 
sold, 

And for your transgressions was 
your mother put away. 

2Wherefore, when I came, was there 
no man? 

When I called, was there none to 
answer? 

Is My hand shortened at all, that it 
cannot redeem? 

Or have I no power to deliver? 

Behold, at My rebuke I dry up the 
sea, 

I make the rivers a wilderness; 

Their fish become foul, because 
there is no water, 

And die for thirst. 

3I clothe the heavens with blackness, 

And I make sackcloth their 
covering. 

 

4The Lord GOD hath given me 

The tongue of them that are taught, 

That I should know how to sustain 
with words him that is weary; 

He wakeneth morning by morning, 

He wakeneth mine ear 

To hear as they that are taught. 

5The Lord GOD hath opened mine 
ear, 

And I was not rebellious, 

Neither turned away backward. 

6I gave my back to the smiters, 

And my checks to them that plucked 
off the hair; 50 




I hid not my face from shame and 
spitting. 

7For the Lord GOD will help me; 

Therefore have I not been 
confounded; 

Therefore have I set my face like a 
flint, 

And I know that I shall not be 
ashamed. 

8He is near that justifieth me; 

Who will contend with me? let us 
stand up together; 

Who is mine adversary? let him 
come near to me. 

9Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; 

Who is he that shall condemn me? 

Behold, they all shall wax old as a 
garment, 

The moth shall eat them up. 

 

10Who is among you that feareth the 
LORD, 

That obeyeth the voice of His 
servant? 

Though he walketh in darkness, 

And hath no light, 

Let him trust in the name of the 
LORD, 

And stay upon his God. 

11Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, 

That gird yourselves with 
firebrands, 

Begone in the flame of your fire, 

And among the brands that ye have 
kindled. 

This shall ye have of My hand; 

Ye shall lie down in sorrow. 

 

Hearken to Me, ye that follow 
after righteousness, 

Ye that seek the LORD; 

Look unto the rock whence ye were 
hewn, 

And to the hole of the pit whence ye 
were digged. 

2Look unto Abraham your father, 

And unto Sarah that bore you; 

For when he was but one I called 
him, 

And I blessed him, and made him 
many. 

3For the LORD hath comforted Zion; 

He hath comforted all her waste 
places, 

And hath made her wilderness like 
Eden, 

And her desert like the garden of the 
LORD; 

Joy and gladness shall be found 
therein, 

Thanksgiving, and the voice of 
melody. 

 

4Attend unto Me, O My people, 

And give ear unto Me, O My nation; 

For instruction shall go forth from 
Me, 

And My right on a sudden for a light 
of the peoples. 

5My favour is near, 

My salvation is gone forth, 

And Mine arms shall judge the 
peoples; 

The isles shall wait for Me, 

And on Mine arm shall they trust. 

6Lift up your eyes to the heavens, 

And look upon the earth beneath; 
51 




For the heavens shall vanish away 
like smoke, 

And the earth shall wax old like a 
garment, 

And they that dwell therein shall die 
in like manner; 

But My salvation shall be for ever, 

And My favour shall not be 
abolished. 

 

7Hearken unto Me, ye that know 
righteousness, 

The people in whose heart is My 
law; 

Fear ye not the taunt of men, 

Neither be ye dismayed at their 
revilings. 

8For the moth shall eat them up like 
a garment, 

And the worm shall eat them like 
wool; 

But My favour shall be for ever, 

And My salvation unto all 
generations. 

 

9Awake, awake, put on strength, 

O arm of the LORD; 

Awake, as in the days of old, 

The generations of ancient times. 

Art thou not it that hewed Rahab in 
pieces, 

That pierced the dragon? 

10Art thou not it that dried up the 
sea, 

The waters of the great deep; 

That made the depths of the sea a 
way 

For the redeemed to pass over? 

11And the ransomed of the LORD 
shall return, 

And come with singing unto Zion, 

And everlasting joy shall be upon 
their heads; 

They shall obtain gladness and joy, 

And sorrow and sighing shall flee 
away. 

 

12I, even I, am He that comforteth 
you: 

Who art thou, that thou art afraid of 
man that shall die, 

And of the son of man that shall be 
made as grass; 

13And hast forgotten the LORD thy 
Maker, 

That stretched forth the heavens, 

And laid the foundations of the 
earth; 

And fearest continually all the day 

Because of the fury of the 
oppressor, 

As he maketh ready to destroy? 

And where is the fury of the 
oppressor? 

14He that is bent down shall speedily 
be loosed; 

And he shall not go down dying into 
the pit, 

Neither shall his bread fail. 

15For I am the LORD thy God, 

Who stirreth up the sea, that the 
waves thereof roar; 

The LORD of hosts is His name. 

16And I have put My words in thy 
mouth, 

And have covered thee in the 
shadow of My hand, 


That I may plant the heavens, 

And lay the foundations of the earth, 

And say unto Zion: ‘Thou art My 
people.’ 

 

17Awake, awake, 

Stand up, O Jerusalem, 

That hast drunk at the hand of the 
LORD 

The cup of His fury; 

Thou hast drunken the beaker, even 
the cup of staggering, 

And drained it. 

18There is none to guide her 

Among all the sons whom she hath 
brought forth; 

Neither is there any that taketh her 
by the hand 

Of all the sons that she hath brought 
up. 

19These two things are befallen thee; 

Who shall bemoan thee? 

Desolation and destruction, 

And the famine and the sword; 

How shall I comfort thee? 

20Thy sons have fainted, they lie at 
the head of all the streets, 

As an antelope in a net; 

They are full of the fury of the LORD, 

The rebuke of thy God. 

21Therefore hear now this, thou 
afflicted, 

And drunken, but not with wine; 

22Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, 

And thy God that pleadeth the cause 
of His people: 

Behold, I have taken out of thy hand 

The cup of staggering; 

The beaker, even the cup of My 
fury, 

Thou shalt no more drink it again; 

23And I will put it into the hand of 
them that afflict thee; 

That have said to thy soul: 

‘Bow down, that we may go over’; 

And thou hast laid thy back as the 
ground, 

And as the street, to them that go 
over. 

 

Awake, awake, 

Put on thy strength, O Zion; 

Put on thy beautiful garments, 

O Jerusalem, the holy city; 

For henceforth there shall no more 
come into thee 

The uncircumcised and the unclean. 

2Shake thyself from the dust; 

Arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem; 

Loose thyself from the bands of thy 
neck, 

O captive daughter of Zion. 

 

3For thus saith the LORD: 

Ye were sold for nought; 

And ye shall be redeemed without 
money. 

4For thus saith the Lord GOD: 

My people went down aforetime 
into Egypt to sojourn there; 

And the Assyrian oppressed them 
without cause. 

5Now therefore, what do I here, 
saith the LORD, 

Seeing that My people is taken away 
for nought? 
52 




They that rule over them do howl, 
saith the LORD, 

And My name continually all the 
day is blasphemed. 

6Therefore My people shall know 
My name; 

Therefore they shall know in that 
day 

That I, even He that spoke, behold, 
here I am. 

 

7How beautiful upon the mountains 

Are the feet of the messenger of 
good tidings, 

That announceth peace, the 
harbinger of good tidings, 

That announceth salvation; 

That saith unto Zion: 

‘Thy God reigneth! ’ 

8Hark, thy watchmen! they lift up 
the voice, 

Together do they sing; 

For they shall see, eye to eye, 

The LORD returning to Zion. 

9Break forth into joy, sing together, 

Ye waste places of Jerusalem; 

For the LORD hath comforted His 
people, 

He hath redeemed Jerusalem. 

10The LORD hath made bare His holy 
arm 

In the eyes of all the nations; 

And all the ends of the earth shall 
see 

The salvation of our God. 

11Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out 
from thence, 

Touch no unclean thing; 

Go ye out of the midst of her; be ye 
clean, 

Ye that bear the vessels of the LORD. 

12For ye shall not go out in haste, 

Neither shall ye go by flight; 

For the LORD will go before you, 

And the God of Israel will be your 
rearward. 

 

13Behold, My servant shall prosper, 

He shall be exalted and lifted up, 
and shall be very high. 

14According as many were appalled 
at thee— 

So marred was his visage unlike that 
of a man, 

And his form unlike that of the sons 
of men— 

15So shall he startle many nations, 

Kings shall shut their mouths 
because of him; 

For that which had not been told 
them shall they see, 

And that which they had not heard 
shall they perceive. 

’Who would have believed our 
report? 

And to whom hath the arm of the 
LORD been revealed? 

2For he shot up right forth as a 
sapling, 

And as a root out of a dry ground; 

He had no form nor comeliness, that 
we should look upon him, 

Nor beauty that we should delight in 
him. 

3He was despised, and forsaken of 
men, 
53 




A man of pains, and acquainted with 
disease, 

And as one from whom men hide 
their face: 

He was despised, and we esteemed 
him not. 

4Surely our diseases he did bear, and 
our pains he carried; 

Whereas we did esteem him 
stricken, 

Smitten of God, and afflicted. 

5But he was wounded because of 
our transgressions, 

He was crushed because of our 
iniquities: 

The chastisement of our welfare was 
upon him, 

And with his stripes we were 
healed. 

6All we like sheep did go astray, 

We turned every one to his own 
way; 

And the LORD hath made to light on 
him 

The iniquity of us all. 

7He was oppressed, though he 
humbled himself 

And opened not his mouth; 

As a lamb that is led to the 
slaughter, 

And as a sheep that before her 
shearers is dumb; 

Yea, he opened not his mouth. 

8By oppression and judgment he 
was taken away, 

And with his generation who did 
reason? 

For he was cut off out of the land of 
the living, 

For the transgression of my people 
to whom the stroke was due. 

9And they made his grave with the 
wicked, 

And with the rich his tomb; 

Although he had done no violence, 

Neither was any deceit in his 
mouth.’ 

 

10Yet it pleased the LORD to crush 
him by disease; 

To see if his soul would offer itself 
in restitution, 

That he might see his seed, prolong 
his days, 

And that the purpose of the LORD 
might prosper by his hand: 

11Of the travail of his soul he shall 
see to the full, even My servant, 

Who by his knowledge did justify 
the Righteous One to the many, 

And their iniquities he did bear. 

12Therefore will I divide him a 
portion among the great, 

And he shall divide the spoil with 
the mighty; 

Because he bared his soul unto 
death, 

And was numbered with the 
transgressors; 

Yet he bore the sin of many, 

And made intercession for the 
transgressors. 

 

Sing, O barren, thou that didst 

 not bear, 

Break forth into singing, and cry 
aloud, thou that didst not travail; 
54 




For more are the children of the 
desolate 

Than the children of the married 
wife, saith the LORD. 

2Enlarge the place of thy tent, 

And let them stretch forth the 
curtains of thy habitations, spare 
not; 

Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen 
thy stakes. 

3For thou shalt spread abroad on the 
right hand and on the left; 

And thy seed shall possess the 
nations, 

And make the desolate cities to be 
inhabited. 

4Fear not, for thou shalt not be 
ashamed. 

Neither be thou confounded, for 
thou shalt not be put to shame; 

For thou shalt forget the shame of 
thy youth, 

And the reproach of thy widowhood 
shalt thou remember no more. 

5For thy Maker is thy husband, 

The LORD of hosts is His name; 

And the Holy One of Israel is thy 
Redeemer, 

The God of the whole earth shall He 
be called. 

6For the LORD hath called thee 

As a wife forsaken and grieved in 
spirit; 

And a wife of youth, can she be 
rejected? 

Saith thy God. 

7For a small moment have I 
forsaken thee; 

But with great compassion will I 
gather thee. 

8In a little wrath I hid My face from 
thee for a moment; 

But with everlasting kindness will I 
have compassion on thee, 

Saith the LORD thy Redeemer. 

9For this is as the waters of Noah 
unto Me; 

For as I have sworn that the waters 
of Noah 

Should no more go over the earth, 

So have I sworn that I would not be 
wroth with thee, 

Nor rebuke thee. 

10For the mountains may depart, 

And the hills be removed; 

But My kindness shall not depart 
from thee, 

Neither shall My covenant of peace 
be removed, 

Saith the LORD that hath compass-
sion on thee. 

 

11O thou afflicted, tossed with 
tempest, 

And not comforted, 

Behold, I will set thy stones in fair 
colours, 

And lay thy foundations with 
sapphires. 

12And I will make thy pinnacles of 
rubies, 

And thy gates of carbuncles, 

And all thy border of precious 
stones. 

13And all thy children shall be 
taught of the LORD; 


And great shall be the peace of thy 
children. 

14In righteousness shalt thou be 
established; 

Be thou far from oppression, for 
thou shalt not fear, 

And from ruin, for it shall not come 
near thee. 

15Behold, they may gather together, 
but not by Me; 

Whosoever shall gather together 
against thee shall fall because of 
thee. 

16Behold, I have created the smith 

That bloweth the fire of coals, 

And bringeth forth a weapon for his 
work; 

And I have created the waster to 
destroy. 

17No weapon that is formed against 
thee shall prosper; 

And every tongue that shall rise 
against thee in judgment thou 
shalt condemn. 

This is the heritage of the servants 
of the LORD, 

And their due reward from Me, saith 
the LORD. 

 

Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye for water, 

And he that hath no money; 

Come ye, buy, and eat; 

Yea, come, buy wine and milk 

Without money and without price. 

2Wherefore do ye spend money for 
that which is not bread? 

And your gain for that which 
satisfieth not? 

Hearken diligently unto Me, and eat 
ye that which is good, 

And let your soul delight itself in 
fatness. 

3Incline your ear, and come unto 
Me; 

Hear, and your soul shall live; 

And I will make an everlasting 
covenant with you, 

Even the sure mercies of David. 

4Behold, I have given him for a 
witness to the peoples, 

A prince and commander to the 
peoples. 

5Behold, thou shalt call a nation that 
thou knowest not, 

And a nation that knew not thee 
shall run unto thee; 

Because of the LORD thy God, 

And for the Holy One of Israel, for 
He hath glorified thee. 

 

6Seek ye the LORD while He may be 
found, 

Call ye upon Him while He is near; 

7Let the wicked forsake his way, 

And the man of iniquity his 
thoughts; 

And let him return unto the LORD, 
and He will have compassion 
upon him, 

And to our God, for He will 
abundantly pardon 

8For My thoughts are not your 
thoughts, 

Neither are your ways My ways, 
saith the LORD. 

9For as the heavens are higher than 
the earth, 
55 




So are My ways higher than your 
ways, 

And My thoughts than your 
thoughts. 

10For as the rain cometh down and 
the snow from heaven, 

And returneth not thither, 

Except it water the earth, 

And make it bring forth and bud, 

And give seed to the sower and 
bread to the eater; 

11So shall My word be that goeth 
forth out of My mouth: 

It shall not return unto Me void, 

Except it accomplish that which I 
please, 

And make the thing whereto I sent it 
prosper. 

12For ye shall go out with joy, 

And be led forth with peace; 

The mountains and the hills shall 
break forth before you into 
singing, 

And all the trees of the field shall 
clap their hands. 

13Instead of the thorn shall come up 
the cypress, 

And instead of the brier shall come 
up the myrtle; 

And it shall be to the LORD for a 
memorial, 

For an everlasting sign that shall not 
be cut off. 

 

Thus saith the LORD: 

Keep ye justice, and do 
righteousness; 

For My salvation is near to come, 

And My favour to be revealed. 

2Happy is the man that doeth this, 

And the son of man that holdeth fast 
by it: 

That keepeth the sabbath from 
profaning it, 

And keepeth his hand from doing 
any evil. 

3Neither let the alien, 

That hath joined himself to the 
LORD, speak, saying: 

‘The LORD will surely separate me 
from His people’; 

Neither let the eunuch say: 

‘Behold, I am a dry tree.’ 

4For thus saith the LORD 

Concerning the eunuchs that keep 
My sabbaths, 

And choose the things that please 
Me, 

And hold fast by My covenant: 

5Even unto them will I give in My 
house 

And within My walls a monument 
and a memorial 

Better than sons and daughters; 

I will give them an everlasting 
memorial, 

That shall not be cut off. 

6Also the aliens, that join 
themselves to the LORD, to 
minister unto Him, 

And to love the name of the LORD, 

To be His servants, 

Every one that keepeth the sabbath 
from profaning it, 

And holdeth fast by My covenant: 

7Even them will I bring to My holy 
mountain, 
56 




And make them joyful in My house 
of prayer; 

Their burnt-offerings and their 
sacrifices 

Shall be acceptable upon Mine altar; 

For My house shall be called 

A house of prayer for all peoples. 

8Saith the Lord GOD who gathereth 
the dispersed of Israel: 

Yet I will gather others to him, 
beside those of him that are 
gathered. 

 

9All ye beasts of the field, come to 
devour, 

Yea, all ye beasts in the forest. 

10His watchmen are all blind, 

Without knowledge; 

They are all dumb dogs, 

They cannot bark; 

Raving, lying down, loving to 
slumber. 

11Yea, the dogs are greedy, 

They know not when they have 
enough; 

And these are shepherds 

That cannot understand; 

They all turn to their own way, 

Each one to his gain, one and all. 

12’Come ye, I will fetch wine, 

And we will fill ourselves with 
strong drink; 

And to-morrow shall be as this day, 

And much more abundant.’ 

 

The righteous perisheth, 

And no man layeth it to heart, 

And godly men are taken away, 

None considering 

That the righteous is taken away 
from the evil to come. 

2He entereth into peace, 

They rest in their beds, 

Each one that walketh in his 
uprightness. 

 

3But draw near hither, 

Ye sons of the sorceress, 

The seed of the adulterer and the 
harlot. 

4Against whom do ye sport 
yourselves? 

Against whom make ye a wide 
mouth, 

And draw out the tongue? 

Are ye not children of transgression, 

A seed of falsehood, 

5Ye that inflame yourselves among 
the terebinths, 

Under every leafy tree; 

That slay the children in the valleys, 

Under the clefts of the rocks? 

6Among the smooth stones of the 
valley is thy portion; 

They, they are thy lot; 

Even to them hast thou poured a 
drink-offering, 

Thou hast offered a meal-offering. 

Should I pacify Myself for these 
things? 

7Upon a high and lofty mountain 

Hast thou set thy bed; 

Thither also wentest thou up 

To offer sacrifice. 

8And behind the doors and the posts 

Hast thou set up thy symbol; 

For thou hast uncovered, and art 
gone up from Me, 
57 




Thou hast enlarged thy bed, 

And chosen thee of them 

Whose bed thou lovedst, 

Whose hand thou sawest. 

9And thou wentest to the king with 
ointment, 

And didst increase thy perfumes, 

And didst send thine ambassadors 
far off, 

Even down to the nether-world. 

10Thou wast wearied with the length 
of thy way; yet saidst thou not: 
‘There is no hope’; thou didst find 
a renewal of thy strength, 
therefore thou wast not affected. 

11And of whom hast thou been 
afraid and in fear, that thou 
wouldest fail? And as for Me, 
thou hast not remembered Me, 
nor laid it to thy heart. Have not I 
held My peace even of long time? 
Therefore thou fearest Me not. 

12I will declare thy righteousness; 
thy works also—they shall not 
profit thee. 

13When thou criest, let them that 
thou hast gathered deliver thee; 
but the wind shall carry them all 
away, a breath shall bear them 
off; but he that taketh refuge in 
Me shall possess the land, and 
shall inherit My holy mountain. 

 

14And He will say: 

Cast ye up, cast ye up, clear the 
way, 

Take up the stumblingblock out of 
the way of My people. 

15For thus saith the High and Lofty 
One 

That inhabiteth eternity, whose 
name is Holy: 

I dwell in the high and holy place, 

With him also that is of a contrite 
and humble spirit, 

To revive the spirit of the humble, 

And to revive the heart of the 
contrite ones. 

16For I will not contend for ever, 

Neither will I be always wroth; 

For the spirit that enwrappeth itself 
is from Me, 

And the souls which I have made. 

17For the iniquity of his 
covetousness was I wroth and 
smote him, 

I hid Me and was wroth; 

And he went on frowardly in the 
way of his heart. 

18I have seen his ways, and will heal 
him; 

I will lead him also, and requite with 
comforts him and his mourners. 

19Peace, peace, to him that is far off 
and to him that is near, 

Saith the LORD that createth the fruit 
of the lips; 

And I will heal him. 

20But the wicked are like the 
troubled sea; 

For it cannot rest, and its waters cast 
up mire and dirt. 

21There is no peace, 

Saith my God concerning the 
wicked. 

 


Cry aloud, spare not, 

Lift up thy voice like a horn, 

And declare unto My people their 
transgression, 

And to the house of Jacob their sins. 

2Yet they seek Me daily, 

And delight to know My ways; 

As a nation that did righteousness, 

And forsook not the ordinance of 
their God, 

They ask of Me righteous 
ordinances, 

They delight to draw near unto God. 

 

3’Wherefore have we fasted, and 
Thou seest not? 

Wherefore have we afflicted our 
soul, and Thou takest no 
knowledge?’— 

Behold, in the day of your fast ye 
pursue your business, 

And exact all your labours. 

4Behold, ye fast for strife and 
contention, 

And to smite with the fist of 
wickedness; 

Ye fast not this day 

So as to make your voice to be 
heard on high. 

5Is such the fast that I have chosen? 

The day for a man to afflict his 
soul? 

Is it to bow down his head as a 
bulrush, 

And to spread sackcloth and ashes 
under him? 

Wilt thou call this a fast, 

And an acceptable day to the LORD? 

6Is not this the fast that I have 
chosen? 

To loose the fetters of wickedness, 

To undo the bands of the yoke, 

And to let the oppressed go free, 

And that ye break every yoke? 

7Is it not to deal thy bread to the 
hungry, 

And that thou bring the poor that are 
cast out to thy house? 

When thou seest the naked, that 
thou cover him, 

And that thou hide not thyself from 
thine own flesh? 

8Then shall thy light break forth as 
the morning, 

And thy healing shall spring forth 
speedily; 

And thy righteousness shall go 
before thee, 

The glory of the LORD shall be thy 
rearward. 

9Then shalt thou call, and the LORD 
will answer; 

Thou shalt cry, and He will say: 
‘Here I am.’ 

If thou take away from the midst of 
thee the yoke, 

The putting forth of the finger, and 
speaking wickedness; 

10And if thou draw out thy soul to 
the hungry, 

And satisfy the afflicted soul; 

Then shall thy light rise in darkness, 

And thy gloom be as the noon-day; 

11And the LORD will guide thee 
continually, 

And satisfy thy soul in drought, 

And make strong thy bones; 
58 




And thou shalt be like a watered 
garden, 

And like a spring of water, whose 
waters fail not. 

12And they that shall be of thee shall 
build the old waste places, 

Thou shalt raise up the foundations 
of many generations; 

And thou shalt be called The 
repairer of the breach, 

The restorer of paths to dwell in. 

13If thou turn away thy foot because 
of the sabbath, 

From pursuing thy business on My 
holy day; 

And call the sabbath a delight, 

And the holy of the LORD 
honourable; 

And shalt honour it, not doing thy 
wonted ways, 

Nor pursuing thy business, nor 
speaking thereof; 

14Then shalt thou delight thyself in 
the LORD, 

And I will make thee to ride upon 
the high places of the earth, 

And I will feed thee with the 
heritage of Jacob thy father; 

For the mouth of the LORD hath 
spoken it. 

 

Behold, the LORD’S hand is 
not shortened, that it cannot 
save, 

Neither His ear heavy, that it cannot 
hear; 

2But your iniquities have separated 

Between you and your God, 

And your sins have hid His face 
from you, 

That He will not hear. 

3For your hands are defiled with 
blood, 

And your fingers with iniquity; 

Your lips have spoken lies, 

Your tongue muttereth wickedness. 

4None sueth in righteousness, 

And none pleadeth in truth; 

They trust in vanity, and speak lies, 

They conceive mischief, and bring 
forth iniquity. 

5They hatch basilisks’eggs, 

And weave the spider’s web; 

He that eateth of their eggs dieth, 

And that which is crushed breaketh 
out into a viper. 

6Their webs shall not become 
garments, 

Neither shall men cover themselves 
with their works; 

Their works are works of iniquity, 

And the act of violence is in their 
hands. 

7Their feet run to evil, 

And they make haste to shed 
innocent blood; 

Their thoughts are thoughts of 
iniquity, 

Desolation and destruction are in 
their paths. 

8The way of peace they know not, 

And there is no right in their goings; 

They have made them crooked 
paths, 

Whosoever goeth therein doth not 
know peace. 
59 




 

9Therefore is justice far from us, 

Neither doth righteousness overtake 
us; 

We look for light, but behold 
darkness, 

For brightness, but we walk in 
gloom. 

10We grope for the wall like the 
blind, 

Yea, as they that have no eyes do 
we grope; 

We stumble at noonday as in the 
twilight; 

We are in dark places like the dead. 

11We all growl like bears, 

And mourn sore like doves; 

We look for right, but there is none; 

For salvation, but it is far off from 
us. 

 

12For our transgressions are 
multiplied before Thee, 

And our sins testify against us; 

For our transgressions are present to 
us, 

And as for our iniquities, we know 
them: 

13Transgressing and denying the 
LORD, 

And turning away from following 
our God, 

Speaking oppression and 
perverseness, 

Conceiving and uttering from the 
heart words of falsehood. 

14And justice is turned away 
backward, 

And righteousness standeth afar off; 

For truth hath stumbled in the broad 
place, 

And uprightness cannot enter. 

15And truth is lacking, 

And he that departeth from evil 
maketh himself a prey. 

 

And the LORD saw it, and it 
displeased Him 

That there was no justice; 

16And He saw that there was no 
man, 

And was astonished that there was 
no intercessor; 

Therefore His own arm brought 
salvation unto Him; 

And His righteousness, it sustained 
Him; 

17And He put on righteousness as a 
coat of mail, 

And a helmet of salvation upon His 
head, 

And He put on garments of 
vengeance for clothing, 

And was clad with zeal as a cloak. 

18According to their deeds, 
accordingly He will repay, 

Fury to His adversaries, recompense 
to His enemies; 

To the islands He will repay 
recompense. 

19So shall they fear the name of the 
LORD from the west, 

And His glory from the rising of the 
sun; 

For distress will come in like a 
flood, 

Which the breath of the LORD 
driveth. 


 

20And a redeemer will come to Zion, 

And unto them that turn from 
transgression in Jacob, 

Saith the LORD. 

21And as for Me, this is My covenant 
with them, saith the LORD; My spirit 
that is upon thee, and My words which 
I have put in thy mouth, shall not 
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the 
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the 
mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the 
LORD, from henceforth and for ever. 

 

Arise, shine, for thy light is 
come, 

And the glory of the LORD is risen 
upon thee. 

2For, behold, darkness shall cover 
the earth, 

And gross darkness the peoples; 

But upon thee the LORD will arise, 

And His glory shall be seen upon 
thee. 

3And nations shall walk at thy light, 

And kings at the brightness of thy 
rising. 

 

4Lift Up thine eyes round about, and 
see: 

They all are gathered together, and 
come to thee; 

Thy sons come from far, 

And thy daughters are borne on the 
side. 

5Then thou shalt see and be radiant, 

And thy heart shall throb and be 
enlarged; 

Because the abundance of the sea 
shall be turned unto thee, 

The wealth of the nations shall come 
unto thee. 

6The caravan of camels shall cover 
thee, 

And of the young camels of Midian 
and Ephah, 

All coming from Sheba; 

They shall bring gold and incense, 

And shall proclaim the praises of the 
LORD. 

7All the flocks of Kedar shall be 
gathered together unto thee, 

The rams of Nebaioth shall minister 
unto thee; 

They shall come up with acceptance 
on Mine altar, 

And I will glorify My glorious 
house. 

 

8Who are these that fly as a cloud, 

And as the doves to their cotes? 

9Surely the isles shall wait for Me, 

And the ships of Tarshish first, 

To bring thy sons from far, 

Their silver and their gold with 
them, 

For the name of the LORD thy God, 

And for the Holy One of Israel, 
because He hath glorified thee. 

 

10And aliens shall build up thy 
walls, 

And their kings shall minister unto 
thee; 

For in My wrath I smote thee, 

But in My favour have I had 
compassion on thee. 
60 




11Thy gates also shall be open 
continually, 

Day and night, they shall not be 
shut; 

That men may bring unto thee the 
wealth of the nations, 

And their kings in procession. 

12For that nation and kingdom that 
will not serve thee shall perish; 

Yea, those nations shall be utterly 
wasted. 

 

13The glory of Lebanon shall come 
unto thee, 

The cypress, the plane-tree and the 
larch together; 

To beautify the place of My 
sanctuary, 

And I will make the place of My 
feet glorious. 

14And the sons of them that afflicted 
thee 

Shall come bending unto thee, 

And all they that despised thee shall 
bow down 

At the soles of thy feet; 

And they shall call thee The city of 
the LORD, 

The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. 

 

15Whereas thou hast been forsaken 
and hated, 

So that no man passed through thee, 

I will make thee an eternal 
excellency, 

A joy of many generations. 

16Thou shalt also suck the milk of 
the nations, 

And shalt suck the breast of kings; 

And thou shalt know that I the LORD 
am thy Saviour, 

And I, the Mighty One of Jacob, thy 
Redeemer. 

 

17For brass I will bring gold, 

And for iron I will bring silver, 

And for wood brass, 

And for stones iron; 

I will also make thy officers peace, 

And righteousness thy magistrates. 

18Violence shall no more be heard in 
thy land, 

Desolation nor destruction within 
thy borders; 

But thou shalt call thy walls 
Salvation, 

And thy gates Praise. 

 

19The sun shall be no more thy light 
by day, 

Neither for brightness shall the 
moon give light unto thee; 

But the LORD shall be unto thee an 
everlasting light, 

And thy God thy glory. 

20Thy sun shall no more go down, 

Neither shall thy moon withdraw 
itself; 

For the LORD shall be thine 
everlasting light, 

And the days of thy mourning shall 
be ended. 

 

21Thy people also shall be all 
righteous, 

They shall inherit the land for ever; 

The branch of My planting, the 
work of My hands, 


Wherein I glory. 

22The smallest shall become a 
thousand, 

And the least a mighty nation; 

I the LORD will hasten it in its time. 

 

The spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me; 

Because the LORD hath anointed me 

To bring good tidings unto the 
humble; 

He hath sent me to bind up the 
broken-hearted, 

To proclaim liberty to the captives, 

And the opening of the eyes to them 
that are bound; 

2To proclaim the year of the LORD’S 
good pleasure, 

And the day of vengeance of our 
God; 

To comfort all that mourn; 

3To appoint unto them that mourn in 
Zion, 

To give unto them a garland for 
ashes, 

The oil of joy for mourning, 

The mantle of praise for the spirit of 
heaviness; 

That they might be called terebinths 
of righteousness, 

The planting of the LORD, wherein 
He might glory. 

4And they shall build the old wastes, 

They shall raise up the former 
desolations, 

And they shall renew the waste 
cities, 

The desolations of many 
generations. 

5And strangers shall stand and feed 
your flocks, 

And aliens shall be your plowmen 
and your vinedressers. 

6But ye shall be named the priests of 
the LORD, 

Men shall call you the ministers of 
our God; 

Ye shall eat the wealth of the 
nations, 

And in their splendour shall ye 
revel. 

7For your shame which was double, 

And for that they rejoiced: 
‘Confusion is their portion’; 

Therefore in their land they shall 
possess double, 

Everlasting joy shall be unto them. 

 

8For I the LORD love justice, 

I hate robbery with iniquity; 

And I will give them their 
recompense in truth, 

And I will make an everlasting 
covenant with them. 

9And their seed shall be known 
among the nations, 

And their offspring among the 
peoples; 

All that see them shall acknowledge 
them, 

That they are the seed which the 
LORD hath blessed. 

 

10I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, 

My soul shall be joyful in my God; 

For He hath clothed me with the 
garments of salvation, 
61 




He hath covered me with the robe of 
victory, 

As a bridegroom putteth on a 
priestly diadem, 

And as a bride adorneth herself with 
her jewels. 

11For as the earth bringeth forth her 
growth, 

And as the garden causeth the things 
that are sown in it to spring forth; 

So the Lord GOD will cause victory 
and glory 

To spring forth before all the 
nations. 

 

For Zion’s sake will I not 
hold My peace, 

And for Jerusalem’s sake I will not 
rest, 

Until her triumph go forth as 
brightness, 

And her salvation as a torch that 
burneth. 

2And the nations shall see thy 
triumph, 

And all kings thy glory; 

And thou shalt be called by a new 
name, 

Which the mouth of the LORD shall 
mark out. 

3Thou shalt also be a crown of 
beauty in the hand of the LORD, 

And a royal diadem in the open 
hand of thy God. 

4Thou shalt no more be termed 
Forsaken, 

Neither shall thy land any more be 
termed Desolate; 

But thou shalt be called, My delight 
is in her, 

And thy land, Espoused; 

For the LORD delighteth in thee, 

And thy land shall be espoused. 

5For as a young man espouseth a 
virgin, 

So shall thy sons espouse thee; 

And as the bridegroom rejoiceth 
over the bride, 

So shall thy God rejoice over thee. 

 

6I have set watchmen 

Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, 

They shall never hold their peace 

Day nor night: 

‘Ye that are the LORD’S 
remembrancers, 

Take ye no rest, 

7And give Him no rest, 

Till He establish, 

And till He make Jerusalem 

A praise in the earth.’ 

8The LORD hath sworn by His right 
hand, 

And by the arm of His strength: 

Surely I will no more give thy corn 

To be food for thine enemies; 

And strangers shall not drink thy 
wine, 

For which thou hast laboured; 

9But they that have garnered it shall 
eat it, 

And praise the LORD, 

And they that have gathered it shall 
drink it 

In the courts of My sanctuary. 

 

10Go through, go through the gates, 
62 




Clear ye the way of the people; 

Cast up, cast up the highway, 

Gather out the stones; 

Lift up an ensign over the peoples. 

11Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed 

Unto the end of the earth: 

Say ye to the daughter of Zion: 

‘Behold, thy salvation cometh; 

Behold, His reward is with Him, 

And His recompense before Him.’ 

12And they shall call them The holy 
people, 

The redeemed of the LORD; 

And thou shalt be called Sought out, 

A city not forsaken. 

 

’Who is this that cometh from 
Edom, 

With crimsoned garments from 
Bozrah? 

This that is glorious in his apparel, 

Stately in the greatness of his 
strength?’— 

’I that speak in victory, mighty to 
save.’— 

2’Wherefore is Thine apparel red, 

And Thy garments like his that 
treadeth in the winevat?’— 

3’I have trodden the winepress 
alone, 

And of the peoples there was no 
man with Me; 

Yea, I trod them in Mine anger, 

And trampled them in My fury; 

And their lifeblood is dashed against 
My garments, 

And I have stained all My raiment. 

4For the day of vengeance that was 
in My heart, 

And My year of redemption are 
come. 

5And I looked, and there was none 
to help, 

And I beheld in astonishment, and 
there was none to uphold; 

Therefore Mine own arm brought 
salvation unto Me, 

And My fury, it upheld Me. 

6And I trod down the peoples in 
Mine anger, 

And made them drunk with My 
fury, 

And I poured out their lifeblood on 
the earth.’ 

 

7I will make mention of the mercies 
of the LORD, 

And the praises of the LORD, 

According to all that the LORD hath 
bestowed on us; 

And the great goodness toward the 
house of Israel, 

Which He hath bestowed on them 
according to His compassions, 

And according to the multitude of 
His mercies. 

8For He said: ‘Surely, they are My 
people, 

Children that will not deal falsely’; 

So He was their Saviour. 

9In all their affliction He was 
afflicted, 

And the angel of His presence saved 
them; 

In His love and in His pity He 
redeemed them; 

And He bore them, and carried them 
all the days of old. 
63 




10But they rebelled, and grieved His 
holy spirit; 

Therefore He was turned to be their 
enemy, 

Himself fought against them. 

11Then His people remembered the 
days of old, the days of Moses: 

‘Where is He that brought them up 
out of the sea 

With the shepherds of His flock? 

Where is He that put His holy spirit 

In the midst of them? 

12That caused His glorious arm to go 
at the right hand of Moses? 

That divided the water before them, 

To make Himself an everlasting 
name? 

13That led them through the deep, 

As a horse in the wilderness, 
without stumbling? 

14As the cattle that go down into the 
valley, 

The spirit of the LORD caused them 
to rest; 

So didst Thou lead Thy people, 

To make Thyself a glorious name.’ 

 

15Look down from heaven, and see, 

Even from Thy holy and glorious 
habitation; 

Where is Thy zeal and Thy mighty 
acts, 

The yearning of Thy heart and Thy 
compassions, 

Now restrained toward me? 

16For Thou art our Father; 

For Abraham knoweth us not, 

And Israel doth not acknowledge us; 

Thou, O LORD, art our Father, 

Our Redeemer from everlasting is 
Thy name. 

17O LORD, why dost Thou make us to 
err from Thy ways, 

And hardenest our heart from Thy 
fear? 

Return for Thy servants’sake, 

The tribes of Thine inheritance. 

18Thy holy people they have well 
nigh driven out, 

Our adversaries have trodden down 
Thy sanctuary. 

19We are become as they over whom 
Thou never borest rule, 

As they that were not called by Thy 
name. 

 

Oh, that Thou wouldest rend the 
heavens, that Thou wouldest 
come down, 

That the mountains might quake at 
Thy presence, 

As when fire kindleth the 
brush-wood, 

And the fire causeth the waters to 
boil; 

To make Thy name known to Thine 
adversaries, 

That the nations might tremble at 
Thy presence, 

2When Thou didst tremendous 
things 

Which we looked not for— 

Oh that Thou wouldest come down, 
that the mountains might quake at 
Thy presence!— 

3And whereof from of old men have 
not heard, nor perceived by the 
ear, 
64 




Neither hath the eye seen a God 
beside Thee, 

Who worketh for him that waiteth 
for Him. 

 

4Thou didst take away him that 
joyfully worked righteousness, 

Those that remembered Thee in Thy 
ways— 

Behold, Thou wast wroth, and we 
sinned— 

Upon them have we stayed of old, 
that we might be saved. 

5And we are all become as one that 
is unclean, 

And all our righteousnesses are as a 
polluted garment; 

And we all do fade as a leaf, 

And our iniquities, like the wind, 
take us away. 

6And there is none that calleth upon 
Thy name, 

That stirreth up himself to take hold 
of Thee; 

For Thou hast hid Thy face from us, 

And hast consumed us by means of 
our iniquities. 

 

7But now, O LORD, Thou art our 
Father; 

We are the clay, and Thou our 
potter, 

And we all are the work of Thy 
hand. 

8Be not wroth very sore, O LORD, 

Neither remember iniquity for ever; 

Behold, look, we beseech Thee, we 
are all Thy people. 

9Thy holy cities are become a 
wilderness, 

Zion is become a wilderness, 

Jerusalem a desolation. 

10Our holy and our beautiful house, 

Where our fathers praised Thee, 

Is burned with fire; 

And all our pleasant things are laid 
waste. 

11Wilt Thou refrain Thyself for these 
things, O LORD? 

Wilt Thou hold Thy peace, and 
afflict us very sore? 

65 



I gave access to them that 
asked not for Me, 

I was at hand to them that sought 
Me not; 

I said: ‘Behold Me, behold Me’, 

Unto a nation that was not called 
by My name. 

2I have spread out My hands all the 
day 

Unto a rebellious people, 

That walk in a way that is not good, 

After their own thoughts; 

3A people that provoke Me 

To My face continually, 

That sacrifice in gardens, 

And burn incense upon bricks; 

4That sit among the graves, 

And lodge in the vaults; 

That eat swine’s flesh, 

And broth of abominable things is in 
their vessels; 

5That say: ‘Stand by thyself, 

Come not near to me, for I am holier 
than thou’; 

These are a smoke in My nose, 

A fire that burneth all the day. 


6Behold, it is written before Me; 

I will not keep silence, except I have 
requited, 

Yea, I will requite into their bosom, 

7Your own iniquities, and the 
iniquities of your fathers together, 

Saith the LORD, that have offered 
upon the mountains, 

And blasphemed Me upon the hills; 

Therefore will I first measure their 
wage into their bosom. 

 

8Thus saith the LORD: 

As, when wine is found in the 
cluster, 

One saith: ‘Destroy it not, 

For a blessing is in it’; 

So will I do for My servants’ sakes, 

That I may not destroy all. 

9And I will bring forth a seed out of 
Jacob, 

And out of Judah an inheritor of My 
mountains; 

And Mine elect shall inherit it, 

And My servants shall dwell there. 

10And Sharon shall be a fold of 
flocks, 

And the valley of Achor a place for 
herds to lie down in, 

For My people that have sought Me; 

11But ye that forsake the LORD, 

That forget My holy mountain, 

That prepare a table for Fortune, 

And that offer mingled wine in full 
measure unto Destiny, 

12I will destine you to the sword, 

And ye shall all bow down to the 
slaughter; 

Because when I called, ye did not 
answer, 

Ehen I spoke, ye did not hear; 

But ye did that which was evil in 
Mine eyes, 

And chose that wherein I delighted 
not. 

 

13Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 

Behold, My servants shall eat, 

But ye shall be hungry; 

Behold, My servants shall drink, 

But ye shall be thirsty; 

Behold, My servants shall rejoice, 

But ye shall be ashamed; 

14Behold, My servants shall sing 

For joy of heart, 

But ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, 

And shall wail for vexation of spirit. 

15And ye shall leave your name for a 
curse unto Mine elect: 

‘So may the Lord GOD slay thee’; 

But He shall call His servants by 
another name; 

16So that he who blesseth himself in 
the earth 

Shall bless himself by the God of 
truth; 

And he that sweareth in the earth 

Shall swear by the God of truth; 

Because the former troubles are 
forgotten, 

And because they are hid from Mine 
eyes. 

17For, behold, I create new heavens 

And a new earth; 

And the former things shall not be 
remembered, 

Nor come into mind. 


18But be ye glad and rejoice for ever 

In that which I create; 

For, behold, I create Jerusalem a 
rejoicing, 

And her people a joy. 

19And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, 

And joy in My people; 

And the voice of weeping shall be 
no more heard in her, 

Nor the voice of crying. 

20There shall be no more thence an 
infant of days, nor an old man, 

That hath not filled his days; 

For the youngest shall die a hundred 
years old, 

And the sinner being a hundred 
years old shall be accursed. 

21And they shall build houses, and 
inhabit them; 

And they shall plant vineyards, and 
eat the fruit of them. 

22They shall not build, and another 
inhabit, 

They shall not plant, and another 
eat; 

For as the days of a tree shall be the 
days of My people, 

And Mine elect shall long enjoy the 
work of their hands. 

23They shall not labour in vain, 

Nor bring forth for terror; 

For they are the seed blessed of the 
LORD, 

And their offspring with them. 

24And it shall come to pass that, 
before they call, I will answer, 

And while they are yet speaking, I 
will hear. 

25The wolf and the lamb shall feed 
together, 

And the lion shall eat straw like the 
ox; 

And dust shall be the serpent’s food. 

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all 
My holy mountain, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

66 



Thus saith the LORD: 

The heaven is My throne, 

And the earth is My footstool; 

Where is the house that ye may 
build unto Me? 

And where is the place that may be 
My resting-place? 

2For all these things hath My hand 
made, 

And so all these things came to be, 

Saith the LORD; 

But on this man will I look, 

Even on him that is poor and of a 
contrite spirit, 

And trembleth at My word. 

3He that killeth an ox is as if he slew 
a man; 

He that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he 
broke a dog’s neck; 

He that offereth a meal-offering, as 
if he offered swine’s blood; 

He that maketh a memorial-offering 
of frankincense, as if he blessed 
an idol; 

According as they have chosen their 
own ways, 

And their soul delighteth in their 
abominations; 

4Even so I will choose their 
mockings, 


And will bring their fears upon 
them; 

Because when I called, none did 
answer; 

When I spoke, they did not hear, 

But they did that which was evil in 
Mine eyes, 

And chose that in which I delighted 
not. 

 

5Hear the word of the LORD, 

Ye that tremble at His word: 

Your brethren that hate you, that 
cast you out for My name’s sake, 
have said: 

‘Let the LORD be glorified, 

That we may gaze upon your joy’, 

But they shall be ashamed. 

6Hark! an uproar from the city, 

Hark! it cometh from the temple, 

Hark! the LORD rendereth 
recompense to His enemies. 

7Before she travailed, she brought 
forth; 

Before her pain came, 

She was delivered of a man-child. 

8Who hath heard such a thing? 

Who hath seen such things? 

Is a land born in one day? 

Is a nation brought forth at once? 

For as soon as Zion travailed, 

She brought forth her children. 

9Shall I bring to the birth, and not 
cause to bring forth? 

Saith the LORD; 

Shall I that cause to bring forth shut 
the womb? 

Saith thy God. 

 

10Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, 

And be glad with her, all ye that 
love her; 

Rejoice for joy with her, 

All ye that mourn for her; 

11That ye may suck, and be satisfied 

With the breast of her consolations; 

That ye may drink deeply with 
delight 

Of the abundance of her glory. 

12For thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, I will extend peace to her 
like a river. 

And the wealth of the nations like 
an overflowing stream, 

And ye shall suck thereof: 

Ye shall be borne upon the side, 

And shall be dandled upon the 
knees. 

13As one whom his mother 
comforteth, 

So will I comfort you; 

And ye shall be comforted in 
Jerusalem. 

14And when ye see this, your heart 
shall rejoice, 

And your bones shall flourish like 
young grass; 

And the hand of the LORD shall be 
known toward His servants, 

And He will have indignation 
against His enemies. 

 

15For, behold, the LORD will come in 
fire, 

And His chariots shall be like the 
whirlwind; 

To render His anger with fury, 

And His rebuke with flames of fire. 


16For by fire will the LORD contend, 

And by His sword with all flesh; 

And the slain of the LORD shall be 
many. 

17They that sanctify themselves and 
purify themselves 

To go unto the gardens, 

Behind one in the midst, 

Eating swine’s flesh, and the 
detestable thing, and the mouse, 

Shall be consumed together, saith 
the LORD. 

18For I [know] their works and their 
thoughts; [the time] cometh, that I will 
gather all nations and tongues; and 
they shall come, and shall see My 
glory. 19And I will work a sign among 
them, and I will send such as escape of 
them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul 
and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal 
and Javan, to the isles afar off, that 
have not heard My fame, neither have 
seen My glory; and they shall declare 
My glory among the nations. 20And 
they shall bring all your brethren out 
of all the nations for an offering unto 
the LORD, upon horses, and in chariots, 
and in fitters, and upon mules, and 
upon swift beasts, to My holy 
mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as 
the children of Israel bring their 
offering in a clean vessel into the 
house of the LORD. 21And of them also 
will I take for the priests and for the 
Levites, saith the LORD. 22For as the 
new heavens and the new earth, which 
I will make, shall remain before Me, 
saith the LORD, so shall your seed and 
your name remain. 

23And it shall come to pass, 

That from one new moon to another, 

And from one sabbath to another, 

Shall all flesh come to worship 
before Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

24And they shall go forth, and look 

Upon the carcasses of the men that 
have rebelled against Me; 

For their worm shall not die, 

Neither shall their fire be quenched; 

And they shall be an abhorring unto 
all flesh. 

 

And it shall come to pass, 

That from one new moon to another, 

And from one sabbath to another, 

Shall all flesh come to worship before Me, 

Saith the Lord. 




..... 

JEREMIAH 

 

1 



THE WORDS of Jeremiah the son of 
Hilkiah, of the priests that were in 
Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, 2to 
whom the word of the LORD came in 
the days of Josiah the son of Amon, 
king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of 
his reign. 3It came also in the days of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah, unto the end of the eleventh 
year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah, unto the carrying away 
of Jerusalem captive in the fifth 
month. 

4And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 

5Before I formed thee in the belly I 
knew thee, 

And before thou camest forth out of 
the womb I sanctified thee; 

I have appointed thee a prophet 
unto the nations. 

6Then said I: ‘Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I 
cannot speak; for I am a child.’ 7But 
the LORD said unto me: 

Say not: I am a child; 

For to whomsoever I shall send thee 
thou shalt go, 

And whatsoever I shall command 
thee thou shalt speak. 

8Be not afraid of them; 

For I am with thee to deliver thee, 

Saith the LORD. 

9Then the LORD put forth His hand, and 
touched my mouth; and the LORD said 
unto me: 

Behold, I have put My words in thy 
mouth; 

10See, I have this day set thee over 
the nations and over the 
kingdoms, 

To root out and to pull down, 

And to destroy and to overthrow; 

To build, and to plant. 

 

11Moreover the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: ‘Jeremiah, what 
seest thou?’ And I said: ‘I see a rod of 
an aalmond-tree.’ 12Then said the LORD 
unto me: ‘Thou hast well seen; for I 
bwatch over My word to perform it.’ 

a Heb. shaked. 

b Heb. shoked 

13And the word of the LORD came 
unto me the second time, saying: 
‘What seest thou?’ And I said: ‘I see a 
seething pot; and the face thereof is 
from the north.’ 14Then the LORD said 
unto me: ‘Out of the north the evil 
shall break forth upon all the 
inhabitants of the land. 15For, lo, I will 
call all the families of the kingdoms of 
the north, saith the LORD; and they 
shall come, and they shall set every 
one his throne at the entrance of the 
gates of Jerusalem, and against all the 


walls thereof round about, and against 
all the cities of Judah. 16And I will 
utter My judgments against them 
touching all their wickedness; in that 
they have forsaken me, and have 
offered unto other gods, and 
worshipped the work of their own 
hands. 17Thou therefore gird up thy 
loins, and arise, and speak unto them 
all that I command thee; be not 
dismayed at them, lest I dismay thee 
before them. 18For, behold, I have 
made thee this day a fortified city, and 
an iron pillar, and brazen walls, 
against the whole land, against the 
kings of Judah, against the princes 
thereof, against the priests thereof, and 
against the people of the land. 19And 
they shall fight against thee; but they 
shall not prevail against thee; For I am 
with thee, saith the LORD, to deliver 
thee.’ 

 

And the word of the LORD came to 
me, saying: 2Go, and cry in the 
ears of Jerusalem, saying: Thus saith 
the LORD: 

I remember for thee the affection of 
thy youth, 

The love of thine espousals; 

How thou wentest after Me in the 
wilderness, 

In a land that was not sown. 

3Israel is the LORD’S hallowed 
portion, 

His first-fruits of the increase; 

All that devour him shall be held 
guilty, 

Evil shall come upon them, saith the 
LORD. 

 

4Hear ye the word of the LORD, O 
house of Jacob, 

And all the families of the house of 
Israel; 

5Thus saith the LORD: 

What unrighteousness have your 
fathers found in Me, 

That they are gone far from Me, 

And have walked after things of 
nought, and are become nought? 

6Neither said they: 

‘Where is the LORD that brought us 
up 

Out of the land of Egypt; 

That led us through the wilderness, 

Through a land of deserts and of 
pits, 

Through a land of drought and of 
the shadow of death, 

Through a land that no man passed 
through, 

And where no man dwelt?’ 

7And I brought you into a land of 
fruitful fields, to eat the fruit 
thereof and the good thereof; but 
when ye entered, ye defiled My 
land, and made My heritage an 
abomination. 

8The priests said not: ‘Where is the 
LORD?’ 

And they that handle the law knew 
Me not, 

And the rulers transgressed against 
Me; 

The prophets also prophesied by 
Baal, 
2 




And walked after things that do not 
profit. 

9Wherefore I will yet plead with 
you, saith the LORD, 

And with your children’s children 
will I plead. 

10For pass over to the isles of the 
Kittites, and see, 

And send unto Kedar, and consider 
diligently, 

And see if there hath been such a 
thing. 

11Hath a nation changed its gods, 

Which yet are no gods? 

But My people hath changed its 
glory 

For that which doth not profit. 

12Be astonished, O ye heavens, at 
this, 

And be horribly afraid, be ye 
exceeding amazed, 

Saith the LORD. 

13For My people have committed 
two evils: 

They have forsaken Me, the 
fountain of living waters, 

And hewed them out cisterns, 
broken cisterns, 

That can hold no water. 

 

14Is Israel a servant? 

Is he a home-born slave? 

Why is he become a prey? 

15The young lions have roared upon 
him, 

And let their voice resound; 

And they have made his land 
desolate, 

His cities are laid waste, 

Without inhabitant. 

16The children also of Noph and 
Tahpanhes 

Feed upon the crown of thy head. 

17Is it not this that doth cause it unto 
thee, 

That thou hast forsaken the LORD thy 
God, 

When He led thee by the way? 

 

18And now what hast thou to do in 
the way to Egypt, 

To drink the waters of Shihor? 

Or what hast thou to do in the way 
to Assyria, 

To drink the waters of the River? 

19Thine own wickedness shall 
correct thee, 

And thy backslidings shall reprove 
thee: 

Know therefore and see that it is an 
evil and a bitter thing, 

That thou hast forsaken the LORD thy 
God, 

Neither is My fear in thee, 

Saith the Lord GOD of hosts. 

 

20For of old time I have broken thy 
yoke, 

And burst thy bands, 

And thou saidst: ‘I will not 
transgress’; 

Upon every high hill 

And under every leafy tree 

Thou didst recline, playing the 
harlot. 

21Yet I had planted thee a noble 
vine, 

Wholly a right seed; 


How then art thou turned into the 
degenerate plant 

Of a strange vine unto Me? 

22For though thou wash thee with 
nitre, 

And take thee much soap, 

Yet thine iniquity is marked before 
Me, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

 

23How canst thou say: ‘I am not 
defiled, 

I have not gone after the Baalim’? 

See thy way in the Valley, 

Know what thou hast done; 

Thou art a swift young camel 
traversing her ways; 

24A wild ass used to the wilderness, 

That snuffeth up the wind in her 
desire; 

Her lust, who can hinder it? 

All they that seek her will not weary 
themselves; 

In her month they shall find her. 

25Withhold thy foot from being 
unshod, 

And thy throat from thirst; 

But thou saidst: ‘There is no hope; 

No, for I have loved strangers, and 
after them will I go.’ 

 

26As the thief is ashamed when he is 
found, 

So is the house of Israel ashamed; 

They, their kings, their princes, 

And their priests, and their prophets; 

27Who say to a stock: ‘Thou art my 
father’, 

And to a stone: ‘Thou hast brought 
us forth’, 

For they have turned their back unto 
Me, and not their face; 

But in the time of their trouble they 
will say: 

‘Arise, and save us.’ 

28But where are thy gods that thou 
hast made thee? 

Let them arise, if they can save thee 
in the time of thy trouble; 

For according to the number of thy 
cities 

Are thy gods, O Judah. 

 

29Wherefore will ye contend with 
Me? 

Ye all have transgressed against Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

30In vain have I smitten your 
children— 

They received no correction; 

Your sword hath devoured your 
prophets, 

Like a destroying lion. 

31O generation, see ye the word of 
the LORD: 

Have I been a wilderness unto 
Israel? 

Or a land of thick darkness? 

Wherefore say My people: ‘We 
roam at large; 

We will come no more unto Thee’? 

32Can a maid forget her ornaments, 

Or a bride her attire? 

Yet My people have forgotten Me 

Days without number. 

 

33How trimmest thou thy way 


To seek love! 

Therefore—even the wicked women 

Hast thou taught thy ways; 

34Also in thy skirts is found the 
blood 

Of the souls of the innocent poor; 

Thou didst not find them breaking 
in; 

Yet for all these things 

35Thou saidst: ‘I am innocent; 

Surely His anger is turned away 
from me’— 

Behold, I will enter into judgment 
with thee, 

Because thou sayest: ‘I have not 
sinned.’ 

 

36How greatly dost thou cheapen 
thyself 

To change thy way? 

Thou shalt be ashamed of Egypt 
also, 

As thou wast ashamed of Asshur. 

37From him also shalt thou go forth, 

With thy hands upon thy head; 

For the LORD hath rejected them in 
whom thou didst trust, 

And thou shalt not prosper in them. 

 

 . . . saying: 

If a man put away his wife, 

And she go from him, 

And become another man’s, 

May he return unto her again? 

Will not that land be greatly 
polluted? 

But thou hast played the harlot with 
many lovers; 

And wouldest thou yet return to 
Me? 

Saith the LORD. 

2Lift up thine eyes unto the high 
hills, and see: 

Where hast thou not been lain with? 

By the ways hast thou sat for them, 

As an Arabian in the wilderness; 

And thou hast polluted the land 

With thy harlotries and with thy 
wickedness. 

3Therefore the showers have been 
withheld, 

And there hath been no latter rain; 

Yet thou hadst a harlot’s forehead, 

Thou refusedst to be ashamed. 

4Didst thou not just now cry unto 
Me: ‘My father, 

Thou art the friend of my youth. 

5Will He bear grudge for ever? 

Will He keep it to the end?’ 

Behold, thou hast spoken, but hast 
done evil things, 

And hast had thy way. 

6And the LORD said unto me in the 
days of Josiah the king: ‘Hast thou 
seen that which backsliding Israel did? 
she went up upon every high mountain 
and under every leafy tree, and there 
played the harlot. 7And I said: After 
she hath done all these things, she will 
return unto me; but she returned not. 
And her treacherous sister Judah saw 
it. 8And I saw, when, forasmuch as 
backsliding Israel had committed 
adultery, I had put her away and given 
her a bill of divorcement, that yet 
treacherous Judah her sister feared not; 
but she also went and played the 
3 




harlot; 9and it came to pass through the 
lightness of her harlotry, that the land 
was polluted, and she committed 
adultery with stones and with stocks; 
10and yet for all this her treacherous 
sister Judah hath not returned unto Me 
with her whole heart, but feignedly, 
saith the LORD— 11even the LORD said 
unto me—backsliding Israel hath 
proved herself more righteous than 
treacherous Judah. 12Go, and proclaim 
these words toward the north, and say: 

Return, thou backsliding Israel, 

Saith the LORD; 

I will not frown upon you; 

For I am merciful, saith the LORD, 

I will not bear grudge for ever. 

13Only acknowledge thine iniquity, 

That thou hast transgressed against 
the LORD thy God, 

And hast scattered thy ways to the 
strangers 

Under every leafy tree, 

And ye have not hearkened to My 
voice, 

Saith the LORD. 

14Return, O backsliding children, saith 
the LORD; for I am a lord unto you, and 
I will take you one of a city, and two 
of a family, and I will bring you to 
Zion; 15and I will give you shepherds 
according to My heart, who shall feed 
you with knowledge and 
understanding. 16And it shall come to 
pass, when ye are multiplied and 
increased in the land, in those days, 
saith the LORD, they shall say no more: 
The ark of the covenant of the LORD; 
neither shall it come to mind; neither 
shall they make mention of it; neither 
shall they miss it; neither shall it be 
made any more. 17At that time they 
shall call Jerusalem The throne of the 
LORD; and all the nations shall be 
gathered unto it, to the name of the 
LORD, to Jerusalem; neither shall they 
walk any more after the stubbornness 
of their evil heart. 18In those days the 
house of Judah shall walk with the 
house of Israel, and they shall come 
together out of the land of the north to 
the land that I have given for an 
inheritance unto your fathers.’ 

 

19But I said: ‘How would I put thee 
among the sons, 

And give thee a pleasant land, 

The goodliest heritage of the 
nations! ’ 

And I said: ‘Thou shalt call Me, My 
father; 

And shalt not turn away from 
following Me.’ 

20Surely as a wife treacherously 
departeth from her husband, 

So have ye dealt treacherously with 
Me, O house of Israel, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

21Hark! upon the high hills is heard 

The suppliant weeping of the 
children of Israel; 

For that they have perverted their 
way, 

They have forgotten the LORD their 
God. 

 

22Return, ye backsliding children, 


I will heal your backslidings.— 

‘Here we are, we are come unto 
Thee; 

For Thou art the LORD our God. 

23Truly vain have proved the hills, 

The uproar on the mountains; 

Truly in the LORD our God 

Is the salvation of Israel. 

24But the shameful thing hath 
devoured 

The labour of our fathers from our 
youth; 

Their flocks and their herds, 

Their sons and their daughters. 

25Let us lie down in our shame, 

And let our confusion cover us; 

For we have sinned against the LORD 
our God, 

We and our fathers, 

From our youth even unto this day; 

And we have not hearkened 

To the voice of the LORD our God.’ 

 

If thou wilt return, O Israel, 

Saith the LORD, 

Yea, return unto Me; 

And if thou wilt put away thy 
detestable things out of My sight, 

And wilt not waver; 

2And wilt swear: ‘As the LORD 
liveth’ 

In truth, in justice, and in 
righteousness; 

Then shall the nations bless 
themselves by Him, 

And in Him shall they glory. 

 

3For thus saith the LORD to the men 
of Judah and to Jerusalem: 

Break up for you a fallow ground, 

And sow not among thorns. 

4Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, 

And take away the foreskins of your 
heart, 

Ye men of Judah and inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; 

Lest My fury go forth like fire, 

And burn that none can quench it, 

Because of the evil of your doings. 

 

5Declare ye in Judah, and publish in 
Jerusalem, 

And say: ‘Blow ye the horn in the 
land’; 

Cry aloud and say: 

‘Assemble yourselves, and let us go 
into the fortified cities.’ 

6Set up a standard toward Zion; 

Put yourselves under covert, stay 
not; 

For I will bring evil from the north, 

And a great destruction. 

7A lion is gone up from his thicket, 

And a destroyer of nations 

Is set out, gone forth from his place; 

To make thy land desolate, 

That thy cities be laid waste, 
without inhabitant. 

8For this gird you with sackcloth, 

Lament and wail; 

For the fierce anger of the LORD 

Is not turned back from us. 

9And it shall come to pass at that 
day, 

Saith the LORD, 

That the heart of the king shall fail, 

And the heart of the princes; 

And the priests shall be astonished, 
4 




And the prophets shall wonder. 

 

10Then said I: ‘Ah, Lord GOD! surely 
Thou hast greatly deceived this people 
and Jerusalem, saying: Ye shall have 
peace; whereas the sword reacheth 
unto the soul.’ 

11At that time shall it be said of this 
people and of Jerusalem; 

A hot wind of the high hills in the 
wilderness 

Toward the daughter of My people, 

Not to fan, nor to cleanse; 

12A wind too strong for this shall 
come for Me; 

Now will I also utter judgments 
against them. 

13Behold, he cometh up as clouds, 

And his chariots are as the 
whirlwind; 

His horses are swifter than eagles.— 

’Woe unto us! for we are 
undone.’— 

14O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from 
wickedness, 

That thou mayest be saved. 

How long shall thy baleful thoughts 

Lodge within thee? 

15For hark! one declareth from Dan, 

And announceth calamity from the 
hills of Ephraim: 

16’Make ye mention to the nations: 

Behold—publish concerning 
Jerusalem— 

Watchers come from a far country, 

And give out their voice against the 
cities of Judah.’ 

17As keepers of a field 

Are they against her round about; 

Because she hath been rebellious 
against Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

18Thy way and thy doings have 
procured 

These things unto thee; 

This is thy wickedness; yea, it is 
bitter, 

Yea, it reacheth unto thy heart. 

 

19My bowels, my bowels! I writhe in 
pain! 

The chambers of my heart! 

My heart moaneth within me! 

I cannot hold my peace! 

Because thou hast heard, O my soul, 
the sound of the horn, 

The alarm of war. 

20Destruction followeth upon 
destruction, 

For the whole land is spoiled; 

Suddenly are my tents spoiled, 

My curtains in a moment. 

21How long shall I see the standard, 

Shall I hear the sound of the horn? 

 

22For My people is foolish, 

They know Me not; 

They are sottish children, 

And they have no understanding; 

They are wise to do evil, 

But to do good they have no knowl-
edge. 

 

23I beheld the earth, 

And, lo, it was waste and void; 

And the heavens, and they had no 
light. 


24I beheld the mountains, and, lo, 
they trembled, 

And all the hills moved to and fro. 

25I beheld, and, lo, there was no 
man, 

And all the birds of the heavens 
were fled. 

26I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful field 
was a wilderness, 

And all the cities thereof were 
broken down 

At the presence of the LORD, 

And before His fierce anger. 

 

27For thus saith the LORD: 

The whole land shall be desolate; 

Yet will I not make a full end. 

28For this shall the earth mourn, 

And the heavens above be black; 

Because I have spoken it, I have 
purposed it, 

And I have not repented, neither 
will I turn back from it. 

29For the noise of the horsemen and 
bowmen 

The whole city fleeth; 

They go into the thickets, 

And climb up upon the rocks; 

Every city is forsaken, 

And not a man dwelleth therein. 

30And thou, that art spoiled, what 
doest thou, 

That thou clothest thyself with 
scarlet, 

That thou deckest thee with 
ornaments of gold, 

That thou enlargest thine eyes with 
paint? 

In vain dost thou make thyself fair; 

Thy lovers despise thee, they seek 
thy life. 

31For I have heard a voice as of a 
woman in travail, 

The anguish as of her that bringeth 
forth her first child, 

The voice of the daughter of Zion, 
that gaspeth for breath, 

That spreadeth her hands: 

‘Woe is me, now! for my soul 
fainteth 

Before the murderers.’ 

 

Run ye to and fro through the 
streets of Jerusalem, 

And see now, and know, 

And seek in the broad places 
thereof, 

If ye can find a man, 

If there be any that doeth justly, that 
seeketh truth; 

And I will pardon her. 

2And though they say: ‘As the LORD 
liveth’, 

Surely they swear falsely. 

3O LORD, are not Thine eyes upon 
truth? 

Thou hast stricken them, but they 
were not affected; 

Thou hast consumed them, but they 
have refused to receive 
correction; 

They have made their faces harder 
than a rock; 

They have refused to return. 

4And I said: ‘Surely these are poor, 

They are foolish, for they know not 
the way of the LORD, 

Nor the ordinance of their God; 
5 




5I will get me unto the great men, 

And will speak unto them; 

For they know the way of the LORD, 

And the ordinance of their God.’ 

But these had altogether broken the 
yoke, 

And burst the bands. 

6Wherefore a lion out of the forest 
doth slay them, 

A wolf of the deserts doth spoil 
them, 

A leopard watcheth over their cities, 

Every one that goeth out thence is 
torn in pieces; 

Because their transgressions are 
many, 

Their backslidings are increased. 

 

7Wherefore should I pardon thee? 

The children have forsaken Me, 

And sworn by no-gods; 

And when I had fed them to the full, 
they committed adultery, 

And assembled themselves in troops 
at the harlots’houses. 

8They are become as well-fed 
horses, lusty stallions; 

Every one neigheth after his 
neighbour’s wife. 

9Shall I not punish for these things? 

Saith the LORD; 

And shall not My soul be avenged 

On such a nation as this? 

 

10Go ye up into her rows, and 
destroy, 

But make not a full end; 

Take away her shoots; 

For they are not the LORD’S. 

11For the house of Israel and the 
house of Judah 

Have dealt very treacherously 
against Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

12They have belied the LORD, 

And said: ‘It is not He, 

Neither shall evil come upon us; 

Neither shall we see sword nor 
famine; 

13And the prophets shall become 
wind, 

And the word is not in them; 

Thus be it done unto them.’ 

14Wherefore thus saith the LORD, the 
God of hosts: 

Because ye speak this word, 

Behold, I will make My words in 
thy mouth fire, 

And this people wood, and it shall 
devour them. 

15Lo, I will bring a nation upon you 
from far, 

O house of Israel, saith the LORD; 

It is an enduring nation, 

It is an ancient nation, 

A nation whose language thou 
knowest not, 

Neither understandest what they 
say. 

16Their quiver is an open sepulchre, 

They are all mighty men. 

17And they shall eat up thy harvest, 
and thy bread, 

They shall eat up thy sons and thy 
daughters, 

They shall eat up thy flocks and thy 
herds, 


They shall eat up thy vines and thy 
fig-trees; 

They shall batter thy fortified cities, 

Wherein thou trusteth, with the 
sword. 

18But even in those days, saith the 
LORD, 

I will not make a full end with you. 

19And it shall come to pass, when ye 
shall say: ‘Wherefore hath the LORD 
our God done all these things unto us?’ 
then shalt Thou say unto them: ‘Like 
as ye have forsaken Me, and served 
strange gods in your land, so shall ye 
serve strangers in a land that is not 
yours.’ 

 

20Declare ye this in the house of 
Jacob, 

And announce it in Judah, saying: 

21Hear now this, O foolish people, 
and without understanding, 

That have eyes, and see not, 

That have ears, and hear not: 

22Fear ye not Me? saith the LORD; 

Will ye not tremble at My presence? 

Who have placed the sand for the 
bound of the sea, 

An everlasting ordinance, which it 
cannot pass; 

And though the waves thereof toss 
themselves, yet can they not 
prevail; 

Though they roar, yet can they not 
pass over it. 

23But this people hath a revolting 
and a rebellious heart; 

They are revolted, and gone. 

24Neither say they in their heart: 

‘Let us now fear the LORD our God, 

That giveth the former rain, and the 
latter in due season; 

That keepeth for us 

The appointed weeks of the 
harvest.’ 

25Your iniquities have turned away 
these things, 

And your sins have withholden 
good from you. 

26For among My people are found 
wicked men; 

They pry, as fowlers lie in wait; 

They set a trap, they catch men. 

27As a cage is full of birds, 

So are their houses full of deceit; 

Therefore they are become great, 
and waxen rich; 

28They are waxen fat, they are 
become sleek; 

Yea, they overpass in deeds of 
wickedness; 

They plead not the cause, the cause 
of the fatherless, 

That they might make it to prosper; 

And the right of the needy do they 
not judge. 

29Shall I not punish for these things? 

Saith the LORD; 

Shall not My soul be avenged 

On such a nation as this? 

 

30An appalling and horrible thing 

Is come to pass in the land: 

31The prophets prophesy in the 
service of falsehood, 

And the priests bear rule at their 
beck; 

And My people love to have it so; 


What then will ye do in the end 
thereof? 

 

Put yourselves under covert, ye 
children of Benjamin, 

Away from the midst of Jerusalem, 

And blow the horn in Tekoa, 

And set up a signal on Beth-cherem; 

For evil looketh forth from the 
north, 

And a great destruction. 

2The comely and delicate one, 

The daughter of Zion, will I cut off. 

3Shepherds with their flocks come 
unto her; 

They pitch their tents against her 
round about; 

They feed bare every one what is 
nigh at hand. 

4’Prepare ye war against her; 

Arise, and let us go up at noon! ’ 

’Woe unto us! for the day declineth, 

For the shadows of the evening are 
stretched out! ’ 

5’Arise, and let us go up by night, 

And let us destroy her palaces.’ 

 

6For thus hath the LORD of hosts 
said: 

Hew ye down her trees, 

And cast up a mound against 
Jerusalem; 

This is the city to be punished; 

Everywhere there is oppression in 
the midst of her. 

7As a cistern welleth with her 
waters, 

So she welleth with her wickedness; 

Violence and spoil is heard in her; 

Before Me continually is sickness 
and wounds. 

8Be thou corrected, O Jerusalem, 

Lest My soul be alienated from thee, 

Lest I make thee desolate, 

A land not inhabited. 

 

9Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

They shall thoroughly glean as a 
vine 

The remnant of Israel; 

Turn again thy hand 

As a grape-gatherer upon the shoots. 

10To whom shall I speak and give 
warning, 

That they may hear? 

Behold, their ear is dull, 

And they cannot attend; 

Behold, the word of the LORD is 
become unto them a reproach, 

They have no delight in it. 

11Therefore I am full of the fury of 
the LORD, 

I am weary with holding in: 

Pour it out upon the babes in the 
street, 

And upon the assembly of young 
men together; 

For even the husband with the wife 
shall be taken, 

The aged with him that is full of 
days. 

12And their houses shall be turned 
unto others, 

Their fields and their wives 
together; 

For I will stretch out My hand upon 
the inhabitants of the land, 

Saith the LORD. 
6 




13For from the least of them even 
unto the greatest of them 

Every one is greedy for gain; 

And from the prophet even unto the 
priest 

Every one dealeth falsely. 

14They have healed also the hurt of 
My people lightly, 

Saying: ‘Peace, peace’, when there 
is no peace. 

15They shall be put to shame 
because they have committed 
abomination; 

Yea, they are not at all ashamed, 

Neither know they how to blush; 

Therefore they shall fall among 
them that fall, 

At the time that I punish them they 
shall stumble, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

16Thus saith the LORD: 

Stand ye in the ways and see, 

And ask for the old paths, 

Where is the good way, and walk 
therein, 

And ye shall find rest for your souls. 

But they said: ‘We will not walk 
therein.’ 

17And I set watchmen over you: 

‘Attend to the sound of the horn’, 

But they said: ‘We will not attend.’ 

18Therefore hear, ye nations, 

And know, O congregation, what is 
against them. 

19Hear, O earth: 

Behold, I will bring evil upon this 
people, 

Even the fruit of their thoughts, 

Because they have not attended unto 
My words, 

And as for My teaching, they have 
rejected it. 

20To what purpose is to Me the 
frankincense that cometh from 
Sheba, 

And the sweet cane, from a far 
country? 

Your burnt-offerings are not 
acceptable, 

Nor your sacrifices pleasing unto 
Me. 

21Therefore thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, I will lay 
stumblingblocks before this 
people, 

And the fathers and the sons 
together shall stumble against 
them, 

The neighbour and his friend, and 
they shall perish. 

 

22Thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, a people cometh from the 
north country, 

And a great nation shall be roused 
from the uttermost parts of the 
earth. 

23They lay hold on bow and spear, 

They are cruel, and have no 
compassion; 

Their voice is like the roaring sea, 

And they ride upon horses; 

Set in array, as a man for war, 

Against thee, O daughter of Zion. 

 

24’We have heard the fame thereof, 
our hands wax feeble, 


Anguish hath taken hold of us, 

And pain, as of a woman in travail.’ 

25Go not forth into the field, 

Nor walk by the way; 

For there is the sword of the enemy, 

And terror on every side. 

26O daughter of my people, gird thee 
with sackcloth, 

And wallow thyself in ashes; 

Make thee mourning, as for an only 
son, 

Most bitter lamentation; 

For the spoiler shall suddenly come 
upon us. 

 

27I have made thee a tower and a 
fortress among My people; 

That thou mayest know and try their 
way. 

28They are all grievous revolters, 

Going about with slanders; 

They are brass and iron; 

They all of them deal corruptly. 

29The bellows blow fiercely, 

The lead is consumed of the fire; 

In vain doth the founder refine, 

For the wicked are not separated. 

30Refuse silver shall men call them, 

Because the LORD hath rejected 
them. 

 

The word that came to Jeremiah 
from the LORD, saying: 2Stand in 
the gate of the LORD’S house, and 
proclaim there this word, and say: 
Hear the word of the LORD, all ye of 
Judah, that enter in at these gates to 
worship the LORD. 3Thus saith the LORD 
of hosts, the God of Israel: 

Amend your ways and your doings, 
and I will cause you to dwell in this 
place. 4Trust ye not in lying words, 
saying: ‘The temple of the LORD, the 
temple of the LORD, the temple of the 
LORD, are these.’ 5Nay, but if ye 
thoroughly amend your ways and your 
doings; if ye thoroughly execute 
justice between a man and his 
neighbour; 6if ye oppress not the 
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, 
and shed not innocent blood in this 
place, neither walk after other gods to 
your hurt; 7then will I cause you to 
dwell in this place, in the land that I 
gave to your fathers, for ever and ever. 
8Behold, ye trust in lying words, that 
cannot profit. 9Will ye steal, murder, 
and commit adultery, and swear 
falsely, and offer unto Baal, and walk 
after other gods whom ye have not 
known, 10and come and stand before 
Me in this house, whereupon My name 
is called, and say: ‘We are delivered’, 
that ye may do all these abominations? 
11Is this house, whereupon My name is 
called, become a den of robbers in 
your eyes? Behold, I, even I, have seen 
it, saith the LORD. 12For go ye now unto 
My place which was in Shiloh, where I 
caused My name to dwell at the first, 
and see what I did to it for the 
wickedness of My people Israel. 13And 
now, because ye have done all these 
works, saith the LORD, and I spoke 
unto you, speaking betimes and often, 
but ye heard not, and I called you, but 
ye answered not; 14therefore will I do 
unto the house, whereupon My name 
7 




is called, wherein ye trust, and unto the 
place which I gave to you and to your 
fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. 
15And I will cast you out of My sight, 
as I have cast out all your brethren, 
even the whole seed of Ephraim. 

16Therefore pray not thou for this 
people, neither lift up cry nor prayer 
for them, neither make intercession to 
Me; for I will not hear thee. 17Seest 
thou not what they do in the cities of 
Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 
18The children gather wood, and the 
fathers kindle the fire, and the women 
knead the dough, to make cakes to the 
queen of heaven, and to pour out 
drink-offerings unto other gods, that 
they may provoke Me. 19Do they 
provoke Me? saith the LORD; do they 
not provoke themselves, to the 
confusion of their own faces? 
20Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, Mine anger and My fury shall 
be poured out upon this place, upon 
man, and upon beast, and upon the 
trees of the field, and upon the fruit of 
the land; and it shall burn, and shall 
not be quenched. 

21Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel: Add your burnt-
offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat 
ye flesh. 22For I spoke not unto your 
fathers, nor commanded them in the 
day that I brought them out of the land 
of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings 
or sacrifices; 23but this thing I 
commanded them, saying: ‘Hearken 
unto My voice, and I will be your God, 
and ye shall be My people; and walk 
ye in all the way that I command you, 
that it may be well with you.’ 24But 
they hearkened not, nor inclined their 
ear, but walked in their own counsels, 
even in the stubbornness of their evil 
heart, and went backward and not 
forward, 25even since the day that your 
fathers came forth out of the land of 
Egypt unto this day; and though I have 
sent unto you all My servants the 
prophets, sending them daily betimes 
and often, 26yet they hearkened not 
unto Me, nor inclined their ear, but 
made their neck stiff; they did worse 
than their fathers. 

27And thou shalt speak all these 
words unto them, but they will not 
hearken to thee; thou shalt also call 
unto them, but they will not answer 
thee. 28Therefore thou shalt say unto 
them: 

This is the nation that hath not 
hearkened 

To the voice of the LORD their God, 

Nor received correction; 

Faithfulness is perished, 

And is cut off from their mouth. 

 

29Cut off thy hair, and cast it away, 

And take up a lamentation on the 
high hills; 

For the LORD hath rejected and 
forsaken the generation of His 
wrath. 

30For the children of Judah have done 
that which is evil in My sight, saith the 
LORD; they have set their detestable 
things in the house whereon My name 
is called, to defile it. 31And they have 


built the high places of Topheth, which 
is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, 
to burn their sons and their daughters 
in the fire; which I commanded not, 
neither came it into My mind. 
32Therefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, that it shall no more be 
called Topheth, nor The valley of the 
son of Hinnom, but The valley of 
slaughter; for they shall bury in 
Topheth, for lack of room. 33And the 
carcasses of this people shall be food 
for the fowls of the heaven, and for the 
beasts of the earth; and none shall 
frighten them away. 34Then will I 
cause to cease from the cities of Judah, 
and from the streets of Jerusalem, the 
voice of mirth and the voice of 
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom 
and the voice of the bride; for the land 

shall be desolate. 1At that time, 
saith the LORD, they shall bring 
out the bones of the kings of Judah, 
and the bones of his princes, and the 
bones of the priests, and the bones of 
the prophets, and the bones of the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their 
graves; 2and they shall spread them 
before the sun, and the moon, and all 
the host of heaven, whom they have 
loved, and whom they have served, 
and after whom they have walked, and 
whom they have sought, and whom 
they have worshipped; they shall not 
be gathered, nor be buried, they shall 
be for dung upon the face of the earth. 
3And death shall be chosen rather than 
life by all the residue that remain of 
this evil family, that remain in all the 
places whither I have driven them, 
saith the LORD of hosts. 

4Moreover thou shalt say unto them: 
Thus saith the LORD: 

Do men fall, and not rise up again? 

Doth one turn away, and not return? 

5Why then is this people of 
Jerusalem slidden back 

By a perpetual backsliding? 

They hold fast deceit, 

They refuse to return. 

6I attended and listened, 

But they spoke not aright; 

No man repenteth him of his 
wickedness, 

Saying: ‘What have I done?’ 

Every one turneth away in his 
course, 

As a horse that rusheth headlong in 
the battle. 

7Yea, the stork in the heaven 

Knoweth her appointed times; 

And the turtle and the swallow and 
the crane 

Observe the time of their coming; 

But My people know not 

The ordinance of the LORD. 

8How do ye say: ‘We are wise, 

And the Law of the LORD is with 
us’? 

Lo, certainly in vain hath wrought 

The vain pen of the scribes. 

9The wise men are ashamed, 

They are dismayed and taken; 

Lo, they have rejected the word of 
the LORD; 

And what wisdom is in them? 

 
8 




10Therefore will I give their wives 
unto others, 

And their fields to them that shall 
possess them; 

For from the least even unto the 
greatest 

Every one is greedy for gain, 

From the prophet even unto the 
priest 

Every one dealeth falsely. 

11And they have healed the hurt of 
the daughter of My people lightly, 

Saying: ‘Peace, peace’, when there 
is no peace. 

12They shall be put to shame 
because they have committed 
abomination; 

Yea, they are not at all ashamed, 

Neither know they how to blush; 
therefore shall they fall among 
them that fall, 

In the time of their visitation they 
shall stumble, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

13I will utterly consume them, saith 
the LORD; 

There are no grapes on the vine, 

Nor figs on the fig-tree, 

And the leaf is faded; 

And I gave them that which they 
transgress. 

14’Why do we sit still? 

Assemble yourselves, and let us 
enter into the fortified cities, 

And let us be cut off there; 

For the LORD our God hath cut us 
off, 

And given us water of gall to drink, 

Because we have sinned against the 
LORD. 

15We looked for peace, but no good 
came; 

And for a time of healing, and 
behold terror! ’ 

16The snorting of his horses is heard 
from Dan; 

At the sound of the neighing of his 
strong ones 

The whole land trembleth; 

For they are come, and have 
devoured the land and all that is 
in it, 

The city and those that dwell 
therein. 

17For, behold, I will send serpents, 
basilisks, among you, 

Which will not be charmed; 

And they shall bite you, saith the 
LORD. 

 

18Though I would take comfort 
against sorrow, 

My heart is faint within me. 

19Behold the voice of the cry of the 
daughter of my people 

From a land far off: 

‘Is not the LORD in Zion? 

Is not her King in her?’— 

‘Why have they provoked Me with 
their graven images, 

And with strange vanities?’— 

20’The harvest is past, the summer is 
ended, 

And we are not saved.’ 

21For the hurt of the daughter of my 
people am I seized with anguish; 


I am black, appalment hath taken 
hold on me. 

22Is there no balm in Gilead? 

Is there no physician there? 

Why then is not the health 

Of the daughter of my people 
recovered? 

23Oh that my head were waters, 

And mine eyes a fountain of tears, 

That I might weep day and night 

For the slain of the daughter of my 
people! 

 

Oh that I were in the wilderness, 

In a lodging-place of wayfaring 
men, 

That I might leave my people, 

And go from them! 

For they are all adulterers, 

An assembly of treacherous men. 

2And they bend their tongue, their 
bow of falsehood; 

And they are grown mighty in the 
land, but not for truth; 

For they proceed from evil to evil, 

And Me they know not, 

Saith the LORD. 

3Take ye heed every one of his 
neighbour, 

And trust ye not in any brother; 

For every brother acteth subtly, 

And every neighbour goeth about 
with slanders. 

4And they deceive every one his 
neighbour, 

And truth they speak not; 

They have taught their tongue to 
speak lies, 

They weary themselves to commit 
iniquity. 

5Thy habitation is in the midst of 
deceit; 

Through deceit they refuse to know 
Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

6Therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts: 

Behold, I will smelt them, and try 
them; 

For how else should I do, 

Because of the daughter of My 
people? 

7Their tongue is a sharpened arrow, 

It speaketh deceit; 

One speaketh peaceably to his 
neighbour with his mouth, 

But in his heart he layeth wait for 
him. 

8Shall I not punish them for these 
things? 

Saith the LORD; 

Shall not My soul be avenged 

On such a nation as this? 

9For the mountains will I take up a 
weeping and wailing, 

And for the pastures of the 
wilderness a lamentation, 

Because they are burned up, so that 
none passeth through. 

And they hear not the voice of the 
cattle; 

Both the fowl of the heavens and the 
beast 

Are fled, and gone. 

10And I will make Jerusalem heaps, 

A lair of jackals; 
9 




And I will make the cities of Judah a 
desolation, 

Without an inhabitant. 

 

11Who is the wise man, that he may 
understand this? 

And who is he to whom the mouth 
of the LORD hath spoken, that he 
may declare it? 

Wherefore is the land perished 

And laid waste like a wilderness, so 
that none passeth through? 

12 And the LORD saith: 

Because they have forsaken My law 
which I set before them, 

And have not hearkened to My 
voice, neither walked therein; 

13 But have walked after the 
stubbornness of their own heart, 

And after the Baalim, which their 
fathers taught them. 

14Therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts, the God of Israel: 

Behold, I will feed them, even this 
people, with wormwood, 

And give them water of gall to 
drink. 

15I will scatter them also among the 
nations, 

Whom neither they nor their fathers 
have known; 

And I will send the sword after 
them, 

Till I have consumed them. 

 

16Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Consider ye, and call for the 
mourning women, that they may 
come; 

And send for the wise women, that 
they may come; 

17let them make haste, and take up a 
wailing for us, 

That our eyes may run down with 
tears, 

And our eyelids gush out with 
waters. 

18For a voice of wailing is heard out 
of Zion: 

‘How are we undone! 

We are greatly confounded, because 
we have forsaken the land, 

Because our dwellings have cast us 
out.’ 

19Yea, hear the word of the LORD, O 
ye women, 

And let your ear receive the word of 
His mouth, 

And teach your daughters wailing, 

And every one her neighbour 
lamentation: 

20‘For death is come up into our 
windows, 

It is entered into our palaces, 

To cut off the children from the 
street, 

And the young men from the broad 
places.— 

21Speak: Thus saith the LORD— 

And the carcasses of men fall 

As dung upon the open field, 

And as the handful after the 
harvestman, 

Which none gathereth.’ 

 

22Thus saith the LORD: 

Let not the wise man glory in his 
wisdom, 


Neither let the mighty man glory in 
his might, 

Let not the rich man glory in his 
riches; 

23But let him that glorieth glory in 
this, 

That he understandeth, and knoweth 
Me, 

That I am the LORD who exercise 
mercy, 

Justice, and righteousness, in the 
earth; 

For in these things I delight, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

24Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, that I will punish all them that 
are circumcised in their 
uncircumcision: 25Egypt, and Judah, 
and Edom, and the children of 
Ammon, and Moab, and all that have 
the corners of their hair polled, that 
dwell in the wilderness; 

For all the nations are 
uncircumcised, 

But all the house of Israel are 
uncircumcised in the heart. 

 

Hear ye the word which the 
LORD speaketh unto you, O 
house of Israel; 2thus saith the LORD: 

Learn not the way of the nations, 

And be not dismayed at the signs of 
heaven; 

For the nations are dismayed at 
them. 

3For the customs of the peoples are 
vanity; 

For it is but a tree which one cutteth 
out of the forest, 

The work of the hands of the 
workman with the axe. 

4They deck it with silver and with 
gold, 

They fasten it with nails and with 
hammers, that it move not. 

5They are like a pillar in a garden of 
cucumbers, and speak not; 

They must needs be borne, because 
they cannot go. 

Be not afraid of them, for they 
cannot do evil, 

Neither is it in them to do good. 

 

6There is none like unto Thee, O 
LORD; 

Thou art great, and Thy name is 
great in might. 

7Who would not fear Thee, O king 
of the nations? 

For it befitteth Thee; 

Forasmuch as among all the wise 
men of the nations, and in all their 
royalty, 

There is none like unto Thee. 

8But they are altogether brutish and 
foolish: 

The vanities by which they are 
instructed are but a stock; 

9Silver beaten into plates which is 
brought from Tarshish, 

And gold from Uphaz, 

The work of the craftsman and of 
the hands of the goldsmith; 

Blue and purple is their clothing; 

They are all the work of skilful men. 

10But the LORD God is the true God, 
10 




He is the living God, and the 
everlasting King; 

At His wrath the earth trembleth, 

And the nations are not able to abide 
His indignation. 

 

11Thus shall ye say unto them: ‘The 
gods that have not made the heavens 
and the earth, these shall perish from 
the earth, and from under the heavens.’ 

 

12He that hath made the earth by His 
power, 

That hath established the world by 
His wisdom, 

And hath stretched out the heavens 
by His understanding; 

13At the sound of His giving a 
multitude of waters in the 
heavens, 

When He causeth the vapours to 
ascend from the ends of the earth; 

When He maketh lightnings with 
the rain, 

And bringeth forth the wind out of 
His treasuries; 

14Every man is proved to be brutish, 
without knowledge, 

Every goldsmith is put to shame by 
the graven image, 

His molten image is falsehood, and 
there is no breath in them. 

15They are vanity, a work of 
delusion; 

In the time of their visitation they 
shall perish. 

16Not like these is the portion of 
Jacob; 

For He is the former of all things, 

And Israel is the tribe of His 
inheritance; 

The LORD of hosts is His name. 

 

 

17Gather up thy wares from the 
ground, 

O thou that abidest in the siege. 

18For thus saith the LORD: Behold, I 
will sling out the inhabitants of the 
land at this time, and will distress 
them, that they may feel it. 

 

19Woe is me for my hurt! 

My wound is grievous; 

But I said: ‘This is but a sickness, 

And I must bear it.’ 

20My tent is spoiled, 

And all my cords are broken; 

My children are gone forth of me, 
and they are not; 

There is none to stretch forth my 
tent any more, 

And to set up my curtains. 

21For the shepherds are become 
brutish, 

And have not inquired of the LORD; 

Therefore they have not prospered, 

And all their flocks are scattered. 

22Hark! a report, behold, it cometh, 

And a great commotion out of the 
north country, 

To make the cities of Judah 
desolate, 

A dwelling-place of jackals. 

23O LORD, I know that man’s way is 
not his own; 

It is not in man to direct his steps as 
he walketh. 


24O LORD, correct me, but in 
measure; 

Not in Thine anger, lest Thou 
diminish me. 

25Pour out Thy wrath upon the 
nations that know Thee not, 

And upon the families that call not 
on Thy name; 

For they have devoured Jacob, 

Yea, they have devoured him and 
consumed him, 

And have laid waste his habitation. 

 

The word that came to 
Jeremiah from the LORD, 
saying: 2’Hear ye the words of this 
covenant, and speak unto the men of 
Judah, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; 3and say thou unto them: 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 
Cursed be the man that heareth not the 
words of this covenant, 4which I 
commanded your fathers in the day 
that I brought them forth out of the 
land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, 
saying: Hearken to My voice, and do 
them, according to all which I 
command you; so shall ye be My 
people, and I will be your God; 5that I 
may establish the oath which I swore 
unto your fathers, to give them a land 
flowing with milk and honey, as at this 
day.’ Then answered I, and said: 
‘Amen, O LORD.’ 

6And the LORD said unto me: 
‘Proclaim all these words in the cities 
of Judah, and in the streets of 
Jerusalem, saying: Hear ye the words 
of this covenant, and do them. 7For I 
earnestly forewarned your fathers in 
the day that I brought them up out of 
the land of Egypt, even unto this day, 
forewarning betimes and often, saying: 
Hearken to My voice. 8Yet they 
hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, 
but walked every one in the 
stubbornness of their evil heart; 
therefore I brought upon them all the 
words of this covenant, which I 
commanded them to do, but they did 
them not.’ 

9And the LORD said unto me: ‘A 
conspiracy is found among the men of 
Judah, and among the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem. 10They are turned back to 
the iniquities of their forefathers, who 
refused to hear My words; and they are 
gone after other gods to serve them; 
the house of Israel and the house of 
Judah have broken My covenant which 
I made with their fathers. 11Therefore 
thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will 
bring evil upon them, which they shall 
not be able to escape; and though they 
shall cry unto Me, I will not hearken 
unto them. 12Then shall the cities of 
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
go and cry unto the gods unto whom 
they offer; but they shall not save them 
at all in the time of their trouble. 13For 
according to the number of thy cities 
are thy gods, O Judah; and according 
to the number of the streets of 
Jerusalem have ye set up altars to the 
shameful thing, even altars to offer 
unto Baal. 14Therefore pray not thou 
for this people, neither lift up cry nor 
prayer for them; for I will not hear 
11 




them in the time that they cry unto Me 
for their trouble.’ 

 

15What hath My beloved to do in 
My house, 

Seeing she hath wrought lewdness 
with many, 

And the hallowed flesh is passed 
from thee? 

When thou doest evil, then thou 
rejoicest. 

16The LORD called thy name 

A leafy olive-tree, fair with goodly 
fruit; 

With the noise of a great tumult 

He hath kindled fire upon it, 

And the branches of it are broken. 

17For the LORD of hosts, that planted 
thee, hath pronounced evil against 
thee, because of the evil of the house 
of Israel and of the house of Judah, 
which they have wrought for 
themselves in provoking Me by 
offering unto Baal. 

 

18And the LORD gave me knowledge 
of it, and I knew it; 

Then Thou showedst me their 
doings. 

19But I was like a docile lamb that is 
led to the slaughter; 

And I knew not that they had 
devised devices against me: 

‘Let us destroy the tree with the fruit 
thereof, 

And let us cut him off from the land 
of the living, 

That his name may be no more 
remembered.’ 

20But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest 
righteously, 

That triest the reins and the heart, 

Let me see Thy vengeance on them; 

For unto Thee have I revealed my 
cause. 

21Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning the men of Anathoth, that 
seek thy life, saying: ‘Thou shalt not 
prophesy in the name of the LORD, that 
thou die not by our hand’; 22therefore 
thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Behold, I will punish them; 

The young men shall die by the 
sword, 

Their sons and their daughters shall 
die by famine; 

23And there shall be no remnant 
unto them; 

For I will bring evil upon the men of 
Anathoth, 

Even the year of their visitation. 

 

Right wouldest Thou be, O 
LORD, 

Were I to contend with Thee, 

Yet will I reason with Thee: 

Wherefore doth the way of the 
wicked prosper? 

Wherefore are all they secure that 
deal very treacherously? 

2Thou hast planted them, yea, they 
have taken root; 

They grow, yea, they bring forth 
fruit; 

Thou art near in their mouth, 

And far from their reins. 

3But Thou, O LORD, knowest me, 
12 




Thou seest me, and triest my heart 
toward Thee; 

Pull them out like sheep for the 
slaughter, 

And prepare them for the day of 
slaughter. 

 

4How long shall the land mourn, 

And the herbs of the whole field 
wither? 

For the wickedness of them that 
dwell therein, the beasts are 
consumed, and the birds; 

Because they said: ‘He seeth not our 
end.’ 

 

5’If thou hast run with the footmen, 
and they have wearied thee, 

Then how canst thou contend with 
horses? 

And though in a land of peace thou 
art secure, 

Yet how wilt thou do in the thickets 
of the Jordan? 

6For even thy brethren, and the 
house of thy father, 

Even they have dealt treacherously 
with thee, 

Even they have cried aloud after 
thee; 

Believe them not, though they speak 
fair words unto thee.’ 

 

7I have forsaken My house, 

I have cast off My heritage; 

I have given the dearly beloved of 
My soul 

Into the hand of her enemies. 

8My heritage is become unto Me 

As a lion in the forest; 

She hath uttered her voice against 
Me; 

Therefore have I hated her. 

9Is My heritage unto Me as a 
speckled bird of prey? 

Are the birds of prey against her 
round about? 

Come ye, assemble all the beasts of 
the field, 

Bring them to devour. 

10Many shepherds have destroyed 
My vineyard, 

They have trodden My portion 
under foot, 

They have made My pleasant 
portion 

A desolate wilderness. 

11They have made it a desolation, 

It mourneth unto Me, being 
desolate; 

The whole land is made desolate, 

Because no man layeth it to heart. 

12Upon all the high hills in the 
wilderness spoilers are come; 

For the sword of the LORD devoureth 

From the one end of the land even to 
the other end of the land, 

No flesh hath peace. 

13They have sown wheat, and have 
reaped thorns; 

They have put themselves to pain, 
they profit not; 

Be ye then ashamed of your 
increase, 

Because of the fierce anger of the 
LORD. 

 


14Thus saith the LORD: As for all 
Mine evil neighbours, that touch the 
inheritance which I have caused My 
people Israel to inherit, behold, I will 
pluck them up from off their land, and 
will pluck up the house of Judah from 
among them. 15And it shall come to 
pass, after that I have plucked them up, 
I will again have compassion on them; 
and I will bring them back, every man 
to his heritage, and every man to his 
land. 16And it shall come to pass, if 
they will diligently learn the ways of 
My people to swear by My name: ‘As 
the LORD liveth, ‘even as they taught 
My people to swear by Baal; then shall 
they be built up in the midst of My 
people. 17But if they will not hearken, 
then will I pluck up that nation, 
plucking up and destroying it, saith the 
LORD. 

 

Thus said the LORD unto me: 
‘Go, and get thee a linen 
girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and 
put it not in water.’ 2So I got a girdle 
according to the word of the LORD, and 
put it upon my loins. 

3And the word of the LORD came 
unto me the second time, saying: 
4’Take the girdle that thou hast gotten, 
which is upon thy loins, and arise, go 
to Perath, and hide it there in a cleft of 
the rock.’ 5So I went, and hid it in 
Perath, as the LORD commanded me. 
6And it came to pass after many days, 
that the LORD said unto me: ‘Arise, go 
to Perath, and take the girdle from 
thence, which I commanded thee to 
hide there.’ 7Then I went to Perath, 
and digged, and took the girdle from 
the place where I had hid it; and, 
behold, the girdle was marred, it was 
profitable for nothing. 

8Then the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 

9Thus saith the LORD: After this 
manner will I mar the pride of Judah, 
and the great pride of Jerusalem, 
10even this evil people, that refuse to 
hear My words, that walk in the 
stubbornness of their heart, and are 
gone after other gods to serve them, 
and to worship them, that it be as this 
girdle, which is profitable for nothing. 
11For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins 
of a man, so have I caused to cleave 
unto Me the whole house of Israel and 
the whole house of Judah, saith the 
LORD, that they might be unto Me for a 
people, and for a name, and for a 
praise, and for a glory; but they would 
not hearken. 

12Moreover thou shalt speak unto 
them this word: Thus saith the LORD, 
the God of Israel: ‘Every bottle is 
filled with wine’; and when they shall 
say unto thee: ‘Do we not know that 
every bottle is filled with wine?’ 
13Then shalt thou say unto them: Thus 
saith the LORD: Behold, I will fill all 
the inhabitants of this land, even the 
kings that sit upon David’s throne, and 
the priests, and the prophets, and all 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with 
drunkenness. 14And I will dash them 
one against another, even the fathers 
and the sons together, saith the LORD; I 
13 




will not pity, nor spare, nor have 
compassion, that I should not destroy 
them. 

 

15Hear ye, and give ear, be not 
proud; 

For the LORD hath spoken. 

16Give glory to the LORD your God, 

Before it grow dark, 

And before your feet stumble 

Upon the mountains of twilight, 

And, while ye look for light, 

He turn it into the shadow of death, 

And make it gross darkness. 

17But if ye will not hear it, 

My soul shall weep in secret for 
your pride; 

And mine eyes shall weep sore, and 
run down with tears, 

Because the LORD’S flock is carried 
away captive. 

 

18Say thou unto the king and to the 
queen-mother: 

‘Sit ye down low; 

For your headtires are come down, 

Even your beautiful crown.’ 

19The cities of the South are shut up, 

And there is none to open them; 

Judah is carried away captive all of 
it; 

It is wholly carried away captive. 

 

20Lift up your eyes, and behold 

Them that come from the north; 

Where is the flock that was given 
thee, 

Thy beautiful flock? 

21What wilt thou say, when He shall 
set the friends over thee as head, 

Whom thou thyself hast trained 
against thee? 

Shall not pangs take hold of thee, 

As of a woman in travail? 

22And if thou say in thy heart: 

‘Wherefore are these things befallen 
me?’— 

For the greatness of thine iniquity 
are thy skirts uncovered, 

And thy heels suffer violence. 

23Can the Ethiopian change his skin, 

Or the leopard his spots? 

Then may ye also do good, 

That are accustomed to do evil. 

24Therefore will I scatter them, as 
the stubble that passeth away 

By the wind of the wilderness. 

25This is thy lot, the portion 
measured unto thee from Me, 

Saith the LORD; 

Because thou hast forgotten Me, 

And trusted in falsehood. 

26Therefore will I also uncover thy 
skirts upon thy face, 

And thy shame shall appear. 

27Thine adulteries, and thy 
neighings, the lewdness of thy 
harlotry, 

On the hills in the field have I seen 
thy detestable acts. 

Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! thou 
wilt not be made clean! 

When shall it ever be? 

 

The word of the LORD that 
came to Jeremiah concerning 
the droughts. 
14 




2Judah mourneth, and the gates 
thereof languish, 

They bow down in black unto the 
ground; 

And the cry of Jerusalem is gone up. 

3And their nobles send their lads for 
water: 

They come to the pits, and find no 
water; 

Their vessels return empty; 

They are ashamed and confounded, 
and cover their heads. 

4Because of the ground which is 
cracked, 

For there hath been no rain in the 
land, 

The plowmen are ashamed, they 
cover their heads. 

5Yea, the hind also in the field 
calveth, and forsaketh her young, 

Because there is no grass, 

6And the wild asses stand on the 
high hills, 

They gasp for air like jackals; 

Their eyes fail, because there is no 
herbage. 

7Though our iniquities testify 
against us, 

O LORD, work Thou for Thy name’s 
sake; 

For our backslidings are many, 

We have sinned against Thee. 

8O Thou hope of Israel, 

The Saviour thereof in time of 
trouble, 

Why shouldest Thou be as a 
stranger in the land, 

And as a wayfaring man that turneth 
aside to tarry for a night? 

9Why shouldest thou be as a man 
overcome, 

As a mighty man that cannot save? 

Yet Thou, O LORD, art in the midst 
of us, 

And Thy name is called upon us; 

Leave us not. 

 

10Thus saith the LORD unto this 
people: 

Even so have they loved to wander, 

They have not refrained their feet; 

Therefore the LORD doth not accept 
them, 

Now will He remember their 
iniquity, 

And punish their sins. 

11And the LORD said unto me: ‘Pray 
not for this people for their good. 
12When they fast, I will not hear their 
cry; and when they offer burnt-
offering and meal-offering, I will not 
accept them; but I will consume them 
by the sword, and by the famine, and 
by the pestilence.’ 13Then said I: ‘Ah, 
Lord GOD! behold, the prophets say 
unto them: Ye shall not see the sword, 
neither shall ye have famine; but I will 
give you assured peace in this place.’ 
14Then the LORD said unto me: ‘The 
prophets prophesy lies in My name; I 
sent them not, neither have I 
commanded them, neither spoke I unto 
them; they prophesy unto you a lying 
vision, and divination, and a thing of 
nought, and the deceit of their own 
heart. 15Therefore thus saith the LORD: 
As for the prophets that prophesy in 
My name, and I sent them not, yet they 


say: Sword and famine shall not be in 
this land, by sword and famine shall 
those prophets be consumed; 16and the 
people to whom they prophesy shall be 
cast out in the streets of Jerusalem 
because of the famine and the sword; 
and they shall have none to bury them, 
them, their wives, nor their sons, nor 
their daughters; for I will pour their 
evil upon them.’ 

 

17And thou shalt say this word unto 
them: 

Let mine eyes run down with tears 
night and day, 

And let them not cease; 

For the virgin daughter of my 
people is broken with a great 
breach, 

With a very grievous blow. 

18If I go forth into the field, 

Then behold the slain with the 
sword! 

And if I enter into the city, 

Then behold them that are sick with 
famine! 

For both the prophet and the priest 
are gone about to a land, and 
knew it not. 

 

19Hast Thou utterly rejected Judah? 

Hath Thy soul loathed Zion? 

Why hast Thou smitten us, and there 
is no healing for us? 

We looked for peace, but no good 
came; 

And for a time of healing, and 
behold terror! 

20We acknowledge, O LORD, our 
wickedness, 

Even the iniquity of our fathers; 

For we have sinned against Thee. 

21Do not contemn us, for Thy 
name’s sake, 

Do not dishonour the throne of Thy 
glory; 

Remember, break not Thy covenant 
with us. 

22Are there any among the vanities 
of the nations that can cause rain? 

Or can the heavens give showers? 

Art not Thou He, O LORD our God, 
and do we not wait for Thee? 

For Thou hast made all these things. 

Then said the LORD unto me: 
‘Though Moses and Samuel 
stood before Me, yet My mind could 
not be toward this people; cast them 
out of My sight, and let them go forth. 
2And it shall come to pass, when they 
say unto thee: Whither shall we go 
forth? then thou shall tell them: Thus 
saith the LORD: Such as are for death, 
to death; and such as are for the sword, 
to the sword; and such as are for the 
famine, to the famine; and such as are 
for captivity, to captivity. 3And I will 
appoint over them four kinds, saith the 
LORD: the sword to slay, and the dogs 
to drag, and the fowls of the heaven, 
and the beasts of the earth, to devour 
and to destroy. 4And I will cause them 
to be a horror among all the kingdoms 
of the earth, because of Manasseh the 
son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that 
which he did in Jerusalem. 
15 




5For who shall have pity upon thee, 
O Jerusalem? 

Or who shall bemoan thee? 

Or who shall turn aside to ask of thy 
welfare? 

6Thou hast cast Me off, saith the 
LORD, 

Thou art gone backward; 

Therefore do I stretch out My hand 
against thee, and destroy thee; 

I am weary with repenting. 

7And I fan them with a fan in the 
gates of the land; 

I bereave them of children, I destroy 
My people, 

Since they return not from their 
ways. 

8Their widows are increased to Me 
above the sand of the seas; 

I bring upon them, against the 
mother, a chosen one, 

Even a spoiler at noonday; 

I cause anguish and terrors to fall 
upon her suddenly. 

9She that hath borne seven 
languisheth; 

Her spirit droopeth; 

Her sun is gone down while it was 
yet day, 

She is ashamed and confounded; 

And the residue of them will I 
deliver to the sword before their 
enemies, 

Saith the LORD.’ 

 

10Woe is me, my mother, that thou 
hast borne me 

A man of strife and a man of 
contention to the whole earth! 

I have not lent, neither have men 
lent to me; 

Yet every one of them doth curse 
me. 

11The LORD said: ‘Verily I will release 
thee for good; verily I will cause the 
enemy to make supplication unto thee 
in the time of evil and in the time of 
affliction. 12Can iron break iron from 
the north and brass? 13Thy substance 
and thy treasures will I give for a spoil 
without price, and that for all thy sins, 
even in all thy borders. 14And I will 
make thee to pass with thine enemies 
into a land which thou knowest not; 
for a fire is kindled in My nostril, 
which shall burn upon you.’ 

 

15Thou, O LORD, knowest; 

Remember me, and think of me, and 
avenge me of my persecutors; 

Take me not away because of Thy 
long-suffering; 

Know that for Thy sake I have 
suffered taunts. 

16Thy words were found, and I did 
eat them; 

And Thy words were unto me a joy 
and the rejoicing of my heart; 

Because Thy name was called on 
me, O LORD God of hosts. 

17I sat not in the assembly of them 
that make merry, nor rejoiced; 

I sat alone because of Thy hand; 

For Thou hast filled me with 
indignation. 

18Why is my pain perpetual, 

And my wound incurable, so that it 
refuseth to be healed? 


Wilt Thou indeed be unto me as a 
deceitful brook, 

As waters that fail? 

 

19Therefore thus saith the LORD: 

If thou return, and I bring thee back, 

Thou shalt stand before Me; 

And if thou bring forth the precious 
out of the vile, 

Thou shalt be as My mouth; 

Let them return unto thee, 

But thou shalt not return unto them. 

20And I will make thee unto this 
people a fortified brazen wall; 

And they shall fight against thee, 

But they shall not prevail against 
thee; 

For I am with thee to save thee and 
to deliver thee, 

Saith the LORD. 

21And I will deliver thee out of the 
hand of the wicked, 

And I will redeem thee out of the 
hand of the terrible. 

 

The word of the LORD came 
also unto me, saying: 

2Thou shalt not take thee a wife, 

Neither shalt thou have sons or 
daughters in this place. 

3For thus saith the LORD concerning the 
sons and concerning the daughters that 
are born in this place, and concerning 
their mothers that bore them, and 
concerning their fathers that begot 
them in this land: 

4They shall die of grievous deaths; 

They shall not be lamented, 

Neither shall they be buried, 

They shall be as dung upon the face 
of the ground; 

And they shall be consumed by the 
sword, and by famine; 

And their carcasses shall be meat for 
the fowls of heaven, 

And for the beasts of the earth. 

5For thus saith the LORD: Enter not into 
the house of mourning, neither go to 
lament, neither bemoan them; for I 
have taken away My peace from this 
people, saith the LORD, even mercy and 
compassion. 6Both the great and the 
small shall die in this land; they shall 
not be buried; neither shall men lament 
for them, nor cut themselves, nor make 
themselves bald for them; 7neither 
shall men break bread for them in 
mourning, to comfort them for the 
dead; neither shall men give them the 
cup of consolation to drink for their 
father or for their mother. 8And thou 
shalt not go into the house of feasting 
to sit with them, to eat and to drink. 
9For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel: 

Behold, I will cause to cease out of 
this place, 

Before your eyes and in your days, 

The voice of mirth and the voice of 
gladness, 

The voice of the bridegroom and the 
voice of the bride. 

10And it shall come to pass, when thou 
shalt tell this people all these words, 
and they shall say unto thee: 
‘Wherefore hath the LORD pronounced 
all this great evil against us? or what is 
our iniquity? or what is our sin that we 
16 




have committed against the LORD our 
God?’ 11then shalt thou say unto them: 
‘Because your fathers have forsaken 
Me, saith the LORD, and have walked 
after other gods, and have served 
them, and have worshipped them, and 
have forsaken Me, and have not kept 
My law; 12and ye have done worse 
than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk 
every one after the stubbornness of his 
evil heart, so that ye hearken not unto 
Me; 13therefore will I cast you out of 
this land into a land that ye have not 
known, neither ye nor your fathers; 
and there shall ye serve other gods day 
and night; forasmuch as I will show 
you no favour.’ 

14Therefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, that it shall no more be 
said: ‘As the LORD liveth, that brought 
up the children of Israel out of the land 
of Egypt, ‘15but: ‘As the LORD liveth, 
that brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the north, and from all 
the countries whither He had driven 
them’; and I will bring them back into 
their land that I gave unto their fathers. 

16Behold, I will send for many 
fishers, saith the LORD, and they shall 
fish them; and afterward I will send for 
many hunters, and they shall hunt 
them from every mountain, and from 
every hill, and out of the clefts of the 
rocks. 

17For Mine eyes are upon all their 
ways, 

They are not hid from My face; 

Neither is their iniquity concealed 
from Mine eyes. 

18And first I will recompense their 
iniquity and their sin double; 

Because they have profaned My 
land; 

They have filled Mine inheritance 

With the carcasses of their 
detestable things and their 
abominations. 

 

19O LORD, my strength, and my 
stronghold, 

And my refuge, in the day of 
affliction, 

Unto Thee shall the nations come 

From the ends of the earth, and shall 
say: 

‘Our fathers have inherited nought 
but lies, 

Vanity and things wherein there is 
no profit.’ 

20Shall a man make unto himself 
gods, 

And they are no gods? 

 

21Therefore, behold, I will cause 
them to know, 

This once will I cause them to know 

My hand and My might; 

And they shall know that My name 
is the LORD. 

 

The sin of Judah is written 

With a pen of iron, and with 
the point of a diamond; 

It is graven upon the tablet of their 
heart, 

And upon the horns of your altars. 

2Like the symbols of their sons are 
their altars, 
17 




And their Asherim are by the leafy 
trees, 

Upon the high hills. 

3O thou that sittest upon the 
mountain in the field, 

I will give thy substance and all thy 
treasures for a spoil, 

And thy high places, because of sin, 
throughout all thy borders. 

4And thou, even of thyself, shalt 
discontinue from thy heritage 

That I gave thee; 

And I will cause thee to serve thine 
enemies 

In the land which thou knowest not; 

For ye have kindled a fire in My 
nostril, 

Which shall burn for ever. 

 

5Thus saith the LORD: 

Cursed is the man that trusteth in 
man, 

And maketh flesh his arm, 

And whose heart departeth from the 
LORD. 

6For he shall be like a tamarisk in 
the desert, 

And shall not see when good 
cometh; 

But shall inhabit the parched places 
in the wilderness, 

A salt land and not inhabited. 

7Blessed is the man that trusteth in 
the LORD, 

And whose trust the LORD is. 

8For he shall be as a tree planted by 
the waters, 

And that spreadeth out its roots by 
the river, 

And shall not see when heat cometh, 

But its foliage shall be luxuriant; 

And shall not be anxious in the year 
of drought, 

Neither shall cease from yielding 
fruit. 

 

9The heart is deceitful above all 
things, 

And it is exceeding weak—who can 
know it? 

10I the LORD search the heart, 

I try the reins, 

Even to give every man according to 
his ways, 

According to the fruit of his doings. 

 

11As the partridge that broodeth over 
young which she hath not brought 
forth, 

So is he that getteth riches, and not 
by right; 

In the midst of his days he shall 
leave them, 

And at his end he shall be a fool. 

 

12Thou throne of glory, on high from 
the beginning, 

Thou place of our sanctuary, 

13Thou hope of Israel, the LORD! 

All that forsake Thee shall be 
ashamed; 

They that depart from Thee shall be 
written in the earth, 

Because they have forsaken the 
LORD, 

The fountain of living waters. 

 


14Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be 
healed; 

Save me, and I shall be saved; 

For Thou art my praise. 

15Behold, they say unto me: 

‘Where is the word of the LORD? let 
it come now.’ 

16As for me, I have not hastened 
from being a shepherd after Thee; 

Neither have I desired the woeful 
day; thou knowest it; 

That which came out of my lips was 
manifest before Thee. 

17Be not a ruin unto me; 

Thou art my refuge in the day of 
evil. 

18Let them be ashamed that 
persecute me, but let not me be 
ashamed; 

Let them be dismayed, but let not 
me be dismayed; 

Bring upon them the day of evil, 

And destroy them with double 
destruction. 

19Thus said the LORD unto me: Go, 
and stand in the gate of the children of 
the people, whereby the kings of Judah 
come in, and by which they go out, 
and in all the gates of Jerusalem; 20and 
say unto them: 

Hear ye the word of the LORD, ye 
kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter 
in by these gates; 21thus saith the LORD: 
Take heed for the sake of your souls, 
and bear no burden on the sabbath day, 
nor bring it in by the gates of 
Jerusalem; 22neither carry forth a 
burden out of your houses on the 
sabbath day, neither do ye any work; 
but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I 
commanded your fathers; 23but they 
hearkened not, neither inclined their 
ear, but made their neck stiff, that they 
might not hear, nor receive instruction. 
24And it shall come to pass, if ye 
diligently hearken unto Me, saith the 
LORD, to bring in no burden through 
the gates of this city on the sabbath 
day, but to hallow the sabbath day, to 
do no work therein; 25then shall there 
enter in by the gates of this city kings 
and princes sitting upon the throne of 
David, riding in chariots and on 
horses, they, and their princes, the men 
of Judah, and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; and this city shall be 
inhabited for ever. 26And they shall 
come from the cities of Judah, and 
from the places round about 
Jerusalem, and from the land of 
Benjamin, and from the Lowland, and 
from the mountains, and from the 
South, bringing burnt-offerings, and 
sacrifices, and meal-offerings, and 
frankincense, and bringing sacrifices 
of thanksgiving, unto the house of the 
LORD. 27But if ye will not hearken unto 
Me to hallow the sabbath day, and not 
to bear a burden and enter in at the 
gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; 
then will I kindle a fire in the gates 
thereof, and it shall devour the palaces 
of Jerusalem, and it shall not be 
quenched. 

 

The word which came to 
Jeremiah from the LORD, 18 




saying: 2’Arise, and go down to the 
potter’s house, and there I will cause 
thee to hear My words.’ 3Then I went 
down to the potter’s house, and, 
behold, he was at his work on the 
wheels. 4And whensoever the vessel 
that he made of the clay was marred in 
the hand of the potter, he made it again 
another vessel, as seemed good to the 
potter to make it. 

5Then the word of the LORD came to 
me, saying: 6’O house of Israel, cannot 
I do with you as this potter? saith the 
LORD. Behold, as the clay in the 
potter’s hand, so are ye in My hand, O 
house of Israel. 7At one instant I may 
speak concerning a nation, and 
concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and 
to break down and to destroy it; 8but if 
that nation turn from their evil, 
because of which I have spoken 
against it, I repent of the evil that I 
thought to do unto it. 9And at one 
instant I may speak concerning a 
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to 
build and to plant it; 10but if it do evil 
in My sight, that it hearken not to My 
voice, then I repent of the good, 
wherewith I said I would benefit it. 
11Now therefore do thou speak to the 
men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, saying: Thus saith the 
LORD: Behold, I frame evil against you, 
and devise a device against you; return 
ye now every one from his evil way, 
and amend your ways and your doings. 
12But they say: There is no hope; but 
we will walk after our own devices, 
and we will do every one after the 
stubbornness of his evil heart.’ 

 

13Therefore thus saith the LORD: 

Ask ye now among the nations, 

Who hath heard such things; 

The virgin of Israel hath done 

A very horrible thing. 

14Doth the snow of Lebanon fail 

From the rock of the field? 

Or are the strange cold flowing 
waters 

Plucked up? 

15For My people hath forgotten Me, 

They offer unto vanity; 

And they have been made to 
stumble in their ways, 

In the ancient paths, 

To walk in bypaths, 

In a way not cast up; 

16To make their land an 
astonishment, 

And a perpetual hissing; 

Every one that passeth thereby shall 
be astonished, 

And shake his head. 

17I will scatter them as with an east 
wind 

Before the enemy; 

I will look upon their back, and not 
their face, 

In the day of their calamity. 

 

18Then said they: 

‘Come, and let us devise devices 
against Jeremiah; 

For instruction shall not perish from 
the priest, 


Nor counsel from the wise, nor the 
word from the prophet. 

Come, and let us smite him with the 
tongue, 

And let us not give heed to any of 
his words.’ 

19Give heed to me, O LORD, 

And hearken to the voice of them 
that contend with me. 

20Shall evil be recompensed for 
good? 

For they have digged a pit for my 
soul. 

Remember how I stood before Thee 

To speak good for them, 

To turn away Thy wrath from them. 

21Therefore deliver up their children 
to the famine, 

And hurl them to the power of the 
sword; 

And let their wives be bereaved of 
their children, and widows; 

And let their men be slain of death, 

And their young men smitten of the 
sword in battle. 

22Let a cry be heard from their 
houses, 

When thou shalt bring a troop 
suddenly upon them; 

For they have digged a pit to take 
me, 

And hid snares for my feet. 

23Yet, LORD, Thou knowest 

All their counsel against me to slay 
me; 

Forgive not their iniquity, 

Neither blot out their sin from Thy 
sight; 

But let them be made to stumble 
before Thee; 

Deal Thou with them in the time of 
Thine anger. 

 

Thus said the LORD: Go, and 
get a potter’s earthen bottle, 
and take of the elders of the people, 
and of the elders of the priests; 2and go 
forth unto the valley of the son of 
Hinnom, which is by the entry of the 
gate Harsith, and proclaim there the 
words that I shall tell thee; 3and say: 
Hear ye the word of the LORD, O kings 
of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; 
thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God 
of Israel: 

Behold, I will bring evil upon this 
place, which whosoever heareth, his 
ears shall tingle; 4because they have 
forsaken Me, and have estranged this 
place, and have offered in it unto other 
gods, whom neither they nor their 
fathers have known, nor the kings of 
Judah; and have filled this place with 
the blood of innocents; 5and have built 
the high places of Baal, to burn their 
sons in the fire for burnt-offerings unto 
Baal; which I commanded not, nor 
spoke it, neither came it into My mind. 
6Therefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, that this place shall no 
more be called Topheth, nor The 
valley of the son of Hinnom, but The 
valley of slaughter; 7and I will make 
void the counsel of Judah and 
Jerusalem in this place; and I will 
cause them to fall by the sword before 
their enemies, and by the hand of them 
19 




that seek their life; and their carcasses 
will I give to be food for the fowls of 
the heaven, and for the beasts of the 
earth; 8and I will make this city an 
astonishment, and a hissing; every one 
that passeth thereby shall be 
astonished and hiss because of all the 
plagues thereof; 9and I will cause them 
to eat the flesh of their sons and the 
flesh of their daughters, and they shall 
eat every one the flesh of his friend, in 
the siege and in the straitness, 
wherewith their enemies, and they that 
seek their life, shall straiten them. 
10Then shalt thou break the bottle in 
the sight of the men that go with thee, 
11and shalt say unto them: Thus saith 
the LORD of hosts: Even so will I break 
this people and this city, as one 
breaketh a potter’s vessel, that cannot 
be made whole again; and they shall 
bury in Topheth, for want of room to 
bury. 12Thus will I do unto this place, 
saith the LORD, and to the inhabitants 
thereof, even making this city as 
Topheth; 13and the houses of 
Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings 
of Judah, which are defiled, shall be as 
the place of Topheth, even all the 
houses upon whose roofs they have 
offered unto all the host of heaven, and 
have poured out drink-offerings unto 
other gods. 

 

14Then came Jeremiah from 
Topheth, whither the LORD had sent 
him to prophesy; and he stood in the 
court of the LORD’S house, and said to 
all the people: 15’Thus saith the LORD 
of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I 
will bring upon this city and upon all 
her towns all the evil that I have 
pronounced against it; because they 
have made their neck stiff, that they 
might not hear My words.’ 

20 



Now Pashhur the son of 
Immer the priest, who was 
chief officer in the house of the LORD, 
heard Jeremiah prophesying these 
things. 2Then Pashhur smote Jeremiah 
the prophet, and put him in the stocks 
that were in the upper gate of 
Benjamin, which was in the house of 
the LORD. 3And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that Pashhur brought forth 
Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said 
Jeremiah unto him: ‘The LORD hath not 
called thy name Pashhur, but 
aMagormissabib. 4For thus saith the 
LORD: Behold, I will make thee a terror 
to thyself, and to all thy friends; and 
they shall fall by the sword of their 
enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it; 
and I will give all Judah into the hand 
of the king of Babylon, and he shall 
carry them captive to Babylon, and 
shall slay them with the sword. 
5Moreover I will give all the store of 
this city, and all the gains thereof, and 
all the wealth thereof, yea, all the 
treasures of the kings of Judah will I 
give into the hand of their enemies, 
who shall spoil them, and take them, 
and carry them to Babylon. 6And thou, 
Pashhur, and all that dwell in thy 
house shall go into captivity; and thou 

a That is, Terror on every side. 


shalt come to Babylon, and there thou 
shalt die, and there shalt thou be 
buried, thou, and all thy friends, to 
whom thou hast prophesied falsely.’ 

 

7O LORD, Thou hast enticed me, and 
I was enticed, 

Thou hast overcome me, and hast 
prevailed; 

I am become a laughing-stock all 
the day, 

Every one mocketh me. 

8For as often as I speak, I cry out, 

I cry: ‘Violence and spoil’; 

Because the word of the LORD is 
made 

A reproach unto me, and a derision, 
all the day. 

9And if I say: ‘I will not make 
mention of Him, 

Nor speak any more in His name’, 

Then there is in my heart as it were 
a burning fire 

Shut up in my bones, 

And I weary myself to hold it in, 

But cannot. 

10For I have heard the whispering of 
many, 

Terror on every side: 

‘Denounce, and we will denounce 
him’; 

Even of all my familiar friends, 

Them that watch for my halting: 

‘Peradventure he will be enticed, 
and we shall prevail against him, 

And we shall take our revenge on 
him.’ 

11But the LORD is with me as a 
mighty warrior; 

Therefore my persecutors shall 
stumble, and they shall not 
prevail; 

They shall be greatly ashamed, 
because they have not prospered, 

Even with an everlasting confusion 
which shall never be forgotten. 

12But, O LORD of hosts, that triest the 
righteous, 

That seest the reins and the heart, 

Let me see Thy vengeance on them; 

For unto Thee have I revealed my 
cause. 

 

13Sing unto the LORD, 

Praise ye the LORD; 

For He hath delivered the soul of the 
needy 

From the hand of evil-doers. 

 

14Cursed be the day 

Wherein I was born; 

The day wherein my mother bore 
me, 

Let it not be blessed. 

15Cursed be the man who brought 
tidings 

To my father, saying: 

‘A man-child is born unto thee’; 

Making him very glad. 

16And let that man be as the cities 

Which the LORD overthrew, and 
repented not; 

And let him hear a cry in the 
morning, 

And an alarm at noontide; 

17Because He slew me not from the 
womb; 


And so my mother would have been 
my grave, 

And her womb always great. 

18Wherefore came I forth out of the 
womb 

To see labour and sorrow, 

That my days should be consumed 
in shame? 

 

The word which came unto 
Jeremiah from the LORD, when 
king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashhur 
the son of Malchiah, and Zephaniah 
the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying: 
2’Inquire, I pray thee, of the LORD for 
us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon maketh war against us; 
peradventure the LORD will deal with 
us according to all His wondrous 
works, that he may go up from us.’ 

3Then said Jeremiah unto them: 
Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah: 4Thus 
saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 

Behold, I will turn back the 
weapons of war that are in your hands, 
wherewith ye fight against the king of 
Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, 
that besiege you without the walls, and 
I will gather them into the midst of this 
city. 5And I myself will fight against 
you with an outstretched hand and 
with a strong arm, even in anger, and 
in fury, and in great wrath. 6And I will 
smite the inhabitants of this city, both 
man and beast; they shall die of a great 
pestilence. 7And afterward, saith the 
LORD, I will deliver Zedekiah king of 
Judah, and his servants, and the 
people, and such as are left in this city 
from the pestilence, from the sword, 
and from the famine, into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and 
into the hand of their enemies, and into 
the hand of those that seek their life; 
and he shall smite them with the edge 
of the sword; he shall not spare them, 
neither have pity, nor have 
compassion. 

8And unto this people thou shalt say: 
Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I set 
before you the way of life and the way 
of death. 9He that abideth in this city 
shall die by the sword, and by the 
famine, and by the pestilence; but he 
that goeth out, and falleth away to the 
Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall 
live, and his life shall be unto him for 
a prey. 10For I have set My face 
against this city for evil, and not for 
good, saith the LORD; it shall be given 
into the hand of the king of Babylon, 
and he shall burn it with fire. 

11And unto the house of the king of 
Judah: Hear ye the word of the LORD; 
12O house of David, thus saith the 
LORD: 

Execute justice in the morning, 

And deliver the spoiled out of the 
hand of the oppressor, 

Lest My fury go forth like fire, 

And burn that none can quench it, 

Because of the evil of your doings. 

 

13Behold, I am against thee, O 
inhabitant of the valley, 

And rock of the plain, saith the 
LORD; 
21 




Ye that say: ‘Who shall come down 
against us? 

Or who shall enter into our 
habitations?’ 

14And I will punish you according to 
the fruit of your doings, 

Saith the LORD; 

And I will kindle a fire in her forest, 

And it shall devour all that is round 
about her. 

 

Thus said the LORD: Go down 
to the house of the king of 
Judah, and speak there this word, 2and 
say: Hear the word of the LORD, O king 
of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of 
David, thou, and thy servants, and thy 
people that enter in by these gates. 
3Thus saith the LORD: 

Execute ye justice and 
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled 
out of the hand of the oppressor; and 
do no wrong, do no violence, to the 
stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, 
neither shed innocent blood in this 
place. 4For if ye do this thing indeed, 
then shall there enter in by the gates of 
this house kings sitting upon the 
throne of David, riding in chariots and 
on horses, he, and his servants, and his 
people. 5But if ye will not hear these 
words, I swear by Myself, saith the 
LORD, that this house shall become a 
desolation. 6For thus saith the LORD 
concerning the house of the king of 
Judah: 

Thou art Gilead unto Me, 

The head of Lebanon; 

Yet surely I will make thee a 
wilderness, 

Cities which are not inhabited. 

7And I will prepare destroyers 
against thee, 

Every one with his weapons; 

And they shall cut down thy choice 
cedars, 

And cast them into the fire. 

8And many nations shall pass by this 
city, and they shall say every man to 
his neighbour: ‘Wherefore hath the 
LORD done thus unto this great city?’ 
9Then they shall answer: ‘Because 
they forsook the covenant of the LORD 
their God, and worshipped other gods, 
and served them.’ 

 

10Weep ye not for the dead, 

Neither bemoan him; 

But weep sore for him that goeth 
away, 

For he shall return no more, 

Nor see his native country. 

11For thus saith the LORD touching 
Shallum the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah 
his father, and who went forth out of 
this place: He shall not return thither 
any more; 12but in the place whither 
they have led him captive, there shall 
he die, and he shall see this land no 
more. 

 

13Woe unto him that buildeth his 
house by unrighteousness, 

And his chambers by injustice; 

That useth his neighbour’s service 
without wages, 
22 




And giveth him not his hire; 

14That saith: ‘I will build me a wide 
house 

And spacious chambers’, 

And cutteth him out windows, 

And it is ceiled with cedar, and 
painted with vermilion. 

15Shalt thou reign, because thou 
strivest to excel in cedar? 

Did not thy father eat and drink, and 
do justice and righteousness? 

Then it was well with him. 

16He judged the cause of the poor 
and needy; 

Then it was well. 

Is not this to know Me? saith the 
LORD. 

17But thine eyes and thy heart 

Are not but for thy covetousness, 

And for shedding innocent blood, 

And for oppression, and for 
violence, to do it. 

18Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiah, king of Judah: 

They shall not lament for him: 

‘Ah my brother! ’ or: ‘Ah sister! ’ 

They shall not lament for him: 

‘Ah lord! ’ or: ‘Ah his glory! ’ 

19He shall be buried with the burial 
of an ass, 

Drawn and cast forth beyond the 
gates of Jerusalem. 

 

20Go up to Lebanon, and cry, 

And lift up thy voice in Bashan; 

And cry from Abarim, 

For all thy lovers are destroyed. 

21I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, 

But thou saidst: ‘I will not hear.’ 

This hath been thy manner from thy 
youth, 

That thou hearkenedst not to My 
voice. 

22The wind shall feed upon all thy 
shepherds, 

And thy lovers shall go into 
captivity; 

Surely then shalt thou be ashamed 
and confounded 

For all thy wickedness. 

23O inhabitant of Lebanon, 

That art nestled in the cedars, 

How gracious shalt thou be when 
pangs come upon thee, 

The pain as of a woman in travail! 

24As I live, saith the LORD, though 
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of 
Judah were the signet upon My right 
hand, yet would I pluck thee thence; 
25and I will give thee into the hand of 
them that seek thy life, and into the 
hand of them of whom thou art afraid, 
even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon, and into the hand of 
the Chaldeans. 26And I will cast thee 
out, and thy mother that bore thee, into 
another country, where ye were not 
born; and there shall ye die. 27But to 
the land whereunto they long to return, 
thither shall they not return. 

28Is this man Coniah a despised, 
broken image? 

Is he a vessel wherein is no 
pleasure? 

Wherefore are they cast out, he and 
his seed, 


And are cast into the land which 
they know not? 

29O land, land, land, 

Hear the word of the LORD. 

30Thus saith the LORD: 

Write ye this man childless, 

A man that shall not prosper in his 
days; 

For no man of his seed shall 
prosper, 

Sitting upon the throne of David, 

And ruling any more in Judah. 

 

Woe unto the shepherds that 
destroy and scatter 

The sheep of My pasture! saith the 
LORD. 

2Therefore thus saith the LORD, the 
God of Israel, against the shepherds 
that feed My people: Ye have scattered 
My flock, and driven them away, and 
have not taken care of them; behold, I 
will visit upon you the evil of your 
doings, saith the LORD. 3And I will 
gather the remnant of My flock out of 
all the countries whither I have driven 
them, and will bring them back to their 
folds; and they shall be fruitful and 
multiply. 4And I will set up shepherds 
over them, who shall feed them; and 
they shall fear no more, nor be 
dismayed, neither shall any be lacking, 
saith the LORD. 

5Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, that I will raise unto David 
a righteous shoot, and he shall 
reign as king and prosper, and 
shall execute justice and 
righteousness in the land. 

6In his days Judah shall be saved, 
and Israel shall dwell safely; and 
this is his name whereby he shall 
be called, The LORD is our 
righteousness. 

7Therefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, that they shall no more 
say: ‘As the LORD liveth, that brought 
up the children of Israel out of the land 
of Egypt’; 8but: ‘As the LORD liveth, 
that brought up and that led the seed of 
the house of Israel out of the north 
country, and from all the countries 
whither I had driven them’; and they 
shall dwell in their own land. 

 

9Concerning the prophets. 

 

My heart within me is broken, 

All my bones shake; 

I am like a drunken man, 

And like a man whom wine hath 
overcome; 

Because of the LORD, 

And because of His holy words. 

10For the land is full of adulterers; 

For because of swearing the land 
mourneth, 

The pastures of the wilderness are 
dried up; 

And their course is evil, 

And their force is not right. 

11For both prophet and priest are 
ungodly; 

Yea, in My house have I found their 
wickedness, 

Saith the LORD. 
23 




12Wherefore their way shall be unto 
them as slippery places in the 
darkness, 

They shall be thrust, and fall 
therein; 

For I will bring evil upon them, 

Even the year of their visitation, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

13And I have seen unseemliness in 
the prophets of Samaria: 

They prophesied by Baal, 

And caused My people Israel to err. 

14But in the prophets of Jerusalem I 
have seen a horrible thing: 

They commit adultery, and walk in 
lies, 

And they strengthen the hands of 
evil-doers, 

That none doth return from his 
wickedness; 

They are all of them become unto 
Me as Sodom, 

And the inhabitants thereof as 
Gomorrah. 

15Therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts concerning the prophets: 

Behold, I will feed them with 
wormwood, 

And make them drink the water of 
gall; 

For from the prophets of Jerusalem 

Is ungodliness gone forth into all the 
land. 

 

16Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Hearken not unto the words of the 
prophets that prophesy unto you, 

They lead you unto vanity; 

They speak a vision of their own 
heart, 

And not out of the mouth of the 
LORD. 

17They say continually unto them 
that despise Me: 

‘The LORD hath said: Ye shall have 
peace’; 

And unto every one that walketh in 
the stubbornness of his own heart 
they say: 

‘No evil shall come upon you’; 

18For who hath stood in the council 
of the LORD, 

That he should perceive and hear 
His word? 

Who hath attended to His word, and 
heard it? 

 

19Behold, a storm of the LORD is 
gone forth in fury, 

Yea, a whirling storm; 

It shall whirl upon the head of the 
wicked. 

20The anger of the LORD shall not 
return, 

Until He have executed, and till He 
have performed the purposes of 
His heart; 

Iin the end of days ye shall consider 
it perfectly. 

21I have not sent these prophets, yet 
they ran; 

I have not spoken to them, yet they 
prophesied. 

22But if they have stood in My 
council, 

Then let them cause My people to 
hear My words, 


And turn them from their evil way, 

And from the evil of their doings. 

 

23Am I a God near at hand, saith the 
LORD, 

And not a God afar off? 

24Can any hide himself in secret 
places 

That I shall not see him? saith the 
LORD. 

Do not I fill heaven and earth? 

Saith the LORD. 

25I have heard what the prophets 
have said, 

That prophesy lies in My name, 
saying: 

‘I have dreamed, I have dreamed.’ 

26How long shall this be? 

Is it in the heart of the prophets that 
prophesy lies, 

And the prophets of the deceit of 
their own heart? 

27That think to cause My people to 
forget My name 

By their dreams which they tell 
every man to his neighbour, 

As their fathers forgot My name for 
Baal. 

28The prophet that hath a dream, let 
him tell a dream; 

And he that hath My word; let him 
speak My word faithfully. 

What hath the straw to do with the 
wheat? 

Saith the LORD. 

29Is not My word like as fire? 

Saith the LORD; 

And like a hammer that breaketh the 
rock in pieces? 

30Therefore, behold, I am against the 
prophets, saith the LORD, that steal My 
words every one from his neighbour. 
31Behold, I am against the prophets, 
saith the LORD, that use there tongues 
and say: ‘He saith.’ 32Behold, I am 
against them that prophesy lying 
dreams, saith the LORD, and do tell 
them, and cause My people to err by 
their lies, and by their wantonness; yet 
I sent them not, nor commanded them; 
neither can they profit this people at 
all, saith the LORD. 

33And when this people, or the 
prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, 
saying: ‘What is the burden of the 
LORD?’ then shalt thou say unto them: 
‘What burden! I will cast you off, saith 
the LORD.’ 34And as for the prophet, 
and the priest, and the people, that 
shall say: ‘The burden of the LORD’, I 
will even punish that man and his 
house. 35Thus shall ye say every one to 
his neighbour, and every one to his 
brother: ‘What hath the LORD 
answered?’ and: ‘What hath the LORD 
spoken?’ 36And the burden of the LORD 
shall ye mention no more; for every 
man’s own word shall be his burden; 
and would ye pervert the words of the 
living God, of the LORD of hosts our 
God? 37Thus shalt thou say to the 
prophet: ‘What hath the LORD 
answered thee?’ and: ‘What hath the 
LORD spoken?’ 38But if ye say: ‘The 
burden of the LORD’; therefore thus 
saith the LORD: Because ye say this 
word: ‘The burden of the LORD’, and I 
have sent unto you, saying: ‘Ye shall 


not say: The burden of the LORD’; 
39therefore, behold, I will utterly tear 
you out, and I will cast you off, and 
the city that I gave unto you and to 
your fathers, away from My presence; 
40and I will bring an everlasting 
reproach upon you, and a perpetual 
shame, which shall not be forgotten 

 

The LORD showed me, and 
behold two baskets of figs set 
before the temple of the LORD; after 
that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
had carried away captive Jeconiah the 
son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and 
the princes of Judah, with the 
craftsmen and smiths, from Jerusalem, 
and had brought them to Babylon. 
2One basket had very good figs, like 
the figs that are first-ripe; and the other 
basket had very bad figs, which could 
not be eaten, they were so bad. 3Then 
said the LORD unto me: ‘What seest 
thou, Jeremiah?’ And I said: ‘Figs; the 
good figs, very good; and the bad, very 
bad, that cannot be eaten, they are so 
bad.’ 4And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 5’Thus saith the LORD, 
the God of Israel: Like these good figs, 
so will I regard the captives of Judah, 
whom I have sent out of this place into 
the land of the Chaldeans, for good. 
6And I will set Mine eyes upon them 
for good, and I will bring them back to 
this land; and I will build them, and 
not pull them down; and I will plant 
them, and not pluck them up. 7And I 
will give them a heart to know Me, 
that I am the LORD; and they shall be 
My people, and I will be their God; for 
they shall return unto Me with their 
whole heart. 8And as the bad figs, 
which cannot be eaten, they are so 
bad; surely thus saith the LORD: So will 
I make Zedekiah the king of Judah, 
and his princes, and the residue of 
Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and 
them that dwell in the land of Egypt; 9I 
will even make them a horror among 
all the kingdoms of the earth for evil; a 
reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a 
curse, in all places whither I shall 
drive them. 10And I will send the 
sword, the famine, and the pestilence, 
among them, till they be consumed 
from off the land that I gave unto them 
and to their fathers.’ 

 

The word that came to 
Jeremiah concerning all the 
people of Judah in the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah, that was the first year of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; 
2which Jeremiah the prophet spoke 
unto all the people of Judah, and to all 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying: 

3From the thirteenth year of Josiah 
the son of Amon, king of Judah, even 
unto this day, these three and twenty 
years, the word of the LORD hath come 
unto me, and I have spoken unto you, 
speaking betimes and often; but ye 
have not hearkened. 4And the LORD 
hath sent unto you all His servants the 
prophets, sending them betimes and 
often—but ye have not hearkened, nor 
inclined your ear to hear— 5saying: 
24 

25 




‘Return ye now every one from his 
evil way, and from the evil of your 
doings, and dwell in the land that the 
LORD hath given unto you and to your 
fathers, for ever and ever; 6and go not 
after other gods to serve them, and to 
worship them, and provoke Me not 
with the work of your hands, and I will 
do you no hurt.’ 7Yet ye have not 
hearkened unto Me, saith the LORD; 
that ye might provoke Me with the 
work of your hands to your own hurt. 
8Therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts: Because ye have not heard My 
words, 9behold, I will send and take all 
the families of the north, saith the 
LORD, and I will send unto 
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, 
My servant, and will bring them 
against this land, and against the 
inhabitants thereof, and against all 
these nations round about; and I will 
utterly destroy them, and make them 
an astonishment, and a hissing, and 
perpetual desolations. 10Moreover I 
will cause to cease from among them 
the voice of mirth and the voice of 
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom 
and the voice of the bride, the sound of 
the millstones, and the light of the 
lamp. 11And this whole land shall be a 
desolation, and a waste; and these 
nations shall serve the king of Babylon 
seventy years. 12And it shall come to 
pass, when seventy years are 
accomplished, that I will punish the 
king of Babylon, and that nation, saith 
the LORD, for their iniquity, and the 
land of the Chaldeans; and I will make 
it perpetual desolations. 13And I will 
bring upon that land all My words 
which I have pronounced against it, 
even all that is written in this book, 
which Jeremiah hath prophesied 
against all the nations. 14For many 
nations and great kings shall make 
bondmen of them also; and I will 
recompense them according to their 
deeds, and according to the work of 
their own hands. 

15For thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel, unto me: Take this cup of the 
wine of fury at My hand, and cause all 
the nations, to whom I send thee, to 
drink it. 16And they shall drink, and 
reel to and fro, and be like madmen, 
because of the sword that I will send 
among them.—17Then took I the cup 
of the LORD’S hand, and made all the 
nations to drink, unto whom the LORD 
had sent me: 18Jerusalem, and the 
cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, 
and the princes thereof, to make them 
an appalment, an astonishment, a 
hissing, and a curse; as it is this day; 
19Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his 
servants, and his princes, and all his 
people; 20and all the mingled people; 
and all the kings of the land of Uz, and 
all the kings of the land of the 
Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Gaza, 
and Ekron, and the remnant of 
Ashdod; 21Edom, and Moab, and the 
children of Ammon; 22and all the kings 
of Tyre, and all the kings of Zidon, 
and the kings of the isle which is 
beyond the sea; 23Dedan, and Tema, 
and Buz, and all that have the corners 


of their hair polled; 24and all the kings 
of Arabia, and all the kings of the 
mingled people that dwell in the 
wilderness; 25and all the kings of 
Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and 
all the kings of the Medes; 26and all the 
kings of the north, far and near, one 
with another; and all the kingdoms of 
the world, which are upon the face of 
the earth.—And the king of aSheshach 
shall drink after them. 27And thou shalt 
say unto them: Thus saith the LORD of 
hosts, the God of Israel: Drink ye, and 
be drunken, and spew, and fall, and 
rise no more, because of the sword 
which I will send among you. 28And it 
shall be, if they refuse to take the cup 
at thy hand to drink, then shalt thou 
say unto them: Thus saith the LORD of 
hosts: Ye shall surely drink. 29For, lo, I 
begin to bring evil on the city 
whereupon My name is called, and 
should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye 
shall not be unpunished; for I will call 
for a sword upon all the inhabitants of 
the earth, saith the LORD of hosts. 

a According to ancient tradition, a 
cipher for Babel. 

30Therefore prophesy thou against 
them all these words, and say unto 
them: 

The LORD doth roar from on high, 

And utter His voice from His holy 
habitation; 

He doth mightily roar because of 
His fold; 

He giveth a shout, as they that tread 
the grapes, 

Against all the inhabitants of the 
earth. 

31A noise is come even to the end of 
the earth; 

For the LORD hath a controversy 
with the nations, 

He doth plead with all flesh; 

As for the wicked, He hath given 
them to the sword, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

32Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Behold, evil shall go forth 

From nation to nation, 

And a great storm shall be raised up 

From the uttermost parts of the 
earth. 

33And the slain of the LORD shall be at 
that day from one end of the earth 
even unto the other end of the earth; 
they shall not be lamented, neither 
gathered, nor buried; they shall be 
dung upon the face of the ground. 

34Wail, ye shepherds, and cry; 

And wallow yourselves in the dust, 
ye leaders of the flock; 

For the days of your slaughter are 
fully come, 

And I will break you in pieces, 

And ye shall fall like a precious 
vessel. 

35And the shepherds shall have no 
way to flee, 

Nor the leaders of the flock to 
escape. 

36Hark! the cry of the shepherds, 

And the wailing of the leaders of the 
flock! 


For the LORD despoileth their 
pasture. 

37And the peaceable folds are 
brought to silence 

Because of the fierce anger of the 
LORD. 

38He hath forsaken His covert, as the 
lion; 

For their land is become a waste 

Because of the fierceness of the 
oppressing sword, 

And because of His fierce anger. 

 

In the beginning of the reign 
of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah, came this word from 
the LORD, saying: 2’Thus saith the 
LORD: Stand in the court of the LORD’S 
house, and speak unto all the cities of 
Judah, which come to worship in the 
LORD’S house, all the words that I 
command thee to speak unto them; 
diminish not a word. 3It may be they 
will hearken, and turn every man from 
his evil way; that I may repent Me of 
the evil, which I purpose to do unto 
them because of the evil of their 
doings. 4And thou shalt say unto them: 
Thus saith the LORD: If ye will not 
hearken to Me, to walk in My law, 
which I have set before you, 5to 
hearken to the words of My servants 
the prophets, whom I send unto you, 
even sending them betimes and often, 
but ye have not hearkened; 6then will I 
make this house like Shiloh, and will 
make this city a curse to all the nations 
of the earth.’ 

7So the priests and the prophets and 
all the people heard Jeremiah speaking 
these words in the house of the LORD. 
8Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah 
had made an end of speaking all that 
the LORD had commanded him to speak 
unto all the people, that the priests and 
the prophets and all the people laid 
hold on him, saying: ‘Thou shalt 
surely die. 9Why hast thou prophesied 
in the name of the LORD, saying: This 
house shall be like Shiloh, and this city 
shall be desolate, without an 
inhabitant?’ And all the people were 
gathered against Jeremiah in the house 
of the LORD. 

10When the princes of Judah heard 
these things, they came up from the 
king’s house unto the house of the 
LORD; and they sat in the entry of the 
new gate of the LORD’S house. 11Then 
spoke the priests and the prophets unto 
the princes and to all the people, 
saying: ‘This man is worthy of death; 
for he hath prophesied against this 
city, as ye have heard with your ears.’ 
12Then spoke Jeremiah unto all the 
princes and to all the people, saying: 
‘The LORD sent me to prophesy against 
this house and against this city all the 
words that ye have heard. 13Therefore 
now amend your ways and your 
doings, and hearken to the voice of the 
LORD your God; and the LORD will 
repent Him of the evil that He hath 
pronounced against you. 14But as for 
me, behold, I am in your hand; do with 
me as is good and right in your eyes. 
15Only know ye for certain that, if ye 
26 




put me to death, ye will bring innocent 
blood upon yourselves, and upon this 
city, and upon the inhabitants thereof; 
for of a truth the LORD hath sent me 
unto you to speak all these words in 
your ears.’ 

16Then said the princes and all the 
people unto the priests and to the 
prophets: ‘This man is not worthy of 
death; for he hath spoken to us in the 
name of the LORD our God.’ 17Then 
rose up certain of the elders of the 
land, and spoke to all the assembly of 
the people, saying: 18’Micah the 
Morashtite prophesied in the days of 
Hezekiah king of Judah; and he spoke 
to all the people of Judah, saying: 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Zion shall be plowed as a field, 

And Jerusalem shall become heaps, 

And the mountain of the house as 
the high places of a forest. 

19Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all 
Judah put him at all to death? did he 
not fear the LORD, and entreat the 
favour of the LORD, and the LORD 
repented Him of the evil which He had 
pronounced against them? Thus might 
we procure great evil against our own 
souls.’ 

20And there was also a man that 
prophesied in the name of the LORD, 
Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath-
jearim; and he prophesied against this 
city and against this land according to 
all the words of Jeremiah; 21and when 
Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty 
men, and all the princes, heard his 
words, the king sought to put him to 
death; but when Uriah heard it, he was 
afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt; 
22and Jehoiakim the king sent men into 
Egypt, Elnathan the son of Achbor, 
and certain men with him, into Egypt; 
23and they fetched forth Uriah out of 
Egypt, and brought him unto 
Jehoiakim the king; who slew him 
with the sword, and cast his dead body 
into the graves of the children of the 
people. 24Nevertheless the hand of 
Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with 
Jeremiah, that they should not give 
him into the hand of the people to put 
him to death. 

 

In the beginning of the reign 
of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah, came this word unto 
Jeremiah from the LORD, saying: 
2’Thus saith the LORD to me: Make 
thee bands and bars, and put them 
upon thy neck; 3and send them to the 
king of Edom, and to the king of 
Moab, and to the king of the children 
of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, 
and to the king of Zidon, by the hand 
of the messengers that come to 
Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of 
Judah; 4and give them a charge unto 
their masters, saying: Thus saith the 
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Thus 
shall ye say unto your masters: 5I have 
made the earth, the man and the beast 
that are upon the face of the earth, by 
My great power and by My 
outstretched arm; and I give it unto 
whom it seemeth right unto Me. 6And 
now have I given all these lands into 
27 




the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king 
of Babylon, My servant; and the beasts 
of the field also have I given him to 
serve him. 7And all the nations shall 
serve him, and his son, and his son’s 
son, until the time of his own land 
come; and then many nations and great 
kings shall make him their bondman. 
8And it shall come to pass, that the 
nation and the kingdom which will not 
serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon, and that will not put their 
neck under the yoke of the king of 
Babylon, that nation will I visit, saith 
the LORD, with the sword, and with the 
famine, and with the pestilence, until I 
have consumed them by his hand. 9But 
as for you, hearken ye not to your 
prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to 
your dreams, nor to your soothsayers, 
nor to your sorcerers, that speak unto 
you, saying: Ye shall not serve the 
king of Babylon; 10for they prophesy a 
lie unto you, to remove you far from 
your land; and that I should drive you 
out and ye should perish. 11But the 
nation that shall bring their neck under 
the yoke of the king of Babylon, and 
serve him, that nation will I let remain 
in their own land, saith the LORD; and 
they shall till it, and dwell therein.’ 

12And I spoke to Zedekiah king of 
Judah according to all these words, 
saying: ‘Bring your necks under the 
yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve 
him and his people, and live. 13Why 
will ye die, thou and thy people, by the 
sword, by the famine, and by the 
pestilence, as the LORD hath spoken 
concerning the nation that will not 
serve the king of Babylon? 14And 
hearken not unto the words of the 
prophets that speak unto you, saying: 
Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon, 
for they prophesy a lie unto you. 15For 
I have not sent them, saith the LORD, 
and they prophesy falsely in My name; 
that I might drive you out, and that ye 
might perish, ye, and the prophets that 
prophesy unto you.’ 

16Also I spoke to the priests and to 
all this people, saying: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD: Hearken not to the words of 
your prophets that prophesy unto you, 
saying: Behold, the vessels of the 
LORD’S house shall now shortly be 
brought back from Babylon; for they 
prophesy a lie unto you. 17Hearken not 
unto them; serve the king of Babylon, 
and live; wherefore should this city 
become desolate? 18But if they be 
prophets, and if the word of the LORD 
be with them, let them now make 
intercession to the LORD of hosts, that 
the vessels which are left in the house 
of the LORD, and in the house of the 
king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not 
to Babylon. 19For thus saith the LORD 
of hosts concerning the pillars, and 
concerning the sea, and concerning the 
bases, and concerning the residue of 
the vessels that remain in this city, 
20which Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon took not, when he carried 
away captive Jeconiah the son of 
Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from 
Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the 
nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; 21yea, 


thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God 
of Israel, concerning the vessels that 
remain in the house of the LORD, and in 
the house of the king of Judah, and at 
Jerusalem: 22They shall be carried to 
Babylon, and there shall they be, until 
the day that I remember them, saith the 
LORD, and bring them up, and restore 
them to this place.’ 

And it came to pass the same 
year, in the beginning of the 
reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the 
fourth year, in the fifth month, that 
Hananiah the son of Azzur the 
prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke 
unto me in the house of the LORD, in 
the presence of the priests and of all 
the people, saying: 2’Thus speaketh the 
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, 
saying: I have broken the yoke of the 
king of Babylon. 3Within two full 
years will I bring back into this place 
all the vessels of the LORD’S house, 
that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
took away from this place, and carried 
them to Babylon; 4and I will bring 
back to this place Jeconiah the son of 
Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the 
captives of Judah, that went to 
Babylon, saith the LORD; for I will 
break the yoke of the king of 
Babylon.’ 5Then the prophet Jeremiah 
said unto the prophet Hananiah in the 
presence of the priests, and in the 
presence of all the people that stood in 
the house of the LORD, 6even the 
prophet Jeremiah said: ‘Amen! the 
LORD do so! the LORD perform thy 
words which thou hast prophesied, to 
bring back the vessels of the LORD’S 
house, and all them that are carried 
away captive, from Babylon unto this 
place! 7Nevertheless hear thou now 
this word that I speak in thine ears, and 
in the ears of all the people: 8The 
prophets that have been before me and 
before thee of old prophesied against 
many countries, and against great 
kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of 
pestilence. 9The prophet that 
prophesieth of peace, when the word 
of the prophet shall come to pass, then 
shall the prophet be known, that the 
LORD hath truly sent him.’ 

10Then Hananiah the prophet took 
the bar from off the prophet 
Jeremiah’s neck, and broke it. 11And 
Hananiah spoke in the presence of all 
the people, saying: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD: Even so will I break the yoke of 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from 
off the neck of all the nations within 
two full years.’ And the prophet 
Jeremiah went his way. 12Then the 
word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, 
after that Hananiah the prophet had 
broken the bar from off the neck of the 
prophet Jeremiah, saying: 13’Go, and 
tell Hananiah, saying: Thus saith the 
LORD: Thou hast broken the bars of 
wood; but thou shalt make in their 
stead bars of iron. 14For thus saith the 
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I have 
put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all 
these nations, that they may serve 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and 
they shall serve him; and I have given 
him the beasts of the field also.’ 
28 




15Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto 
Hananiah the prophet: ‘Hear now, 
Hananiah; the LORD hath not sent thee; 
but thou makest this people to trust in 
a lie. 16’Therefore thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, I will send thee away from off 
the face of the earth; this year thou 
shalt die, because thou hast spoken 
perversion against the LORD.’ 17So 
Hananiah the prophet died the same 
year in the seventh month. 

Now these are the words of the 
letter that Jeremiah the prophet 
sent from Jerusalem unto the residue 
of the elders of the captivity, and to the 
priests, and to the prophets, and to all 
the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar 
had carried away captive from 
Jerusalem to Babylon, 2after that 
Jeconiah the king, and the queen-
mother, and the officers, and the 
princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and 
the craftsmen, and the smiths, were 
departed from Jerusalem; 3by the hand 
of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and 
Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, whom 
Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto 
Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, saying: 

4Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel, unto all the captivity, 
whom I have caused to be carried 
away captive from Jerusalem unto 
Babylon: 

5Build ye houses, and dwell in them, 
and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of 
them; 6take ye wives, and beget sons 
and daughters; and take wives for your 
sons, and give your daughters to 
husbands, that they may bear sons and 
daughters; and multiply ye there, and 
be not diminished. 7And seek the 
peace of the city whither I have caused 
you to be carried away captive, and 
pray unto the LORD for it; for in the 
peace thereof shall ye have peace. 

8For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel: Let not your prophets 
that are in the midst of you, and your 
diviners, beguile you, neither hearken 
ye to your dreams which ye cause to 
be dreamed. 9For they prophesy falsely 
unto you in My name; I have not sent 
them, saith the LORD. 

10For thus saith the LORD: After 
seventy years are accomplished for 
Babylon, I will remember you, and 
perform My good word toward you, in 
causing you to return to this place. 
11For I know the thoughts that I think 
toward you, saith the LORD, thoughts of 
peace, and not of evil, to give you a 
future and a hope. 12And ye shall call 
upon Me, and go, and pray unto Me, 
and I will hearken unto you. 13And ye 
shall seek Me, and find Me, when ye 
shall search for Me with all your heart. 
14And I will be found of you, saith the 
LORD, and I will turn your captivity, 
and gather you from all the nations, 
and from all the places whither I have 
driven you, saith the LORD; and I will 
bring you back unto the place whence 
I caused you to be carried away 
captive. 15For ye have said: ‘The LORD 
hath raised us up prophets in Babylon.’ 
16For thus saith the LORD concerning 
the king that sitteth upon the throne of 
29 




David, and concerning all the people 
that dwell in this city, your brethren 
that are not gone forth with you into 
captivity; 17thus saith the LORD of 
hosts: Behold, I will send upon them 
the sword, the famine, and the 
pestilence, and will make them like 
vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are 
so bad. 18And I will pursue after them 
with the sword, with the famine, and 
with the pestilence, and will make 
them a horror unto all the kingdoms of 
the earth, a curse, and an astonishment, 
and a hissing, and a reproach, among 
all the nations whither I have driven 
them; 19because they have not 
hearkened to My words, saith the 
LORD, wherewith I sent unto them My 
servants the prophets, sending them 
betimes and often; but ye would not 
hear, saith the LORD. 20Hear ye 
therefore the word of the LORD, all ye 
of the captivity, whom I have sent 
away from Jerusalem to Babylon: 
21Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God 
of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of 
Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah the 
son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie 
unto you in My name: Behold, I will 
deliver them into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and 
he shall slay them before your eyes; 
22and of them shall be taken up a curse 
by all the captivity of Judah that are in 
Babylon, saying: ‘The LORD make thee 
like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom 
the king of Babylon roasted in the 
fire’; 23because they have wrought vile 
deeds in Israel, and have committed 
adultery with their neighbours’wives, 
and have spoken words in My name 
falsely, which I commanded them not; 
but I am He that knoweth, and am 
witness, saith the LORD. 

24And concerning Shemaiah the 
Nehelamite thou shalt speak, saying: 
25Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel, saying: Because thou 
hast sent letters in thine own name 
unto all the people that are at 
Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of 
Maaseiah the priest, and to all the 
priests, saying: 26’The LORD hath made 
thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the 
priest, that there should be officers in 
the house of the LORD for every man 
that is mad, and maketh himself a 
prophet, that thou shouldest put him in 
the stocks and in the collar. 27Now 
therefore, why hast thou not rebuked 
Jeremiah of Anathoth, who maketh 
himself a prophet to you, 28forasmuch 
as he hath sent unto us in Babylon, 
saying: The captivity is long; build ye 
houses, and dwell in them; and plant 
gardens, and eat the fruit of them?’ 
29And Zephaniah the priest read this 
letter in the ears of Jeremiah the 
prophet. 30Then came the word of the 
LORD unto Jeremiah, saying: 31Send to 
all them of the captivity, saying: Thus 
saith the LORD concerning Shemaiah 
the Nehelamite: Because that 
Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, 
and I sent him not, and he hath caused 
you to trust in a lie; 32therefore thus 
saith the LORD: Behold, I will punish 
Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his 


seed; he shall not have a man to dwell 
among this people, neither shall he 
behold the good that I will do unto My 
people, saith the LORD; because he hath 
spoken perversion against the LORD. 

 

The word that came to 
Jeremiah from the LORD, 
saying: 2’Thus speaketh the LORD, the 
God of Israel, saying: Write thee all 
the words that I have spoken unto thee 
in a book. 3For, lo, the days come, 
saith the LORD, that I will turn the 
captivity of My people Israel and 
Judah, saith the LORD; and I will cause 
them to return to the land that I gave to 
their fathers, and they shall possess it.’ 

4And these are the words that the 
LORD spoke concerning Israel and 
concerning Judah. 5For thus saith the 
LORD: 

We have heard a voice of trembling, 

Of fear, and not of peace. 

6Ask ye now, and see whether a man 
doth travail with child; 

Wherefore do I see every man 

With his hands on his loins, as a 
woman in travail, 

And all faces are turned into 
paleness? 

7Alas! for that day is great, 

So that none is like it; 

And it is a time of trouble unto 
Jacob, 

But out of it shall he be saved. 

8And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

That I will break his yoke from off 
thy neck, 

And will burst thy bands; 

And strangers shall no more make 
him their bondman; 

9But they shall serve the LORD their 
God, 

And David their king, 

Whom I will raise up unto them. 

 

10Therefore fear thou not, O Jacob 
My servant, saith the LORD; 

Neither be dismayed, O Israel; 

For, lo, I will save thee from afar, 

And thy seed from the land of their 
captivity; 

And Jacob shall again be quiet and 
at ease, 

And none shall make him afraid. 

11For I am with thee, saith the LORD, 
to save thee; 

For I will make a full end of all the 
nations whither I have scattered 
thee, 

But I will not make a full end of 
thee; 

For I will correct thee in measure, 

And will not utterly destroy thee. 

 

12For thus saith the LORD: 

Thy hurt is incurable, 

And thy wound is grievous. 

13None deemeth of thy wound that it 
may be bound up; 

Thou hast no healing medicines. 

14All thy lovers have forgotten thee, 

They seek thee not; 

For I have wounded thee with the 
wound of an enemy, 
30 




With the chastisement of a cruel 
one; 

For the greatness of thine iniquity, 

Because thy sins were increased. 

15Why criest thou for thy hurt, 

That thy pain is incurable? 

For the greatness of thine iniquity, 
because thy sins were increased, 

I have done these things unto thee. 

16Therefore all they that devour thee 
shall be devoured, 

And all thine adversaries, every one 
of them, shall go into captivity; 

And they that spoil thee shall be a 
spoil, 

And all that prey upon thee will I 
give for a prey. 

17For I will restore health unto thee, 

And I will heal thee of thy wounds, 
saith the LORD; 

Because they have called thee an 
outcast: 

‘She is aZion, there is none that 
careth for her.’ 

a With a play on the meaning, a dry 
land. 

 

18Thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, I will turn the captivity of 
Jacob’s tents, 

And have compassion on his 
dwelling-places; 

And the city shall be builded upon 
her own mound, 

And the palace shall be inhabited 
upon its wonted place. 

19And out of them shall proceed 
thanksgiving 

And the voice of them that make 
merry; 

And I will multiply them, and they 
shall not be diminished, 

I will also increase them, and they 
shall not dwindle away. 

20Their children also shall be as 
aforetime, 

And their congregation shall be 
established before Me, 

And I will punish all that oppress 
them. 

21And their prince shall be of 
themselves, 

And their ruler shall proceed from 
the midst of them; 

And I will cause him to draw near, 
and he shall approach unto Me; 

For who is he that hath pledged his 
heart 

To approach unto Me? saith the 
LORD. 

22And ye shall be My people, and I 
will be your God. 

 

23Behold, a storm of the LORD is 
gone forth in fury, 

A sweeping storm; it shall whirl 
upon the head of the wicked. 

24The fierce anger of the LORD shall 
not return, 

Until He have executed, and till He 
have performed 

The purposes of His heart; 

In the end of days ye shall consider 
it. 

At that time, saith the LORD, 

Will I be the God of all the 
families of Israel, 
31 




 And they shall be My people. 

 

2Thus saith the LORD: 

The people that were left of the 
sword 

Have found grace in the wilderness, 

Even Israel, when I go to cause him 
to rest. 

3’From afar the LORD appeared unto 
me.’ 

’Yea, I have loved thee with an 
everlasting love; 

Therefore with affection have I 
drawn thee. 

4Again will I build thee, and thou 
shalt be built, 

O virgin of Israel; 

Again shalt thou be adorned with 
thy tabrets, 

And shalt go forth in the dances of 
them that make merry. 

5Again shalt thou plant vineyards 
upon the mountains of Samaria; 

The planters shall plant, and shall 
have the use thereof. 

6For there shall be a day, 

That the watchmen shall call upon 
the mount Ephraim: 

Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion, 

Unto the LORD our God.’ 

 

7For thus saith the LORD: 

Sing with gladness for Jacob, 

And shout at the head of the nations; 

Announce ye, praise ye, and say: 

‘O LORD, save Thy people, 

The remnant of Israel.’ 

8Behold, I will bring them from the 
north country, 

And gather them from the uttermost 
parts of the earth, 

And with them the blind and the 
lame, 

The woman with child and her that 
travaileth with child together; 

A great company shall they return 
hither. 

9They shall come with weeping, 

And with supplications will I lead 
them; 

I will cause them to walk by rivers 
of waters, 

In a straight way wherein they shall 
not stumble; 

For I am become a father to Israel, 

And Ephraim is My first-born. 

 

10Hear the word of the LORD, O ye 
nations, 

And declare it in the isles afar off, 
and say: 

‘He that scattered Israel doth gather 
him, 

And keep him, as a shepherd doth 
his flock.’ 

11For the LORD hath ransomed Jacob, 

And He redeemeth him from the 
hand of him that is stronger than 
he. 

12And they shall come and sing in 
the height of Zion, 

And shall flow unto the goodness of 
the LORD, 

To the corn, and to the wine, and to 
the oil, 

And to the young of the flock and of 
the herd; 


And their soul shall be as a watered 
garden, 

And they shall not pine any more at 
all. 

13Then shall the virgin rejoice in the 
dance, 

And the young men and the old 
together; 

For I will turn their mourning into 
joy, 

And will comfort them, and make 
them rejoice from their sorrow. 

14And I will satiate the soul of the 
priests with fatness, 

And My people shall be satisfied 
with My goodness, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

15Thus saith the LORD: 

A voice is heard in Ramah, 

Lamentation, and bitter weeping, 

Rachel weeping for her children; 

She refuseth to be comforted for her 
children, 

Because they are not. 

 

16Thus saith the LORD: 

Refrain thy voice from weeping, 

And thine eyes from tears; 

For thy work shall be rewarded, 
saith the LORD; 

And they shall come back from the 
land of the enemy. 

17And there is hope for thy future, 
saith the LORD; 

And thy children shall return to their 
own border. 

18I have surely heard Ephraim 
bemoaning himself: 

‘Thou hast chastised me, and I was 
chastised, 

As a calf untrained; 

Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, 

For Thou art the LORD my God. 

19Surely after that I was turned, I 
repented, 

And after that I was instructed, I 
smote upon my thigh; 

I was ashamed, yea, even 
confounded, 

Because I did bear the reproach of 
my youth.’ 

20Is Ephraim a darling son unto Me? 

Is he a child that is dandled? 

For as often as I speak of him, 

I do earnestly remember him still; 

Therefore My heart yearneth for 
him, 

I will surely have compassion upon 
him, saith the LORD. 

 

21Set thee up waymarks, 

Make thee guide-posts; 

Set thy heart toward the high-way, 

Even the way by which thou 
wentest; 

Return, O virgin of Israel, 

Return to these thy cities. 

22How long wilt thou turn away 
coyly, 

O thou backsliding daughter? 

For the LORD hath created a new 
thing in the earth: 

A woman shall court a man. 

 

23Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel: 

Yet again shall they use this speech 


In the land of Judah and in the cities 
thereof, 

When I shall turn their captivity: 

‘The LORD bless thee, O habitation 
of righteousness, 

O mountain of holiness.’ 

24And Judah and all the cities 
thereof 

Shall dwell therein together: 

The husbandmen, and they that go 
forth with flocks. 

25For I have satiated the weary soul, 

And every pining soul have I 
replenished. 

 

26Upon this I awaked, and beheld; 

And my sleep was sweet unto me. 

 

27Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, that I will sow the house of 
Israel and the house of Judah with the 
seed of man, and with the seed of 
beast. 28And it shall come to pass, that 
like as I have watched over them to 
pluck up and to break down, and to 
overthrow and to destroy, and to 
afflict; so will I watch over them to 
build and to plant, saith the LORD. 

29In those days they shall say no 
more: 

‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes, 

And the children’s teeth are set on 
edge.’ 

30But every one shall die for his own 
iniquity; every man that eateth the sour 
grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge. 

31Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, that I will make a new covenant 
with the house of Israel, and with the 
house of Judah; 32not according to the 
covenant that I made with their fathers 
in the day that I took them by the hand 
to bring them out of the land of Egypt; 
forasmuch as they broke My covenant, 
although I was a lord over them, saith 
the LORD. 33But this is the covenant 
that I will make with the house of 
Israel after those days, saith the LORD, 
I will put My law in their inward parts, 
and in their heart will I write it; and I 
will be their God, and they shall be My 
people; 34and they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbour, and every 
man his brother, saying: ‘Know the 
LORD’; for they shall all know Me, 
from the least of them unto the greatest 
of them, saith the LORD; for I will 
forgive their iniquity, and their sin will 
I remember no more. 

 

35Thus saith the LORD, 

Who giveth the sun for a light by 
day, 

And the ordinances of the moon and 
of the stars for a light by night, 

Who stirreth up the sea, that the 
waves thereof roar, 

The LORD of hosts is His name: 

36If these ordinances depart from 
before Me, 

Saith the LORD, 

Then the seed of Israel also shall 
cease 

From being a nation before Me for 
ever. 

 

37Thus saith the LORD: 

If heaven above can be measured, 


And the foundations of the earth 
searched out beneath, 

Then will I also cast off all the seed 
of Israel 

For all that they have done, saith the 
LORD. 

38Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, that the city shall be built to the 
LORD from the tower of Hananel unto 
the gate of the corner. 39And the 
measuring line shall yet go out straight 
forward unto the hill Gareb, and shall 
turn about unto Goah. 40And the whole 
valley of the dead bodies, and of the 
ashes, and all the fields unto the brook 
Kidron, unto the corner of the horse 
gate toward the east, shall be holy unto 
the LORD; it shall not be plucked up, 
nor thrown down any more for ever. 

 

The word that came to 
Jeremiah from the LORD in the 
tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, 
which was the eighteenth year of 
Nebuchadrezzar. 2Now at that time the 
king of Babylon’s army was besieging 
Jerusalem; and Jeremiah the prophet 
was shut up in the court of the guard, 
which was in the king of Judah’s 
house. 3For Zedekiah king of Judah 
had shut him up, saying: ‘Wherefore 
dost thou prophesy, and say: Thus 
saith the LORD: Behold, I will give this 
city into the hand of the king of 
Babylon, and he shall take it; 4and 
Zedekiah king of Judah shall not 
escape out of the hand of the 
Chaldeans, but shall surely be 
delivered into the hand of the king of 
Babylon, and shall speak with him 
mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall 
behold his eyes; 5and he shall lead 
Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall 
he be until I remember him, saith the 
LORD; though ye fight with the 
Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper?’ 

6And Jeremiah said: ‘The word of 
the LORD came unto me, saying: 
7Behold, Hanamel, the son of Shallum 
thine uncle, shall come unto thee, 
saying: Buy thee my field that is in 
Anathoth; for the right of redemption 
is thine to buy it.’ 8So Hanamel mine 
uncle’s son came to me in the court of 
the guard according to the word of the 
LORD, and said unto me: ‘Buy my 
field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, 
which is in the land of Benjamin; for 
the right of inheritance is thine, and 
the redemption is thine; buy it for 
thyself.’ Then I knew that this was the 
word of the LORD. 9And I bought the 
field that was in Anathoth of Hanamel 
mine uncle’s son, and weighed him the 
money, even seventeen shekels of 
silver. 10And I subscribed the deed, 
and sealed it, and called witnesses, and 
weighed him the money in the 
balances. 11So I took the deed of the 
purchase, both that which was sealed, 
containing the terms and conditions, 
and that which was open; 12and I 
delivered the deed of the purchase 
unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son 
of Mahseiah, in the presence of 
Hanamel mine uncle[‘s son], and in 
the presence of the witnesses that 
subscribed the deed of the purchase, 
32 




before all the Jews that sat in the court 
of the guard. 13And I charged Baruch 
before them, saying: 14’Thus saith the 
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Take 
these deeds, this deed of the purchase, 
both that which is sealed, and this deed 
which is open, and put them in an 
earthen vessel; that they may continue 
many days. 15For thus saith the LORD 
of hosts, the God of Israel: Houses and 
fields and vineyards shall yet again be 
bought in this land.’ 

16Now after I had delivered the deed 
of the purchase unto Baruch the son of 
Neriah, I prayed unto the LORD, saying: 
17’Ah Lord GOD! behold, Thou hast 
made the heaven and the earth by Thy 
great power and by Thy outstretched 
arm; there is nothing too hard for 
Thee; 18who showest mercy unto 
thousands, and recompensest the 
iniquity of the fathers into the bosom 
of their children after them; the great, 
the mighty God, the LORD of hosts is 
His name; 19great in counsel, and 
mighty in work; whose eyes are open 
upon all the ways of the sons of men, 
to give every one according to his 
ways, and according to the fruit of his 
doings; 20who didst set signs and 
wonders in the land of Egypt, even 
unto this day, and in Israel and among 
other men; and madest Thee a name, 
as at this day; 21and didst bring forth 
Thy people Israel out of the land of 
Egypt with signs, and with wonders, 
and with a strong hand, and with an 
outstretched arm, and with great terror; 
22and gavest them this land, which 
Thou didst swear to their fathers to 
give them, a land flowing with milk 
and honey; 23and they came in, and 
possessed it; but they hearkened not to 
Thy voice, neither walked in Thy law; 
they have done nothing of all that 
Thou commandedst them to do; 
therefore Thou hast caused all this evil 
to befall them; 24behold the mounds, 
they are come unto the city to take it; 
and the city is given into the hand of 
the Chaldeans that fight against it, 
because of the sword, and of the 
famine, and of the pestilence; and what 
Thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, 
behold, Thou seest it. 25Yet Thou hast 
said unto me, O Lord GOD: Buy thee 
the field for money, and call witnesses; 
whereas the city is given into the hand 
of the Chaldeans.’ 

26Then came the word of the LORD 
unto Jeremiah, saying: 27’Behold, I am 
the LORD, the God of all flesh; is there 
any thing too hard for Me? 28Therefore 
thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will give 
this city into the hand of the 
Chaldeans, and into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and 
he shall take it; 29and the Chaldeans, 
that fight against this city, shall come 
and set this city on fire, and burn it, 
with the houses, upon whose roofs 
they have offered unto Baal, and 
poured out drink-offerings unto other 
gods, to provoke Me. 30For the 
children of Israel and the children of 
Judah have only done that which was 
evil in My sight from their youth; for 
the children of Israel have only 


provoked Me with the work of their 
hands, saith the LORD. 31For this city 
hath been to Me a provocation of Mine 
anger and of My fury from the day that 
they built it even unto this day, that I 
should remove it from before My face; 
32because of all the evil of the children 
of Israel and of the children of Judah, 
which they have done to provoke Me, 
they, their kings, their princes, their 
priests, and their prophets, and the 
men of Judah, and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem. 33And they have turned 
unto Me the back, and not the face; 
and though I taught them, teaching 
them betimes and often, yet they have 
not hearkened to receive instruction. 
34But they set their abominations in the 
house whereupon My name is called, 
to defile it. 35And they built the high 
places of Baal, which are in the valley 
of the son of Hinnom, to set apart their 
sons and their daughters unto Molech; 
which I commanded them not, neither 
came it into My mind, that they should 
do this abomination; to cause Judah to 
sin. 36And now therefore thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel, concerning 
this city, whereof ye say: It is given 
into the hand of the king of Babylon 
by the sword, and by the famine, and 
by the pestilence: 37Behold, I will 
gather them out of all the countries, 
whither I have driven them in Mine 
anger, and in My fury, and in great 
wrath; and I will bring them back unto 
this place, and I will cause them to 
dwell safely; 38and they shall be My 
people, and I will be their God; 39and I 
will give them one heart and one way, 
that they may fear Me for ever; for the 
good of them, and of their children 
after them; 40and I will make an 
everlasting covenant with them, that I 
will not turn away from them, to do 
them good; and I will put My fear in 
their hearts, that they shall not depart 
from Me. 41Yea, I will rejoice over 
them to do them good, and I will plant 
them in this land in truth with My 
whole heart and with My whole soul. 
42For thus saith the LORD: Like as I 
have brought all this great evil upon 
this people, so will I bring upon them 
all the good that I have promised them. 
43And fields shall be bought in this 
land, whereof ye say: It is desolate, 
without man or beast; it is given into 
the hand of the Chaldeans. 44Men shall 
buy fields for money, and subscribe 
the deeds, and seal them, and call 
witnesses, in the land of Benjamin, 
and in the places about Jerusalem, and 
in the cities of Judah, and in the cities 
of the hill-country, and in the cities of 
the Lowland, and in the cities of the 
South; for I will cause their captivity 
to return, saith the LORD.’ 

Moreover the word of the 
LORD came unto Jeremiah the 
second time, while he was yet shut up 
in the court of the guard, saying: 

2Thus saith the LORD the Maker 
thereof, 

The LORD that formed it to establish 
it, 

The LORD is His name: 
33 




3Call unto Me, and I will answer 
thee, 

And will tell thee great things, and 
hidden, which thou knowest not. 

4For thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel, concerning the houses of this 
city, and concerning the houses of the 
kings of Judah, which are broken 
down for mounds, and for ramparts; 
5whereon they come to fight with the 
Chaldeans, even to fill them with the 
dead bodies of men, whom I have slain 
in Mine anger and in My fury, and for 
all whose wickedness I have hid My 
face from this city: 6Behold, I will 
bring it healing and cure, and I will 
cure them; and I will reveal unto them 
the abundance of peace and truth. 
7And I will cause the captivity of 
Judah and the captivity of Israel to 
return, and will build them, as at the 
first. 8And I will cleanse them from all 
their iniquity, whereby they have 
sinned against Me; and I will pardon 
all their iniquities, whereby they have 
sinned against Me, and whereby they 
have transgressed against Me. 9And 
this city shall be to Me for a name of 
joy, for a praise and for a glory, before 
all the nations of the earth, which shall 
hear all the good that I do unto them, 
and shall fear and tremble for all the 
good and for all the peace that I 
procure unto it. 

10Thus saith the LORD: Yet again 
there shall be heard in this place, 
whereof ye say: It is waste, without 
man and without beast, even in the 
cities of Judah, and in the streets of 
Jerusalem, that are desolate, without 
man and without inhabitant and 
without beast, 11the voice of joy and 
the voice of gladness, the voice of the 
bridegroom and the voice of the bride, 
the voice of them that say: ‘Give 
thanks to the LORD of hosts, for the 
LORD is good, for His mercy endureth 
for ever’, even of them that bring 
offerings of thanksgiving into the 
house of the LORD. For I will cause the 
captivity of the land to return as at the 
first, saith the LORD. 

12Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Yet 
again shall there be in this place, 
which is waste, without man and 
without beast, and in all the cities 
thereof, a habitation of shepherds 
causing their flocks to lie down. 13In 
the cities of the hill-country, in the 
cities of the Lowland, and in the cities 
of the South, and in the land of 
Benjamin, and in the places about 
Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, 
shall the flocks again pass under the 
hands of him that counteth them, saith 
the LORD. 

14Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, that I will perform that good 
word which I have spoken concerning 
the house of Israel and concerning the 
house of Judah. 15In those days, and at 
that time, 

Will I cause a shoot of righteousness 
to grow up unto David; 

And he shall execute justice and 
righteousness in the land. 

16In those days shall Judah be saved, 

And Jerusalem shall dwell safely; 


And this is the name whereby she 
shall be called, 

The LORD is our righteousness. 

17For thus saith the LORD: There 
shall not be cut off unto David a man 
to sit upon the throne of the house of 
Israel; 18neither shall there be cut off 
unto the priests the Levites a man 
before Me to offer burnt-offerings, and 
to burn meal-offerings, and to do 
sacrifice continually. 

19And the word of the LORD came 
unto Jeremiah, saying: 20Thus saith the 
LORD: 

If ye can break My covenant with 
the day, 

And My covenant with the night, 

So that there should not be day and 
night in their season; 

21Then may also My covenant be 
broken with David My servant, 

That he should not have a son to 
reign upon his throne; 

And with the Levites the priests, My 
ministers. 

22As the host of heaven cannot be 
numbered, 

Neither the sand of the sea 
measured; 

So will I multiply the seed of David 
My servant, 

And the Levites that minister unto 
Me. 

23And the word of the LORD came to 
Jeremiah, saying: 24’Considerest thou 
not what this people have spoken, 
saying: The two families which the 
LORD did choose, He hath cast them 
off? and they contemn My people, that 
they should be no more a nation before 
them. 25Thus saith the LORD: If My 
covenant be not with day and night, if 
I have not appointed the ordinances of 
heaven and earth; 26then will I also 
cast away the seed of Jacob, and of 
David My servant, so that I will not 
take of his seed to be rulers over the 
seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for 
I will cause their captivity to return, 
and will have compassion on them.’ 

 

The word which came unto 
Jeremiah from the LORD, when 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and 
all his army, and all the kingdoms of 
the land of his dominion, and all the 
peoples, fought against Jerusalem, and 
against all the cities thereof, saying: 

2Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel: Go, and speak to Zedekiah king 
of Judah, and tell him: Thus saith the 
LORD: Behold, I will give this city into 
the hand of the king of Babylon, and 
he shall burn it with fire; 3and thou 
shalt not escape out of his hand, but 
shalt surely be taken, and delivered 
into his hand; and thine eyes shall 
behold the eyes of the king of 
Babylon, and he shall speak with thee 
mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to 
Babylon. 4Yet hear the word of the 
LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah: Thus 
saith the LORD concerning thee: Thou 
shalt not die by the sword; 5thou shalt 
die in peace; and with the burnings of 
thy fathers, the former kings that were 
before thee, so shall they make a 
burning for thee; and they shall lament 
34 




thee: ‘Ah lord! ’ for I have spoken the 
word, saith the LORD. 

6Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke 
all these words unto Zedekiah king of 
Judah in Jerusalem, 7when the king of 
Babylon’s army fought against 
Jerusalem, and against all the cities of 
Judah that were left, against Lachish 
and against Azekah; for these alone 
remained of the cities of Judah as 
fortified cities. 

8The word that came unto Jeremiah 
from the LORD, after that the king 
Zedekiah had made a covenant with all 
the people that were at Jerusalem, to 
proclaim liberty unto them; 9that every 
man should let his manservant, and 
every man his maidservant, being a 
Hebrew man or a Hebrew woman, go 
free; that none should make bondmen 
of them, even of a Jew his brother; 
10and all the princes and all the people 
hearkened, that had entered into the 
covenant to let every one his man-
servant, and every one his maid-
servant, go free, and not to make 
bondmen of them any more; they 
hearkened, and let them go; 11but 
afterwards they turned, and caused the 
servants and the handmaids, whom 
they had let go free, to return, and 
brought them into subjection for 
servants and for handmaids; 
12therefore the word of the LORD came 
to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying: 

13Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel: I made a covenant with your 
fathers in the day that I brought them 
forth out of the land of Egypt, out of 
the house of bondage, saying: 14’At the 
end of seven years ye shall let go 
every man his brother that is a 
Hebrew, that hath been sold unto thee, 
and hath served thee six years, thou 
shalt let him go free from thee’; but 
your fathers hearkened not unto Me, 
neither inclined their ear. 15And ye 
were now turned, and had done that 
which is right in Mine eyes, in 
proclaiming liberty every man to his 
neighbour; and ye had made a 
covenant before Me in the house 
whereon My name is called; 16but ye 
turned and profaned My name, and 
caused every man his servant, and 
every man his handmaid, whom ye had 
let go free at their pleasure, to return; 
and ye brought them into subjection, to 
be unto you for servants and for 
handmaids. 17Therefore thus saith the 
LORD: Ye have not hearkened unto Me, 
to proclaim liberty, every man to his 
brother, and every man to his 
neighbour; behold, I proclaim for you 
a liberty, saith the LORD, unto the 
sword, unto the pestilence, and unto 
the famine; and I will make you a 
horror unto all the kingdoms of the 
earth. 18And I will give the men that 
have transgressed My covenant, that 
have not performed the words of the 
covenant which they made before Me, 
when they cut the calf in twain and 
passed between the parts thereof; 19the 
princes of Judah, and the princes of 
Jerusalem, the officers, and the priests, 
and all the people of the land, that 
passed between the parts of the calf; 


20I will even give them into the hand of 
their enemies, and into the hand of 
them that seek their life; and their dead 
bodies shall be for food unto the fowls 
of the heaven, and to the beasts of the 
earth. 21And Zedekiah king of Judah 
and his princes will I give into the 
hand of their enemies, and into the 
hand of them that seek their life, and 
into the hand of the king of Babylon’s 
army, that are gone up from you. 
22Behold, I will command, saith the 
LORD, and cause them to return to this 
city; and they shall fight against it, and 
take it, and burn it with fire; and I will 
make the cities of Judah a desolation, 
without inhabitant. 

The word which came unto 
Jeremiah from the LORD in the 
days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah, saying: 2’Go unto the 
house of the Rechabites, and speak 
unto them, and bring them into the 
house of the LORD, into one of the 
chambers, and give them wine to 
drink.’ 3Then I took Jaazaniah the son 
of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, 
and his brethren, and all his sons, and 
the whole house of the Rechabites; 
4and I brought them into the house of 
the LORD, into the chamber of the sons 
of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man 
of God, which was by the chamber of 
the princes, which was above the 
chamber of Maaseiah the son of 
Shallum, the keeper of the door; 5and I 
set before the sons of the house of the 
Rechabites goblets full of wine, and 
cups, and I said unto them: ‘Drink ye 
wine.’ 6But they said: ‘We will drink 
no wine; for Jonadab the son of 
Rechab our father commanded us, 
saying: Ye shall drink no wine, neither 
ye, nor your sons, for ever; 7neither 
shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor 
plant vineyard, nor have any; but all 
your days ye shall dwell in tents, that 
ye may live many days in the land 
wherein ye sojourn. 8And we have 
hearkened to the voice of Jonadab the 
son of Rechab our father in all that he 
charged us, to drink no wine all our 
days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our 
daughters; 9nor to build houses for us 
to dwell in, neither to have vineyard, 
or field, or seed; 10but we have dwelt 
in tents, and have hearkened, and done 
according to all that Jonadab our father 
commanded us. 11But it came to pass, 
when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
came up against the land, that we said: 
Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for 
fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and 
for fear of the army of the Arameans; 
so we dwell at Jerusalem.’ 

12Then came the word of the LORD 
unto Jeremiah, saying: 13’Thus saith 
the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: 
Go, and say to the men of Judah and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Will ye 
not receive instruction to hearken to 
My words? saith the LORD. 14The 
words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, 
that he commanded his sons, not to 
drink wine, are performed, and unto 
this day they drink none, for they 
hearken to their father’s 
commandment; but I have spoken unto 
35 




you, speaking betimes and often, and 
ye have not hearkened unto Me. 15I 
have sent also unto you all My 
servants the prophets, sending them 
betimes and often, saying: Return ye 
now every man from his evil way, and 
amend your doings, and go not after 
other gods to serve them, and ye shall 
dwell in the land which I have given to 
you and to your fathers; but ye have 
not inclined your ear, nor hearkened 
unto Me. 16Because the sons of 
Jonadab the son of Rechab have 
performed the commandment of their 
father which he commanded them, but 
this people hath not hearkened unto 
Me; 17therefore thus saith the LORD, the 
God of hosts, the God of Israel: 
Behold, I will bring upon Judah and 
upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
all the evil that I have pronounced 
against them; because I have spoken 
unto them, but they have not heard, 
and I have called unto them, but they 
have not answered.’ 

18And unto the house of the 
Rechabites Jeremiah said: Thus saith 
the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: 
Because ye have hearkened to the 
commandment of Jonadab your father, 
and kept all his precepts, and done 
according unto all that he commanded 
you; 19therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts, the God of Israel: There shall 
not be cut off unto Jonadab the son of 
Rechab a man to stand before Me for 
ever.’ 

 

And it came to pass in the 
fourth year of Jehoiakim the 
son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this 
word came unto Jeremiah from the 
LORD, saying: 2’Take thee a roll of a 
book, and write therein all the words 
that I have spoken unto thee against 
Israel, and against Judah, and against 
all the nations, from the day I spoke 
unto thee, from the days of Josiah, 
even unto this day. 3It may be that the 
house of Judah will hear all the evil 
which I purpose to do unto them; that 
they may return every man from his 
evil way, and I may forgive their 
iniquity and their sin.’ 

4Then Jeremiah called Baruch the 
son of Neriah; and Baruch wrote from 
the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of 
the LORD, which He had spoken unto 
him, upon a roll of a book. 5And 
Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying: 
‘I am detained, I cannot go into the 
house of the LORD; 6therefore go thou, 
and read in the roll, which thou hast 
written from my mouth, the words of 
the LORD in the ears of the people in 
the LORD’S house upon a fast-day; and 
also thou shalt read them in the ears of 
all Judah that come out of their cities. 
7It may be they will present their 
supplication before the LORD, and will 
return every one from his evil way; for 
great is the anger and the fury that the 
LORD hath pronounced against this 
people.’ 8And Baruch the son of 
Neriah did according to all that 
Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, 
36 




reading in the book the words of the 
LORD in the LORD’S house. 

9Now it came to pass in the fifth 
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah, in the ninth month, that 
they proclaimed a fast before the LORD, 
all the people in Jerusalem, and all the 
people that came from the cities of 
Judah unto Jerusalem. 10Then did 
Baruch read in the book the words of 
Jeremiah in the house of the LORD, in 
the chamber of Gemariah the son of 
Shaphan the scribe, in the upper court, 
at the entry of the new gate of the 
LORD’S house, in the ears of all the 
people. 11And when Micaiah the son of 
Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had 
heard out of the book all the words of 
the LORD, 12he went down into the 
king’s house, into the scribe’s 
chamber; and, lo, all the princes sat 
there, even Elishama the scribe, and 
Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and 
Elnathan the son of Achbor, and 
Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and 
Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all 
the princes. 13Then Micaiah declared 
unto them all the words that he had 
heard, when Baruch read the book in 
the ears of the people. 14Therefore all 
the princes sent Jehudi the son of 
Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the 
son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying: 
‘Take in thy hand the roll wherein thou 
hast read in the ears of the people, and 
come.’ So Baruch the son of Neriah 
took the roll in his hand, and came 
unto them. 15And they said unto him: 
‘Sit down now, and read it in our ears.’ 
So Baruch read it in their ears. 16Now 
it came to pass, when they had heard 
all the words, they turned in fear one 
toward another, and said unto Baruch: 
‘We will surely tell the king of all 
these words.’ 17And they asked 
Baruch, saying: ‘Tell us now: How 
didst thou write all these words at his 
mouth?’ 18Then Baruch answered 
them: ‘He pronounced all these words 
unto me with his mouth, and I wrote 
them with ink in the book.’ 19Then said 
the princes unto Baruch: ‘Go, hide 
thee, thou and Jeremiah, and let no 
man know where ye are.’ 20And they 
went in to the king into the court; but 
they had deposited the roll in the 
chamber of Elishama the scribe; and 
they told all the words in the ears of 
the king. 21So the king sent Jehudi to 
fetch the roll; and he took it out of the 
chamber of Elishama the scribe. And 
Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, 
and in the ears of all the princes that 
stood beside the king. 22Now the king 
was sitting in the winter-house in the 
ninth month; and the brazier was 
burning before him. 23And it came to 
pass, when Jehudi had read three or 
four columns, that he cut it with the 
penknife, and cast it into the fire that 
was in the brazier, until all the roll was 
consumed in the fire that was in the 
brazier. 24Yet they were not afraid, nor 
rent their garments, neither the king, 
nor any of his servants that heard all 
these words. 25Moreover Elnathan and 
Delaiah and Gemariah had entreated 
the king not to burn the roll; but he 


would not hear them. 26And the king 
commanded Jerahmeel the king’s son, 
and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and 
Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take 
Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the 
prophet; but the LORD hid them. 

27Then the word of the LORD came to 
Jeremiah, after that the king had 
burned the roll, and the words which 
Baruch wrote at the mouth of 
Jeremiah, saying: 28’Take thee again 
another roll, and write in it all the 
former words that were in the first roll, 
which Jehoiakim the king of Judah 
hath burned. 29And concerning 
Jehoiakim king of Judah thou shalt 
say: Thus saith the LORD: Thou hast 
burned this roll, saying: Why hast thou 
written therein, saying: The king of 
Babylon shall certainly come and 
destroy this land, and shall cause to 
cease from thence man and beast? 
30Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: 
He shall have none to sit upon the 
throne of David; and his dead body 
shall be cast out in the day to the heat, 
and in the night to the frost. 31And I 
will visit upon him and his seed and 
his servants their iniquity; and I will 
bring upon them, and upon the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the 
men of Judah, all the evil that I have 
pronounced against them, but they 
hearkened not.’ 

32Then took Jeremiah another roll, 
and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the 
son of Neriah; who wrote therein from 
the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of 
the book which Jehoiakim king of 
Judah had burned in the fire; and there 
were added besides unto them many 
like words. 

 

And Zedekiah the son of 
Josiah reigned as king, instead 
of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made 
king in the land of Judah. 2But neither 
he, nor his servants, nor the people of 
the land, did hearken unto the words of 
the LORD, which He spoke by the 
prophet Jeremiah. 

3And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal 
the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah 
the son of Maaseiah the priest, to the 
prophet Jeremiah, saying: ‘Pray now 
unto the LORD our God for us.’ 4Now 
Jeremiah came in and went out among 
the people; for they had not put him 
into prison. 5And Pharaoh’s army was 
come forth out of Egypt; and when the 
Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem 
heard tidings of them, they broke up 
from Jerusalem. 6Then came the word 
of the LORD unto the prophet Jeremiah, 
saying: 7’Thus saith the LORD, the God 
of Israel: Thus shall ye say to the king 
of Judah, that sent you unto Me to 
inquire of Me: Behold, Pharaoh’s 
army, which is come forth to help you, 
shall return to Egypt into their own 
land. 8And the Chaldeans shall return, 
and fight against this city; and they 
shall take it, and burn it with fire. 
9Thus saith the LORD: Deceive not 
yourselves, saying: The Chaldeans 
shall surely depart from us; for they 
37 




shall not depart. 10For though ye had 
smitten the whole army of the 
Chaldeans that fight against you, and 
there remained but wounded men 
among them, yet would they rise up 
every man in his tent, and burn this 
city with fire.’ 

11And it came to pass, that when the 
army of the Chaldeans was broken up 
from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh’s 
army, 12then Jeremiah went forth out 
of Jerusalem to go into the land of 
Benjamin, to receive his portion there, 
in the midst of the people. 13And when 
he was in the gate of Benjamin, a 
captain of the ward was there, whose 
name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, 
the son of Hananiah; and he laid hold 
on Jeremiah the prophet, saying: 
‘Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.’ 
14Then said Jeremiah: ‘It is false; I fall 
not away to the Chaldeans’; but he 
hearkened not to him; so Irijah laid 
hold on Jeremiah, and brought him to 
the princes. 15And the princes were 
wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, 
and put him in prison in the house of 
Jonathan the scribe; for they had made 
that the prison. 

16When Jeremiah was come into the 
dungeon-house, and into the cells, and 
Jeremiah had remained there many 
days; 17then Zedekiah the king sent, 
and fetched him; and the king asked 
him secretly in his house, and said: ‘Is 
there any word from the LORD?’ And 
Jeremiah said: ‘There is.’ He said also: 
‘Thou shalt be delivered into the hand 
of the king of Babylon.’ 18Moreover 
Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah: 
‘Wherein have I sinned against thee, or 
against thy servants, or against this 
people, that ye have put me in prison? 
19Where now are your prophets that 
prophesied unto you, saying: The king 
of Babylon shall not come against you, 
nor against this land? 20And now hear, 
I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my 
supplication, I pray thee, be presented 
before thee; that thou cause me not to 
return to the house of Jonathan the 
scribe, lest I die there.’ 21Then 
Zedekiah the king commanded, and 
they committed Jeremiah into the court 
of the guard, and they gave him daily a 
loaf of bread out of the bakers’street, 
until all the bread in the city was spent. 
Thus Jeremiah remained in the court 
of the guard. 

And Shephatiah the son of 
Mattan, and Gedaliah the son 
of Pashhur, and Jucal the son of 
Shelemiah, and Pashhur the son of 
Malchiah, heard the words that 
Jeremiah spoke unto all the people, 
saying: 2’Thus saith the LORD: He that 
remaineth in this city shall die by the 
sword, by the famine, and by the 
pestilence; but he that goeth forth to 
the Chaldeans shall live, and his life 
shall be unto him for a prey, and he 
shall live. 3Thus saith the LORD: This 
city shall surely be given into the hand 
of the army of the king of Babylon, 
and he shall take it.’ 4Then the princes 
said unto the king: ‘Let this man, we 
pray thee, be put to death; forasmuch 
as he weakeneth the hands of the men 
38 




of war that remain in this city, and the 
hands of all the people, in speaking 
such words unto them; for this man 
seeketh not the welfare of this people, 
but the hurt.’ 5Then Zedekiah the king 
said: ‘Behold, he is in your hand; for 
the king is not he that can do any thing 
against you.’ 6Then took they 
Jeremiah, and cast him into the pit of 
Malchiah the king’s son, that was in 
the court of the guard; and they let 
down Jeremiah with cords. And in the 
pit there was no water, but mire; and 
Jeremiah sank in the mire. 

7Now when Ebed-melech the 
Ethiopian, an officer, who was in the 
king’s house, heard that they had put 
Jeremiah in the pit; the king then 
sitting in the gate of Benjamin; 8Ebed-
melech went forth out of the king’s 
house, and spoke to the king, saying: 
9’My lord the king, these men have 
done evil in all that they have done to 
Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have 
cast into the pit; and he is like to die in 
the place where he is because of the 
famine; for there is no more bread in 
the city.’ 10Then the king commanded 
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying: 
‘Take from hence thirty men with thee, 
and take up Jeremiah the prophet out 
of the pit, before he die.’ 11So Ebed-
melech took the men with him, and 
went into the house of the king under 
the treasury, and took thence worn 
clouts and worn rags, and let them 
down by cords into the pit to Jeremiah. 
12And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said 
unto Jeremiah: ‘Put now these worn 
clouts and rags under thine armholes 
under the cords.’ And Jeremiah did so. 
13So they drew up Jeremiah with the 
cords, and took him up out of the pit; 
and Jeremiah remained in the court of 
the guard. 

14Then Zedekiah the king sent, and 
took Jeremiah the prophet unto him 
into the third entry that was in the 
house of the LORD; and the king said 
unto Jeremiah: ‘I will ask thee a thing; 
hide nothing from me.’ 15Then 
Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah: ‘If I 
declare it unto thee, wilt thou not 
surely put me to death? and if I give 
thee counsel, thou wilt not hearken 
unto me.’ 16So Zedekiah the king 
swore secretly unto Jeremiah, saying: 
‘As the LORD liveth, that made us this 
soul, I will not put thee to death, 
neither will I give thee into the hand of 
these men that seek thy life.’ 

17Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah: 
‘Thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, 
the God of Israel: If thou wilt go forth 
unto the king of Babylon’s princes, 
then thy soul shall live, and this city 
shall not be burned with fire; and thou 
shalt live, thou, and thy house; 18but if 
thou wilt not go forth to the king of 
Babylon’s princes, then shall this city 
be given into the hand of the 
Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with 
fire, and thou shalt not escape out of 
their hand.’ 19And Zedekiah the king 
said unto Jeremiah: ‘I am afraid of the 
Jews that are fallen away to the 
Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into 
their hand, and they mock me.’ 20But 


Jeremiah said: ‘They shall not deliver 
thee. Hearken, I beseech thee, to the 
voice of the LORD, in that which I 
speak unto thee; so it shall be well 
with thee, and thy soul shall live. 21But 
if thou refuse to go forth, this is the 
word that the LORD hath shown me: 
22Behold, all the women that are left in 
the king of Judah’s house shall be 
brought forth to the king of Babylon’s 
princes, and those women shall say: 

Thy familiar friends have set thee 
on, 

And have prevailed over thee; 

Thy feet are sunk in the mire, 

And they are turned away back. 

23And they shall bring out all thy 
wives and thy children to the 
Chaldeans; and thou shalt not escape 
out of their hand, but shalt be taken by 
the hand of the king of Babylon; and 
thou shalt cause this city to be burned 
with fire.’ 

24Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah: 
‘Let no man know of these words, and 
thou shalt not die. 25But if the princes 
hear that I have talked with thee, and 
they come unto thee, and say unto 
thee: Declare unto us now what thou 
hast said unto the king; hide it not 
from us, and we will not put thee to 
death; also what the king said unto 
thee; 26then thou shalt say unto them: I 
presented my supplication before the 
king, that he would not cause me to 
return to Jonathan’s house, to die 
there.’ 27Then came all the princes 
unto Jeremiah, and asked him; and he 
told them according to all these words 
that the king had commanded. So they 
left off speaking with him; for the 
matter was not reported. 28So Jeremiah 
abode in the court of the guard until 
the day that Jerusalem was taken. 

And it came to pass, when 

39 



Jerusalem was taken—1in the 
ninth year of Zedekiah king of 
Judah, in the tenth month, came 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and 
all his army against Jerusalem, and 
besieged it; 2in the eleventh year of 
Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the 
ninth day of the month, a breach was 
made in the city— 3that all the princes 
of the king of Babylon came in, and 
sat in the middle gate, even Nergal-
sarezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim 
aRab-saris, Nergal-sarezer aRab-mag, 
with all the residue of the princes of 
the king of Babylon. 4And it came to 
pass, that when Zedekiah the king of 
Judah and all the men of war saw 
them, then they fled, and went forth 
out of the city by night, by the way of 
the king’s garden, by the gate betwixt 
the two walls; and he went out the way 
of the Arabah. 5But the army of the 
Chaldeans pursued after them, and 
overtook Zedekiah in the plains of 
Jericho; and when they had taken him, 
they brought him up to 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon to 
Riblah in the land of Hamath, and he 
gave judgment upon him. 6Then the 
king of Babylon slew the sons of 
Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes; 

a Titles of officers. 


also the king of Babylon slew all the 
nobles of Judah. 7Moreover he put out 
Zedekiah’s eyes, and bound him in 
fetters, to carry him to Babylon. 8And 
the Chaldeans burned the king’s 
house, and the house of the people, 
with fire, and broke down the walls of 
Jerusalem. 9Then Nebuzaradan the 
captain of the guard carried away 
captive into Babylon the remnant of 
the people that remained in the city, 
the deserters also, that fell away to 
him, with the rest of the people that 
remained. 10But Nebuzaradan the 
captain of the guard left of the poor of 
the people, that had nothing, in the 
land of Judah, and gave them 
vineyards and fields in that day. 11Now 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave 
charge concerning Jeremiah to 
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, 
saying: 12’Take him, and look well to 
him, and do him no harm; but do unto 
him even as he shall say unto thee.’ 
13So Nebuzaradan the captain of the 
guard sent, and Nebushazban Rab-
saris, and Nergal-sarezer Rab-mag, 
and all the chief officers of the king of 
Babylon; 14they sent, and took 
Jeremiah out of the court of the guard, 
and committed him unto Gedaliah the 
son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, 
that he should carry him home; so he 
dwelt among the people. 

15Now the word of the LORD came 
unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in 
the court of the guard, saying: 16’Go, 
and speak to Ebed-melech the 
Ethiopian, saying: Thus saith the LORD 
of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I 
will bring My words upon this city for 
evil, and not for good; and they shall 
be accomplished before thee in that 
day. 17But I will deliver thee in that 
day, saith the LORD; and thou shalt not 
be given into the hand of the men of 
whom thou art afraid. 18For I will 
surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not 
fall by the sword, but thy life shall be 
for a prey unto thee; because thou hast 
put thy trust in Me, saith the LORD.’ 

 

The word which came to 
Jeremiah from the LORD, after 
that Nebuzaradan the captain of the 
guard had let him go from Ramah, 
when he had taken him being bound in 
chains among all the captives of 
Jerusalem and Judah, that were carried 
away captive unto Babylon. 2And the 
captain of the guard took Jeremiah, 
and said unto him: ‘The LORD thy God 
pronounced this evil upon this place; 
3and the LORD hath brought it, and 
done according as He spoke; because 
ye have sinned against the LORD, and 
have not hearkened to His voice, 
therefore this thing is come upon you. 
4And now, behold, I loose thee this 
day from the chains which are upon 
thy hand. If it seem good unto thee to 
come with me into Babylon, come, 
and I will look well unto thee; but if it 
seem ill unto thee to come with me 
into Babylon, forbear; behold, all the 
land is before thee; whither it seemeth 
good and right unto thee to go, thither 
go.—5Yet he would not go back.—Go 
40 




back then to Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom 
the king of Babylon hath made 
governor over the cities of Judah, and 
dwell with him among the people; or 
go wheresoever it seemeth right unto 
thee to go.’ So the captain of the guard 
gave him an allowance and a present, 
and let him go. 6Then went Jeremiah 
unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to 
Mizpah, and dwelt with him among 
the people that were left in the land. 

7Now when all the captains of the 
forces that were in the fields, even 
they and their men, heard that the king 
of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son 
of Ahikam governor in the land, and 
had committed unto him men, and 
women, and children, and of the 
poorest of the land, of them that were 
not carried away captive to Babylon; 
8then they came to Gedaliah to 
Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan 
the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the 
son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of 
Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah 
the son of the Maacathite, they and 
their men. 9And Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam the son of Shaphan swore 
unto them and to their men, saying: 
‘Fear not to serve the Chaldeans; dwell 
in the land, and serve the king of 
Babylon, and it shall be well with you. 
10As for me, behold, I will dwell at 
Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans 
that may come unto us; but ye, gather 
ye wine and summer fruits and oil, and 
put them in your vessels, and dwell in 
your cities that ye have taken.’ 
11Likewise when all the Jews that were 
in Moab, and among the children of 
Ammon, and in Edom, and that were 
in all the countries, heard that the king 
of Babylon had left a remnant of 
Judah, and that he had set over them 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son 
of Shaphan; 12then all the Jews 
returned out of all places whither they 
were driven, and came to the land of 
Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and 
gathered wine and summer fruits in 
great abundance. 

13Moreover Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were in the fields, came to 
Gedaliah to Mizpah, 14and said unto 
him: ‘Dost thou know that Baalis the 
king of the children of Ammon hath 
sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to 
take thy life?’ But Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam believed them not. 15Then 
Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to 
Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying: 
‘Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no 
man shall know it; wherefore should 
he take thy life, that all the Jews that 
are gathered unto thee should be 
scattered, and the remnant of Judah 
perish?’ 16But Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of 
Kareah: ‘Thou shalt not do this thing; 
for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.’ 

Now it came to pass in the 
seventh month, that Ishmael 
the son of Nethaniah, the son of 
Elishama, of the seed royal, and one of 
41 




the chief officers of the king, and ten 
men with him, came unto Gedaliah the 
son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there 
they did eat bread together in Mizpah. 
2Then arose Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, and the ten men that were 
with him, and smote Gedaliah the son 
of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the 
sword, and slew him, whom the king 
of Babylon had made governor over 
the land. 3Ishmael also slew all the 
Jews that were with him, even with 
Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the 
Chaldeans that were found there, even 
the men of war. 

4And it came to pass the second day 
after he had slain Gedaliah, and no 
man knew it, 5that there came certain 
men from Shechem, from Shiloh, and 
from Samaria, even fourscore men, 
having their beards shaven and their 
clothes rent, and having cut 
themselves, with meal-offerings and 
frankincense in their hand to bring 
them to the house of the LORD. 6And 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went 
forth from Mizpah to meet them, 
weeping all along as he went; and it 
came to pass, as he met them, he said 
unto them: ‘Come to Gedaliah the son 
of Ahikam.’ 7And it was so, when they 
came into the midst of the city, that 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew 
them, and cast them into the midst of 
the pit, he, and the men that were with 
him. 8But ten men were found among 
them that said unto Ishmael: ‘Slay us 
not; for we have stores hidden in the 
field, of wheat, and of barley, and of 
oil, and of honey.’ So he forbore, and 
slew them not among their brethren. 
9Now the pit wherein Ishmael cast all 
the dead bodies of the men whom he 
had slain by the side of Gedaliah was 
that which Asa the king had made for 
fear of Baasa king of Israel; the same 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled 
with them that were slain. 10Then 
Ishmael carried away captive all the 
residue of the people that were in 
Mizpah, even the king’s daughters, 
and all the people that remained in 
Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the 
captain of the guard had committed to 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam; Ishmael 
the son of Nethaniah carried them 
away captive, and departed to go over 
to the children of Ammon. 

11But when Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were with him, heard of all 
the evil that Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah had done, 12then they took 
all the men, and went to fight with 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and 
found him by the great waters that are 
in Gibeon. 13Now it came to pass, that 
when all the people that were with 
Ishmael saw Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were with him, then they 
were glad. 14So all the people that 
Ishmael had carried away captive from 
Mizpah cast about and returned, and 
went unto Johanan the son of Kareah. 
15But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah 
escaped from Johanan with eight men, 
and went to the children of Ammon. 


16Then took Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were with him, all the 
remnant of the people whom he had 
recovered from Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he 
had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, 
the men, even the men of war, and the 
women, and the children, and the 
officers, whom he had brought back 
from Gibeon; 17and they departed, and 
dwelt in Geruth Chimham, which is by 
Beth-lehem, to go to enter into Egypt, 
18because of the Chaldeans; for they 
were afraid of them, because Ishmael 
the son of Nethaniah had slain 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom 
the king of Babylon made governor 
over the land. 

Then all the captains of the 
forces, and Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of 
Hoshaiah, and all the people from the 
least even unto the greatest, came near, 
2and said unto Jeremiah the prophet: 
‘Let, we pray thee, our supplication be 
accepted before thee, and pray for us 
unto the LORD thy God, even for all 
this remnant; for we are left but a few 
of many, as thine eyes do behold us; 
3that the LORD thy God may tell us the 
way wherein we should walk, and the 
thing that we should do.’ 4Then 
Jeremiah the prophet said unto them: 
‘I have heard you; behold, I will pray 
unto the LORD your God according to 
your words; and it shall come to pass, 
that whatsoever thing the LORD shall 
answer you, I will declare it unto you; 
I will keep nothing back from you.’ 
5Then they said to Jeremiah: ‘The 
LORD be a true and faithful witness 
against us, if we do not even according 
to all the word wherewith the LORD thy 
God shall send thee to us. 6Whether it 
be good, or whether it be evil, we will 
hearken to the voice of the LORD our 
God, to whom we send thee; that it 
may be well with us, when we hearken 
to the voice of the LORD our God.’ 

7And it came to pass after ten days, 
that the word of the LORD came unto 
Jeremiah. 8Then called he Johanan the 
son of Kareah, and all the captains of 
the forces that were with him, and all 
the people from the least even to the 
greatest, 9and said unto them: ‘Thus 
saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto 
whom ye sent me to present your 
supplication before Him: 10If ye will 
still abide in this land, then will I build 
you, and not pull you down, and I will 
plant you, and not pluck you up; for I 
repent Me of the evil that I have done 
unto you. 11Be not afraid of the king of 
Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be 
not afraid of him, saith the LORD; for I 
am with you to save you, and to 
deliver you from his hand. 12And I will 
grant you compassion, that he may 
have compassion upon you, and cause 
you to return to your own land. 13But if 
ye say: We will not abide in this land; 
so that ye hearken not to the voice of 
the LORD your God; 14saying: No; but 
we will go into the land of Egypt, 
where we shall see no war, nor hear 
the sound of the horn, nor have hunger 
42 




of bread; and there will we abide; 
15now therefore hear ye the word of 
the LORD, O remnant of Judah: Thus 
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of 
Israel: If ye wholly set your faces to 
enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn 
there; 16then it shall come to pass, that 
the sword, which ye fear, shall 
overtake you there in the land of 
Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye are 
afraid, shall follow hard after you there 
in Egypt; and there ye shall die. 17So 
shall it be with all the men that set 
their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn 
there; they shall die by the sword, by 
the famine, and by the pestilence; and 
none of them shall remain or escape 
from the evil that I will bring upon 
them. 18For thus saith the LORD of 
hosts, the God of Israel: As Mine 
anger and My fury hath been poured 
forth upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, so shall My fury be poured 
forth upon you, when ye shall enter 
into Egypt; and ye shall be an 
execration, and an astonishment, and a 
curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see 
this place no more. 19The LORD hath 
spoken concerning you, O remnant of 
Judah: Go ye not into Egypt; know 
certainly that I have forewarned you 
this day. 20For ye have dealt 
deceitfully against your own souls; for 
ye sent me unto the LORD your God, 
saying: Pray for us unto the LORD our 
God; and according unto all that the 
LORD our God shall say, so declare 
unto us, and we will do it; 21and I have 
this day declared it to you; but ye have 
not hearkened to the voice of the LORD 
your God in any thing for which He 
hath sent me unto you. 22Now 
therefore know certainly that ye shall 
die by the sword, by the famine, and 
by the pestilence, in the place whither 
ye desire to go to sojourn there.’ 

And it came to pass, that when 
Jeremiah had made an end of 
speaking unto all the people all the 
words of the LORD their God, 
wherewith the LORD their God had sent 
him to them, even all these words, 
2then spoke Azariah the son of 
Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the proud men, saying 
unto Jeremiah: ‘Thou speakest falsely; 
the LORD our God hath not sent thee to 
say: Ye shall not go into Egypt to 
sojourn there; 3but Baruch the son of 
Neriah setteth thee on against us, to 
deliver us into the hand of the 
Chaldeans, that they may put us to 
death, and carry us away captives to 
Babylon.’ 4So Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces, and all the people, hearkened 
not to the voice of the LORD, to dwell 
in the land of Judah. 5But Johanan the 
son of Kareah, and all the captains of 
the forces, took all the remnant of 
Judah, that were returned from all the 
nations whither they had been driven 
to sojourn in the land of Judah: 6the 
men, and the women, and the children, 
and the king’s daughters, and every 
person that Nebuzaradan the captain of 
the guard had left with Gedaliah the 
son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, 
43 




and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch 
the son of Neriah; 7and they came into 
the land of Egypt; for they hearkened 
not to the voice of the LORD; and they 
came even to Tahpanhes. 

8Then came the word of the LORD 
unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying: 
9’Take great stones in thy hand, and 
hide them in the mortar in the 
framework, which is at the entry of 
Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in the 
sight of the men of Judah; 10and say 
unto them: Thus saith the LORD of 
hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will 
send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king 
of Babylon, My servant, and will set 
his throne upon these stones that I 
have hid; and he shall spread his royal 
pavilion over them. 11And he shall 
come, and shall smite the land of 
Egypt; such as are for death to death, 
and such as are for captivity to 
captivity, and such as are for the sword 
to the sword. 12And I will kindle a fire 
in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and 
he shall burn them, and carry them 
away captives; and he shall fold up the 
land of Egypt, as a shepherd foldeth up 
his garment; and he shall go forth from 
thence in peace. 13He shall also break 
the pillars of Beth-shemesh, that is in 
the land of Egypt; and the houses of 
the gods of Egypt shall he burn with 
fire.’ 

 

The word that came to 
Jeremiah concerning all the 
Jews that dwelt in the land of Egypt, 
that dwelt at Migdol, and at 
Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the 
country of Pathros, saying: 2’Thus 
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of 
Israel: Ye have seen all the evil that I 
have brought upon Jerusalem, and 
upon all the cities of Judah; and, 
behold, this day they are a desolation, 
and no man dwelleth therein; 3because 
of their wickedness which they have 
committed to provoke Me, in that they 
went to offer, and to serve other gods, 
whom they knew not, neither they, nor 
ye, nor your fathers. 4Howbeit I sent 
unto you all My servants the prophets, 
sending them betimes and often, 
saying: Oh, do not this abominable 
thing that I hate. 5But they hearkened 
not, nor inclined their ear to turn from 
their wickedness, to forbear offering 
unto other gods. 6Wherefore My fury 
and Mine anger was poured forth, and 
was kindled in the cities of Judah and 
in the streets of Jerusalem; and they 
are wasted and desolate, as at this day. 
7Therefore now thus saith the LORD, 
the God of hosts, the God of Israel: 
Wherefore commit ye this great evil 
against your own souls, to cut off from 
you man and woman, infant and 
suckling, out of the midst of Judah, to 
leave you none remaining; 8in that ye 
provoke Me with the works of your 
hands, offering unto other gods in the 
land of Egypt, whither ye are gone to 
sojourn; that ye may be cut off, and 
that ye may be a curse and a reproach 
among all the nations of the earth? 
9Have ye forgotten the wicked deeds 
of your fathers, and the wicked deeds 
44 




of the kings of Judah, and the wicked 
deeds of their wives, and your own 
wicked deeds, and the wicked deeds of 
your wives, which they committed in 
the land of Judah, and in the streets of 
Jerusalem? 10They are not humbled 
even unto this day, neither have they 
feared, nor walked in My law, nor in 
My statutes, that I set before you and 
before your fathers. 11Therefore thus 
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of 
Israel: Behold, I will set My face 
against you for evil, even to cut off all 
Judah. 12And I will take the remnant of 
Judah, that have set their faces to go 
into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, 
and they shall all be consumed; in the 
land of Egypt shall they fall; they shall 
be consumed by the sword and by the 
famine; they shall die, from the least 
even unto the greatest, by the sword 
and by the famine; and they shall be an 
execration, and an astonishment, and a 
curse, and a reproach. 13For I will 
punish them that dwell in the land of 
Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, 
by the sword, by the famine, and by 
the pestilence; 14so that none of the 
remnant of Judah, that are gone into 
the land of Egypt to sojourn there, 
shall escape or remain, that they 
should return into the land of Judah, to 
which they have a desire to return to 
dwell there; for none shall return save 
such as shall escape.’ 

15Then all the men who knew that 
their wives offered unto other gods, 
and all the women that stood by, a 
great assembly, even all the people 
that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in 
Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying: 
16’As for the word that thou hast 
spoken unto us in the name of the 
LORD, we will not hearken unto thee. 
17But we will certainly perform every 
word that is gone forth out of our 
mouth, to offer unto the queen of 
heaven, and to pour out drink-
offerings unto her, as we have done, 
we and our fathers, our kings and our 
princes, in the cities of Judah, and in 
the streets of Jerusalem; for then had 
we plenty of food, and were well, and 
saw no evil. 18But since we let off to 
offer to the queen of heaven, and to 
pour out drink-offerings unto her, we 
have wanted all things, and have been 
consumed by the sword and by the 
famine. 19And is it we that offer to the 
queen of heaven, and pour out drink-
offerings unto her? did we make her 
cakes in her image, and pour out 
drink-offerings unto her, without our 
husbands?’ 

20Then Jeremiah said unto all the 
people, to the men, and to the women, 
even to all the people that had given 
him that answer, saying: 21’The 
offering that ye offered in the cities of 
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, 
ye and your fathers, your kings and 
your princes, and the people of the 
land, did not the LORD remember them, 
and came it not into His mind? 22So 
that the LORD could no longer bear, 
because of the evil of your doings, and 
because of the abominations which ye 
have committed; therefore is your land 


become a desolation, and an 
astonishment, and a curse, without an 
inhabitant, as at this day. 23Because ye 
have offered, and because ye have 
sinned against the LORD, and have not 
hearkened to the voice of the LORD, nor 
walked in His law, nor in His statutes, 
nor in His testimonies; therefore this 
evil is happened unto you, as at this 
day.’ 

24Moreover Jeremiah said unto all 
the people, and to all the women: 
‘Hear the word of the LORD, all Judah 
that are in the land of Egypt: 25Thus 
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of 
Israel, saying: Ye and your wives have 
both spoken with your mouths, and 
with your hands have fulfilled it, 
saying: We will surely perform our 
vows that we have vowed, to offer to 
the queen of heaven, and to pour out 
drink-offerings unto her; ye shall 
surely establish your vows, and surely 
perform your vows. 26Therefore hear 
ye the word of the LORD, all Judah that 
dwell in the land of Egypt: Behold, I 
have sworn by My great name, saith 
the LORD, that My name shall no more 
be named in the mouth of any man of 
Judah in all the land of Egypt saying: 
As the Lord GOD liveth. 27Behold, I 
watch over them for evil, and not for 
good; and all the men of Judah that are 
in the land of Egypt shall be consumed 
by the sword and by the famine, until 
there be an end of them. 28And they 
that escape the sword shall return out 
of the land of Egypt into the land of 
Judah, few in number; and all the 
remnant of Judah, that are gone into 
the land of Egypt to sojourn there, 
shall know whose word shall stand, 
Mine, or theirs. 29And this shall be the 
sign unto you, saith the LORD, that I 
will punish you in this place, that ye 
may know that My words shall surely 
stand against you for evil; 30thus saith 
the LORD: Behold, I will give Pharaoh 
Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of 
his enemies, and into the hand of them 
that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah 
king of Judah into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his 
enemy, and that sought his life.’ 

 

The word that Jeremiah the 
prophet spoke unto Baruch the 
son of Neriah, when he wrote these 
words in a book at the mouth of 
Jeremiah, in the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah, saying: 2’Thus saith the LORD, 
the God of Israel, concerning thee, O 
Baruch: Thou didst say: 

3Woe is me now! 

For the LORD hath added sorrow to 
my pain; 

I am weary with my groaning, 

And I find no rest. 

4Thus shalt thou say unto him: 

Thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, that which I have built will 
I break down, 

And that which I have planted I will 
pluck up; 

And this in the whole land. 

5And seekest thou great things for 
thyself? 
45 




Seek them not; 

for, behold, I will bring evil upon all 
flesh, saith the LORD; but thy life will I 
give unto thee for a prey in all places 
whither thou goest.’ 

 

The word of the LORD which 
came to Jeremiah the prophet 
concerning the nations. 

2Of Egypt: concerning the army of 
Pharaoh-neco king of Egypt, which 
was by the river Euphrates in 
Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon smote in the fourth 
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah. 

3Make ready buckler and shield, 

And draw near to battle. 

4Harness the horses, and mount, ye 
horsemen, 

And stand forth with your helmets; 

Furbish the spears, put on the coats 
of mail. 

5Wherefore do I see them dismayed 
and turned backward? 

And their mighty ones are beaten 
down, 

And they are fled apace, and look 
not back; 

Terror is on every side, saith the 
LORD. 

6The swift cannot flee away, 

Nor the mighty man escape; 

In the north by the river Euphrates 

Have they stumbled and fallen. 

7Who is this like the Nile that riseth 
up, 

Like the rivers whose waters toss 
themselves? 

8Egypt is like the Nile that riseth up, 

And like the rivers whose waters 
toss themselves; 

And he saith: ‘I will rise up, I will 
cover the earth, 

I will destroy the city and the 
inhabitants thereof.’ 

9Prance, ye horses, and rush madly, 
ye chariots; 

And let the mighty men go forth: 

Cush and Put, that handle the shield, 

And the Ludim, that handle and 
bend the bow. 

 

10For the Lord GOD of hosts shall 
have on that day 

A day of vengeance, that He may 
avenge Him of His adversaries; 

And the sword shall devour and be 
satiate, 

And shall be made drunk with their 
blood; 

For the Lord GOD of hosts hath a 
sacrifice 

In the north country by the river 
Euphrates. 

11Go up into Gilead, and take balm, 

O virgin daughter of Egypt; 

In vain dost thou use many 
medicines; 

There is no cure for thee. 

12The nations have heard of thy 
shame, 

And the earth is full of thy cry; 

For the mighty man hath stumbled 
against the mighty, 

They are fallen both of them 
together. 

 
46 




13The word that the LORD spoke to 
Jeremiah the prophet, how that 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
should come and smite the land of 
Egypt. 

14Declare ye in Egypt, and announce 
in Migdol, 

And announce in Noph and in 
Tahpanhes; 

Say ye: ‘Stand forth, and prepare 
thee, 

For the sword hath devoured round 
about thee.’ 

15Why is thy strong one 
overthrown? 

He stood not, because the LORD did 
thrust him down. 

16He made many to stumble; 

Yea, they fell one upon another, 

And said: ‘Arise, and let us return to 
our own people, 

And to the land of our birth, 

From the oppressing sword.’ 

17They cried there: ‘Pharaoh king of 
Egypt is but a noise; 

He hath let the appointed time pass 
by.’ 

18As I live, saith the King, 

Whose name is the LORD of hosts, 

Surely like Tabor among the 
mountains, 

And like Carmel by the sea, so shall 
he come. 

19O thou daughter that dwellest in 
Egypt, 

Furnish thyself to go into captivity; 

For Noph shall become a desolation, 

And shall be laid waste, without 
inhabitant. 

 

20Egypt is a very fair heifer; 

But the gadfly out of the north is 
come, it is come. 

21Also her mercenaries in the midst 
of her 

Are like calves of the stall, 

For they also are turned back, they 
are fled away together, 

They did not stand; 

For the day of their calamity is 
come upon them, 

The time of their visitation. 

22The sound thereof shall go like the 
serpent’s; 

For they march with an army, 

And come against her with axes, 

As hewers of wood. 

23They cut down her forest, saith the 
LORD, 

Though it cannot be searched; 

Because they are more than the 
locusts, 

And are innumerable. 

24The daughter of Egypt is put to 
shame; 

She is delivered into the hand of the 
people of the north. 

25The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, 
saith: Behold, I will punish Amon of 
No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with her 
gods, and her kings; even Pharaoh, and 
them that trust in him; 26and I will 
deliver them into the hand of those that 
seek their lives, and into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and 
into the hand of his servants; and 
afterwards it shall be inhabited, as in 
the days of old, saith the LORD. 


 

27But fear not thou, O Jacob My 
servant, 

Neither be dismayed, O Israel; 

For, lo, I will save thee from afar, 

And thy seed from the land of their 
captivity; 

And Jacob shall again be quiet and 
at ease, 

And none shall make him afraid. 

28Fear not thou, O Jacob My 
servant, saith the LORD, 

For I am with thee; 

For I will make a full end of all the 
nations whither I have driven 
thee, 

But I will not make a full end of 
thee; 

And I will correct thee in measure, 

But will not utterly destroy thee. 

 

The word of the LORD that 
came to Jeremiah the prophet 
con-cerning the Philistines, before that 
Pharaoh smote Gaza. 

2Thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, waters rise up out of the 
north, 

And shall become an overflowing 
stream, 

And they shall overflow the land 
and all that is therein, 

The city and them that dwell 
therein; 

And the men shall cry, 

And all the inhabitants of the land 
shall wail. 

3At the noise of the stamping of the 
hoofs of his strong ones, 

At the rushing of his chariots, at the 
rumbling of his wheels, 

The fathers look not back to their 
children 

For feebleness of hands; 

4Because of the day that cometh 

To spoil all the Philistines, 

To cut off from Tyre and Zidon 

Every helper that remaineth; 

For the LORD will spoil the 
Philistines, 

The remnant of the isle of Caphtor. 

5Baldness is come upon Gaza, 

Ashkelon is brought to nought, the 
remnant of their valley; 

How long wilt thou cut thyself? 

6O thou sword of the LORD, 

How long will it be ere thou be 
quiet? 

Put up thyself into thy scabbard, 

Rest, and be still. 

7How canst thou be quiet? 

For the LORD hath given it a charge; 

Against Ashkelon, and against the 
sea-shore, 

There hath He appointed it. 

 

Of Moab. 

 

Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the 
God of Israel: 

Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled; 

Kiriathaim is put to shame, it is 
taken; 

Misgab is put to shame and 
dismayed. 

2The praise of Moab is no more; 

In Heshbon they have devised evil 
against her: 
47 

48 




‘Come, and let us cut her off from 
being a nation.’ 

Thou also, O Madmen, shalt be 
brought to silence; 

The sword shall pursue thee. 

3Hark! a cry from Horonaim, 

Spoiling and great destruction! 

4Moab is destroyed; 

Her little ones have caused a cry to 
be heard. 

5For by the ascent of Luhith 

With continual weeping shall they 
go up; 

For in the going down of Horonaim 

They have heard the distressing cry 
of destruction. 

6Flee, save your lives, 

And be like a tamarisk in the 
wilderness. 

 

7For, because thou hast trusted 

In thy works and in thy treasures, 

Thou also shalt be taken; 

And Chemosh shall go forth into 
captivity, 

His priests and his princes together. 

8And the spoiler shall come upon 
every city, 

And no city shall escape; 

The valley also shall perish, and the 
plain shall be destroyed; 

As the LORD hath spoken. 

9Give wings unto Moab, 

For she must fly and get away; 

And her cities shall become a 
desolation, 

Without any to dwell therein. 

10Cursed be he that doeth the work 
of the LORD with a slack hand, 

And cursed be he that keepeth back 
his sword from blood. 

11Moab hath been at ease from his 
youth, 

And he hath settled on his lees, 

And hath not been emptied from 
vessel to vessel, 

Neither hath he gone into captivity; 

Therefore his taste remaineth in 
him, 

And his scent is not changed. 

12Therefore, behold, the days come, 

Saith the LORD, 

That I will send unto him them that 
tilt up, 

And they shall tilt him up; 

And they shall empty his vessels, 

And break their bottles in pieces. 

13And Moab shall be ashamed of 
Chemosh, 

As the house of Israel was ashamed 

Of Beth-el their confidence. 

 

14How say ye: ‘We are mighty men, 

And valiant men for the war’? 

15Moab is spoiled, and they are gone 
up into her cities, 

And his chosen young men are gone 
down to the slaughter, 

Saith the King, 

Whose name is the LORD of hosts. 

16The calamity of Moab is near to 
come, 

And his affliction hasteth fast. 

17Bemoan him, all ye that are round 
about him, 

And all ye that know his name; 

Say: ‘How is the strong staff 
broken, 


The beautiful rod! ’ 

18O thou daughter that dwellest in 
Dibon, 

Come down from thy glory, and sit 
in thirst; 

For the spoiler of Moab is come up 
against thee, 

He hath destroyed thy strongholds. 

19O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the 
way, and watch; 

Ask him that fleeth, and her that 
escapeth; 

Say: ‘What hath been done?’ 

20Moab is put to shame, for it is 
dismayed; 

Wail and cry; 

Tell ye it in Arnon, 

That Moab is spoiled. 

21And judgment is come upon the 
country of the Plain; upon Holon, and 
upon Jahzah, and upon Mephaath; 
22and upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and 
upon Beth-diblathaim; 23and upon 
Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and 
upon Beth-meon; 24and upon Kerioth, 
and upon Bozrah, and upon all the 
cities of the land of Moab, far or near. 

25The horn of Moab is cut off, 

And his arm is broken, 

Saith the LORD. 

26Make ye him drunken, 

For he magnified himself against the 
LORD; 

And Moab shall wallow in his 
vomit, 

And he also shall be in derision. 

27For was not Israel a derision unto 
thee? 

Was he found among thieves? 

For as often as thou speakest of him, 

Thou waggest the head. 

28O ye that dwell in Moab, 

Leave the cities, and dwell in the 
rock; 

And be like the dove that maketh 
her nest 

In the sides of the pit’s mouth. 

 

29We have heard of the pride of 
Moab; 

He is very proud; 

His loftiness, and his pride, and his 
haughtiness, 

And the assumption of his heart. 

30I know his arrogancy, saith the 
LORD, 

That it is ill-founded; 

His boastings have wrought nothing 
well-founded. 

31Therefore will I wail for Moab; 

Yea, I will cry out for all Moab; 

For the men of Kir-heres shall my 
heart moan. 

32With more than the weeping of 
Jazer will I weep for thee, 

O vine of Sibmah; 

Thy branches passed over the sea, 

They reached even to the sea of 
Jazer; 

Upon thy summer fruits and upon 
thy vintage 

The spoiler is fallen. 

33And gladness and joy is taken 
away 

From the fruitful field, and from the 
land of Moab; 

And I have caused wine to cease 
from the winepresses; 


None shall tread with shouting; 

The shouting shall be no shouting. 

34From the cry of Heshbon even 
unto Elealeh, 

Even unto Jahaz have they uttered 
their voice, 

From Zoar even unto Horonaim, 

A heifer of three years old; 

For the Waters of Nimrim also 

Shall be desolate. 

 

35Moreover I will cause to cease in 
Moab, 

Saith the LORD, 

Him that offereth in the high place, 

And him that offereth to his gods. 

36Therefore my heart moaneth for 
Moab 

Like pipes, and my heart moaneth 
like pipes for the men of Kir-
heres; 

Therefore the abundance that he 
hath gotten is perished. 

37For every head is bald, 

And every beard clipped; 

Upon all the hands are cuttings, 

And upon the loins sackcloth. 

38On all the housetops of Moab and 
in the broad places thereof 

There is lamentation every where; 

For I have broken Moab like a 
vessel wherein is no pleasure, 

Saith the LORD. 

39’How is it broken down! ’ wail ye! 

‘How hath Moab turned the back 
with shame! ’ 

So shall Moab become a derision 
and a dismay 

To all that are round about him. 

 

40For thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, he shall swoop as a vulture, 

And shall spread out his wings 
against Moab. 

41The cities are taken, 

And the strongholds are seized, 

And the heart of the mighty men of 
Moab at that day 

Shall be as the heart of a woman in 
her pangs. 

42And Moab shall be destroyed from 
being a people, 

Because he hath magnified himself 
against the LORD. 

43Terror, and the pit, and the trap, 

Are upon thee, O inhabitant of 
Moab, 

Saith the LORD. 

44He that fleeth from the terror 

Shall fall into the pit; 

And he that getteth up out of the pit 

Shall be taken in the trap; 

For I will bring upon her, even upon 
Moab, 

The year of their visitation, saith the 
LORD. 

 

45In the shadow of Heshbon the 
fugitives 

Stand without strength; 

For a fire is gone forth out of 
Heshbon, 

And a flame from the midst of 
Sihon, 

And it devoureth the corner of 
Moab, 

And the crown of the head of the 
tumultuous ones. 


46Woe unto thee, O Moab! 

The people of Chemosh is undone; 

For thy sons are taken away captive, 

And thy daughters into captivity. 

47Yet will I turn the captivity of 
Moab 

In the end of days, saith the LORD. 

 

Thus far is the judgment of Moab. 

 

Of the children of Ammon. 

 

Thus saith the LORD: 

Hath Israel no sons? 

Hath he no heir? 

Why then doth Malcam take 
possession of Gad, 

And his people dwell in the cities 
thereof? 

2Therefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, 

That I will cause an alarm of war to 
be heard 

Against Rabbah of the children of 
Ammon; 

And it shall become a desolate 
mound, 

And her daughters shall be burned 
with fire; 

Then shall Israel dispossess them 
that did dispossess him, 

Saith the LORD. 

3Wail, O Heshbon, for Ai is undone; 

Cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird 
you with sackcloth; 

Lament, and run to and fro among 
the folds; 

For Malcam shall go into captivity, 

His priests and his princes together. 

4Wherefore gloriest thou in the 
valleys, 

Thy flowing valley, O backsliding 
daughter? 

That didst trust in thy treasures: 

‘Who shall come unto me?’ 

5Behold, I will bring a terror upon 
thee, 

Saith the Lord GOD of hosts, 

From all that are round about thee; 

And ye shall be driven out every 
man right forth, 

And there shall be none to gather up 
him that wandereth. 

6But afterward I will bring back the 
captivity of the children of 
Ammon, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

7Of Edom. 

 

Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Is wisdom no more in Teman? 

Is counsel perished from the 
prudent? 

Is their wisdom vanished? 

8Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, 

O inhabitants of Dedan; 

For I do bring the calamity of Esau 
upon him, 

The time that I shall punish him. 

9If grape-gatherers came to thee, 

Would they not leave some gleaning 
grapes? 

If thieves by night, 

Would they not destroy till they had 
enough? 

10But I have made Esau bare, 

I have uncovered his secret places, 
49 




And he shall not be able to hide 
himself; 

His seed is spoiled, and his brethren, 

And his neighbours, and he is not. 

11Leave thy fatherless children, I 
will rear them, 

And let thy widows trust in Me. 

12For thus saith the LORD: Behold, they 
to whom it pertained not to drink of 
the cup shall assuredly drink; and art 
thou he that shall altogether go 
unpunished? thou shalt not go 
unpunished, but thou shalt surely 
drink. 13For I have sworn by Myself, 
saith the LORD, that Bozrah shall 
become an astonishment, a reproach, a 
waste, and a curse; and all the cities 
thereof shall be perpetual wastes. 

14I have heard a message from the 
LORD, 

And an ambassador is sent among 
the nations: 

‘Gather yourselves together, and 
come against her, 

And rise up to the battle.’ 

15For, behold, I make thee small 
among the nations, 

And despised among men. 

16Thy terribleness hath deceived 
thee, 

Even the pride of thy heart, 

O thou that dwellest in the clefts of 
the rock, 

That holdest the height of the hill; 

Though thou shouldest make thy 
nest as high as the eagle, 

I will bring thee down from thence, 
saith the LORD. 

17And Edom shall become an 
astonishment; 

Every one that passeth by it 

Shall be astonished and shall hiss at 
all the plagues thereof. 

18As in the overthrow of Sodom and 
Gomorrah 

And the neighbour cities thereof, 
saith the LORD, 

No man shall abide there, 

Neither shall any son of man dwell 
therein. 

19Behold, he shall come up like a 
lion From the thickets of the 
Jordan 

Against the strong habitation; 

For I will suddenly make him run 
away from it, 

And whoso is chosen, him will I 
appoint over it; 

For who is like Me? and who will 
appoint Me a time? 

And who is that shepherd that will 
stand before Me? 

20Therefore hear ye the counsel of 
the LORD, 

That He hath taken against Edom; 

And His purposes, that He hath 
purposed against the inhabitants 
of Teman: 

Surely the least of the flock shall 
drag them away, 

Surely their habitation shall be 
appalled at them. 

21The earth quaketh at the noise of 
their fall; 

There is a cry, the noise whereof is 
heard in the Red Sea. 


22Behold, he shall come up and 
swoop down as the vulture, 

And spread out his wings against 
Bozrah; 

And the heart of the mighty men of 
Edom at that day 

Shall be as the heart of a woman in 
her pangs. 

 

23Of Damascus. 

 

Hamath is ashamed, and Arpad; 

For they have heard evil tidings, 
they are melted away; 

There is trouble in the sea; 

It cannot be quiet. 

24Damascus is waxed feeble, she 
turneth herself to flee, 

And trembling hath seized on her; 

Anguish and pangs have taken hold 
of her, as of a woman in travail. 

25’How is the city of praise left 
unrepaired, 

The city of my joy?’ 

26Therefore her young men shall fall 
in her broad places, 

And all the men of war shall be 
brought to silence in that day, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

27And I will kindle a fire in the wall 
of Damascus, 

And it shall devour the palaces of 
Ben-hadad. 

 

28Of Kedar, and of the kingdoms of 
Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon smote. 

Thus saith the LORD: 

Arise ye, go up against Kedar, 

And spoil the children of the east. 

29Their tents and their flocks shall 
they take, 

They shall carry away for 
themselves their curtains, 

And all their vessels, and their 
camels; 

And they shall proclaim against 
them a terror on every side. 

30Flee ye, flit far off, dwell deep, 

O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the 
LORD; 

For Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon hath taken counsel 
against you, 

And hath conceived a purpose 
against you. 

31Arise, get you up against a nation 
that is at ease, 

That dwelleth without care, saith the 
LORD; 

That have neither gates nor bars, 

That dwell alone. 

32And their camels shall be a booty, 

And the multitude of their cattle a 
spoil; 

And I will scatter unto all winds 
them that have the corners polled; 

And I will bring their calamity from 
every side of them, saith the 
LORD. 

33And Hazor shall be a dwelling-
place of jackals, 

A desolation for ever; no man shall 
abide there, 

Neither shall any son of man dwell 
therein. 

 


34The word of the LORD that came to 
Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam 
in the beginning of the reign of 
Zedekiah king of Judah, saying: 

35Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

Behold, I will break the bow of 
Elam 

The chief of their might. 

36And I will bring against Elam the 
four winds 

From the four quarters of heaven, 

And will scatter them toward all 
those winds; 

And there shall be no nation whither 
the dispersed of Elam shall not 
come. 

37And I will cause Elam to be 
dismayed before their enemies, 

And before them that seek their life; 

And I will bring evil upon them, 

Even My fierce anger, saith the 
LORD; 

And I will send the sword after 
them, 

Till I have consumed them; 

38And I will set My throne in Elam, 

And will destroy from thence king 
and princes, saith the LORD. 

39But it shall come to pass in the end 
of days, 

That I will bring back the captivity 
of Elam, saith the LORD. 

 

The word that the LORD spoke 
concerning Babylon, 
concerning the land of the Chaldeans, 
by Jeremiah the prophet. 

2Declare ye among the nations and 
announce, 

And set up a standard; 

Announce, and conceal not; 

Say: ‘Babylon is taken, 

Bel is put to shame, Merodach is 
dismayed; 

Her images are put to shame, her 
idols are dismayed.’ 

3For out of the north there cometh 
up a nation against her, 

Which shall make her land desolate, 

And none shall dwell therein; 

They are fled, they are gone, both 
man and beast. 

4In those days, and in that time, 
saith the LORD, 

The children of Israel shall come, 

They and the children of Judah 
together; 

They shall go on their way weeping, 

And shall seek the LORD their God. 

5They shall inquire concerning Zion 

With their faces hitherward: 

‘Come ye, and join yourselves to the 
LORD 

In an everlasting covenant that shall 
not be forgotten.’ 

 

6My people hath been lost sheep; 

Their shepherds have caused them 
to go astray, 

They have turned them away on the 
mountains; 

They have gone from mountain to 
hill, 

They have forgotten their resting-
place. 

7All that found them have devoured 
them; 
50 




And their adversaries said: ‘We are 
not guilty’; 

Because they have sinned against 
the LORD, the habitation of justice, 

Even the LORD, the hope of their 
fathers. 

 

8Flee out of the midst of Babylon, 

And go forth out of the land of the 
Chaldeans, 

And be as the he-goats before the 
flocks. 

9For, lo, I will stir up and cause to 
come up against Babylon 

An assembly of great nations from 
the north country; 

And they shall set themselves in 
array against her, 

From thence she shall be taken; 

Their arrows shall be as of a mighty 
man that maketh childless; 

None shall return in vain. 

10And Chaldea shall be a spoil; 

All that spoil her shall be satisfied, 
saith the LORD. 

11Because ye are glad, because ye 
rejoice, 

O ye that plunder My heritage, 

Because ye gambol as a heifer at 
grass, 

And neigh as strong horses; 

12Your mother shall be sore 
ashamed, 

She that bore you shall be 
confounded; 

Behold, the hindermost of the 
nations 

Shall be a wilderness, a dry land, 
and a desert. 

13Because of the wrath of the LORD it 
shall not be inhabited, 

But it shall be wholly desolate; 

Every one that goeth by Babylon 

Shall be appalled and hiss at all her 
plagues. 

14Set yourselves in array against 
Babylon round about, 

All ye that bend the bow, 

Shoot at her, spare no arrows; 

For she hath sinned against the 
LORD. 

15Shout against her round about, she 
hath submitted herself; 

Her buttresses are fallen, her walls 
are thrown down; 

For it is the vengeance of the LORD, 
take vengeance upon her; 

As she hath done, do unto her. 

16Cut off the sower from Babylon, 

And him that handleth the sickle in 
the time of harvest; 

For fear of the oppressing sword 
they shall turn every one to his 
people, 

And they shall flee every one to his 
own land. 

 

17Israel is a scattered sheep, 

The lions have driven him away; 

First the king of Assyria hath 
devoured him, 

And last this Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon hath broken his bones. 

18Therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts, the God of Israel: 

Behold, I will punish the king of 
Babylon and his land, 


As I have punished the king of 
Assyria. 

19And I will bring Israel back to his 
pasture, 

And he shall feed on Carmel and 
Bashan, 

And his soul shall be satisfied upon 
the hills of Ephraim and in 
Gilead. 

20In those days, and in that time, 
saith the LORD, 

The iniquity of Israel shall be sought 
for, and there shall be none, 

And the sins of Judah, and they shall 
not be found; 

For I will pardon them whom I 
leave as a remnant. 

 

21Go up against the land of 
aMerathaim, even against it, 

a That is, Double rebellion. 

b That is, Visitation. 

And against the inhabitants of 
bPekod; 

Waste and utterly destroy after 
them, saith the LORD, 

And do according to all that I have 
commanded thee. 

22Hark! battle is in the land, 

And great destruction. 

23How is the hammer of the whole 
earth 

Cut asunder and broken! 

How is Babylon become 

A desolation among the nations! 

24I have laid a snare for thee, and 
thou art also taken, O Babylon, 

And thou wast not aware; 

Thou art found, and also caught, 

Because thou hast striven against 
the LORD. 

25The LORD hath opened His 
armoury, 

And hath brought forth the weapons 
of His indignation; 

For it is a work that the Lord GOD of 
hosts 

Hath to do in the land of the 
Chaldeans. 

26Come against her from every 
quarter, open her granaries, 

Cast her up as heaps, and destroy 
her utterly; 

Let nothing of her be left. 

27Slay all her bullocks, let them go 
down to the slaughter; 

Woe unto them! for their day is 
come, 

The time of their visitation. 

28Hark! they flee and escape out of 
the land of Babylon, 

To declare in Zion the vengeance of 
the LORD our God, 

The vengeance of His temple. 

29Call together the archers against 
Babylon, 

All them that bend the bow; 

Encamp against her round about, 

Let none thereof escape; 

Recompense her according to her 
work, 

According to all that she hath done, 
do unto her: 

For she hath been arrogant against 
the LORD, 

Against the Holy One of Israel. 


30Therefore shall her young men fall 
in her broad places, 

And all her men of war shall be 
brought to silence in that day, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

31Behold, I am against thee, O thou 
most arrogant, 

Saith the Lord GOD of hosts; 

For thy day is come, 

The time that I will punish thee. 

32And the most arrogant shall 
stumble and fall, 

And none shall raise him up; 

And I will kindle a fire in his cities, 

And it shall devour all that are 
round about him. 

 

33Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

The children of Israel and the 
children of Judah are oppressed 
together; 

And all that took them captives hold 
them fast; 

They refuse to let them go. 

34Their Redeemer is strong, 

The LORD of hosts is His name; 

He will thoroughly plead their 
cause, 

That He may give rest to the earth, 

And disquiet the inhabitants of 
Babylon. 

35A sword is upon the Chaldeans, 
saith the LORD, 

And upon the inhabitants of 
Babylon, and upon her princes, 
and upon her wise men. 

36A sword is upon the boasters, and 
they shall become fools; 

A sword is upon her mighty men, 
and they shall be dismayed. 

37A sword is upon their horses, and 
upon their chariots, 

And upon all the mingled people 
that are in the midst of her, 

And they shall become as women; 

A sword is upon her treasures, and 
they shall be robbed. 

38A drought is upon her waters, and 
they shall be dried up; 

For it is a land of graven images, 

And they are mad upon things of 
horror. 

39Therefore the wild-cats with the 
jackals shall dwell there, 

And the ostriches shall dwell 
therein; and it shall be no more 
inhabited for ever, 

Neither shall it be dwelt in from 
generation to generation. 

40As when God overthrew Sodom 
and Gomorrah 

And the neighbour cities thereof, 
saith the LORD; 

So shall no man abide there, 

Neither shall any son of man dwell 
therein. 

 

41Behold, a people cometh from the 
north, 

And a great nation, and many kings 

Shall be roused from the uttermost 
parts of the earth. 

42They lay hold on bow and spear, 

They are cruel, and have no 
compassion; 

Their voice is like the roaring sea, 

And they ride upon horses; 


Set in array, as a man for war, 

Against thee, O daughter of 
Babylon. 

43The king of Babylon hath heard 
the fame of them, 

And his hands wax feeble; 

Anguish hath taken hold of him, 

And pain, as of a woman in travail. 

44Behold, he shall come up like a 
lion from the thickets of the 
Jordan 

Against the strong habitation; 

For I will suddenly make them run 
away from it, 

And whoso is chosen, him will I 
appoint over it; 

For who is like Me? and who will 
appoint Me a time? 

And who is that shepherd that will 
stand before Me? 

45Therefore hear ye the counsel of 
the LORD, 

That He hath taken against Babylon, 

And His purposes, that He hath 
purposed against the land of the 
Chaldeans: 

Surely the least of the flock shall 
drag them away, 

Surely their habitation shall be 
appalled at them. 

46At the noise of the taking of 
Babylon the earth quaketh, 

And the cry is heard among the 
nations. 

 

51 



Thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, I will raise up against 
Babylon, 

And against them that dwell in aLeb-
kamai, a destroying wind. 

a That is, The heart of them that 
rises up against Me. According to 
ancient tradition, a cipher for Casdim, 
that is Chaldea. 

2And I will send unto Babylon 
strangers, that shall fan her, 

And they shall empty her land; 

For in the day of trouble they shall 
be against her round about. 

3Let the archer bend his bow against 
her, 

And let him lift himself up against 
her in his coat of mail; 

And spare ye not her young men, 

Destroy ye utterly all her host. 

4And they shall fall down slain in 
the land of the Chaldeans, 

And thrust through in her streets. 

5For Israel is not widowed, nor 
Judah, 

Of his God, of the LORD of hosts; 

For their land is full of guilt 

Against the Holy One of Israel. 

6Flee out of the midst of Babylon, 

And save every man his life, 

Be not cut off in her iniquity; 

For it is the time of the LORD’S 
vengeance; 

He will render unto her a 
recompense. 

7Babylon hath been a golden cup in 
LORD’S hand, 

That made all the earth drunken; 

The nations have drunk of her wine, 

Therefore the nations are mad. 


8Babylon is suddenly fallen and 
destroyed, 

Wail for her; 

Take balm for her pain, 

If so be she may be healed. 

9We would have healed Babylon, 
but she is not healed; 

Forsake her, and let us go every one 
into his own country; 

For her judgment reacheth unto 
heaven, 

And is lifted up even to the skies. 

10The LORD hath brought forth our 
victory; 

Come, and let us declare in Zion 

The work of the LORD our God. 

 

11Make bright the arrows, 

Fill the quivers, 

The LORD hath roused the spirit of 
the kings of the Medes; 

Because His device is against 
Babylon, to destroy it; 

For it is the vengeance of the LORD, 

The vengeance of His temple. 

12Set up a standard against the walls 
of Babylon, 

Make the watch strong, 

Set the watchmen, prepare the 
ambushes; 

For the LORD hath both devised and 
done 

That which He spoke concerning the 
inhabitants of Babylon. 

13O thou that dwellest upon many 
waters, 

Abundant in treasures, 

Thine end is come, 

The measure of thy covetousness. 

14The LORD of hosts hath sworn by 
Himself: 

Surely I will fill thee with men, as 
with the canker-worm, 

And they shall lift up a shout against 
thee. 

 

15He that hath made the earth by His 
power, 

That hath established the world by 
His wisdom, 

And hath stretched out the heavens 
by His discernment; 

16At the sound of His giving a 
multitude of waters in the 
heavens, 

He causeth the vapours to ascend 
from the ends of the earth; 

He maketh lightnings at the time of 
the rain, 

And bringeth forth the wind out of 
His treasuries; 

17Every man is proved to be brutish, 
for the knowledge— 

Every goldsmith is put to shame by 
the graven image— 

That his molten image is falsehood, 
and there is no breath in them. 

18They are vanity, a work of 
delusion; 

In the time of their visitation they 
shall perish, 

19The portion of Jacob is not like 
these; 

For He is the former of all things, 

And [Israel] is the tribe of His 
inheritance; 

The LORD of hosts is His name. 

 


20Thou art My maul and weapons of 
war, 

And with thee will I shatter the 
nations, 

And with thee will I destroy 
kingdoms; 

21And with thee will I shatter the 
horse and his rider, 

And with thee will I shatter the 
chariot and him that rideth 
therein; 

22And with thee will I shatter man 
and woman, 

And with thee will I shatter the old 
man and the youth, 

And with thee will I shatter the 
young man and the maid; 

23And with thee will I shatter the 
shepherd and his flock, 

And with thee will I shatter the 
husbandman and his yoke of 
oxen, 

And with thee will I shatter 
governors and deputies. 

24And I will render unto Babylon 
and to all the inhabitants of 
Chaldea 

All their evil that they have done in 
Zion, in your sight; 

Saith the LORD. 

 

25Behold, I am against thee, 

O destroying mountain, saith the 
LORD, 

Which destroyest all the earth; 

And I will stretch out My hand upon 
thee, 

And roll thee down from the rocks, 

And will make thee a burnt 
mountain. 

26And they shall not take of thee a 
stone for a corner, 

Nor a stone for foundations; 

But thou shalt be desolate for ever, 
saith the LORD. 

 

27Set ye up a standard in the land, 

Blow the horn among the nations, 

Prepare the nations against her, 

Call together against her the 
kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and 
Ashkenaz; 

Appoint a marshal against her; 

Cause the horses to come up as the 
rough canker-worm. 

28Prepare against her the nations, the 
kings of the Medes, 

The governors thereof, and all the 
deputies thereof, 

And all the land of his dominion. 

29And the land quaketh and is in 
pain; 

For the purposes of the LORD are 
performed against Babylon, 

To make the land of Babylon a 
desolation, without inhabitant. 

30The mighty men of Babylon have 
forborne to fight, 

They remain in their strongholds; 

Their might hath failed, they are 
become as women; 

Her dwelling-places are set on fire; 

Her bars are broken. 

31One post runneth to meet another, 

And one messenger to meet an 
other, 

To tell the king of Babylon 


That his city is taken on every 
quarter; 

32And the fords are seized, 

And the castles they have burned 
with fire, 

And the men of war are affrighted. 

 

33For thus saith the LORD of hosts, 
the God of Israel: 

The daughter of Babylon is like a 
threshing-floor 

At the time when it is trodden; 

Yet a little while, and the time of 
harvest 

Shall come for her. 

34Nebuchadrezzar the king of 
Babylon hath devoured me, 

He hath crushed me, 

He hath set me down as an empty 
vessel, 

He hath swallowed me up like a 
dragon, 

He hath filled his maw with my 
delicacies; 

He hath washed me clean. 

35’The violence done to me and to 
my flesh be upon Babylon’, 

Shall the inhabitant of Zion say; 

And: ‘My blood be upon the 
inhabitants of Chaldea’, 

Shall Jerusalem say. 

 

36Therefore thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, I will plead thy cause, 

And take vengeance for thee; 

And I will dry up her sea, 

And make her fountain dry. 

37And Babylon shall become heaps, 

A dwelling-place for jackals, 

An astonishment, and a hissing, 

Without inhabitant. 

38They shall roar together like young 
lions; 

They shall growl as lions’whelps. 

39With their poison I will prepare 
their feast, 

And I will make them drunken, that 
they may be convulsed, 

And sleep a perpetual sleep, and not 
wake, 

Saith the LORD. 

40I will bring them down like lambs 
to the slaughter, 

Like rams with he-goats. 

41How is Sheshach taken! 

And the praise of the whole earth 
seized! 

How is Babylon become an 
astonishment 

Among the nations! 

42The sea is come up upon Babylon; 

She is covered with the multitude of 
the waves thereof. 

43Her cities are become a desolation, 

A dry land, and a desert, 

A land wherein no man dwelleth, 

Neither doth any son of man pass 
thereby. 

44And I will punish Bel in Babylon, 

And I will bring forth out of his 
mouth that which he hath 
swallowed up, 

And the nations shall not flow any 
more unto him; 

Yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall. 

45My people, go ye out of the midst 
of her, 

And save yourselves every man 


From the fierce anger of the LORD. 

46And let not your heart faint, 
neither fear ye, 

For the rumour that shall be heard in 
the land; 

For a rumour shall come one year, 

And after that in another year a 
rumour, 

And violence in the land, ruler 
against ruler. 

47Therefore behold, the days come, 

That I will do judgment upon the 
graven images of Babylon, 

And her whole land shall be 
ashamed; 

And all her slain shall fall in the 
midst of her. 

48Then the heaven and the earth, and 
all that is therein, 

Shall sing for joy over Babylon; 

For the spoilers shall come unto her 

From the north, saith the LORD. 

49As Babylon hath caused the slain 
of Israel to fall, 

So at Babylon shall fall the slain of 
all the land. 

50Ye that have escaped the sword, 

Go ye, stand not still; 

Remember the LORD from afar, 

And let Jerusalem come into your 
mind. 

51’We are ashamed, because we 
have heard reproach, 

Confusion hath covered our faces; 

For strangers are come 

Into the sanctuaries of the LORD’S 
house.’ 

 

52Wherefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, 

That I will do judgment upon her 
graven images; 

Aand through all her land the 
wounded shall groan. 

53Though Babylon should mount up 
to heaven, 

And though she should fortify the 
height of her strength, 

Yet from Me shall spoilers come 
unto her, saith the LORD. 

54Hark! a cry from Babylon, 

And great destruction from the land 
of the Chaldeans! 

55For the LORD spoileth Babylon, 

And destroyeth out of her the great 
voice; 

And their waves roar like many 
waters, 

The noise of their voice is uttered; 

56For the spoiler is come upon her, 
even upon Babylon, 

And her mighty men are taken, 

Their bows are shattered; 

For the LORD is a God of 
recompenses, 

He will surely requite. 

57And I will make drunk her princes 
and her wise men, 

Her governors and her deputies, and 
her mighty men; 

And they shall sleep a perpetual 
sleep, and not wake, 

Saith the King, whose name is the 
LORD of hosts. 

 

58Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 


The broad walls of Babylon shall be 
utterly overthrown, 

And her high gates shall be burned 
with fire; 

And the peoples shall labour for 
vanity, 

And the nations for the fire; 

And they shall be weary. 

 

59The word which Jeremiah the 
prophet commanded Seraiah the son of 
Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he 
went with Zedekiah the king of Judah 
to Babylon in the fourth year of his 
reign. Now Seraiah was quartermaster. 
60And Jeremiah wrote in one book all 
the evil that should come upon 
Babylon, even all these words that are 
written concerning Babylon. 61And 
Jeremiah said to Seraiah: ‘When thou 
comest to Babylon, then see that thou 
read all these words, 62and say: O 
LORD, Thou hast spoken concerning 
this place, to cut it off, that none shall 
dwell therein, neither man nor beast, 
but that it shall be desolate for ever. 
63And it shall be, when thou hast made 
an end of reading this book, that thou 
shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into 
the midst of the Euphrates; 64and thou 
shalt say: Thus shall Babylon sink, and 
shall not rise again because of the evil 
that I will bring upon her; and they 
shall be weary.’ 

 

Thus far are the words of Jeremiah. 

 

Zedekiah was one and twenty 
years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned eleven years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of 
Libnah. 2And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD, according 
to all that Jehoiakim had done. 3For 
through the anger of the LORD did it 
come to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, 
until He had cast them out from His 
presence. And Zedekiah rebelled 
against the king of Babylon. 4And it 
came to pass in the ninth year of his 
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth 
day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon came, he and all his 
army, against Jerusalem, and 
encamped against it; and they built 
forts against it round about. 5So the 
city was besieged unto the eleventh 
year of king Zedekiah. 6In the fourth 
month, in the ninth day of the month, 
the famine was sore in the city, so that 
there was no bread for the people of 
the land. 7Then a breach was made in 
the city, and all the men of war fled, 
and went forth out of the city by night 
by the way of the gate between the two 
walls, which was by the king’s 
garden—now the Chaldeans were 
against the city round about—and they 
went by the way of the Arabah. 8But 
the army of the Chaldeans pursued 
after the king, and overtook Zedekiah 
in the plains of Jericho; and all his 
army was scattered from him. 9Then 
they took the king, and carried him up 
unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in 
the land of Hamath; and he gave 
judgment upon him. 10And the king of 52 




Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah 
before his eyes; he slew also all the 
princes of Judah in Riblah. 11And he 
put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the 
king of Babylon bound him in fetters, 
and carried him to Babylon, and put 
him in prison till the day of his death. 

12Now in the fifth month, in the 
tenth day of the month, which was the 
nineteenth year of king 
Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, 
came Nebuzaradan the captain of the 
guard, who stood before the king of 
Babylon, into Jerusalem; 13and he 
burned the house of the LORD, and the 
king’s house; and all the houses of 
Jerusalem, even every great man’s 
house, burned he with fire. 14And all 
the army of the Chaldeans, that were 
with the captain of the guard, broke 
down all the walls of Jerusalem round 
about. 15Then Nebuzaradan the captain 
of the guard carried away captive of 
the poorest sort of the people, and the 
residue of the people that remained in 
the city, and those that fell away, that 
fell to the king of Babylon, and the 
residue of the multitude. 16But 
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard 
left of the poorest of the land to be 
vinedressers and husbandmen. 17And 
the pillars of brass that were in the 
house of the LORD, and the bases and 
the brazen sea that were in the house 
of the LORD, did the Chaldeans break 
in pieces, and carried all the brass of 
them to Babylon. 18The pots also, and 
the shovels, and the snuffers, and the 
basins, and the pans, and all the 
vessels of brass wherewith they 
ministered, took they away. 19And the 
cups, and the fire-pans, and the basins, 
and the pots, and the candlesticks, and 
the pans, and the bowls—that which 
was of gold, in gold, and that which 
was of silver, in silver—the captain of 
the guard took away. 20The two pillars, 
the one sea, and the twelve brazen 
bulls that were under the bases, which 
king Solomon had made for the house 
of the LORD—the brass of all these 
vessels was without weight. 21And as 
for the pillars, the height of the one 
pillar was eighteen cubits; and a line of 
twelve cubits did compass it; and the 
thickness thereof was four fingers; it 
was hollow. 22And a capital of brass 
was upon it; and the height of the one 
capital was five cubits, with network 
and pomegranates upon the capital 
round about, all of brass; and the 
second pillar also had like unto these, 
and pomegranates. 23And there were 
ninety and six pomegranates on the 
outside; all the pomegranates were a 
hundred upon the network round 
about. 

24And the captain of the guard took 
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah 
the second priest, and the three keepers 
of the door; 25and out of the city he 
took an officer that was set over the 
men of war; and seven men of them 
that saw the king’s face, who were 
found in the city; and the scribe of the 
captain of the host, who mustered the 
people of the land; and threescore men 
of the people of the land, that were 


found in the midst of the city. 26And 
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard 
took them, and brought them to the 
king of Babylon to Riblah. 27And the 
king of Babylon smote them, and put 
them to death at Riblah in the land of 
Hamath. So Judah was carried away 
captive out of his land. 28This is the 
people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried 
away captive: in the seventh year three 
thousand Jews and three and twenty; 
29in the eighteenth year of 
Nebuchadrezzar, from Jerusalem, eight 
hundred thirty and two persons; 30in 
the three and twentieth year of 
Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the 
captain of the guard carried away 
captive of the Jews seven hundred 
forty and five persons; all the persons 
were four thousand and six hundred. 
31And it came to pass in the seven and 
thirtieth year of the captivity of 
Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the 
twelfth month, in the five and 
twentieth day of the month, that Evil-
merodach king of Babylon, in the first 
year of his reign, lifted up the head of 
Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought 
him forth out of prison. 32And he 
spoke kindly to him, and set his throne 
above the throne of the kings that were 
with him in Babylon. 33And he 
changed his prison garments, and did 
eat bread before him continually all 
the days of his life. 34And for his 
allowance, there was a continual 
allowance given him of the king of 
Babylon, every day a portion until the 
day of his death, all the days of his 
life. 




...... 

EZEKIEL 

 

Now it came to pass in the 
thirtieth year, in the fourth month, 
in the fifth day of the month, as I was 
among the captives by the river 
Chebar that the heavens were opened, 
and I saw visions of God. 2In the fifth 
day of the month, which was the fifth 
year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity, 
3the word of the LORD came expressly 
unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of 
Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by 
the river Chebar; and the hand of the 
LORD was there upon him. 

4And I looked, and, behold, a 
stormy wind came out of the north, a 
great cloud, with a fire flashing up, so 
that a brightness was round about it; 
and out of the midst thereof as the 
colour of electrum, out of the midst of 
the fire. 5And out of the midst thereof 
came the likeness of four living 
creatures. And this was their 
appearance: they had the likeness of a 
man. 6And every one had four faces, 
and every one of them had four wings. 
7And their feet were straight feet; and 
the sole of their feet was like the sole 
of a calf’s foot; and they sparkled like 
the colour of burnished brass. 8And 
they had the hands of a man under 
their wings on their four sides; and as 
for the faces and wings of them four, 
9their wings were joined one to 
another; they turned not when they 
went; they went every one straight 
forward. 10As for the likeness of their 
faces, they had the face of a man; and 
they four had the face of a lion on the 
right side; and they four had the face 
of an ox on the left side; they four had 
also the face of an eagle. 11Thus were 
their faces; and their wings were 
stretched upward; two wings of every 
one were joined one to another, and 
two covered their bodies. 12And they 
went every one straight forward; 
whither the spirit was to go, they went; 
they turned not when they went. 13As 
for the likeness of the living creatures, 
their appearance was like coals of fire, 
burning like the appearance of torches; 
it flashed up and down among the 
living creatures; and there was 
brightness to the fire, and out of the 
fire went forth lightning. 14And the 
living creatures ran and returned as the 
appearance of a flash of lightning. 

15Now as I beheld the living 
creatures, behold one wheel at the 
bottom hard by the living creatures, at 
the four faces thereof. 16The 
appearance of the wheels and their 
work was like unto the colour of a 
beryl; and they four had one likeness; 
and their appearance and their work 
was as it were a wheel within a wheel. 
17When they went, they went toward 
their four sides; they turned not when 
1 




they went. 18As for their rings, they 
were high and they were dreadful; and 
they four had their rings full of eyes 
round about. 19And when the living 
creatures went, the wheels went hard 
by them; and when the living creatures 
were lifted up from the bottom, the 
wheels were lifted up. 20Whithersoever 
the spirit was to go, as the spirit was to 
go thither, so they went; and the 
wheels were lifted up beside them; for 
the spirit of the living creature was in 
the wheels. 21When those went, these 
went, and when those stood, these 
stood; and when those were lifted up 
from the earth, the wheels were lifted 
up beside them; for the spirit of the 
living creature was in the wheels. 

22And over the heads of the living 
creatures there was the likeness of a 
firmament, like the colour of the 
terrible ice, stretched forth over their 
heads above. 23And under the 
firmament were their wings 
conformable the one to the other; this 
one of them had two which covered, 
and that one of them had two which 
covered, their bodies. 24And when they 
went, I heard the noise of their wings 
like the noise of great waters, like the 
voice of the Almighty, a noise of 
tumult like the noise of a host; when 
they stood, they let down their wings. 
25For, when there was a voice above 
the firmament that was over their 
heads, as they stood, they let down 
their wings. 

26And above the firmament that was 
over their heads was the likeness of a 
throne, as the appearance of a sapphire 
stone; and upon the likeness of the 
throne was a likeness as the 
appearance of a man upon it above. 
27And I saw as the colour of electrum, 
as the appearance of fire round about 
enclosing it, from the appearance of 
his loins and upward; and from the 
appearance of his loins and downward 
I saw as it were the appearance of fire, 
and there was brightness round about 
him. 28As the appearance of the bow 
that is in the cloud in the day of rain, 
so was the appearance of the 
brightness round about. This was the 
appearance of the likeness of the glory 
of the LORD. And when I saw it, I fell 
upon my face, and I heard a voice of 
one that spoke. 

And He said unto me: ‘Son of 
man, stand upon thy feet, and I 
will speak with thee.’ 2And spirit 
entered into me when He spoke unto 
me, and set me upon my feet; and I 
heard Him that spoke unto me. 

3And He said unto me: ‘Son of man, 
I send thee to the children of Israel, to 
rebellious nations, that have rebelled 
against Me; they and their fathers have 
transgressed against Me, even unto 
this very day; 4and the children are 
brazen-faced and stiff-hearted, I do 
send thee unto them; and thou shalt 
say unto them: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD. 5And they, whether they will 
hear, or whether they will forbear—for 
they are a rebellious house—yet shall 
know that there hath been a prophet 
among them. 
2 




6And thou, son of man, be not afraid 
of them, neither be afraid of their 
words, though defiers and despisers be 
with thee, and thou dost dwell among 
scorpions; be not afraid of their words, 
nor be dismayed at their looks, for 
they are a rebellious house. 7And thou 
shalt speak My words unto them, 
whether they will hear, or whether 
they will forbear; for they are most 
rebellious. 

8And thou, son of man, hear what I 
say unto thee: be not thou rebellious 
like that rebellious house; open thy 
mouth, and eat that which I give thee.’ 
9And when I looked, behold, a hand 
was put forth unto me; and, lo, a roll of 
a book was therein; 10and He spread it 
before me, and it was written within 
and without; and there was written 
therein lamentations, and moaning, 
and woe. 

And He said unto me: ‘Son of 
man, eat that which thou findest; 
eat this roll, and go, speak unto the 
house of Israel.’ 2So I opened my 
mouth, and He caused me to eat that 
roll. 3And He said unto me: ‘Son of 
man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy 
bowels with this roll that I give thee.’ 
Then did I eat it; and it was in my 
mouth as honey for sweetness. 

4And He said unto me: ‘Son of man, 
go, get thee unto the house of Israel, 
and speak with My words unto them. 
5For thou art not sent to a people of an 
unintelligible speech and of a slow 
tongue, but to the house of Israel; 6not 
to many peoples of an unintelligible 
speech and of a slow tongue, whose 
words thou canst not understand. 
Surely, if I sent thee to them, they 
would hearken unto thee. 7But the 
house of Israel will not consent to 
hearken unto thee; for they consent not 
to hearken unto Me; for all the house 
of Israel are of a hard forehead and of 
a stiff heart. 8Behold, I have made thy 
face hard against their faces, and thy 
forehead hard against their foreheads. 
9As an adamant harder than flint have I 
made thy forehead; fear them not, 
neither be dismayed at their looks, for 
they are a rebellious house.’ 

10Moreover He said unto me: ‘Son 
of man, all My words that I shall speak 
unto thee receive in thy heart, and hear 
with thine ears. 11And go, get thee to 
them of the captivity, unto the children 
of thy people, and speak unto them, 
and tell them: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD; whether they will hear, or 
whether they will forbear.’ 

12Then a spirit lifted me up, and I 
heard behind me the voice of a great 
rushing: ‘Blessed be the glory of the 
LORD from His place’; 13also the noise 
of the wings of the living creatures as 
they touched one another, and the 
noise of the wheels beside them, even 
the noise of a great rushing. 14So a 
spirit lifted me up, and took me away; 
and I went in bitterness, in the heat of 
my spirit, and the hand of the LORD 
was strong upon me. 15Then I came to 
them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that 
dwelt by the river Chebar, and I sat 
3 




where they sat; and I remained there 
appalled among them seven days. 

16And it came to pass at the end of 
seven days, that the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 17’Son of man, I 
have appointed thee a watchman unto 
the house of Israel; and when thou 
shalt hear a word at My mouth, thou 
shalt give them warning from Me. 
18When I say unto the wicked: Thou 
shalt surely die; and thou givest him 
not warning, nor speakest to warn the 
wicked from his wicked way, to save 
his life; the same wicked man shall die 
in his iniquity, but his blood will I 
require at thy hand. 19Yet if thou warn 
the wicked, and he turn not from his 
wickedness, nor from his wicked way, 
he shall die in his iniquity; but thou 
hast delivered thy soul. 20Again, when 
a righteous man doth turn from his 
righteousness, and commit iniquity, I 
will lay a stumblingblock before him, 
he shall die; because thou hast not 
given him warning, he shall die in his 
sin, and his righteous deeds which he 
hath done shall not be remembered; 
but his blood will I require at thy hand. 
21Nevertheless if thou warn the 
righteous man, that the righteous sin 
not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely 
live, because he took warning; and 
thou hast delivered thy soul.’ 

22And the hand of the LORD came 
there upon me; and He said unto me: 
‘Arise, go forth into the plain, and I 
will there speak with thee.’ 23Then I 
arose, and went forth into the plain; 
and, behold, the glory of the LORD 
stood there, as the glory which I saw 
by the river Chebar; and I fell on my 
face. 24Then spirit entered into me, and 
set me upon my feet; and He spoke 
with me, and said unto me: ‘Go, shut 
thyself within thy house. 25But thou, 
son of man, behold, bands shall be put 
upon thee, and thou shalt be bound 
with them, and thou shalt not go out 
among them; 26and I will make thy 
tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, 
that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not 
be to them a reprover; for they are a 
rebellious house. 27But when I speak 
with thee, I will open thy mouth, and 
thou shalt say unto them: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD; he that heareth, let him 
hear, and he that forbeareth, let him 
forbear; for they are a rebellious 
house. 

Thou also, son of man, take thee a 
tile, and lay it before thee, and 
trace upon it a city, even Jerusalem; 
2and lay siege against it, and build 
forts against it, and cast up a mound 
against it; set camps also against it, 
and set battering rams against it round 
about. 3And take thou unto thee an iron 
griddle, and set it for a wall of iron 
between thee and the city; and set thy 
face toward it, and it shall be besieged, 
and thou shalt lay siege against it. This 
shall be a sign to the house of Israel. 

4Moreover lie thou upon thy left 
side, and lay the iniquity of the house 
of Israel upon it; according to the 
number of the days that thou shalt lie 
upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity. 
5For I have appointed the years of their 
4 




iniquity to be unto thee a number of 
days, even three hundred and ninety 
days; so shalt thou bear the iniquity of 
the house of Israel. 6And again, when 
thou hast accomplished these, thou 
shalt lie on thy right side, and shalt 
bear the iniquity of the house of Judah; 
forty days, each day for a year, have I 
appointed it unto thee. 7And thou shalt 
set thy face toward the siege of 
Jerusalem, with thine arm uncovered; 
and thou shalt prophesy against it. 
8And, behold, I lay bands upon thee, 
and thou shalt not turn thee from one 
side to another, till thou hast 
accomplished the days of thy siege. 
9Take thou also unto thee wheat, and 
barley, and beans, and lentils, and 
millet, and spelt, and put them in one 
vessel, and make thee bread thereof; 
according to the number of the days 
that thou shalt lie upon thy side, even 
three hundred and ninety days, shalt 
thou eat thereof. 10And thy food which 
thou shalt eat shall be by weight, 
twenty shekels a day; from time to 
time shalt thou eat it. 11Thou shalt 
drink also water by measure, the sixth 
part of a hin; from time to time shalt 
thou drink. 12And thou shalt eat it as 
barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it in 
their sight with dung that cometh out 
of man.’ 

13And the LORD said: ‘Even thus 
shall the children of Israel eat their 
bread unclean, among the nations 
whither I will drive them.’ 14Then said 
I: ‘Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath 
not been polluted; for from my youth 
up even till now have I not eaten of 
that which dieth of itself, or is torn of 
beasts; neither came there abhorred 
flesh into my mouth.’ 15Then He said 
unto me: ‘See, I have given thee cow’s 
dung for man’s dung, and thou shalt 
prepare thy bread thereon.’ 16Moreover 
He said unto me: ‘Son of man, behold, 
I will break the staff of bread in 
Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by 
weight, and with anxiety; and they 
shall drink water by measure, and in 
appalment; 17that they may want bread 
and water, and be appalled one with 
another, and pine away in their 
iniquity. 

 

And thou, son of man, take thee a 
sharp sword, as a barber’s razor 
shalt thou take it unto thee, and cause 
it to pass upon thy head and upon thy 
beard; then take thee balances to 
weigh, and divide the hair. 2A third 
part shalt thou burn in the fire in the 
midst of the city, when the days of the 
siege are fulfilled; and thou shalt take 
a third part, and smite it with the 
sword round about her; and a third part 
thou shalt scatter to the wind, and I 
will draw out a sword after them. 
3Thou shalt also take thereof a few by 
number, and bind them in thy skirts. 
4And of them again shalt thou take, 
and cast them into the midst of the fire, 
and burn them in the fire; therefrom 
shall a fire come forth into all the 
house of Israel. 

5Thus saith the Lord GOD: This is 
Jerusalem! I have set her in the midst 
5 




of the nations, and countries are round 
about her. 6And she hath rebelled 
against Mine ordinances in doing 
wickedness more than the nations, and 
against My statutes more than the 
countries that are round about her; for 
they have rejected Mine ordinances, 
and as for My statutes, they have not 
walked in them. 7Therefore thus saith 
the Lord GOD: Because ye have 
outdone the nations that are round 
about you, in that ye have not walked 
in My statutes, neither have kept Mine 
ordinances, neither have done after the 
ordinances of the nations that are 
round about you; 8therefore thus saith 
the Lord GOD: Behold, I, even I, am 
against thee, and I will execute 
judgments in the midst of thee in the 
sight of the nations. 9And I will do in 
thee that which I have not done, and 
whereunto I will not do any more the 
like, because of all thine abominations. 
10Therefore the fathers shall eat the 
sons in the midst of thee, and the sons 
shall eat their fathers; and I will 
execute judgments in thee, and the 
whole remnant of thee will I scatter 
unto all the winds. 11Wherefore, as I 
live, saith the Lord GOD, surely, 
because thou hast defiled My 
sanctuary with all thy detestable 
things, and with all thine 
abominations, therefore will I also 
diminish thee; neither shall Mine eye 
spare, and I also will have no pity. 12A 
third part of thee shall die with the 
pestilence, and with famine shall they 
be consumed in the midst of thee; and 
a third part shall fall by the sword 
round about thee; and a third part I 
will scatter unto all the winds, and will 
draw out a sword after them. 13Thus 
shall Mine anger spend itself, and I 
will satisfy My fury upon them, and I 
will be eased; and they shall know that 
I the LORD have spoken in My zeal, 
when I have spent My fury upon them. 
14Moreover I will make thee an 
amazement and a reproach, among the 
nations that are round about thee, in 
the sight of all that pass by. 15So it 
shall be a reproach and a taunt, an 
instruction and an astonishment, unto 
the nations that are round about thee, 
when I shall execute judgments in thee 
in anger and in fury, and in furious 
rebukes; I the LORD have spoken it; 
16when I shall send upon them the evil 
arrows of famine, that are for 
destruction, which I will send to 
destroy you; and I will increase the 
famine upon you, and will break your 
staff of bread; 17and I will send upon 
you famine and evil beasts, and they 
shall bereave thee; and pestilence and 
blood shall pass through thee; and I 
will bring the sword upon thee. I the 
LORD have spoken it.’ 

And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 2’Son of man, 
set thy face toward the mountains of 
Israel, and prophesy against them, 3and 
say: Ye mountains of Israel, hear the 
word of the Lord GOD: Thus saith the 
Lord GOD concerning the mountains 
and concerning the hills, concerning 
the ravines and concerning the valleys: 
6 




Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword 
upon you, and I will destroy your high 
places. 4And your altars shall become 
desolate, and your sun-images shall be 
broken; and I will cast down your slain 
men before your idols. 5And I will lay 
the carcasses of the children of Israel 
before their idols; and I will scatter 
your bones round about your altars. 6In 
all your dwelling-places the cities shall 
be laid waste, and the high places shall 
be desolate; that your altars may be 
laid waste and made desolate, and your 
idols may be broken and cease, and 
your sun-images may be hewn down, 
and your works may be blotted out. 
7And the slain shall fall in the midst of 
you, and ye shall know that I am the 
LORD. 8Yet will I leave a remnant, in 
that ye shall have some that escape the 
sword among the nations, when ye 
shall be scattered through the 
countries. 9And they that escape of you 
shall remember Me among the nations 
whither they shall be carried captives, 
how that I have been anguished with 
their straying heart, which hath 
departed from Me, and with their eyes, 
which are gone astray after their idols; 
and they shall loathe themselves in 
their own sight for the evils which they 
have committed in all their 
abominations. 10And they shall know 
that I am the LORD; I have not said in 
vain that I would do this evil unto 
them. 

11Thus saith the Lord GOD: Smite 
with thy hand, and stamp with thy 
foot, and say: Alas! because of all the 
evil abominations of the house of 
Israel; for they shall fall by the sword, 
by the famine, and by the pestilence. 
12He that is far off shall die of the 
pestilence; and he that is near shall fall 
by the sword; and he that remaineth 
and is besieged shall die by the 
famine; thus will I spend My fury 
upon them. 13And ye shall know that I 
am the LORD, when their slain men 
shall be among their idols round about 
their altars, upon every high hill, in all 
the tops of the mountains, and under 
every leafy tree, and under every thick 
terebinth, the place where they did 
offer sweet savour to all their idols. 
14And I will stretch out My hand upon 
them, and make the land desolate and 
waste, more than the wilderness of 
Diblah, throughout all their 
habitations; and they shall know that I 
am the LORD.’ 

Moreover the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’And 
thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord 
GOD concerning the land of Israel: An 
end! the end is come upon the four 
corners of the land. 3Now is the end 
upon thee, and I will send Mine anger 
upon thee, and will judge thee 
according to thy ways; and I will bring 
upon thee all thine abominations. 4And 
Mine eye shall not spare thee, neither 
will I have pity; but I will bring thy 
ways upon thee, and thine 
abominations shall be in the midst of 
thee; and ye shall know that I am the 
LORD. 
7 




5Thus saith the Lord GOD: An evil, a 
singular evil, behold, it cometh. 6An 
end is come, the end is come, it 
awaketh against thee; behold, it 
cometh. 7The turn is come unto thee, O 
inhabitant of the land; the time is 
come, the day of tumult is near, and 
not of joyful shouting upon the 
mountains. 8Now will I shortly pour 
out My fury upon thee, and spend 
Mine anger upon thee, and will judge 
thee according to thy ways; and I will 
bring upon thee all thine abominations. 
9And Mine eye shall not spare, neither 
will I have pity; I will bring upon thee 
according to thy ways, and thine 
abominations shall be in the midst of 
thee; and ye shall know that I the LORD 
do smite. 10Behold the day; behold, it 
cometh; the turn is come forth; the rod 
hath blossomed, arrogancy hath 
budded. 11Violence is risen up into a 
rod of wickedness; nought cometh 
from them, nor from their tumult, nor 
from their turmoil, neither is there 
eminency among them. 12The time is 
come, the day draweth near; let not the 
buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for 
wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. 
13For the seller shall not return to that 
which is sold, although they be yet 
alive; for the vision is touching the 
whole multitude thereof, which shall 
not return; neither shall any stand 
possessed of the iniquity of his life. 
14They have blown the horn, and have 
made all ready, but none goeth to the 
battle; for My wrath is upon all the 
multitude thereof. 15The sword is 
without, and the pestilence and the 
famine within; he that is in the field 
shall die with the sword, and he that is 
in the city, famine and pestilence shall 
devour him. 16But they that shall at all 
escape of them, shall be on the 
mountains like doves of the valleys, all 
of them moaning, every one in his 
iniquity. 17All hands shall be slack, and 
all knees shall drip with water. 18They 
shall also gird themselves with 
sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; 
and shame shall be upon all faces, and 
baldness upon all their heads. 19They 
shall cast their silver in the streets, and 
their gold shall be as an unclean thing; 
their silver and their gold shall not be 
able to deliver them in the day of the 
wrath of the LORD; they shall not 
satisfy their souls, neither fill their 
bowels; because it hath been the 
stumblingblock of their iniquity. 20And 
as for the beauty of their ornament, 
which was set for a pride, they made 
the images of their abominations and 
their detestable things thereof; 
therefore have I made it unto them as 
an unclean thing. 21And I will give it 
into the hands of the strangers for a 
prey, and to the wicked of the earth for 
a spoil; and they shall profane it. 22I 
will also turn My face from them, and 
they shall profane My secret place; 
and robbers shall enter into it, and 
profane it. 

23Make the chain; for the land is full 
of bloody crimes, and the city is full of 
violence. 24Wherefore I will bring the 
worst of the nations, and they shall 


possess their houses; I will also make 
the pride of the strong to cease; and 
their holy places shall be profaned. 
25Horror cometh; and they shall seek 
peace, and there shall be none. 
26Calamity shall come upon calamity, 
and rumour shall be upon rumour; and 
they shall seek a vision of the prophet, 
and instruction shall perish from the 
priest, and counsel from the elders. 
27The king shall mourn, and the prince 
shall be clothed with appalment, and 
the hands of the people of the land 
shall be enfeebled; I will do unto them 
after their way, and according to their 
deserts will I judge them; and they 
shall know that I am the LORD.’ 

And it came to pass in the sixth 
year, in the sixth month, in the 
fifth day of the month, as I sat in my 
house, and the elders of Judah sat 
before me, that the hand of the Lord 
GOD fell there upon me. 2Then I 
beheld, and lo a likeness as the 
appearance of fire: from the 
appearance of his loins and downward, 
fire; and from his loins and upward, as 
the appearance of brightness, as the 
colour of electrum. 3And the form of a 
hand was put forth, and I was taken by 
a lock of my head; and a spirit lifted 
me up between the earth and the 
heaven, and brought me in the visions 
of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the 
gate of the inner court that looketh 
toward the north; where was the seat 
of the image of jealousy, which 
provoketh to jealousy. 4And, behold, 
the glory of the God of Israel was 
there, according to the vision that I 
saw in the plain. 5Then said He unto 
me: ‘Son of man, lift up thine eyes 
now the way toward the north.’ So I 
lifted up mine eyes the way toward the 
north, and behold northward of the 
gate of the altar this image of jealousy 
in the entry. 

6And He said unto me: ‘Son of man, 
seest thou what they do? even the great 
abominations that the house of Israel 
do commit here, that I should go far 
off from My sanctuary? but thou shalt 
again see yet greater abominations.’ 
7And He brought me to the door of the 
court; and when I looked, behold a 
hole in the wall. 8Then said He unto 
me: ‘Son of man, dig now in the wall’; 
and when I had digged in the wall, 
behold a door. 9And He said unto me: 
‘Go in, and see the wicked 
abominations that they do here.’ 10So I 
went in and saw; and behold every 
detestable form of creeping things and 
beasts, and all the idols of the house of 
Israel, portrayed upon the wall round 
about. 11And there stood before them 
seventy men of the elders of the house 
of Israel, and in the midst of them 
stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, 
every man with his censer in his hand; 
and a thick cloud of incense went up. 
12Then said He unto me: ‘Son of man, 
hast thou seen what the elders of the 
house of Israel do in the dark, every 
man in his chambers of imagery? for 
they say: The LORD seeth us not, the 
LORD hath forsaken the land.’ 13He said 
also unto me: ‘Thou shalt again see yet 
8 




greater abominations which they do.’ 
14Then He brought me to the door of 
the gate of the LORD’S house which 
was toward the north; and, behold, 
there sat the women weeping for 
Tammuz. 15Then said He unto me: 
‘Hast thou seen this, O son of man? 
thou shalt again see yet greater 
abominations than these.’ 16And He 
brought me into the inner court of the 
LORD’S house, and, behold, at the door 
of the temple of the LORD, between the 
porch and the altar, were about five 
and twenty men, with their backs 
toward the temple of the LORD, and 
their faces toward the east; and they 
worshipped the sun toward the east. 
17Then He said unto me: ‘Hast thou 
seen this, O son of man? Is it a light 
thing to the house of Judah that they 
commit the abominations which they 
commit here in that they fill the land 
with violence, and provoke Me still 
more, and, lo, they put the branch to 
their nose? 18Therefore will I also deal 
in fury; Mine eye shall not spare, 
neither will I have pity; and though 
they cry in Mine ears with a loud 
voice, yet will I not hear them.’ 

Then he called in mine ears with a 
loud voice, saying: ‘Cause ye 
them that have charge over the city to 
draw near, every man with his 
destroying weapon in his hand.’ 2And, 
behold, six men came from the way of 
the upper gate, which lieth toward the 
north, every man with his weapon of 
destruction in his hand; and one man 
in the midst of them clothed in linen, 
with a writer’s inkhorn on his side. 
And they went in, and stood beside the 
brazen altar. 3And the glory of the God 
of Israel was gone up from the cherub, 
whereupon it was, to the threshold of 
the house; and He called to the man 
clothed in linen, who had the writer’s 
inkhorn on his side. 4And the LORD 
said unto him: ‘Go through the midst 
of the city, through the midst of 
Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the 
foreheads of the men that sigh and that 
cry for all the abominations that are 
done in the midst thereof.’ 5And to the 
others He said in my hearing: ‘Go ye 
through the city after him, and smite; 
let not your eye spare, neither have ye 
pity; 6slay utterly the old man, the 
young man and the maiden, and little 
children and women; but come not 
near any man upon whom is the mark; 
and begin at My sanctuary.’ Then they 
began at the elders that were before the 
house. 7And He said unto them: 
‘Defile the house, and fill the courts 
with the slain; go ye forth.’ And they 
went forth, and smote in the city. 8And 
it came to pass, while they were 
smiting, and I was left, that I fell upon 
my face, and cried, and said: ‘Ah Lord 
GOD! wilt Thou destroy all the residue 
of Israel in Thy pouring out of Thy 
fury upon Jerusalem?’ 9Then said He 
unto me: ‘The iniquity of the house of 
Israel and Judah is exceeding great, 
and the land is full of blood, and the 
city full of wresting of judgment; for 
they say: The LORD hath forsaken the 
land, and the LORD seeth not. 10And as 
9 




for Me also, Mine eye shall not spare, 
neither will I have pity, but I will bring 
their way upon their head.’ 11And, 
behold, the man clothed in linen, who 
had the inkhorn on his side, reported, 
saying: ‘I have done according to all 
that Thou hast commanded me.’ 

Then I looked, and, behold, 
upon the firmament that was 
over the head of the cherubim, there 
appeared above them as it were a 
sapphire stone, as the appearance of 
the likeness of a throne. 2And He 
spoke unto the man clothed in linen, 
and said: ‘Go in between the 
wheelwork, even under the cherub, 
and fill both thy hands with coals of 
fire from between the cherubim, and 
dash them against the city.’ And he 
went in in my sight. 3Now the 
cherubim stood on the right side of the 
house, when the man went in; and the 
cloud filled the inner court. 4And the 
glory of the LORD mounted up from the 
cherub to the threshold of the house; 
and the house was filled with the 
cloud, and the court was full of the 
brightness of the LORD’S glory. 5And 
the sound of the wings of the cherubim 
was heard even to the outer court, as 
the voice of God Almighty when He 
speaketh. 6And it came to pass, when 
He commanded the man clothed in 
linen, saying: ‘Take fire from between 
the wheelwork, from between the 
cherubim’, that he went in, and stood 
beside a wheel. 7And the cherub 
stretched forth his hand from between 
the cherubim unto the fire that was 
between the cherubim, and took 
thereof, and put it into the hands of 
him that was clothed in linen, who 
took it and went out. 8And there 
appeared in the cherubim the form of a 
man’s hand under their wings. 9And I 
looked, and behold four wheels beside 
the cherubim, one wheel beside one 
cherub, and another wheel beside 
another cherub; and the appearance of 
the wheels was as the colour of a beryl 
stone. 10And as for their appearance, 
they four had one likeness, as if a 
wheel had been within a wheel. 
11When they went, they went toward 
their four sides; they turned not as they 
went, but to the place whither the head 
looked they followed it; they turned 
not as they went. 12And their whole 
body, and their backs, and their hands, 
and their wings, and the wheels were 
full of eyes round about, even the 
wheels that they four had. 13As for the 
wheels, they were called in my hearing 
The wheelwork. 14And every one had 
four faces: the first face was the face 
of the cherub, and the second face was 
the face of a man, and the third the 
face of a lion, and the fourth the face 
of an eagle. 15And the cherubim 
mounted up—this is the living creature 
that I saw by the river Chebar. 16And 
when the cherubim went, the wheels 
went beside them; and when the 
cherubim lifted up their wings to 
mount up from the earth, the same 
wheels also turned not from beside 
them. 17When they stood, these stood, 
and when they mounted up, these 
10 




mounted up with them; for the spirit of 
the living creature was in them. 18And 
the glory of the LORD went forth from 
off the threshold of the house, and 
stood over the cherubim. 19And the 
cherubim lifted up their wings, and 
mounted up from the earth in my sight 
when they went forth, and the wheels 
beside them; and they stood at the door 
of the east gate of the LORD’S house; 
and the glory of the God of Israel was 
over them above. 20This is the living 
creature that I saw under the God of 
Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew 
that they were cherubim. 21Every one 
had four faces apiece, and every one 
four wings; and the likeness of the 
hands of a man was under their wings. 
22And as for the likeness of their faces, 
they were the faces which I saw by the 
river Chebar, their appearances and 
themselves; they went every one 
straight forward. 

Then a spirit lifted me up, and 
brought me unto the east gate 
of the LORD’S house, which looketh 
eastward; and behold at the door of the 
gate five and twenty men; and I saw in 
the midst of them Jaazaniah the son of 
Azzur, and Pelatiah the son of 
Benaiah, princes of the people. 2And 
He said unto me: ‘Son of man, these 
are the men that devise iniquity, and 
that give wicked counsel in this city; 
3that say: The time is not near to build 
houses! this city is the caldron, and we 
are the flesh. 4Therefore prophesy 
against them, prophesy, O son of 
man.’ 5And the spirit of the LORD fell 
upon me, and He said unto me: 
‘Speak: Thus saith the LORD: Thus 
have ye said, O house of Israel; for I 
know the things that come into your 
mind. 6Ye have multiplied your slain 
in this city, and ye have filled the 
streets thereof with the slain. 
7Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Your slain whom ye have laid in the 
midst of it, they are the flesh, and this 
city is the caldron; but ye shall be 
brought forth out of the midst of it. 
8Ye have feared the sword; and the 
sword will I bring upon you, saith the 
Lord GOD. 9And I will bring you forth 
out of the midst thereof, and deliver 
you into the hands of strangers, and 
will execute judgments among you. 
10Ye shall fall by the sword: I will 
judge you upon the border of Israel; 
and ye shall know that I am the LORD. 
11Though this city shall not be your 
caldron, ye shall be the flesh in the 
midst thereof; I will judge you upon 
the border of Israel; 12and ye shall 
know that I am the LORD; for ye have 
not walked in My statutes, neither 
have ye executed Mine ordinances, but 
have done after the ordinances of the 
nations that are round about you.’ 
13And it came to pass, when I 
prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of 
Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon 
my face, and cried with a loud voice, 
and said: ‘Ah Lord GOD! wilt Thou 
make a full end of the remnant of 
Israel?’ 

14And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 15’Son of man, as for 
11 




thy brethren, even thy brethren, the 
men of thy kindred, and all the house 
of Israel, all of them, concerning 
whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
have said: Get you far from the LORD! 
unto us is this land given for a 
possession; 16therefore say: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD: Although I have 
removed them far off among the 
nations, and although I have scattered 
them among the countries, yet have I 
been to them as a little sanctuary in the 
countries where they are come; 
17therefore say: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: I will even gather you from the 
peoples, and assemble you out of the 
countries where ye have been 
scattered, and I will give you the land 
of Israel. 18And they shall come 
thither, and they shall take away all the 
detestable things thereof and all the 
abominations thereof from thence. 
19And I will give them one heart, and I 
will put a new spirit within you; and I 
will remove the stony heart out of their 
flesh, and will give them a heart of 
flesh; 20that they may walk in My 
statutes, and keep Mine ordinances, 
and do them; and they shall be My 
people, and I will be their God. 21But 
as for them whose heart walketh after 
the heart of their detestable things and 
their abominations, I will bring their 
way upon their own heads, saith the 
Lord GOD.’ 

22Then did the cherubim lift up their 
wings, and the wheels were beside 
them; and the glory of the God of 
Israel was over them above. 23And the 
glory of the LORD went up from the 
midst of the city, and stood upon the 
mountain which is on the east side of 
the city. 24And a spirit lifted me up, 
and brought me in the vision by the 
spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of 
the captivity. So the vision that I had 
seen went up from Me. 25Then I spoke 
unto them of the captivity all the 
things that the LORD had shown me. 

The word of the LORD also 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, thou dwellest in the midst of 
the rebellious house, that have eyes to 
see, and see not, that have ears to hear, 
and hear not; for they are a rebellious 
house. 3Therefore, thou son of man, 
prepare thee stuff for exile, and 
remove as though for exile by day in 
their sight; and thou shalt remove from 
thy place to another place in their 
sight; it may be they will perceive, for 
they are a rebellious house. 4And thou 
shalt bring forth thy stuff by day in 
their sight, as stuff for exile; and thou 
shalt go forth thyself at even in their 
sight, as when men go forth into exile. 
5Dig thou through the wall in their 
sight, and carry out thereby. 6In their 
sight shalt thou bear it upon thy 
shoulder, and carry it forth in the 
darkness; thou shalt cover thy face, 
that thou see not the ground; for I have 
set thee for a sign unto the house of 
Israel.’ 7And I did so as I was 
commanded: I brought forth my stuff 
by day, as stuff for exile, and in the 
even I digged through the wall with 
my hand; I carried out in the darkness, 
12 




and bore it upon my shoulder in their 
sight. 

8And in the morning came the word 
of the LORD unto me, saying: 9’Son of 
man, hath not the house of Israel, the 
rebellious house, said unto thee: What 
doest thou? 10Say thou unto them: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: Concerning 
the prince, even this burden, in 
Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel 
among whom they are, 11say: I am 
your sign: like as I have done, so shall 
it be done unto them—they shall go 
into exile, into captivity. 12And the 
prince that is among them shall bear 
upon his shoulder, and go forth in the 
darkness; they shall dig through the 
wall to carry out thereby; he shall 
cover his face, that he see not the 
ground with his eyes. 13My net also 
will I spread upon him, and he shall be 
taken in My snare; and I will bring 
him to Babylon to the land of the 
Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, 
though he shall die there. 14And I will 
disperse toward every wind all that are 
round about him to help him, and all 
his troops; and I will draw out the 
sword after them. 15And they shall 
know that I am the LORD, when I shall 
scatter them among the nations, and 
disperse them in the countries. 16But I 
will leave a few men of them from the 
sword, from the famine, and from the 
pestilence; that they may declare all 
their abominations among the nations 
whither they come; and they shall 
know that I am the LORD.’ 

17Moreover the word of the LORD 
came to me, saying: 18’Son of man, eat 
thy bread with quaking, and drink thy 
water with trembling and with anxiety; 
19and say unto the people of the land: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land 
of Israel. They shall eat their bread 
with anxiety, and drink their water 
with appalment, that her land may be 
desolate from all that is therein, 
because of the violence of all them that 
dwell therein. 20And the cities that are 
inhabited shall be laid waste, and the 
land shall be desolate; and ye shall 
know that I am the LORD.’ 

21And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 22’Son of man, what 
is that proverb that ye have in the land 
of Israel, saying: The days are 
prolonged, and every vision faileth? 
23Tell them therefore: Thus saith the 
Lord GOD: I will make this proverb to 
cease, and they shall no more use it as 
a proverb in Israel; but say unto them: 
The days are at hand, and the word of 
every vision. 24For there shall be no 
more any vain vision nor smooth 
divination within the house of Israel. 
25For I am the LORD; I will speak, what 
word soever it be that I shall speak, 
and it shall be performed; it shall be no 
more delayed; for in your days, O 
rebellious house, will I speak the 
word, and will perform it, saith the 
Lord GOD.’ 

26Again the word of the LORD came 
to me, saying: 27’Son of man, behold, 
they of the house of Israel say: The 


vision that he seeth is for many days to 
come, and he prophesieth of times that 
are far off. 28Therefore say unto them: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: There shall 
none of My words be delayed any 
more, but the word which I shall speak 
shall be performed, saith the Lord 
GOD.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, prophesy against the prophets 
of Israel that prophesy, and say thou 
unto them that prophesy out of their 
own heart: Hear ye the word of the 
LORD: 3Thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe 
unto the vile prophets, that follow their 
own spirit, and things which they have 
not seen! 4O Israel, thy prophets have 
been like foxes in ruins. 5Ye have not 
gone up into the breaches, neither 
made up the hedge for the house of 
Israel, to stand in the battle in the day 
of the LORD. 6They have seen vanity 
and lying divination, that say: The 
LORD saith; and the LORD hath not sent 
them, yet they hope that the word 
would be confirmed! 7Have ye not 
seen a vain vision, and have ye not 
spoken a lying divination, whereas ye 
say: The LORD saith; albeit I have not 
spoken? 

8Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Because ye have spoken vanity, and 
seen lies, therefore, behold, I am 
against you, saith the Lord GOD. 9And 
My hand shall be against the prophets 
that see vanity, and that divine lies; 
they shall not be in the council of My 
people, neither shall they be written in 
the register of the house of Israel, 
neither shall they enter into the land of 
Israel; and ye shall know that I am the 
Lord GOD. 10Because, even because 
they have led My people astray, 
saying: Peace, and there is no peace; 
and when it buildeth up a slight wall, 
behold, they daub it with whited 
plaster; 11say unto them that daub it 
with whited plaster, that it shall fall; 
there shall be an overflowing shower, 
and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall, 
and a stormy wind shall break forth, 
12and, lo, when the wall is fallen, shall 
it not be said unto you: Where is the 
daubing wherewith ye have daubed it? 
13Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: I 
will even cause a stormy wind to break 
forth in My fury; and there shall be an 
overflowing shower in Mine anger, 
and great hailstones in fury to 
consume it. 14So will I break down the 
wall that ye have daubed with whited 
plaster, and bring it down to the 
ground, so that the foundation thereof 
shall be uncovered; and it shall fall, 
and ye shall be consumed in the midst 
thereof; and ye shall know that I am 
the LORD. 15Thus will I spend My fury 
upon the wall, and upon them that 
have daubed it with whited plaster; 
and I will say unto you: The wall is no 
more, neither they that daubed it; 16to 
wit, the prophets of Israel that 
prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and 
that see visions of peace for her, and 
there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD. 

17And thou, son of man, set thy face 
against the daughters of thy people, 
13 




that prophesy out of their own heart; 
and prophesy thou against them, 18and 
say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe to 
the women that sew cushions upon all 
elbows, and make pads for the head of 
persons of every stature to hunt souls! 
Will ye hunt the souls of My people, 
and save souls alive for yourselves? 
19And ye have profaned Me among My 
people for handfuls of barley and for 
crumbs of bread, to slay the souls that 
should not die, and to save the souls 
alive that should not live, by your 
lying to My people that hearken unto 
lies. 20Wherefore thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Behold, I am against your 
cushions, wherewith ye hunt the souls 
as birds, and I will tear them from your 
arms; and I will let the souls go, even 
the souls that ye hunt as birds. 21Your 
pads also will I tear, and deliver My 
people out of your hand, and they shall 
be no more in your hand to be hunted; 
and ye shall know that I am the LORD. 
22Because with lies ye have cowed the 
heart of the righteous, when I have not 
grieved him; and strengthened the 
hands of the wicked, that he should not 
return from his wicked way, that he be 
saved alive; 23therefore ye shall no 
more see vanity, nor divine 
divinations; and I will deliver My 
people out of your hand; and ye shall 
know that I am the LORD.’ 

Then came certain of the 
elders of Israel unto me, and 
sat before me. 2And the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying: 3’Son of 
man, these men have set up their idols 
in their mind, and put the 
stumblingblock of their iniquity before 
their face; should I be inquired of at all 
by them? 4Therefore speak unto them, 
and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Every man of the house of Israel 
that setteth up his idols in his mind, 
and putteth the stumblingblock of his 
iniquity before his face, and cometh to 
the prophet—I the LORD will answer 
him that cometh according to the 
multitude of his idols; 5that I may take 
the house of Israel in their own heart, 
because they are all turned away from 
Me through their idols. 

6Therefore say unto the house of 
Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Return 
ye, and turn yourselves from your 
idols; and turn away your faces from 
all your abominations. 7For every one 
of the house of Israel, or of the 
strangers that sojourn in Israel, that 
separateth himself from Me, and 
taketh his idols into his heart, and 
putteth the stumblingblock of his 
iniquity before his face, and cometh to 
the prophet, that he inquire for him of 
Me—I the LORD will answer him by 
Myself, 8and I will set My face against 
that man, and will make him a sign 
and a proverb, and I will cut him off 
from the midst of My people; and ye 
shall know that I am the LORD. 9And 
when the prophet is enticed and 
speaketh a word, I the LORD have 
enticed that prophet, and I will stretch 
out My hand upon him, and will 
destroy him from the midst of My 
people Israel. 10And they shall bear 
14 




their iniquity; the iniquity of the 
prophet shall be even as the iniquity of 
him that inquireth; 11that the house of 
Israel may go no more astray from Me, 
neither defile themselves any more 
with all their transgressions; but that 
they may be My people, and I may be 
their God, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

12And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 13’Son of man, when 
a land sinneth against Me by 
trespassing grievously, and I stretch 
out My hand upon it, and break the 
staff of the bread thereof, and send 
famine upon it, and cut off from it man 
and beast; 14though these three men, 
Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they 
should deliver but their own souls by 
their righteousness, saith the Lord 
GOD. 15If I cause evil beasts to pass 
through the land, and they bereave it, 
and it be desolate, so that no man may 
pass through because of the beasts; 
16though these three men were in it, as 
I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall 
deliver neither sons nor daughters; 
they only shall be delivered, but the 
land shall be desolate. 17Or if I bring a 
sword upon that land, and say: Let the 
sword go through the land, so that I cut 
off from it man and beast; 18though 
these three men were in it, as I live, 
saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver 
neither sons nor daughters, but they 
only shall be delivered themselves. 
19Or if I send a pestilence into that 
land, and pour out My fury upon it in 
blood, to cut off from it man and beast; 
20though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were 
in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they 
shall deliver neither son nor daughter; 
they shall but deliver their own souls 
by their righteousness. 21For thus saith 
the Lord GOD: How much more when I 
send My four sore judgments against 
Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, 
and the evil beasts, and the pestilence, 
to cut off from it man and beast. 
22And, behold, though there be left a 
remnant therein that shall be brought 
forth, both sons and daughters; behold, 
when they come forth unto you, and ye 
see their way and their doings, then ye 
shall be comforted concerning the evil 
that I have brought upon Jerusalem, 
even concerning all that I have brought 
upon it; 23and they shall comfort you, 
when ye see their way and their 
doings, and ye shall know that I have 
not done without cause all that I have 
done in it, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, what is the vine-tree more 
than any tree, the vine branch which 
grew up among the trees of the forest? 
3Shall wood be taken thereof to make 
any work? or will men take a pin of it 
to hang any vessel thereon? 4Behold, it 
is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire 
hath devoured both the ends of it, and 
the midst of it is singed; is it profitable 
for any work? 5Behold, when it was 
whole, it was meet for no work; how 
much less, when the fire hath devoured 
it, and it is singed, shall it yet be meet 
for any work? 6Therefore thus saith the 
Lord GOD: As the vine-tree among the 
15 




trees of the forest, which I have given 
to the fire for fuel, so do I give the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 7And I will 
set My face against them; out of the 
fire are they come forth, and the fire 
shall devour them; and ye shall know 
that I am the LORD, when I set My face 
against them. 8And I will make the 
land desolate, because they have acted 
treacherously, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

Again the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, cause Jerusalem to know her 
abominations, 3and say: Thus saith the 
Lord GOD unto Jerusalem: Thine origin 
and thy nativity is of the land of the 
Canaanite; the Amorite was thy father, 
and thy mother was a Hittite. 4And as 
for thy nativity, in the day thou wast 
born thy navel was not cut, neither 
wast thou washed in water for 
cleansing; thou was not salted at all, 
nor swaddled at all. 5No eye pitied 
thee, to do any of these unto thee, to 
have compassion upon thee; but thou 
wast cast out in the open field in the 
loathsomeness of thy person, in the 
day that thou wast born. 

6And when I passed by thee, and 
saw thee wallowing in thy blood, I 
said unto thee: In thy blood, live; yea, 
I said unto thee: In thy blood, live; 7I 
cause thee to increase, even as the 
growth of the field. And thou didst 
increase and grow up, and thou camest 
to excellent beauty: thy breasts were 
fashioned, and thy hair was grown; yet 
thou wast naked and bare. 8Now when 
I passed by thee, and looked upon 
thee, and, behold, thy time was the 
time of love, I spread my skirt over 
thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I 
swore unto thee, and entered into a 
covenant with thee, saith the Lord 
GOD, and thou becamest Mine. 9Then 
washed I thee with water; yea, I 
cleansed away thy blood from thee, 
and I anointed thee with oil. 10I clothed 
thee also with richly woven work, and 
shod thee with sealskin, and I wound 
fine linen about thy head, and covered 
thee with silk. 11I decked thee also 
with ornaments, and I put bracelets 
upon thy hands, and a chain on thy 
neck. 12And I put a ring upon thy nose, 
and earrings in thine ears, and a 
beautiful crown upon thy head. 13Thus 
wast thou decked with gold and silver; 
and thy raiment was of fine linen, and 
silk, and richly woven work; thou didst 
eat fine flour, and honey, and oil; and 
thou didst wax exceeding beautiful, 
and thou wast meet for royal estate. 
14And thy renown went forth among 
the nations for thy beauty; for it was 
perfect, through My splendour which I 
had put upon thee, saith the Lord GOD. 

15But thou didst trust in thy beauty 
and play the harlot because of thy 
renown, and didst pour out thy 
harlotries on every one that passed by; 
his it was. 16And thou didst take of thy 
garments, and didst make for thee high 
places decked with divers colours, and 
didst play the harlot upon them; the 
like things shall not come, neither shall 
it be so. 17Thou didst also take thy fair 
jewels of My gold and of My silver, 
16 




which I had given thee, and madest for 
thee images of men, and didst play the 
harlot with them; 18and thou didst take 
thy richly woven garments and cover 
them, and didst set Mine oil and Mine 
incense before them. 19My bread also 
which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, 
and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou 
didst even set it before them for a 
sweet savour, and thus it was; saith the 
Lord GOD. 20Moreover thou hast taken 
thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou 
hast borne unto Me, and these hast 
thou sacrificed unto them to be 
devoured. Were thy harlotries a small 
matter, 21that thou hast slain My 
children, and delivered them up, in 
setting them apart unto them? 22And in 
all thine abominations and thy 
harlotries thou hast not remembered 
the days of thy youth, when thou wast 
naked and bare, and wast wallowing in 
thy blood. 23And it came to pass after 
all thy wickedness—woe, woe unto 
thee! saith the Lord GOD— 24that thou 
hast built unto thee an eminent place, 
and hast made thee a lofty place in 
every street. 25Thou hast built thy lofty 
place at every head of the way, and 
hast made thy beauty an abomination, 
and hast opened thy feet to every one 
that passed by, and multiplied thy 
harlotries. 26Thou hast also played the 
harlot with the Egyptians, thy 
neighbours, great of flesh; and hast 
multiplied thy harlotry, to provoke Me. 
27Behold, therefore I have stretched 
out My hand over thee, and have 
diminished thine allowance, and 
delivered thee unto the will of them 
that hate thee, the daughters of the 
Philistines, that are ashamed of thy 
lewd way. 28Thou hast played the 
harlot also with the Assyrians, without 
having enough; yea, thou hast played 
the harlot with them, and yet thou wast 
not satisfied. 29Thou hast moreover 
multiplied thy harlotry with the land of 
traffic, even with Chaldea; and yet 
thou didst not have enough herewith. 
30How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord 
GOD, seeing thou doest all these things, 
the work of a wanton harlot; 31in that 
thou buildest thine eminent place in 
the head of every way, and makest thy 
lofty place in every street; and hast not 
been as a harlot that enhanceth her 
hire. 32Thou wife that committest 
adultery, that takest strangers instead 
of thy husband— 33to all harlots gifts 
are given; but thou hast given thy gifts 
to all thy lovers, and hast bribed them 
to come unto thee from every side in 
thy harlotries. 34And the contrary is in 
thee from other women, in that thou 
didst solicit to harlotry, and wast not 
solicited; and in that thou givest hire, 
and no hire is given unto thee, thus 
thou art contrary. 

35Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word 
of the LORD! 36Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Because thy filthiness was 
poured out, and thy nakedness 
uncovered through thy harlotries with 
thy lovers; and because of all the idols 
of thy abominations, and for the blood 
of thy children, that thou didst give 
unto them; 37therefore behold, I will 


gather all thy lovers, unto whom thou 
hast been pleasant, and all them that 
thou hast loved, with all them that thou 
hast hated; I will even gather them 
against thee from every side, and will 
uncover thy nakedness unto them, that 
they may see all thy nakedness. 38And 
I will judge thee, as women that break 
wedlock and shed blood are judged; 
and I will bring upon thee the blood of 
fury and jealousy. 39I will also give 
thee into their hand, and they shall 
throw down thine eminent place, and 
break down thy lofty places; and they 
shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take 
thy fair jewels; and they shall leave 
thee naked and bare. 40They shall also 
bring up an assembly against thee, and 
they shall stone thee with stones, and 
thrust thee through with their swords. 
41And they shall burn thy houses with 
fire, and execute judgments upon thee 
in the sight of many women; and I will 
cause thee to cease from playing the 
harlot, and thou shalt also give no hire 
any more. 42So will I satisfy My fury 
upon thee, and My jealousy shall 
depart from thee, and I will be quiet, 
and will be no more angry. 43Because 
thou hast not remembered the days of 
thy youth, but hast fretted Me in all 
these things; lo, therefore I also will 
bring thy way upon thy head, saith the 
Lord GOD; or hast thou not committed 
this lewdness above all thine 
abominations? 

44Behold, every one that useth 
proverbs shall use this proverb against 
thee, saying: As the mother, so her 
daughter. 45Thou art thy mother’s 
daughter, that loatheth her husband 
and her children; and thou art the sister 
of thy sisters, who loathed their 
husbands and their children; your 
mother was a Hittite, and your father 
an Amorite. 46And thine elder sister is 
Samaria, that dwelleth at thy left hand, 
she and her daughters; and thy 
younger sister, that dwelleth at thy 
right hand, is Sodom and her 
daughters. 47Yet hast thou not walked 
in their ways, nor done after their 
abominations; but in a very little while 
thou didst deal more corruptly than 
they in all thy ways. 48As I live, saith 
the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath 
not done, she nor her daughters, as 
thou hast done, thou and thy 
daughters. 49Behold, this was the 
iniquity of thy sister Sodom: pride, 
fulness of bread, and careless ease was 
in her and in her daughters; neither did 
she strengthen the hand of the poor 
and needy. 50And they were haughty, 
and committed abomination before 
Me; therefore I removed them when I 
saw it. 51Neither hath Samaria 
committed even half of thy sins; but 
thou hast multiplied thine 
abominations more than they, and hast 
justified thy sisters by all thine 
abominations which thou hast done. 
52Thou also, bear thine own shame, in 
that thou hast given judgment for thy 
sisters; through thy sins that thou hast 
committed more abominable than they, 
they are more righteous than thou; yea, 
be thou also confounded, and bear thy 


shame, in that thou hast justified thy 
sisters. 

53And I will turn their captivity, the 
captivity of Sodom and her daughters, 
and the captivity of Samaria and her 
daughters, and the captivity of thy 
captives in the midst of them; 54that 
thou mayest bear thine own shame, 
and mayest be ashamed because of all 
that thou hast done, in that thou art a 
comfort unto them. 55And thy sisters, 
Sodom and her daughters, shall return 
to their former estate, and Samaria and 
her daughters shall return to their 
former estate, and thou and thy 
daughters shall return to your former 
estate. 56For thy sister Sodom was not 
mentioned by thy mouth in the day of 
thy pride; 57before thy wickedness was 
uncovered, as at the time of the taunt 
of the daughters of Aram, and of all 
that are round about her, the daughters 
of the Philistines, that have thee in 
disdain round about. 58Thou hast borne 
thy lewdness and thine abominations, 
saith the LORD. 

59For thus saith the Lord GOD: I will 
even deal with thee as thou hast done, 
who hast despised the oath in breaking 
the covenant. 60Nevertheless I will 
remember My covenant with thee in 
the days of thy youth, and I will 
establish unto thee an everlasting 
covenant. 61Then shalt thou remember 
thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou 
shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder 
sisters and thy younger; and I will give 
them unto thee for daughters, but not 
because of thy covenant. 62And I will 
establish My covenant with thee, and 
thou shalt know that I am the LORD; 
63that thou mayest remember, and be 
confounded, and never open thy mouth 
any more, because of thy shame; when 
I have forgiven thee all that thou hast 
done, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a 
parable unto the house of Israel, 3and 
say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: 

A great eagle with great wings 

And long pinions, 

Full of feathers, which had divers 
colours, 

Came unto Lebanon, 

And took the top of the cedar; 

4He cropped off the topmost of the 
young twigs thereof, 

And carried it into a land of traffic; 

He set it in a city of merchants. 

5He took also of the seed of the 
land, 

And planted it in a fruitful soil; 

He placed it beside many waters, 

He set it as a slip. 

6And it grew, and became a 
spreading vine 

Of low stature, 

Whose tendrils might turn toward 
him, 

And the roots thereof be under him; 

So it became a vine, and brought 
forth branches, 

And shot forth sprigs. 

 

7There was also another great eagle 
with great wings 
17 




And many feathers; 

And, behold, this vine did bend 

Its roots toward him, 

And shot forth its branches toward 
him, from the beds of its 
plantation, 

That he might water it. 

8It was planted in a good soil 

By many waters, 

That it might bring forth branches, 
and that it might bear fruit, 

That it might be a stately vine. 

9Say thou: Thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Shall it prosper? 

Shall he not pull up the roots 
thereof, 

And cut off the fruit thereof, that it 
wither, 

Yea, wither in all its sprouting 
leaves? 

Neither shall great power or much 
people be at hand 

When it is plucked up by the roots 
thereof. 

10Yea, behold, being planted, shall it 
prosper? 

Shall it not utterly wither, when the 
east wind toucheth it? 

In the beds where it grew it shall 
wither.’ 

11Moreover the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 12’Say now to 
the rebellious house: Know ye not 
what these things mean? tell them: 
Behold, the king of Babylon came to 
Jerusalem, and took the king thereof, 
and the princes thereof, and brought 
them to him to Babylon; 13and he took 
of the seed royal, and made a covenant 
with him, and brought him under an 
oath, and the mighty of the land he 
took away; 14that his might be a lowly 
kingdom, that it might not lift itself up, 
but that by keeping his covenant it 
might stand. 15But he rebelled against 
him in sending his ambassadors into 
Egypt, that they might give him horses 
and much people. Shall he prosper? 
shall he escape that doeth such things? 
shall he break the covenant, and yet 
escape? 16As I live, saith the Lord GOD, 
surely in the place where the king 
dwelleth that made him king, whose 
oath he despised, and whose covenant 
he broke, even with him in the midst 
of Babylon he shall die. 17Neither shall 
Pharaoh with his mighty army and 
great company succour him in the war, 
when they cast up mounds and build 
forts, to cut off many souls; 18seeing he 
hath despised the oath by breaking the 
covenant, when, lo, he had given his 
hand, and hath done all these things, 
he shall not escape. 19Therefore thus 
saith the Lord GOD: As I live, surely 
Mine oath that he hath despised, and 
My covenant that he hath broken, I 
will even bring it upon his own head. 
20And I will spread My net upon him, 
and he shall be taken in My snare, and 
I will bring him to Babylon, and will 
plead with him there for his treachery 
that he hath committed against Me. 
21And all his mighty men in all his 
bands shall fall by the sword, and they 
that remain shall be scattered toward 
every wind; and ye shall know that I 
the LORD have spoken it. 22Thus saith 


the Lord GOD: Moreover I will take, 
even I, of the lofty top of the cedar, 
and will set it; I will crop off from the 
topmost of its young twigs a tender 
one, and I will plant it upon a high 
mountain and eminent; 23in the 
mountain of the height of Israel will I 
plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, 
and bear fruit, and be a stately cedar; 
and under it shall dwell all fowl of 
every wing, in the shadow of the 
branches thereof shall they dwell. 
24And all the trees of the field shall 
know that I the LORD have brought 
down the high tree, have exalted the 
low tree, have dried up the green tree, 
and have made the dry tree to flourish; 
I the LORD have spoken and have done 
it.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’What 
mean ye, that ye use this proverb in the 
land of Israel, saying: 

The fathers have eaten sour grapes, 

And the children’s teeth are set on 
edge? 

3As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shall 
not have occasion any more to use this 
proverb in Israel. 4Behold, all souls are 
Mine; as the soul of the father, so also 
the soul of the son is Mine; the soul 
that sinneth, it shall die. 

5But if a man be just, and do that 
which is lawful and right, 6and hath 
not eaten upon the mountains, neither 
hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of 
the house of Israel, neither hath defiled 
his neighbour’s wife, neither hath 
come near to a woman in her impurity; 
7and hath not wronged any, but hath 
restored his pledge for a debt, hath 
taken nought by robbery, hath given 
his bread to the hungry, and hath 
covered the naked with a garment; 8he 
that hath not given forth upon interest, 
neither hath taken any increase, that 
hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, 
hath executed true justice between 
man and man, 9hath walked in My 
statutes, and hath kept Mine 
ordinances, to deal truly; he is just, he 
shall surely live, saith the Lord GOD. 

10If he beget a son that is a robber, a 
shedder of blood, and that doeth to a 
brother any of these things, 11whereas 
he himself had not done any of these 
things, for he hath even eaten upon the 
mountains, and defiled his neighbour’s 
wife, 12hath wronged the poor and 
needy, hath taken by robbery, hath not 
restored the pledge, and hath lifted up 
his eyes to the idols, hath committed 
abomination, 13hath given forth upon 
interest, and hath taken increase; shall 
he then live? he shall not live—he hath 
done all these abominations; he shall 
surely be put to death, his blood shall 
be upon him. 

14Now, lo, if he beget a son, that 
seeth all his father’s sins, which he 
hath done, and considereth, and doeth 
not such like, 15that hath not eaten 
upon the mountains, neither hath lifted 
up his eyes to the idols of the house of 
Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour’s 
wife, 16neither hath wronged any, hath 
not taken aught to pledge, neither hath 
taken by robbery, but hath given his 
18 




bread to the hungry, and hath covered 
the naked with a garment, 17that hath 
withdrawn his hand from the poor, that 
hath not received interest nor increase, 
hath executed Mine ordinances, hath 
walked in My statutes; he shall not die 
for the iniquity of his father, he shall 
surely live. 18As for his father, because 
he cruelly oppressed, committed 
robbery on his brother, and did that 
which is not good among his people, 
behold, he dieth for his iniquity. 19Yet 
say ye: Why doth not the son bear the 
iniquity of the father with him? When 
the son hath done that which is lawful 
and right, and hath kept all My 
statutes, and hath done them, he shall 
surely live. 20The soul that sinneth, it 
shall die; the son shall not bear the 
iniquity of the father with him, neither 
shall the father bear the iniquity of the 
son with him; the righteousness of the 
righteous shall be upon him, and the 
wickedness of the wicked shall be 
upon him. 

21But if the wicked turn from all his 
sins that he hath committed, and keep 
all My statutes, and do that which is 
lawful and right, he shall surely live, 
he shall not die. 22None of his 
transgressions that he hath committed 
shall be remembered against him; for 
his righteousness that he hath done he 
shall live. 23Have I any pleasure at all 
that the wicked should die? saith the 
Lord GOD; and not rather that he 
should return from his ways, and live? 

24But when the righteous turneth 
away from his righteousness, and 
committeth iniquity, and doeth 
according to all the abominations that 
the wicked man doeth, shall he live? 
None of his righteous deeds that he 
hath done shall be remembered; for his 
trespass that he trespassed, and for his 
sin that he hath sinned, for them shall 
he die. 25Yet ye say: The way of the 
Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house 
of Israel: Is it My way that is not 
equal? is it not your ways that are 
unequal? 26When the righteous man 
turneth away from his righteousness, 
and committeth iniquity, he shall die 
therefor; for his iniquity that he hath 
done shall he die. 27Again, when the 
wicked man turneth away from his 
wickedness that he hath committed, 
and doeth that which is lawful and 
right, he shall save his soul alive. 
28Because he considereth, and turneth 
away from all his transgressions that 
he hath committed, he shall surely 
live, he shall not die. 29Yet saith the 
house of Israel: The way of the Lord is 
not equal. O house of Israel, is it My 
ways that are not equal? is it not your 
ways that are unequal? 30Therefore I 
will judge you, O house of Israel, 
every one according to his ways, saith 
the Lord GOD. Return ye, and turn 
yourselves from all your 
transgressions; so shall they not be a 
stumblingblock of iniquity unto you. 
31Cast away from you all your 
transgressions, wherein ye have 
transgressed; and make you a new 
heart and a new spirit; for why will ye 
die, O house of Israel? 32For I have no 


pleasure in the death of him that dieth, 
saith the Lord GOD; wherefore turn 
yourselves, and live. 

Moreover, take thou up a 
lamentation for the princes of 
Israel, 2and say: 

How was thy mother a lioness; 

Among lions she couched, 

In the midst of the young lions 

She reared her whelps! 

3And she brought up one of her 
whelps, 

He became a young lion; 

And he learned to catch the prey, 

He devoured men. 

4Then the nations assembled against 
him, 

He was taken in their pit; 

And they brought him with hooks 

Unto the land of Egypt. 

 

5Now when she saw that she was 
disappointed, 

And her hope was lost, 

Then she took another of her 
whelps, 

And made him a young lion. 

6And he went up and down among 
the lions, 

He became a young lion; 

And he learned to catch the prey, 

He devoured men. 

7And he knew their castles, 

And laid waste their cities; 

And the land was desolate, 

And the fulness thereof, 

Because of the noise of his roaring. 

 

8Then the nations cried out against 
him 

On every side from the provinces; 

And they spread their net over him, 

He was taken in their pit. 

9And they put him in a cage with 
hooks, 

And brought him to the king of 
Babylon; 

That they might bring him into 
strongholds, 

So that his voice should no more be 
heard 

Upon the mountains of Israel. 

 

10Thy mother was like a vine, in thy 
likeness, 

Planted by the waters; 

She was fruitful and full of branches 

By reason of many waters. 

11And she had strong rods 

To be sceptres for them that bore 
rule; 

And her stature was exalted 

Among the thick branches, 

And she was seen in her height 

With the multitude of her tendrils. 

12But she was plucked up in fury, 

She was cast down to the ground, 

And the east wind dried up her fruit; 

Her strong rods were broken off and 
withered, 

The fire consumed her. 

13And now she is planted in the 
wilderness, 

In a dry and thirsty ground. 

14And fire is gone out of the rod of 
her branches, 

It hath devoured her fruit, 
19 




So that there is in her no strong rod 

To be a sceptre to rule.’ 

This is a lamentation, and it was for a 
lamentation. 

And it came to pass in the 
seventh year, in the fifth 
month, the tenth day of the month, that 
certain of the elders of Israel came to 
inquire of the LORD, and sat before me. 
2And the word of the LORD came unto 
me, saying: 3’Son of man, speak unto 
the elders of Israel, and say unto them: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: Are ye come 
to inquire of Me? As I live, saith the 
Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by 
you. 4Wilt thou judge them, son of 
man, wilt thou judge them? cause them 
to know the abominations of their 
fathers; 5and say unto them: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD: In the day when I chose 
Israel, and lifted up My hand unto the 
seed of the house of Jacob, and made 
Myself known unto them in the land of 
Egypt, when I lifted up My hand unto 
them, saying: I am the LORD your God; 
6in that day I lifted up My hand unto 
them, to bring them forth out of the 
land of Egypt into a land that I had 
sought out for them, flowing with milk 
and honey, which is the beauty of all 
lands; 7and I said unto them: Cast ye 
away every man the detestable things 
of his eyes, and defile not yourselves 
with the idols of Egypt; I am the LORD 
your God. 8But they rebelled against 
Me, and would not hearken unto Me; 
they did not every man cast away the 
detestable things of their eyes, neither 
did they forsake the idols of Egypt; 
then I said I would pour out My fury 
upon them, to spend My anger upon 
them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 
9But I wrought for My name’s sake, 
that it should not be profaned in the 
sight of the nations, among whom they 
were, in whose sight I made Myself 
known unto them, so as to bring them 
forth out of the land of Egypt. 10So I 
caused them to go forth out of the land 
of Egypt, and brought them into the 
wilderness. 11And I gave them My 
statutes, and taught them Mine 
ordinances, which if a man do, he shall 
live by them. 12Moreover also I gave 
them My sabbaths, to be a sign 
between Me and them, that they might 
know that I am the LORD that sanctify 
them. 13But the house of Israel rebelled 
against Me in the wilderness; they 
walked not in My statutes, and they 
rejected Mine ordinances, which if a 
man do, he shall live by them, and My 
sabbaths they greatly profaned; then I 
said I would pour out My fury upon 
them in the wilderness, to consume 
them. 14But I wrought for My name’s 
sake, that it should not be profaned in 
the sight of the nations, in whose sight 
I brought them out. 15Yet also I lifted 
up My hand unto them in the 
wilderness, that I would not bring 
them into the land which I had given 
them, flowing with milk and honey, 
which is the beauty of all lands; 
16because they rejected Mine 
ordinances, and walked not in My 
statutes, and profaned My sabbaths—
for their heart went after their idols. 
20 




17Nevertheless Mine eye spared them 
from destroying them, neither did I 
make a full end of them in the 
wilderness. 18And I said unto their 
children in the wilderness: Walk ye 
not in the statutes of your fathers, 
neither observe their ordinances, nor 
defile yourselves with their idols; 19I 
am the LORD your God; walk in My 
statutes, and keep Mine ordinances, 
and do them; 20and hallow My 
sabbaths, and they shall be a sign 
between Me and you, that ye may 
know that I am the LORD your God. 
21But the children rebelled against Me; 
they walked not in My statutes, neither 
kept Mine ordinances to do them, 
which if a man do, he shall live by 
them; they profaned My sabbaths; then 
I said I would pour out My fury upon 
them, to spend My anger upon them in 
the wilderness. 22Nevertheless I 
withdrew My hand, and wrought for 
My name’s sake, that it should not be 
profaned in the sight of the nations, in 
whose sight I brought them forth. 23I 
lifted up My hand unto them also in 
the wilderness, that I would scatter 
them among the nations, and disperse 
them through the countries; 24because 
they had not executed Mine 
ordinances, but had rejected My 
statutes, and had profaned My 
sabbaths, and their eyes were after 
their fathers’idols. 25Wherefore I gave 
them also statutes that were not good, 
and ordinances whereby they should 
not live; 26and I polluted them in their 
own gifts, in that they set apart all that 
openeth the womb, that I might 
destroy them, to the end that they 
might know that I am the LORD. 
27Therefore, son of man, speak unto 
the house of Israel, and say unto them: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: In this 
moreover have your fathers 
blasphemed Me, in that they dealt 
treacherously with Me. 28For when I 
had brought them into the land, which 
I lifted up My hand to give unto them, 
then they saw every high hill, and 
every thick tree, and they offered there 
their sacrifices, and there they 
presented the provocation of their 
offering, there also they made their 
sweet savour, and there they poured 
out their drink-offerings. 29Then I said 
unto them: What meaneth the high 
place whereunto ye go? So the name 
thereof is called Bamah unto this day. 

30Wherefore say unto the house of 
Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: When 
ye pollute yourselves after the manner 
of your fathers, and go after their 
abominations, 31and when, in offering 
your gifts, in making your sons to pass 
through the fire, ye pollute yourselves 
with all your idols, unto this day; shall 
I then be inquired of by you, O house 
of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, 
I will not be inquired of by you; 32and 
that which cometh into your mind 
shall not be at all; in that ye say: We 
will be as the nations, as the families 
of the countries, to serve wood and 
stone. 33As I live, saith the Lord GOD, 
surely with a mighty hand, and with an 
outstretched arm, and with fury poured 


out, will I be king over you; 34and I 
will bring you out from the peoples, 
and will gather you out of the 
countries wherein ye are scattered, 
with a mighty hand, and with an 
outstretched arm, and with fury poured 
out; 35and I will bring you into the 
wilderness of the peoples, and there 
will I plead with you face to face. 
36Like as I pleaded with your fathers in 
the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so 
will I plead with you, saith the Lord 
GOD. 37And I will cause you to pass 
under the rod, and I will bring you into 
the bond of the covenant; 38and I will 
purge out from among you the rebels, 
and them that transgress against Me; I 
will bring them forth out of the land 
where they sojourn, but they shall not 
enter into the land of Israel; and ye 
shall know that I am the LORD. 39As for 
you, O house of Israel, thus saith the 
Lord GOD: Go ye, serve every one his 
idols, even because ye will not hearken 
unto Me; but My holy name shall ye 
no more profane with your gifts, and 
with your idols. 40For in My holy 
mountain, in the mountain of the 
height of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, 
there shall all the house of Israel, all of 
them, serve Me in the land; there will I 
accept them, and there will I require 
your heave-offerings, and the first of 
your gifts, with all your holy things. 
41With your sweet savour will I accept 
you, when I bring you out from the 
peoples, and gather you out of the 
countries wherein ye have been 
scattered; and I will be sanctified in 
you in the sight of the nations. 42And 
ye shall know that I am the LORD, 
when I shall bring you into the land of 
Israel, into the country which I lifted 
up My hand to give unto your fathers. 
43And there shall ye remember your 
ways, and all your doings, wherein ye 
have polluted yourselves; and ye shall 
loathe yourselves in your own sight for 
all your evils that ye have committed. 
44And ye shall know that I am the 
LORD, when I have wrought with you 
for My name’s sake, not according to 
your evil ways, nor according to your 
corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, 
saith the Lord GOD.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, set thy face toward the South, 
and preach toward the South, and 
prophesy against the forest of the field 
in the South; 3and say to the forest of 
the South: Hear the word of the LORD: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I 
will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall 
devour every green tree in thee, and 
every dry tree, it shall not be 
quenched, even a flaming flame; and 
all faces from the south to the north 
shall be seared thereby. 4all flesh shall 
see that I the LORD have kindled it; it 
shall not be quenched.’ 5Then said I: 
‘Ah Lord GOD! they say of me: Is he 
not a maker of parables?’ 

6Then the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 7’Son of man, set thy 
face toward Jerusalem, and preach 
toward the sanctuaries, and prophesy 
against the land of Israel; 8say to the 
21 




land of Israel: Thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, I am against thee, and will 
draw forth My sword out of its sheath, 
and will cut off from thee the righteous 
and the wicked. 9Seeing then that I will 
cut off from thee the righteous and the 
wicked, therefore shall My sword go 
forth out of its sheath against all flesh 
from the south to the north; 10and all 
flesh shall know that I the LORD have 
drawn forth My sword out of its 
sheath; it shall not return any more. 
11Sigh therefore, thou son of man; with 
the breaking of thy loins and with 
bitterness shalt thou sigh before their 
eyes. 12And it shall be, when they say 
unto thee: Wherefore sighest thou? 
that thou shalt say: Because of the 
tidings, for it cometh; and every heart 
shall melt, and all hands shall be slack, 
and every spirit shall be faint, and all 
knees shall drip with water; behold, it 
cometh, and it shall be done, saith the 
Lord GOD.’ 

13And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 14’Son of man, 
prophesy, and say: Thus saith the 
LORD: Say: 

A sword, a sword, it is sharpened, 

And also furbished: 

15It is sharpened that it may make a 
sore slaughter, 

It is furbished that it may glitter— 

Or shall we make mirth?— 

Against the rod of My son, 
contemning every tree. 

16 And it is given to be furbished, 

That it may be handled; 

The sword, it is sharpened, 

Yea, it is furbished, 

To give it into the hand of the 
slayer. 

17Cry and wail, son of man; for it is 
upon My people, it is upon all the 
princes of Israel; they are thrust down 
to the sword with My people; smite 
therefore upon thy thigh. 18For there is 
a trial; and what if it contemn even the 
rod? It shall be no more, saith the Lord 
GOD. 19Thou therefore, son of man, 
prophesy, and smite thy hands 
together; and let the sword be doubled 
the third time, the sword of those to be 
slain; it is the sword of the great one 
that is to be slain, which compasseth 
them about. 20I have set the point of 
the sword against all their gates, that 
their heart may melt, and their 
stumblings be multiplied; ah! it is 
made glittering, it is sharpened for 
slaughter. 21Go thee one way to the 
right, or direct thyself to the left; 
whither is thy face set? 22I will also 
smite My hands together, and I will 
satisfy My fury; I the LORD have 
spoken it.’ 

23And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 24‘Now, thou son of 
man, make thee two ways, that the 
sword of the king of Babylon may 
come; they twain shall come forth out 
of one land; and mark a signpost, mark 
it clear at the head of the way to the 
city. 25Thou shalt make a way, that the 
sword may come to Rabbah of the 
children of Ammon, and to Judah in 
Jerusalem the fortified. 26For the king 
of Babylon standeth at the parting of 


the way, at the head of the two ways, 
to use divination; he shaketh the 
arrows to and fro, he inquireth of the 
teraphim, he looketh in the liver. 27In 
his right hand is the lot Jerusalem, to 
set battering rams, to open the mouth 
for the slaughter, to lift up the voice 
with shouting, to set battering rams 
against the gates, to cast up mounds, to 
build forts. 28And it shall be unto them 
as a false divination in their sight, who 
have weeks upon weeks! but it 
bringeth iniquity to remembrance, that 
they may be taken. 

29Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Because ye have made your iniquity to 
be remembered, in that your 
transgressions are uncovered, so that 
your sins do appear in all your doings; 
because that ye are come to 
remembrance, ye shall be taken with 
the hand. 30And thou, O wicked one, 
that art to be slain, the prince of Israel, 
whose day is come, in the time of the 
iniquity of the end; 31thus saith the 
Lord GOD: The mitre shall be removed, 
and the crown taken off; this shall be 
no more the same: that which is low 
shall be exalted, and that which is high 
abased. 32A ruin, a ruin, a ruin, will I 
make it; this also shall be no more, 
until he come whose right it is, and I 
will give it him. 

33And thou, son of man, prophesy, 
and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD 
concerning the children of Ammon, 
and concerning their taunt; and say 
thou: 

O sword, O sword keen-edged, 

Furbished for the slaughter, 

To the uttermost, because of the 
glitterings; 

34While they see falsehood unto 
thee, 

While they divine lies unto thee, 

To lay thee upon the necks of the 
wicked that are to be slain, 

Whose day is come, in the time of 
the iniquity of the end!— 

35Cause it to return into its sheath!— 

In the place where thou wast 
created, in the land of thine 
origin, 

Will I judge thee. 

36And I will pour out My 
indignation upon thee, 

I will blow upon thee with the fire 
of My wrath; 

And I will deliver thee into the hand 
of brutish men, 

Skilful to destroy. 

37Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; 

Thy blood shall be in the midst of 
the land, 

Thou shalt be no more remembered; 

For I the LORD have spoken it.’ 

 

Moreover the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying: 
2’Now, thou, son of man, wilt thou 
judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city? 
then cause her to know all her 
abominations. 3And thou shalt say: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: O city that 
sheddest blood in the midst of thee, 
that thy time may come, and that 
makest idols unto thyself to defile 
thee; 4thou art become guilty in thy 
22 




blood that thou hast shed, and art 
defiled in thine idols which thou hast 
made; and thou hast caused thy days to 
draw near, and art come even unto thy 
years; therefore have I made thee a 
reproach unto the nations, and a 
mocking to all the countries! 5Those 
that are near, and those that are far 
from thee, shall mock thee, thou 
defiled of name and full of tumult. 

6Behold, the princes of Israel, every 
one according to his might, have been 
in thee to shed blood. 7In thee have 
they made light of father and mother; 
in the midst of thee have they dealt by 
oppression with the stranger; in thee 
have they wronged the fatherless and 
the widow. 8Thou hast despised My 
holy things, and hast profaned My 
sabbaths. 9In thee have been 
talebearers to shed blood; and in thee 
they have eaten upon the mountains; in 
the midst of thee they have committed 
lewdness. 10In thee have they 
uncovered their fathers’nakedness; in 
thee have they humbled her that was 
unclean in her impurity. 11And each 
hath committed abomination with his 
neighbour’s wife; and each hath 
lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law; 
and each in thee hath humbled his 
sister, his father’s daughter. 12In thee 
have they taken gifts to shed blood; 
thou hast taken interest and increase, 
and thou hast greedily gained of thy 
neighbours by oppression, and hast 
forgotten Me, saith the Lord GOD. 

13Behold, therefore, I have smitten 
My hand at thy dishonest gain which 
thou hast made, and at thy blood 
which hath been in the midst of thee. 
14Can thy heart endure, or can thy 
hands be strong, in the days that I shall 
deal with thee? I the LORD have spoken 
it, and will do it. 15And I will scatter 
thee among the nations, and disperse 
thee through the countries; and I will 
consume thy filthiness out of thee. 
16And thou shalt be profaned in 
thyself, in the sight of the nations; and 
thou shalt know that I am the LORD.’ 

17And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 18’Son of man, the 
house of Israel is become dross unto 
Me; all of them are brass and tin and 
iron and lead, in the midst of the 
furnace; they are the dross of silver. 
19Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Because ye are all become dross, 
therefore, behold, I will gather you 
into the midst of Jerusalem. 20As they 
gather silver and brass and iron and 
lead and tin into the midst of the 
furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to 
melt it; so will I gather you in Mine 
anger and in My fury, and I will cast 
you in, and melt you. 21Yea, I will 
gather you, and blow upon you with 
the fire of My wrath, and ye shall be 
melted in the midst thereof. 22As silver 
is melted in the midst of the furnace, 
so shall ye be melted in the midst 
thereof; and ye shall know that I the 
LORD have poured out My fury upon 
you.’ 

23And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 24’Son of man, say 
unto her: Thou art a land that is not 


cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of 
indignation. 25There is a conspiracy of 
her prophets in the midst thereof, like 
a roaring lion ravening the prey; they 
have devoured souls, they take 
treasure and precious things, they have 
made her widows many in the midst 
thereof. 26Her priests have done 
violence to My law, and have profaned 
My holy things; they have put no 
difference between the holy and the 
common, neither have they taught 
difference between the unclean and the 
clean, and have hid their eyes from My 
sabbaths, and I am profaned among 
them. 27Her princes in the midst 
thereof are like wolves ravening the 
prey: to shed blood, and to destroy 
souls, so as to get dishonest gain. 
28And her prophets have daubed for 
them with whited plaster, seeing 
falsehood, and divining lies unto them, 
saying: Thus saith the Lord GOD, when 
the LORD hath not spoken. 29The people 
of the land have used oppression, and 
exercised robbery, and have wronged 
the poor and needy, and have 
oppressed the stranger unlawfully. 
30And I sought for a man among them, 
that should make up the hedge, and 
stand in the breach before Me for the 
land, that I should not destroy it; but I 
found none. 31Therefore have I poured 
out Mine indignation upon them; I 
have consumed them with the fire of 
My wrath; their own way have I 
brought upon their heads, saith the 
Lord GOD.’ 

 

23 



And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, there were two women, the 
daughters of one mother; 3and they 
committed harlotries in Egypt; they 
committed harlotries in their youth; 
there were their bosoms pressed, and 
there their virgin breasts were bruised. 
4And the names of them were Oholah 
the elder, and Oholibah her sister; and 
they became Mine, and they bore sons 
and daughters. And as for their names, 
Samaria is aOholah, and Jerusalem 
bOholibah. 

a That is, Her tent. 

b That is, My tent is in her. 

5And Oholah played the harlot when 
she was Mine; and she doted on her 
lovers, on the Assyrians, warriors, 
6clothed with blue, governors and 
rulers, handsome young men all of 
them, horsemen riding upon horses. 
7And she bestowed her harlotries upon 
them, the choicest men of Assyria all 
of them; and on whomsoever she 
doted, with all their idols she defiled 
herself. 8Neither hath she left her 
harlotries brought from Egypt; for in 
her youth they lay with her, and they 
bruised her virgin breasts; and they 
poured out their lust upon her. 
9Wherefore I delivered her into the 
hand of her lovers, into the hand of the 
Assyrians, upon whom she doted. 
10These uncovered her nakedness; they 
took her sons and her daughters, and 
her they slew with the sword; and she 


became a byword among women, for 
judgments were executed upon her. 

11And her sister Oholibah saw this, 
yet was she more corrupt in her doting 
than she, and in her harlotries more 
than her sister in her harlotries. 12She 
doted upon the Assyrians, governors 
and rulers, warriors, clothed most 
gorgeously, horsemen riding upon 
horses, all of them handsome young 
men. 13And I saw that she was defiled; 
they both took one way. 14And she 
increased her harlotries; for she saw 
men portrayed upon the wall, the 
images of the Chaldeans portrayed 
with vermilion, 15girded with girdles 
upon their loins, with pendant turbans 
upon their heads, all of them captains 
to look upon, the likeness of the sons 
of Babylon, even of Chaldea, the land 
of their nativity. 16And as soon as she 
saw them she doted upon them, and 
sent messengers unto them into 
Chaldea. 17And the Babylonians came 
to her into the bed of love, and they 
defiled her with their lust; and she was 
polluted with them, and her soul was 
alienated from them. 18So she 
uncovered her harlotries, and 
uncovered her nakedness; then My 
soul was alienated from her, like as 
My soul was alienated from her sister. 
19Yet she multiplied her harlotries, 
remembering the days of her youth, 
wherein she had played the harlot in 
the land of Egypt. 20And she doted 
upon concubinage with them, whose 
flesh is as the flesh of asses, and 
whose issue is like the issue of horses. 
21Thus thou didst call to remembrance 
the lewdness of thy youth, when they 
from Egypt bruised thy breasts for the 
bosom of thy youth. 

22Therefore, O Oholibah, thus saith 
the Lord GOD: Behold, I will raise up 
thy lovers against thee, from whom thy 
soul is alienated, and I will bring them 
against thee on every side: 23the 
Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, 
Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the 
Assyrians with them, handsome young 
men, governors and rulers all of them, 
captains and councillors, all of them 
riding upon horses. 24And they shall 
come against thee with hosts, chariots, 
and wheels, and with an assembly of 
peoples; they shall set themselves in 
array against thee with buckler and 
shield and helmet round about; and I 
will commit the judgment unto them, 
and they shall judge thee according to 
their judgments. 25And I will set My 
jealousy against thee, and they shall 
deal with thee in fury; they shall take 
away thy nose and thine ears, and thy 
residue shall fall by the sword; they 
shall take thy sons and thy daughters, 
and thy residue shall be devoured by 
the fire. 26They shall also strip thee of 
thy clothes, and take away thy fair 
jewels. 27Thus will I make thy 
lewdness to cease from thee, and thy 
harlotry brought from the land of 
Egypt, so that thou shalt not lift up 
thine eyes unto them, nor remember 
Egypt any more. 

28For thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I will deliver thee into the 


hand of them whom thou hatest, into 
the hand of them from whom thy soul 
is alienated; 29and they shall deal with 
thee in hatred, and shall take away all 
thy labour, and shall leave thee naked 
and bare; and the nakedness of thy 
harlotries shall be uncovered, both thy 
lewdness and thy harlotries. 30These 
things shall be done unto thee, for that 
thou hast gone astray after the nations, 
and because thou art polluted with 
their idols. 31In the way of thy sister 
hast thou walked; therefore will I give 
her cup into thy hand. 32Thus saith the 
Lord GOD: 

Thou shalt drink of thy sister’s cup, 

Which is deep and large; 

Thou shalt be for a scorn and a 
derision; 

It is full to the uttermost. 

33Thou shalt be filled with 
drunkenness and sorrow, 

With the cup of astonishment and 
appalment, 

With the cup of thy sister Samaria. 

34Thou shalt even drink it and drain 
it, 

And thou shalt craunch the sherds 
thereof, 

And shalt tear thy breasts; 

For I have spoken it, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

35Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Because thou hast forgotten Me, and 
cast Me behind thy back, therefore 
bear thou also thy lewdness and thy 
harlotries.’ 

36The LORD said moreover unto me: 
‘Son of man, wilt thou judge Oholah 
and Oholibah? then declare unto them 
their abominations. 37For they have 
committed adultery, and blood is in 
their hands, and with their idols have 
they committed adultery; and their 
sons, whom they bore unto Me, they 
have also set apart unto them to be 
devoured. 38Moreover this they have 
done unto Me: they have defiled My 
sanctuary in the same day, and have 
profaned My sabbaths. 39For when 
they had slain their children to their 
idols, then they came the same day 
into My sanctuary to profane it; and, 
lo, thus have they done in the midst of 
My house. 40And furthermore ye have 
sent for men that come from far; unto 
whom a messenger was sent, and, lo, 
they came; for whom thou didst wash 
thyself, paint thine eyes, and deck 
thyself with ornaments; 41and sattest 
upon a stately bed, with a table 
prepared before it, whereupon thou 
didst set Mine incense and Mine oil. 
42And the voice of a multitude being at 
ease was therein; and for the sake of 
men, they were so many, brought 
drunken from the wilderness, they put 
bracelets upon their hands, and 
beautiful crowns upon their heads. 
43Then said I of her that was worn out 
by adulteries: Still they commit 
harlotries with her, even her. 44For 
every one went in unto her, as men go 
in unto a harlot; so went they in unto 
Oholah and unto Oholibah, the lewd 
women. 45But righteous men, they 
shall judge them as adulteresses are 
judged, and as women that shed blood 


are judged; because they are 
adulteresses, and blood is in their 
hands. 

46For thus saith the Lord GOD: An 
assembly shall be brought up against 
them, and they shall be made a horror 
and a spoil. 47And the assembly shall 
stone them with stones, and despatch 
them with their swords; they shall slay 
their sons and their daughters, and 
burn up their houses with fire. 48Thus 
will I cause lewdness to cease out of 
the land, that all women may be taught 
not to do after your lewdness. 49And 
your lewdness shall be recompensed 
upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of 
your idols; and ye shall know that I am 
the Lord GOD.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me in the ninth 
year, in the tenth month, in the tenth 
day of the month, saying: 2’Son of 
man, write thee the name of the day, 
even of this selfsame day; this 
selfsame day the king of Babylon hath 
invested Jerusalem. 3And utter a 
parable concerning the rebellious 
house, and say unto them: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD: 

Set on the pot, set it on, 

And also pour water into it; 

4Gather into it the pieces belonging 
to it, 

Even every good piece, the thigh, 
and the shoulder; 

Fill it with the choice bones. 

5Take the choice of the flock, 

And pile also the bones under it; 

Make it boil well, 

That the bones thereof may also be 
seethed in the midst of it. 

6Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Woe to the bloody city, to the pot 
whose filth is therein, and whose filth 
is not gone out of it! bring it out piece 
by piece; no lot is fallen upon it. 7For 
her blood is in the midst of her; she set 
it upon the bare rock; she poured it not 
upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 
8that it might cause fury to come up, 
that vengeance might be taken, I have 
set her blood upon the bare rock, that it 
should not be covered. 9Therefore thus 
saith the Lord GOD: Woe to the bloody 
city! I also will make the pile great, 
10heaping on the wood, kindling the 
fire, that the flesh may be consumed; 
and preparing the mixture, that the 
bones also may be burned; 11then will I 
set it empty upon the coals thereof, 
that it may be hot, and the bottom 
thereof may burn, and that the 
impurity of it may be molten in it, that 
the filth of it may be consumed12It 
hath wearied itself with toil; yet its 
great filth goeth not forth out of it, yea, 
its noisome filth. 13Because of thy 
filthy lewdness, because I have purged 
thee and thou wast not purged, thou 
shalt not be purged from thy filthiness 
any more, till I have satisfied My fury 
upon thee. 14I the LORD have spoken it; 
it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I 
will not go back, neither will I spare, 
neither will I repent; according to thy 
ways, and according to thy doings, 
shall they judge thee, saith the Lord 
GOD.’ 
24 




15Also the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 16’Son of man, 
behold, I take away from thee the 
desire of thine eyes with a stroke; yet 
neither shalt thou make lamentation 
nor weep, neither shall thy tears run 
down. 17Sigh in silence; make no 
mourning for the dead, bind thy 
headtire upon thee, and put thy shoes 
upon thy feet, and cover not thine 
upper lip, and eat not the bread of 
men.’ 18So I spoke unto the people in 
the morning, and at even my wife 
died; and I did in the morning as I was 
commanded. 19And the people said 
unto me: ‘Wilt thou not tell us what 
these things are to us, that thou doest 
so?’ 20Then I said unto them: ‘The 
word of the LORD came unto me, 
saying: 21Speak unto the house of 
Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I will profane My sanctuary, 
the pride of your power, the desire of 
your eyes, and the longing of your 
soul; and your sons and your daughters 
whom ye have left behind shall fall by 
the sword. 22And ye shall do as I have 
done: ye shall not cover your upper 
lips, nor eat the bread of men; 23and 
your tires shall be upon your heads, 
and your shoes upon your feet; ye shall 
not make lamentation nor weep; but ye 
shall pine away in your iniquities, and 
moan one toward another. 24Thus shall 
Ezekiel be unto you a sign; according 
to all that he hath done shall ye do; 
when this cometh, then shall ye know 
that I am the Lord GOD. 

25And thou, son of man, shall it not 
be in the day when I take from them 
their stronghold, the joy of their glory, 
the desire of their eyes, and the 
yearning of their soul, their sons and 
their daughters, 26that in that day he 
that escapeth shall come unto thee, to 
cause thee to hear it with thine ears? 
27In that day shall thy mouth be 
opened together with him that is 
escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be 
no more dumb; so shalt thou be a sign 
unto them; and they shall know that I 
am the LORD.’ 

 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, set thy face toward the 
children of Ammon, and prophesy 
against them; 3and say unto the 
children of Ammon: Hear the word of 
the Lord GOD: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Because thou saidst: Aha! against 
My sanctuary, when it was profaned, 
and against the land of Israel, when it 
was made desolate, and against the 
house of Judah, when they went into 
captivity; 4therefore, behold, I will 
deliver thee to the children of the east 
for a possession, and they shall set 
their encampments in thee, and make 
their dwellings in thee; they shall eat 
thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk. 
5And I will make Rabbah a pasture for 
camels, and the children of Ammon a 
couching-place for flocks; and ye shall 
know that I am the LORD. 6For thus 
saith the Lord GOD: Because thou hast 
clapped thy hands, and stamped with 
25 




the feet, and rejoiced with all the 
disdain of thy soul against the land of 
Israel; 7therefore, behold, I stretch out 
My hand upon thee, and will deliver 
thee for a spoil to the nations; and I 
will cut thee off from the peoples, and 
I will cause thee to perish out of the 
countries; I will destroy thee, and thou 
shalt know that I am the LORD. 

8Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because 
that Moab and Seir do say: Behold, the 
house of Judah is like unto all the 
nations, 9therefore, behold, I will open 
the flank of Moab on the side of the 
cities, on the side of his cities which 
are on his frontiers, the beauteous 
country of Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, 
and Kiriathaim, 10together with the 
children of Ammon, unto the children 
of the east, and I will give them for a 
possession, that the children of 
Ammon may not be remembered 
among the nations; 11and I will execute 
judgments upon Moab; and they shall 
know that I am the LORD. 

12Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because 
that Edom hath dealt against the house 
of Judah by taking vengeance, and 
hath greatly offended, and revenged 
himself upon them; 13therefore thus 
saith the Lord GOD: I will stretch out 
My hand upon Edom, and will cut off 
man and beast from it; and I will make 
it desolate from Teman, even unto 
Dedan shall they fall by the sword. 
14And I will lay My vengeance upon 
Edom by the hand of My people Israel; 
and they shall do in Edom according to 
Mine anger and according to My fury; 
and they shall know my vengeance, 
saith the Lord GOD. 

15Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because 
the Philistines have dealt by revenge, 
and have taken vengeance with disdain 
of soul to destroy, for the old hatred; 
16therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I will stretch out My hand 
upon the Philistines, and I will cut off 
the Cherethites, and destroy the 
remnant of the sea-coast. 17And I will 
execute great vengeance upon them 
with furious rebukes; and they shall 
know that I am the LORD, when I shall 
lay My vengeance upon them.’ 

And it came to pass in the 
eleventh year, in the first day 
of the month, that the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying: 2’Son of 
man, because that Tyre hath said 
against Jerusalem: 

Aha, she is broken that was the gate 
of the peoples; 

She is turned unto me; 

I shall be filled with her that is laid 
waste; 

3Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 

Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, 

And will cause many nations to 
come up against thee, 

As the sea causeth its waves to 
come up. 

4And they shall destroy the walls of 
Tyre, 

And break down her towers; 

I will also scrape her dust from her, 

And make her a bare rock. 

5She shall be a place for the 
spreading of nets 
26 




In the midst of the sea; 

For I have spoken it, saith the Lord 
GOD; 

And she shall become a spoil to the 
nations. 

6And her daughters that are in the 
field 

Shall be slain with the sword; 

And they shall know that I am the 
LORD. 

7For thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I 
will bring upon Tyre Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon, king of kings, from 
the north, with horses, and with 
chariots, and with horsemen, and a 
company, and much people. 

8He shall slay with the sword 

Thy daughters in the field; 

And he shall make forts against 
thee, 

And cast up a mound against thee, 

And set up bucklers against thee. 

9And he shall set his battering 
engines 

Against thy walls, 

And with his axes 

He shall break down thy towers. 

10By reason of the abundance of his 
horses 

Their dust shall cover thee; 

At the noise of the horsemen, 

And of the wheels, and of the 
chariots, 

Thy walls shall shake, 

When he shall enter into thy gates, 

As men enter into a city 

Wherein is made a breach. 

11With the hoofs of his horses 

Shall he tread down all thy streets; 

He shall slay thy people with the 
sword, 

And the pillars of thy strength 

Shall go down to the ground. 

12And they shall make a spoil of thy 
riches, 

And make a prey of thy 
merchandise; 

And they shall break down thy 
walls, 

And destroy the houses of thy 
delight; 

And thy stones and thy timber and 
thy dust 

Shall they lay in the midst of the 
waters. 

13And I will cause the noise of thy 
songs to cease, 

And the sound of thy harps shall be 
no more heard. 

14And I will make thee a bare rock; 

Thou shalt be a place for the 
spreading of nets, 

Thou shalt be built no more; 

For I the LORD have spoken, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

15Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyre: 
Shall not the isles shake at the sound 
of thy fall, when the wounded groan, 
when the slaughter is made in the 
midst of thee? 

16Then all the princes of the sea 
shall come down from their thrones, 
and lay away their robes, and strip off 
their richly woven garments; they shall 
clothe themselves with trembling; they 
shall sit upon the ground, and shall 
tremble every moment, and be 
appalled at thee. 


17And they shall take up a 
lamentation for thee, and say to thee: 

How art thou destroyed, that wast 
peopled from the seas, 

The renowned city, 

That wast strong in the sea, 

Thou and thy inhabitants, 

That caused your terror to be 

On all that inhabit the earth! 

18Now shall the isles tremble 

In the day of thy fall; 

Yea, the isles that are in the sea 

Shall be affrighted at thy going out. 

19For thus saith the Lord GOD: When I 
shall make thee a desolate city, like the 
cities that are not inhabited; when I 
shall bring up the deep upon thee, and 
the great waters shall cover thee; 
20then will I bring thee down with 
them that descend into the pit, to the 
people of old time, and will make thee 
to dwell in the nether parts of the 
earth, like the places that are desolate 
of old, with them that go down to the 
pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I 
will set glory in the land of the living; 
21I will make thee a terror, and thou 
shalt be no more; though thou be 
sought for, yet shalt thou never be 
found again, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

Moreover the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying: 
2’And thou, son of man, take up a 
lamentation for Tyre, 3and say unto 
Tyre, that dwelleth at the entry of the 
sea, that is the merchant of the peoples 
unto many isles: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: 

Thou, O Tyre, hast said: 

I am of perfect beauty. 

4Thy borders are in the heart of the 
seas, 

Thy builders have perfected thy 
beauty. 

5Of cypress-trees from Senir have 
they fashioned 

All thy planks; 

They have taken cedars from 
Lebanon 

To make masts for thee. 

6Of the oaks of Bashan 

Have they made thine oars; 

Thy deck have they made of ivory 
inlaid in larch, 

From the isles of the Kittites. 

7Of fine linen with richly woven 
work from Egypt 

Was thy sail, 

That it might be to thee for an 
ensign; 

Blue and purple from the isles of 
Elishah 

Was thine awning. 

8The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad 

Were thy rowers; 

Thy wise men, O Tyre, were in thee, 

They were thy pilots. 

9The elders of Gebal and the wise 
men thereof 

Were in thee thy calkers; 

All the ships of the sea with their 
mariners were in thee 

To exchange thy merchandise. 

10Persia and Lud and Put were in 
thine army, 

Thy men of war; 

They hanged the shield and helmet 
in thee, 
27 




They set forth thy comeliness. 

11The men of Arvad and Helech were 
upon thy walls round about, and the 
Gammadim were in thy towers; they 
hanged their shields upon thy walls 
round about; they have perfected thy 
beauty. 12Tarshish was thy merchant 
by reason of the multitude of all kinds 
of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and 
lead, they traded for thy wares. 
13Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they 
were thy traffickers; they traded the 
persons of men and vessels of brass for 
thy merchandise. 14They of the house 
of Togarmah traded for thy wares with 
horses and horsemen and mules. 15The 
men of Dedan were thy traffickers; 
many isles were the mart of thy hand; 
they brought thee as tribute horns of 
ivory and ebony. 16Aram was thy 
merchant by reason of the multitude of 
thy wealth; they traded for thy wares 
with carbuncles, purple, and richly 
woven work, and fine linen, and coral, 
and rubies. 17Judah, and the land of 
Israel, they were thy traffickers; they 
traded for thy merchandise wheat of 
Minnith, and balsam, and honey, and 
oil, and balm. 18Damascus was thy 
merchant for the multitude of thy 
wealth, by reason of the multitude of 
all riches, with the wine of Helbon, 
and white wool. 19Vedan and Javan 
traded with yarn for thy wares; 
massive iron, cassia, and calamus, 
were among thy merchandise. 20Dedan 
was thy trafficker in precious cloths 
for riding. 21Arabia, and all the princes 
of Kedar, they were the merchants of 
thy hand; in lambs, and rams, and 
goats, in these were they thy 
merchants. 22The traffickers of Sheba 
and Raamah, they were thy traffickers; 
they traded for thy wares with chief of 
all spices, and with all precious stones, 
and gold. 23Haran and Canneh and 
Eden, the traffickers of Sheba, Asshur 
was as thine apprentice in traffic. 
24These were thy traffickers in 
gorgeous fabrics, in wrappings of blue 
and richly woven work, and in chests 
of rich apparel, bound with cords and 
cedar-lined, among thy merchandise. 
25The ships of Tarshish brought thee 
tribute for thy merchandise; 

 

So wast thou replenished, and made 
very heavy 

In the heart of the seas. 

26Thy rowers have brought thee 

Into great waters; 

The east wind hath broken thee 

In the heart of the seas. 

27Thy riches, and thy wares, thy 
merchandise, 

Thy mariners, and thy pilots, 

Thy calkers, and the exchangers of 
thy merchandise, 

And all thy men of war, that are in 
thee, 

With all thy company which is in 
the midst of thee, 

Shall fall into the heart of the seas 

In the day of thy ruin. 

28At the sound of the cry of thy 
pilots 

The waves shall shake. 

29And all that handle the oar, 


The mariners, and all the pilots of 
the sea, 

Shall come down from their ships, 

They shall stand upon the land, 

30And shall cause their voice to be 
heard over thee, 

And shall cry bitterly, 

And shall cast up dust upon their 
heads, 

They shall roll themselves in the 
ashes; 

31And they shall make themselves 
utterly bald for thee, 

And gird them with sackcloth, 

And they shall weep for thee in 
bitterness of soul 

With bitter lamentation. 

32And in their wailing they shall 
take up a lamentation for thee, 

And lament over thee: 

Who was there like Tyre, fortified 

In the midst of the sea? 

33When thy wares came forth out of 
the seas, 

Thou didst fill many peoples; 

With the multitude of thy riches and 
of thy merchandise 

Didst thou enrich the kings of the 
earth. 

34Now that thou art broken by the 
seas 

In the depths of the waters, 

And thy merchandise and all thy 
company 

Are fallen in the midst of thee, 

35All the inhabitants of the isles 

Are appalled at thee, 

And their kings are horribly afraid, 

They are troubled in their 
countenance; 

36The merchants among the peoples 
hiss at thee; 

Thou art become a terror, 

And never shalt be any more.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, say unto the prince of Tyre: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD: 

Because thy heart is lifted up, 

And thou hast said: I am a god, 

I sit in the seat of God, 

In the heart of the seas; 

Yet thou art man, and not God, 

Though thou didst set thy heart as 
the heart of God— 

3Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel! 

There is no secret that they can hide 
from thee! 

4By thy wisdom and by thy 
discernment 

Thou hast gotten thee riches, 

And hast gotten gold and silver 

Into thy treasures; 

5In thy great wisdom by thy traffic 

Hast thou increased thy riches, 

And thy heart is lifted up because of 
thy riches— 

6Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 

Because thou hast set thy heart 

As the heart of God; 

7Therefore, behold, I will bring 
strangers upon thee, 

The terrible of the nations; 

And they shall draw their swords 
against the beauty of thy wisdom, 

And they shall defile thy brightness. 
28 




8They shall bring thee down to the 
pit; 

And thou shalt die the deaths of 
them that are slain, 

In the heart of the seas. 

9Wilt thou yet say before him that 
slayeth thee: 

I am God? 

But thou art man, and not God, 

In the hand of them that defile thee. 

10Thou shalt die the deaths of the 
uncircumcised 

By the hand of strangers; 

For I have spoken, saith the Lord 
GOD.’ 

11Moreover the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 12’Son of man, take 
up a lamentation for the king of Tyre, 
and say unto him: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Thou seal most accurate, full of 
wisdom, and perfect in beauty, 13thou 
wast in Eden the garden of God; every 
precious stone was thy covering, the 
carnelian, the topaz, and the emerald, 
the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the 
sapphire, the carbuncle, and the 
smaragd, and gold; the workmanship 
of thy settings and of thy sockets was 
in thee, in the day that thou wast 
created they were prepared. 14Thou 
wast the far-covering cherub; and I set 
thee, so that thou wast upon the holy 
mountain of God; thou hast walked up 
and down in the midst of stones of fire. 
15Thou wast perfect in thy ways from 
the day that thou wast created, till 
unrighteousness was found in thee. 
16By the multitude of thy traffic they 
filled the midst of thee with violence, 
and thou hast sinned; therefore have I 
cast thee as profane out of the 
mountain of God; and I have destroyed 
thee, O covering cherub, from the 
midst of the stones of fire. 17Thy heart 
was lifted up because of thy beauty, 
thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by 
reason of thy brightness; I have cast 
thee to the ground, I have laid thee 
before kings, that they may gaze upon 
thee. 18By the multitude of thine 
iniquities, in the unrighteousness of 
thy traffic, thou hast profaned thy 
sanctuaries; therefore have I brought 
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it 
hath devoured thee, and I have turned 
thee to ashes upon the earth in the 
sight of all them that behold thee. 19All 
they that know thee among the peoples 
shall be appalled at thee; thou art 
become a terror, and thou shalt never 
be any more.’ 

20And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 21’Son of man, set thy 
face toward Zidon, and prophesy 
against it, 22and say: Thus saith the 
Lord GOD: 

Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon, 

And I will be glorified in the midst 
of thee; 

And they shall know that I am the 
LORD, when I shall have executed 
judgments in her, and shall be 
sanctified in her. 

23For I will send into her pestilence 

And blood in her streets; 

And the wounded shall fall in the 
midst of her 


By the sword upon her on every 
side; and they shall know that I am the 
LORD. 24And there shall be no more a 
pricking brier unto the house of Israel, 
nor a piercing thorn of any that are 
round about them, that did have them 
in disdain; and they shall know that I 
am the Lord GOD. 

25Thus saith the Lord GOD: When I 
shall have gathered the house of Israel 
from the peoples among whom they 
are scattered, and shall be sanctified in 
them in the sight of the nations, then 
shall they dwell in their own land 
which I gave to My servant Jacob. 
26And they shall dwell safely therein, 
and shall build houses, and plant 
vineyards; yea, they shall dwell safely; 
when I have executed judgments upon 
all those that have them in disdain 
round about them; and they shall know 
that I am the LORD their God.’ 

In the tenth year, in the tenth 
month, in the twelfth day of 
the month, the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 2’Son of man, set thy 
face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, 
and prophesy against him, and against 
all Egypt; 3speak, and say: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD: 

Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh 

King of Egypt, 

The great dragon that lieth 

In the midst of his rivers, 

That hath said: My river is mine 
own, 

And I have made it for myself. 

4And I will put hooks in thy jaws, 
and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to 
stick unto thy scales; and I will bring 
thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, 
and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick 
unto thy scales. 5And I will cast thee 
into the wilderness, 

Thee and all the fish of thy rivers; 

Thou shalt fall upon the open field; 

Thou shalt not be brought together, 
nor gathered; 

To the beasts of the earth and to the 
fowls of the heaven 

Have I given thee for food. 

6And all the inhabitants of Egypt 
shall know 

That I am the LORD, 

Because they have been a staff of 
reed 

To the house of Israel. 

7When they take hold of thee with 
the hand, thou dost break, 

And rend all their shoulders; 

And when they lean upon thee, thou 
breakest, 

And makest all their loins to be at a 
stand. 

8Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, 
and will cut off from thee man and 
beast. 9And the land of Egypt shall be 
desolate and waste, and they shall 
know that I am the LORD; because he 
hath said: The river is mine, and I have 
made it. 10Therefore, behold, I am 
against thee, and against thy rivers, 
and I will make the land of Egypt 
utterly waste and desolate, from 
Migdol to Syene even unto the border 
of Ethiopia. 11No foot of man shall 
pass through it, nor foot of beast shall 
29 




pass through it, neither shall it be 
inhabited forty years. 12And I will 
make the land of Egypt desolate in the 
midst of the countries that are desolate, 
and her cities among the cities that are 
laid waste shall be desolate forty 
years; and I will scatter the Egyptians 
among the nations, and will disperse 
them through the countries. 

13For thus saith the Lord GOD: At the 
end of forty years will I gather the 
Egyptians from the peoples whither 
they were scattered; 14and I will turn 
the captivity of Egypt, and will cause 
them to return into the land of Pathros, 
into the land of their origin; and they 
shall be there a lowly kingdom. 15It 
shall be the lowliest of the kingdoms, 
neither shall it any more lift itself up 
above the nations; and I will diminish 
them, that they shall no more rule over 
the nations. 16And it shall be no more 
the confidence of the house of Israel, 
bringing iniquity to remembrance, 
when they turn after them; and they 
shall know that I am the Lord GOD.’ 

17And it came to pass in the seven 
and twentieth year, in the first month, 
in the first day of the month, the word 
of the LORD came unto me, saying: 
18’Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon caused his army to serve a 
great service against Tyre; every head 
was made bald, and every shoulder 
was peeled; yet had he no wages, nor 
his army, from Tyre, for the service 
that he had served against it; 
19Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I will give the land of Egypt 
unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; 
and he shall carry off her abundance, 
and take her spoil, and take her prey; 
and it shall be the wages for his army. 
20I have given him the land of Egypt as 
his hire for which he served, because 
they wrought for Me, saith the Lord 
GOD. 

21In that day will I cause a horn to 
shoot up unto the house of Israel, and I 
will give thee the opening of the 
mouth in the midst of them; and they 
shall know that I am the LORD.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, prophesy, and say: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD: 

Wail ye: Woe worth the day! 

3For the day is near, 

Even the day of the LORD is near, 

A day of clouds, it shall be the time 
of the nations. 

4And a sword shall come upon 
Egypt, 

And convulsion shall be in Ethiopia, 

When the slain shall fall in Egypt; 

And they shall take away her 
abundance, 

And her foundation shall be broken 
down. 

5Ethiopia, and Put, and Lud, and all the 
mingled people, and Cub, and the 
children of the land that is in league, 
shall fall with them by the sword. 

6Thus saith the LORD: 

They also that uphold Egypt shall 
fall, 

And the pride of her power shall 
come down; 
30 




From Migdol to Syene shall they 
fall in it by the sword, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

7And they shall be desolate in the 
midst of the countries that are 
desolate, 

And her cities shall be in the midst 
of the cities that are wasted. 

8And they shall know that I am the 
LORD, 

When I have set a fire in Egypt, 

And all her helpers are destroyed. 

9In that day shall messengers go 
forth from before Me in ships 

To make the confident Ethiopians 
afraid; 

And there shall come convulsion 
upon them in the day of Egypt; 

For, lo, it cometh. 

 

10Thus saith the Lord GOD: 

I will also make the multitude of 
Egypt to cease, 

By the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon. 

11He and his people with him, the 
terrible of the nations, 

Shall be brought in to destroy the 
land; 

And they shall draw their swords 
against Egypt, 

And fill the land with the slain. 

12And I will make the rivers dry, 

And will give the land over into the 
hand of evil men; 

And I will make the land desolate, 

And all that is therein, by the hand 
of strangers; 

I the LORD have spoken it. 

 

13Thus saith the Lord GOD: 

I will also destroy the idols, 

And I will cause the things of 
nought to cease from Noph; 

And there shall be no more a prince 
out of the land of Egypt; 

And I will put a fear in the land of 
Egypt. 

14And I will make Pathros desolate, 

And will set a fire in Zoan, 

And will execute judgments in No. 

15And I will pour My fury upon Sin, 
the stronghold of Egypt; 

And I will cut off the multitude of 
No. 

16And I will set a fire in Egypt; 

Sin shall be in great convulsion, 

And No shall be rent asunder; 

And in Noph shall come adversaries 
in the day-time. 

17The young men of Aven and of Pi-
beseth shall fall by the sword; 

And these cities shall go into 
captivity. 

18At Tehaphnehes also the day shall 
withdraw itself, 

When I shall break there the yokes 
of Egypt, 

And the pride of her power shall 
cease in her; 

As for her, a cloud shall cover her, 

And her daughters shall go into 
captivity. 

19Thus will I execute judgments in 
Egypt; 

And they shall know that I am the 
LORD.’ 

 


20And it came to pass in the eleventh 
year, in the first month, in the seventh 
day of the month, that the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying: 21’Son of 
man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh 
king of Egypt; and, lo, it hath not been 
bound up to be healed, to put a roller, 
that it be bound up and wax strong, 
that it hold the sword. 22Therefore thus 
saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am 
against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and 
will break his arms, the strong, and 
that which was broken; and I will 
cause the sword to fall out of his hand. 
23And I will scatter the Egyptians 
among the nations, and will disperse 
them through the countries. 24And I 
will strengthen the arms of the king of 
Babylon, and put My sword in his 
hand; but I will break the arms of 
Pharaoh, and he shall groan before him 
with the groanings of a deadly 
wounded man. 25And I will hold up the 
arms of the king of Babylon, and the 
arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and 
they shall know that I am the LORD, 
when I shall put My sword into the 
hand of the king of Babylon, and he 
shall stretch it out upon the land of 
Egypt. 26And I will scatter the 
Egyptians among the nations, and 
disperse them through the countries; 
and they shall know that I am the 
LORD.’ 

And it came to pass in the 
eleventh year, in the third 
month, in the first day of the month, 
that the word of the LORD came unto 
me, saying: 2’Son of man, say unto 
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his 
multitude: 

Whom art thou like in thy 
greatness? 

3Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in 
Lebanon, 

With fair branches, and with a 
shadowing shroud, 

And of a high stature; 

And its top was among the thick 
boughs. 

4The waters nourished it, 

The deep made it to grow; 

Her rivers ran round 

About her plantation, 

And she sent out her conduits 

Unto all the trees of the field. 

5Therefore its stature was exalted 

Above all the trees of the field; 

And its boughs were multiplied, 

And its branches became long, 

Because of the multitude of waters, 
when it shot them forth. 

6All the fowls of heaven made 

Their nests in its boughs, 

And all the beasts of the field did 
bring forth their young 

Under its branches, 

And under its shadow dwelt 

All great nations. 

7Thus was it fair in its greatness, 

In the length of its branches; 

For its root was 

By many waters. 

8The cedars in the garden of God 

Could not hide it; 

The cypress-trees were not 

Like its boughs, 

And the plane-trees were not 
31 




As its branches; 

Nor was any tree in the garden of 
God 

Like unto it in its beauty. 

9I made it fair 

By the multitude of its branches; 

So that all the trees of Eden, 

That were in the garden of God, 
envied it. 

10Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Because thou art exalted in stature, and 
he hath set his top among the thick 
boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his 
height; 11I do even deliver him into the 
hand of the mighty one of the nations; 
he shall surely deal with him; I do 
drive him out according to his 
wickedness. 12And strangers, the 
terrible of the nations, do cut him off, 
and cast him down; upon the 
mountains and in all the valleys his 
branches are fallen, and his boughs lie 
broken in all the channels of the land; 
and all the peoples of the earth do go 
down from his shadow, and do leave 
him. 13Upon his carcass all the fowls 
of the heaven do dwell, and upon his 
branches are all the beasts of the field; 
14to the end that none of all the trees 
by the waters exalt themselves in their 
stature, neither set their top among the 
thick boughs, nor that their mighty 
ones stand up in their height, even all 
that drink water; for they are all 
delivered unto death, to the nether 
parts of the earth, in the midst of the 
children of men, with them that go 
down to the pit. 

15Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the 
day when he went down to the nether-
world I caused the deep to mourn and 
cover itself for him, and I restrained 
the rivers thereof, and the great waters 
were stayed; and I caused Lebanon to 
mourn for him, and all the trees of the 
field fainted for him. 16I made the 
nations to shake at the sound of his 
fall, when I cast him down to the 
nether-world with them that descend 
into the pit; and all the trees of Eden, 
the choice and best of Lebanon, all 
that drink water, were comforted in the 
nether parts of the earth. 17They also 
went down into the nether-world with 
him unto them that are slain by the 
sword; yea, they that were in his arm, 
that dwelt under his shadow in the 
midst of the nations. 

18To whom art thou thus like in 
glory and in greatness among the trees 
of Eden? yet shall thou be brought 
down with the trees of Eden unto the 
nether parts of the earth; thou shalt lie 
in the midst of the uncircumcised, with 
them that are slain by the sword. This 
is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith 
the Lord GOD.’ 

And it came to pass in the 
twelfth year, in the twelfth 
month, in the first day of the month, 
that the word of the LORD came unto 
me, saying: 2’Son of man, take up a 
lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, 
and say unto him: 

Thou didst liken thyself unto a 
young lion of the nations; 
32 




Whereas thou art as a dragon in the 
seas; 

And thou didst gush forth with thy 
rivers, 

And didst trouble the waters with 
thy feet, 

And foul their rivers. 

3Thus saith the Lord GOD: 

I will therefore spread out My net 
over thee 

With a company of many peoples; 

And they shall bring thee up in My 
net. 

4And I will cast thee upon the land, 

I will hurl thee upon the open field, 

And will cause all the fowls of the 
heaven to settle upon thee, 

And I will fill the beasts of the 
whole earth with thee. 

5And I will lay thy flesh upon the 
mountains, 

And fill the valleys with thy 
foulness. 

6I will also water with thy blood the 
land wherein thou swimmest, 
even to the mountains; 

And the channels shall be full of 
thee. 

7And when I shall extinguish thee, I 
will cover the heaven, 

And make the stars thereof black; 

I will cover the sun with a cloud, 

And the moon shall not give her 
light. 

8All the bright lights of heaven 

Will I make black over thee, 

And set darkness upon thy land, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

9I will also vex the hearts of many 
peoples, when I shall bring thy 
destruction among the nations, into the 
countries which thou hast not known. 
10Yea, I will make many peoples 
appalled at thee, and their kings shall 
be horribly afraid for thee, when I 
shall brandish My sword before them; 
and they shall tremble at every 
moment, every man for his own life, in 
the day of thy fall. 

11For thus saith the Lord GOD: The 
sword of the king of Babylon shall 
come upon thee. 12By the swords of 
the mighty will I cause thy multitude 
to fall; 

The terrible of the nations are they 
all; 

And they shall spoil the pride of 
Egypt, 

And all the multitude thereof shall 
be destroyed. 

13I will destroy also all the beasts 
thereof 

From beside many waters; 

Neither shall the foot of man trouble 
them any more, 

Nor the hoofs of beasts trouble 
them. 

14Then will I make their waters to 
settle, 

And cause their rivers to run like oil, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

15When I shall make the land of 
Egypt desolate and waste, 

A land destitute of that whereof it 
was full, 

When I shall smite all them that 
dwell therein, 


Then shall they know that I am the 
LORD. 

16This is the lamentation wherewith 
they shall lament; 

The daughters of the nations shall 
lament therewith; 

For Egypt, and for all her multitude, 
shall they lament therewith, 

Saith the Lord GOD.’ 

 

17It came to pass also in the twelfth 
year, in the fifteenth day of the month, 
that the word of the LORD came unto 
me, saying: 18’Son of man, wail for the 
multitude of Egypt, and cast them 
down, even her, with the daughters of 
the mighty nations, unto the nether 
parts of the earth, with them that go 
down into the pit. 

19Whom dost thou pass in beauty? 

Go down, and be thou laid with the 
uncircumcised. 

20They shall fall in the midst of them 
that are slain by the sword; she is 
delivered to the sword; draw her down 
and all her multitudes. 21The strong 
among the mighty shall speak of him 
out of the midst of the nether-world 
with them that helped him; they are 
gone down, they lie still, even the 
uncircumcised, slain by the sword. 
22Asshur is there and all her company; 
their graves are round about them; all 
of them slain, fallen by the sword; 
23whose graves are set in the uttermost 
parts of the pit, and her company is 
round about her grave; all of them 
slain, fallen by the sword, who caused 
terror in the land of the living. 24There 
is Elam and all her multitude round 
about her grave; all of them slain, 
fallen by the sword, who are gone 
down uncircumcised into the nether 
parts of the earth, who caused their 
terror in the land of the living; yet 
have they borne their shame with them 
that go down to the pit. 25They have 
set her a bed in the midst of the slain 
with all her multitude; her graves are 
round about them; all of them 
uncircumcised, slain by the sword; 
because their terror was caused in the 
land of the living, yet have they borne 
their shame with them that go down to 
the pit; they are put in the midst of 
them that are slain. 26There is 
Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude; 
her graves are round about them; all of 
them uncircumcised, slain by the 
sword; because they caused their terror 
in the land of the living. 27And they 
that are inferior to the uncircumcised 
shall not lie with the mighty that are 
gone down to the nether-world with 
their weapons of war, whose swords 
are laid under their heads, and whose 
iniquities are upon their bones; 
because the terror of the mighty was in 
the land of the living. 28But thou, in the 
midst of the uncircumcised shalt thou 
be broken and lie, even with them that 
are slain by the sword. 29There is 
Edom, her kings and all her princes, 
who for all their might are laid with 
them that are slain by the sword; they 
shall lie with the uncircumcised, and 
with them that go down to the pit. 
30There are the princes of the north, all 


of them, and all the Zidonians, who are 
gone down with the slain, ashamed for 
all the terror which they caused by 
their might, and they lie uncircumcised 
with them that are slain by the sword, 
and bear their shame with them that go 
down to the pit. 31These shall Pharaoh 
see, and shall be comforted over all his 
multitude; even Pharaoh and all his 
army, slain by the sword, saith the 
Lord GOD. 32For I have put My terror 
in the land of the living; and he shall 
be laid in the midst of the 
uncircumcised, with them that are 
slain by the sword, even Pharaoh and 
all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, speak to the children of thy 
people, and say unto them: When I 
bring the sword upon a land, if the 
people of the land take a man from 
among them, and set him for their 
watchman; 3if, when he seeth the 
sword come upon the land, he blow 
the horn, and warn the people; 4then 
whosoever heareth the sound of the 
horn, and taketh not warning, if the 
sword come, and take him away, his 
blood shall be upon his own head; 5he 
heard the sound of the horn, and took 
not warning, his blood shall be upon 
him; whereas if he had taken warning, 
he would have delivered his soul. 6But 
if the watchman see the sword come, 
and blow not the horn, and the people 
be not warned, and the sword do come, 
and take any person from among them, 
he is taken away in his iniquity, but his 
blood will I require at the watchman’s 
hand. 

7So thou, son of man, I have set thee 
a watchman unto the house of Israel; 
therefore, when thou shalt hear the 
word at My mouth, warn them from 
Me. 8When I say unto the wicked: O 
wicked man, thou shalt surely die, and 
thou dost not speak to warn the wicked 
from his way; that wicked man shall 
die in his iniquity, but his blood will I 
require at thy hand. 9Nevertheless, if 
thou warn the wicked of his way to 
turn from it, and he turn not from his 
way; he shall die in his iniquity, but 
thou hast delivered thy soul. 

10Therefore, O thou son of man, say 
unto the house of Israel: Thus ye 
speak, saying: Our transgressions and 
our sins are upon us, and we pine away 
in them; how then can we live? 11Say 
unto them: As I live, saith the Lord 
GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of 
the wicked, but that the wicked turn 
from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye 
from your evil ways; for why will ye 
die, O house of Israel? 

12And thou, son of man, say unto the 
children of thy people: The 
righteousness of the righteous shall not 
deliver him in the day of his 
transgression; and as for the 
wickedness of the wicked, he shall not 
stumble thereby in the day that he 
turneth from his wickedness; neither 
shall he that is righteous be able to live 
thereby in the day that he sinneth. 
13When I say to the righteous, that he 
33 




shall surely live; if he trust to his 
righteousness, and commit iniquity, 
none of his righteous deeds shall be 
remembered; but for his iniquity that 
he hath committed, for it shall he die. 
14Again, when I say unto the wicked: 
Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from 
his sin, and do that which is lawful and 
right; 15if the wicked restore the 
pledge, give back that which he had 
taken by robbery, walk in the statutes 
of life, committing no iniquity; he 
shall surely live, he shall not die. 
16None of his sins that he hath 
committed shall be remembered 
against him; he hath done that which is 
lawful and right; he shall surely live. 
17Yet the children of thy people say: 
The way of the Lord is not equal; but 
as for them, their way is not equal. 
18When the righteous turneth from his 
righteousness, and committeth 
iniquity, he shall even die thereby. 
19And when the wicked turneth from 
his wickedness, and doeth that which 
is lawful and right, he shall live 
thereby. 20Yet ye say: The way of the 
Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, I 
will judge you every one after his 
ways.’ 

21And it came to pass in the twelfth 
year of our captivity, in the tenth 
month, in the fifth day of the month, 
that one that had escaped out of 
Jerusalem came unto me, saying: ‘The 
city is smitten.’ 22Now the hand of the 
LORD had been upon me in the 
evening, before he that was escaped 
came; and He had opened my mouth 
against his coming to me in the 
morning; and my mouth was opened, 
and I was no more dumb. 23Then the 
word of the LORD came unto me, 
saying: 24’Son of man, they that 
inhabit those waste places in the land 
of Israel speak, saying: Abraham was 
one, and he inherited the land; but we 
are many; the land is given us for 
inheritance. 25Wherefore say unto 
them: Thus saith the Lord GOD. Ye eat 
with the blood, and lift up your eyes 
unto your idols, and shed blood; and 
shall ye possess the land? 26Ye stand 
upon your sword, ye work 
abomination, and ye defile every one 
his neighbour’s wife; and shall ye 
possess the land? 27Thus shalt thou say 
unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: 
As I live, surely they that are in the 
waste places shall fall by the sword, 
and him that is in the open field will I 
give to the beasts to be devoured, and 
they that are in the strongholds and in 
the caves shall die of the pestilence. 
28And I will make the land most 
desolate, and the pride of her power 
shall cease; and the mountains of 
Israel shall be desolate, so that none 
shall pass through. 29Then shall they 
know that I am the LORD, when I have 
made the land most desolate, because 
of all their abominations which they 
have committed. 

30And as for thee, son of man, the 
children of thy people that talk of thee 
by the walls and in the doors of the 
houses, and speak one to another, 
every one to his brother, saying: 


Come, I pray you, and hear what is the 
word that cometh forth from the LORD; 
31and come unto thee as the people 
cometh, and sit before thee as My 
people, and hear thy words, but do 
them not—for with their mouth they 
show much love, but their heart goeth 
after their covetousness; 32and, lo, thou 
art unto them as a love song of one 
that hath a pleasant voice, and can play 
well on an instrument; so they hear thy 
words, but they do them not— 33when 
this cometh to pass—behold, it 
cometh—then shall they know that a 
prophet hath been among them.’ 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, prophesy against the 
shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say 
unto them, even to the shepherds: Thus 
saith the Lord GOD: Woe unto the 
shepherds of Israel that have fed 
themselves! should not the shepherds 
feed the sheep? 3Ye did eat the fat, and 
ye clothed you with the wool, ye killed 
the fatlings; but ye fed not the sheep. 
4The weak have ye not strengthened, 
neither have ye healed that which was 
sick, neither have ye bound up that 
which was broken, neither have ye 
brought back that which was driven 
away, neither have ye sought that 
which was lost; but with force have ye 
ruled over them and with rigour. 5So 
were they scattered, because there was 
no shepherd; and they became food to 
all the beasts of the field, and were 
scattered. 6My sheep wandered 
through all the mountains, and upon 
every high hill, yea, upon all the face 
of the earth were My sheep scattered, 
and there was none that did search or 
seek. 7Therefore, ye shepherds, hear 
the word of the LORD: 8As I live, saith 
the Lord GOD, surely forasmuch as My 
sheep became a prey, and My sheep 
became food to all the beasts of the 
field, because there was no shepherd, 
neither did My shepherds search for 
My sheep, but the shepherds fed 
themselves, and fed not My sheep; 
9therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word 
of the LORD: 10Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Behold, I am against the 
shepherds; and I will require My sheep 
at their hand, and cause them to cease 
from feeding the sheep; neither shall 
the shepherds feed themselves any 
more; and I will deliver My sheep 
from their mouth, that they may not be 
food for them. 

11For thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, here am I, and I will search 
for My sheep, and seek them out. 12As 
a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the 
day that he is among his sheep that are 
separated, so will I seek out My sheep; 
and I will deliver them out of all 
places whither they have been 
scattered in the day of clouds and thick 
darkness. 13And I will bring them out 
from the peoples, and gather them 
from the countries, and will bring them 
into their own land; and I will feed 
them upon the mountains of Israel, by 
the streams, and in all the habitable 
places of the country. 14I will feed 
them in a good pasture, and upon the 
34 




high mountains of Israel shall their 
fold be; there shall they lie down in a 
good fold, and in a fat pasture shall 
they feed upon the mountains of Israel. 
15I will feed My sheep, and I will 
cause them to lie down, saith the Lord 
GOD. 16I will seek that which was lost, 
and will bring back that which was 
driven away, and will bind up that 
which was broken, and will strengthen 
that which was sick; and the fat and 
the strong I will destroy, I will feed 
them in justice. 17And as for you, O 
My flock, thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I judge between cattle and 
cattle, even the rams and the he-goats. 
18Seemeth it a small thing unto you to 
have fed upon the good pasture, but ye 
must tread down with your feet the 
residue of your pasture? and to have 
drunk of the settled waters, but ye 
must foul the residue with your feet? 
19And as for My sheep, they eat that 
which ye have trodden with your feet, 
and they drink that which ye have 
fouled with your feet. 

20Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD 
unto them: Behold, I, even I, will 
judge between the fat cattle and the 
lean cattle. 21Because ye thrust with 
side and with shoulder, and push all 
the weak with your horns, till ye have 
scattered them abroad; 22therefore will 
I save My flock, and they shall no 
more be a prey; and I will judge 
between cattle and cattle. 23And I will 
set up one shepherd over them, and he 
shall feed them, even My servant 
David; he shall feed them, and he shall 
be their shepherd. 24And I the LORD 
will be their God, and My servant 
David prince among them; I the LORD 
have spoken. 25And I will make with 
them a covenant of peace, and will 
cause evil beasts to cease out of the 
land; and they shall dwell safely in the 
wilderness, and sleep in the woods. 
26And I will make them and the places 
round about My hill a blessing; and I 
will cause the shower to come down in 
its season; there shall be showers of 
blessing. 27And the tree of the field 
shall yield its fruit, and the earth shall 
yield her produce, and they shall be 
safe in their land; and they shall know 
that I am the LORD, when I have 
broken the bars of their yoke, and have 
delivered them out of the hand of those 
that made bondmen of them. 28And 
they shall no more be a prey to the 
nations, neither shall the beast of the 
earth devour them; but they shall dwell 
safely, and none shall make them 
afraid. 29And I will raise up unto them 
a plantation for renown, and they shall 
be no more consumed with hunger in 
the land, neither bear the shame of the 
nations any more. 30And they shall 
know that I the LORD their God am 
with them, and that they, the house of 
Israel, are My people, saith the Lord 
GOD. 31And ye My sheep, the sheep of 
My pasture, are men, and I am your 
God, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

 

Moreover the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying: 
2’Son of man, set thy face against 
35 




mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 
3and say unto it: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: Behold, I am against thee, O 
mount Seir, and I will stretch out My 
hand against thee, and I will make thee 
most desolate. 4I will lay thy cities 
waste, and thou shalt be desolate; and 
thou shalt know that I am the LORD. 
5Because thou hast had a hatred of old, 
and hast hurled the children of Israel 
unto the power of the sword in the 
time of their calamity, in the time of 
the iniquity of the end; 6therefore, as I 
live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare 
thee unto blood, and blood shall 
pursue thee; surely thou hast hated 
thine own blood, therefore blood shall 
pursue thee. 7Thus will I make mount 
Seir most desolate, and cut off from it 
him that passeth through and him that 
returneth. 8And I will fill his 
mountains with his slain; in thy hills 
and in thy valleys and in all thy 
streams shall they fall that are slain 
with the sword. 9I will make thee 
perpetual desolations, and thy cities 
shall not return; and ye shall know that 
I am the LORD. 10Because thou hast 
said: These two nations and these two 
countries shall be mine, and we will 
possess it; whereas the LORD was there; 
11therefore, as I live, saith the Lord 
GOD, I will do according to thine anger 
and according to thine envy, which 
thou hast used out of thy hatred against 
them; and I will make Myself known 
among them, when I shall judge thee. 
12And thou shalt know that I the LORD 
have heard all thy blasphemies which 
thou hast spoken against the mountains 
of Israel, saying: They are laid 
desolate, they are given us to devour. 
13And ye have magnified yourselves 
against Me with your mouth, and have 
multiplied your words against Me; I 
have heard it. 14Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: When the whole earth rejoiceth, I 
will make thee desolate. 15As thou 
didst rejoice over the inheritance of the 
house of Israel, because it was 
desolate, so will I do unto thee; thou 
shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all 
Edom, even all of it; and they shall 
know that I am the LORD. 

 

And thou, son of man, 
prophesy unto the mountains 
of Israel, and say: Ye mountains of 
Israel, hear the word of the LORD. 
2Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because the 
enemy hath said against you: Aha! 
even the ancient high places are ours 
in possession; 3therefore prophesy, and 
say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because, 
even because they have made you 
desolate, and swallowed you up on 
every side, that ye might be a 
possession unto the rest of the nations, 
and ye are taken up in the lips of 
talkers, and the evil report of the 
people; 4therefore, ye mountains of 
Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD to the 
mountains and to the hills, to the 
streams and to the valleys, to the 
desolate wastes and to the cities that 
are forsaken, which are become a prey 
and derision to the residue of the 
36 




nations that are round about; 5therefore 
thus saith the Lord GOD: Surely in the 
fire of My jealousy have I spoken 
against the residue of the nations, and 
against all Edom, that have appointed 
My land unto themselves for a 
possession with the joy of all their 
heart, with disdain of soul, to cast it 
out for a prey; 6therefore prophesy 
concerning the land of Israel, and say 
unto the mountains and to the hills, to 
the streams and to the valleys: Thus 
saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I have 
spoken in My jealousy and in My fury, 
because ye have borne the shame of 
the nations; 7therefore thus saith the 
Lord GOD: I have lifted up My hand: 
Surely the nations that are round about 
you, they shall bear their shame. 8But 
ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall 
shoot forth your branches, and yield 
your fruit to My people Israel; for they 
are at hand to come. 9For, behold, I am 
for you, and I will turn unto you, and 
ye shall be tilled and sown; 10and I will 
multiply men upon you, all the house 
of Israel, even all of it; and the cities 
shall be inhabited, and the waste 
places shall be builded; 11and I will 
multiply upon you man and beast, and 
they shall increase and be fruitful; and 
I will cause you to be inhabited after 
your former estate, and will do better 
unto you than at your beginnings; and 
ye shall know that I am the LORD. 
12Yea, I will cause men to walk upon 
you, even my people Israel, and they 
shall possess thee, and thou shalt be 
their inheritance; and thou shalt no 
more henceforth bereave them of 
children. 13Thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Because they say unto you: Thou land 
art a devourer of men, and hast been a 
bereaver of thy nations; 14therefore 
thou shalt devour men no more, 
neither bereave thy nations any more, 
saith the Lord GOD; 15neither will I 
suffer the shame of the nations any 
more to be heard against thee, neither 
shalt thou bear the reproach of the 
peoples any more, neither shalt thou 
cause thy nations to stumble any more, 
saith the Lord GOD.’ 

16Moreover the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 17’Son of man, 
when the house of Israel dwelt in their 
own land, they defiled it by their way 
and by their doings; their way before 
Me was as the uncleanness of a 
woman in her impurity. 18Wherefore I 
poured out My fury upon them for the 
blood which they had shed upon the 
land, and because they had defiled it 
with their idols; 19and I scattered them 
among the nations, and they were 
dispersed through the countries; 
according to their way and according 
to their doings I judged them. 20And 
when they came unto the nations, 
whither they came, they profaned My 
holy name; in that men said of them: 
These are the people of the LORD, and 
are gone forth out of His land. 21But I 
had pity for My holy name, which the 
house of Israel had profaned among 
the nations, whither they came. 
22Therefore say unto the house of 
Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: I do 


not this for your sake, O house of 
Israel, but for My holy name, which ye 
have profaned among the nations, 
whither ye came. 23And I will sanctify 
My great name, which hath been 
profaned among the nations, which ye 
have profaned in the midst of them; 
and the nations shall know that I am 
the LORD, saith the Lord GOD, when I 
shall be sanctified in you before their 
eyes. 24For I will take you from among 
the nations, and gather you out of all 
the countries, and will bring you into 
your own land. 25And I will sprinkle 
clean water upon you, and ye shall be 
clean; from all your uncleannesses, 
and from all your idols, will I cleanse 
you. 26A new heart also will I give 
you, and a new spirit will I put within 
you; and I will take away the stony 
heart out of your flesh, and I will give 
you a heart of flesh. 27And I will put 
My spirit within you, and cause you to 
walk in My statutes, and ye shall keep 
Mine ordinances, and do them. 28And 
ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to 
your fathers; and ye shall be My 
people, and I will be your God. 29And I 
will save you from all your 
uncleannesses; and I will call for the 
corn, and will increase it, and lay no 
famine upon you. 30And I will multiply 
the fruit of the tree, and the increase of 
the field, that ye may receive no more 
the reproach of famine among the 
nations. 31Then shall ye remember 
your evil ways, and your doings that 
were not good; and ye shall loathe 
yourselves in your own sight for your 
iniquities and for your abominations. 
32Not for your sake do I this, saith the 
Lord GOD, be it known unto you; be 
ashamed and confounded for your 
ways, O house of Israel. 

33Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the 
day that I cleanse you from all your 
iniquities, I will cause the cities to be 
inhabited, and the waste places shall 
be builded. 34And the land that was 
desolate shall be tilled, whereas it was 
a desolation in the sight of all that 
passed by. 35And they shall say: This 
land that was desolate is become like 
the garden of Eden; and the waste and 
desolate and ruined cities are fortified 
and inhabited. 36Then the nations that 
are left round about you shall know 
that I the LORD have builded the ruined 
places, and planted that which was 
desolate; I the LORD have spoken it, 
and I will do it. 

37Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will yet 
for this be inquired of by the house of 
Israel, to do it for them; I will increase 
them with men like a flock. 38As the 
flock for sacrifice, as the flock of 
Jerusalem in her appointed seasons, so 
shall the waste cities be filled with 
flocks of men; and they shall know 
that I am the LORD.’ 

 

The hand of the LORD was 
upon me, and the LORD carried 
me out in a spirit, and set me down in 
the midst of the valley, and it was full 
of bones; 2and He caused me to pass 
by them round about, and, behold, 
there were very many in the open 
37 




valley; and, lo, they were very dry. 
3And He said unto me: ‘Son of man, 
can these bones live?’ And I answered: 
‘O Lord GOD, Thou knowest.’ 4Then 
He said unto me: ‘Prophesy over these 
bones, and say unto them: O ye dry 
bones, hear the word of the LORD: 
5Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these 
bones: Behold, I will cause breath to 
enter into you, and ye shall live. 6And I 
will lay sinews upon you, and will 
bring up flesh upon you, and cover 
you with skin, and put breath in you, 
and ye shall live; and ye shall know 
that I am the LORD.’ 7So I prophesied 
as I was commanded; and as I 
prophesied, there was a noise, and 
behold a commotion, and the bones 
came together, bone to its bone. 8And I 
beheld, and, lo, there were sinews 
upon them, and flesh came up, and 
skin covered them above; but there 
was no breath in them. 9Then said He 
unto me: ‘Prophesy unto the breath, 
prophesy, son of man, and say to the 
breath: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Come 
from the four winds, O breath, and 
breathe upon these slain, that they may 
live.’ 10So I prophesied as He 
commanded me, and the breath came 
into them, and they lived, and stood up 
upon their feet, an exceeding great 
host. 11Then He said unto me: ‘Son of 
man, these bones are the whole house 
of Israel; behold, they say: Our bones 
are dried up, and our hope is lost; we 
are clean cut off. 12Therefore 
prophesy, and say unto them: Thus 
saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will open 
your graves, and cause you to come up 
out of your graves, O My people; and I 
will bring you into the land of Israel. 
13And ye shall know that I am the 
LORD, when I have opened your 
graves, and caused you to come up out 
of your graves, O My people. 14And I 
will put My spirit in you, and ye shall 
live, and I will place you in your own 
land; and ye shall know that I the LORD 
have spoken, and performed it, saith 
the LORD.’ 

15And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 16’And thou, son of 
man, take thee one stick, and write 
upon it: For Judah, and for the children 
of Israel his companions; then take 
another stick, and write upon it: For 
Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and of all 
the house of Israel his companions; 
17and join them for thee one to another 
into one stick, that they may become 
one in thy hand. 18And when the 
children of thy people shall speak unto 
thee, saying: Wilt thou not tell us what 
thou meanest by these? 19say into 
them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, 
which is in the hand of Ephraim, and 
the tribes of Israel his companions; 
and I will put them unto him together 
with the stick of Judah, and make them 
one stick, and they shall be one in My 
hand. 20And the sticks whereon thou 
writest shall be in thy hand before their 
eyes. 21And say unto them: Thus saith 
the Lord GOD: Behold, I will take the 
children of Israel from among the 
nations, whither they are gone, and 


will gather them on every side, and 
bring them into their own land; 22and I 
will make them one nation in the land, 
upon the mountains of Israel, and one 
king shall be king to them all; and they 
shall be no more two nations, neither 
shall they be divided into two 
kingdoms any more at all; 23neither 
shall they defile themselves any more 
with their idols, nor with their 
detestable things, nor with any of their 
transgressions; but I will save them out 
of all their dwelling-places, wherein 
they have sinned, and will cleanse 
them; so shall they be My people, and 
I will be their God. 24And My servant 
David shall be king over them, and 
they all shall have one shepherd; they 
shall also walk in Mine ordinances, 
and observe My statutes, and do them. 
25And they shall dwell in the land that 
I have given unto Jacob My servant, 
wherein your fathers dwelt; and they 
shall dwell therein, they, and their 
children, and their children’s children, 
for ever; and David My servant shall 
be their prince for ever. 26Moreover I 
will make a covenant of peace with 
them—it shall be an everlasting 
covenant with them; and I will 
establish them, and multiply them, and 
will set My sanctuary in the midst of 
them for ever. 27My dwelling-place 
also shall be over them; and I will be 
their God, and they shall be My 
people. 28And the nations shall know 
that I am the LORD that sanctify Israel, 
when My sanctuary shall be in the 
midst of them for ever.’ 

 

And the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 2’Son 
of man, set thy face toward Gog, of the 
land of Magog, the chief prince of 
Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy 
against him, 3and say: Thus saith the 
Lord GOD: Behold, I am against thee, 
O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and 
Tubal; 4and I will turn thee about, and 
put hooks into thy jaws, and I will 
bring thee forth, and all thine army, 
horses and horsemen, all of them 
clothed most gorgeously, a great 
company with buckler and shield, all 
of them handling swords: 5Persia, 
Cush, and Put with them, all of them 
with shield and helmet; 6Gomer, and 
all his bands; the house of Togarmah 
in the uttermost parts of the north, and 
all his bands; even many peoples with 
thee. 7Be thou prepared, and prepare 
for thyself, thou, and all thy company 
that are assembled unto thee, and be 
thou guarded of them. 8After many 
days thou shalt be mustered for 
service, in the latter years thou shalt 
come against the land that is brought 
back from the sword, that is gathered 
out of many peoples, against the 
mountains of Israel, which have been a 
continual waste; but it is brought forth 
out of the peoples, and they dwell 
safely all of them. 9And thou shalt 
ascend, thou shalt come like a storm, 
thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the 
land, thou, and all thy bands, and 
many peoples with thee. 
38 




10Thus saith the Lord GOD: It shall 
come to pass in that day, that things 
shall come into thy mind, and thou 
shalt devise an evil device; 11and thou 
shalt say: I will go up against the land 
of unwalled villages; I will come upon 
them that are at quiet, that dwell 
safely, all of them dwelling without 
walls, and having neither bars nor 
gates; 12to take the spoil and to take the 
prey; to turn thy hand against the 
waste places that are now inhabited, 
and against the people that are 
gathered out of the nations, that have 
gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in 
the middle of the earth. 13Sheba, and 
Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, 
with all the magnates thereof, shall say 
unto thee: Comest thou to take the 
spoil? hast thou assembled thy 
company to take the prey? to carry 
away silver and gold, to take away 
cattle and goods, to take great spoil? 

14Therefore, son of man, prophesy, 
and say unto Gog: Thus saith the Lord 
GOD: In that day when My people 
Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not 
know it? 15And thou shalt come from 
thy place out of the uttermost parts of 
the north, thou, and many peoples with 
thee, all of them riding upon horses, a 
great company and a mighty army; 
16and thou shalt come up against My 
people Israel, as a cloud to cover the 
land; it shall be in the end of days, and 
I will bring thee against My land, that 
the nations may know Me, when I 
shall be sanctified through thee, O 
Gog, before their eyes. 

17Thus saith the Lord GOD: Art thou 
he of whom I spoke in old time by My 
servants the prophets of Israel, that 
prophesied in those days for many 
years, that I would bring thee against 
them? 18And it shall come to pass in 
that day, when Gog shall come against 
the land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, 
that My fury shall arise up in My 
nostrils. 19For in My jealousy and in 
the fire of My wrath have I spoken: 
Surely in that day there shall be a great 
shaking in the land of Israel; 20so that 
the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of 
the heaven, and the beasts of the field 
and all creeping things that creep upon 
the ground, and all the men that are 
upon the face of the earth, shall shake 
at My presence, and the mountains 
shall be thrown down, and the steep 
places shall fall, and every wall shall 
fall to the ground. 21And I will call for 
a sword against him throughout all my 
mountains, saith the Lord GOD; every 
man’s sword shall be against his 
brother. 22And I will plead against him 
with pestilence and with blood; and I 
will cause to rain upon him, and upon 
his bands, and upon the many peoples 
that are with him, an overflowing 
shower, and great hailstones, fire, and 
brimstone. 23Thus will I magnify 
Myself, and sanctify Myself, and I will 
make Myself known in the eyes of 
many nations; and they shall know that 
I am the LORD. 

And thou, son of man, 
prophesy against Gog, and 
say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, 
39 




I am against thee, O Gog, chief prince 
of Meshech and Tubal; 2and I will turn 
thee about and lead thee on, and will 
cause thee to come up from the 
uttermost parts of the north; and I will 
bring thee upon the mountains of 
Israel; 3and I will smite thy bow out of 
thy left hand, and will cause thine 
arrows to fall out of thy right hand. 
4Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of 
Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the 
peoples that are with thee; I will give 
thee unto the ravenous birds of every 
sort and to the beasts of the field, to be 
devoured. 5Thou shalt fall upon the 
open field; for I have spoken it, saith 
the Lord GOD. 6And I will send a fire 
on Magog, and on them that dwell 
safely in the isles; and they shall know 
that I am the LORD. 7And My holy 
name will I make known in the midst 
of My people Israel; neither will I 
suffer My holy name to be profaned 
any more; and the nations shall know 
that I am the LORD, the Holy One in 
Israel. 8Behold, it cometh, and it shall 
be done, saith the Lord GOD; This is 
the day whereof I have spoken. 9And 
they that dwell in the cities of Israel 
shall go forth, and shall make fires of 
the weapons and use them as fuel, both 
the shields and the bucklers, the bows 
and the arrows, and the hand-staves, 
and the spears, and they shall make 
fires of them seven years; 10so that 
they shall take no wood out of the 
field, neither cut down any out of the 
forests, for they shall make fires of the 
weapons; and they shall spoil those 
that spoiled them, and rob those that 
robbed them, saith the Lord GOD. 

11And it shall come to pass in that 
day, that I will give unto Gog a place 
fit for burial in Israel, the valley of 
them that pass through on the east of 
the sea; and it shall stop them that pass 
through; and there shall they bury Gog 
and all his multitude; and they shall 
call it the valley of aHamon-gog. 12And 
seven months shall the house of Israel 
be burying them, that they may cleanse 
the land. 13Yea, all the people of the 
land shall bury them, and it shall be to 
them a renown; in the day that I shall 
be glorified, saith the Lord GOD. 14And 
they shall set apart men of continual 
employment, that shall pass through 
the land to bury with them that pass 
through those that remain upon the 
face of the land, to cleanse it; after the 
end of seven months shall they search. 
15And when they that pass through 
shall pass through the land, and any 
seeth a man’s bone, then shall he set 
up a sign by it, till the buriers have 
buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog. 
16And bHamonah shall also be the 
name of a city. Thus shall they cleanse 
the land. 

a That is, The multitude of Gog. 

b That is, Multitude. 

17And thou, son of man, thus saith 
the Lord GOD: Speak unto the birds of 
every sort, and to every beast of the 
field: Assemble yourselves, and come; 
gather yourselves on every side to My 
feast that I do prepare for you, even a 


great feast, upon the mountains of 
Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink 
blood. 18The flesh of the mighty shall 
ye eat, and the blood of the princes of 
the earth shall ye drink; rams, lambs, 
and goats, bullocks, fatlings of Bashan 
are they all of them. 19And ye shall eat 
fat till ye be full, and drink blood till 
ye be drunken, of My feast which I 
have prepared for you. 20And ye shall 
be filled at My table with horses and 
horsemen, with mighty men, and with 
all men of war, saith the Lord GOD. 
21And I will set My glory among the 
nations, and all the nations shall see 
My judgment that I have executed, and 
My hand that I have laid upon them. 
22So the house of Israel shall know that 
I am the LORD their God, from that day 
and forward. 23And the nations shall 
know that the house of Israel went into 
captivity for their iniquity, because 
they broke faith with Me, and I hid My 
face from them; so I gave them into 
the hand of their adversaries, and they 
fell all of them by the sword. 
24According to their uncleanness and 
according to their transgressions did I 
unto them; and I hid My face from 
them. 

25Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 
Now will I bring back the captivity of 
Jacob, and have compassion upon the 
whole house of Israel; and I will be 
jealous for My holy name. 26And they 
shall bear their shame, and all their 
breach of faith which they have 
committed against Me, when they 
shall dwell safely in their land, and 
none shall make them afraid; 27when I 
have brought them back from the 
peoples, and gathered them out of their 
enemies’lands, and am sanctified in 
them in the sight of many nations. 
28And they shall know that I am the 
LORD their God, in that I caused them 
to go into captivity among the nations, 
and have gathered them unto their own 
land; and I will leave none of them any 
more there; 29neither will I hide My 
face any more from them; for I have 
poured out My spirit upon the house of 
Israel, saith the Lord GOD.’ 

 

In the five and twentieth year 
of our captivity, in the 
beginning of the year, in the tenth day 
of the month, in the fourteenth year 
after that the city was smitten, in the 
selfsame day, the hand of the LORD 
was upon me, and He brought me 
thither. 2In the visions of God brought 
He me into the land of Israel, and set 
me down upon a very high mountain, 
whereon was as it were the frame of a 
city on the south. 3And He brought me 
thither, and, behold, there was a man, 
whose appearance was like the 
appearance of brass, with a line of flax 
in his hand, and a measuring reed; and 
he stood in the gate. 4And the man said 
unto me: ‘Son of man, behold with 
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, 
and set thy heart upon all that I shall 
show thee, for to the intent that I might 
show them unto thee art thou brought 
thither; declare all that thou seest to 
the house of Israel.’ 
40 




5And behold a wall on the outside of 
the house round about, and in the 
man’s hand a measuring reed of six 
cubits long, of a cubit and a hand-
breadth each; so he measured the 
breadth of the building, one reed, and 
the height, one reed. 

6Then came he unto the gate which 
looketh toward the east, and went up 
the steps thereof; and he measured the 
jamb of the gate, one reed broad, and 
the other jamb, one reed broad. 7And 
every cell was one reed long, and one 
reed broad; and the space between the 
cells was five cubits; and the jambs of 
the gate by the porch of the gate within 
were one reed. 8He measured also the 
porch of the gate toward the house, 
one reed. 9Then measured he the porch 
of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts 
thereof, two cubits; and the porch of 
the gate was inward. 10And the cells of 
the gate eastward were three on this 
side, and three on that side; they three 
were of one measure; and the posts 
had one measure on this side and on 
that side. 11And he measured the 
breadth of the entry of the gate, ten 
cubits; and the length of the gate, 
thirteen cubits; 12and a border before 
the cells, one cubit [on this side], and a 
border, one cubit on that side; and the 
cells, six cubits on this side, and six 
cubits on that side. 13And he measured 
the gate from the roof of the one cell to 
the roof of the other, a breadth of five 
and twenty cubits; door against door. 
14He made also posts of threescore 
cubits; even unto the posts of the court 
in the gates round about. 15And from 
the forefront of the gate of the entrance 
unto the forefront of the inner porch of 
the gate were fifty cubits. 16And there 
were narrow windows to the cells and 
to their posts within the gate round 
about, and likewise to the arches; and 
windows were round about inward; 
and upon each post were palm-trees. 

17Then brought he me into the outer 
court, and, lo, there were chambers 
and a pavement, made for the court 
round about; thirty chambers were 
upon the pavement. 18And the 
pavement was by the side of the gates, 
corresponding unto the length of the 
gates, even the lower pavement. 
19Then he measured the breadth from 
the forefront of the lower gate unto the 
forefront of the inner court without, a 
hundred cubits, eastward as also 
northward. 

20And the gate of the outer court that 
looked toward the north, he measured 
the length thereof and the breadth 
thereof. 21And the cells thereof were 
three on this side and three on that 
side; and the posts thereof and the 
arches thereof were after the measure 
of the first gate; the length thereof was 
fifty cubits, and the breadth five and 
twenty cubits. 22And the windows 
thereof, and the arches thereof, and the 
palm-trees thereof, were after the 
measure of the gate that looketh 
toward the east; and it was ascended 
by seven steps; and the arches thereof 
were before them. 23And there was a 
gate to the inner court over against the 


other gate, northward as also eastward; 
and he measured from gate to gate a 
hundred cubits. 

24And he led me toward the south, 
and behold a gate toward the south; 
and he measured the posts thereof, and 
the arches thereof according to these 
measures. 25And there were windows 
in it and in the arches thereof round 
about, like those windows; the length 
was fifty cubits, and the breadth five 
and twenty cubits. 26And there were 
seven steps to go up to it, and the 
arches thereof were before them; and it 
had palm-trees, one on this side, and 
another on that side, upon the posts 
thereof. 27And there was a gate to the 
inner court toward the south; and he 
measured from gate to gate toward the 
south a hundred cubits. 

28Then he brought me to the inner 
court by the south gate; and he 
measured the south gate according to 
these measures; 29and the cells thereof, 
and the posts thereof, and the arches 
thereof, according to these measures; 
and there were windows in it and in 
the arches thereof round about; it was 
fifty cubits long, and five and twenty 
cubits broad. 30And there were arches 
round about, five and twenty cubits 
long, and five cubits broad. 31And the 
arches thereof were toward the outer 
court; and palm-trees were upon the 
posts thereof; and the going up to it 
had eight steps. 

32And he brought me into the inner 
court toward the east; and he measured 
the gate according to these measures; 
33and the cells thereof, and the posts 
thereof, and the arches thereof, 
according to these measures; and there 
were windows therein and in the 
arches thereof round about; it was fifty 
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits 
broad. 34And the arches thereof were 
toward the outer court; and palm-trees 
were upon the posts thereof, on this 
side, and on that side; and the going up 
to it had eight steps. 

35And he brought me to the north 
gate; and he measured it according to 
these measures; 36the cells thereof, the 
posts thereof, and the arches thereof; 
and there were windows therein round 
about; the length was fifty cubits, and 
the breadth five and twenty cubits. 
37And the posts thereof were toward 
the outer court; and palm-trees were 
upon the posts thereof, on this side, 
and on that side; and the going up to it 
had eight steps. 

38And a chamber with the entry 
thereof was by the posts at the gates; 
there was the burnt-offering to be 
washed. 39And in the porch of the gate 
were two tables on this side, and two 
tables on that side, to slay thereon the 
burnt-offering and the sin-offering and 
the guilt-offering. 40And on the one 
side without, as one goeth up to the 
entry of the gate toward the north, 
were two tables; and on the other side 
of the porch of the gate were two 
tables. 41Four tables were on this side, 
and four tables on that side, by the side 
of the gate; eight tables, whereupon to 
slay the sacrifices. 42Moreover there 


were four tables for the burnt-offering, 
of hewn stone, a cubit and a half long, 
and a cubit and a half broad, and one 
cubit high, whereupon to lay the 
instruments wherewith the burnt-
offering and the sacrifice are slain. 
43And the slabs, a handbreadth long, 
were fastened within round about; and 
upon the tables was to be the flesh of 
the offering. 44And without the inner 
gate were chambers for the guard in 
the inner court, which was at the side 
of the north gate, and their prospect 
was toward the south; one at the side 
of the east gate having the prospect 
toward the north. 45And he said unto 
me: ‘This chamber, whose prospect is 
toward the south, is for the priests, the 
keepers of the charge of the house. 
46And the chamber whose prospect is 
toward the north is for the priests, the 
keepers of the charge of the altar; these 
are the sons of Zadok, who from 
among the sons of Levi come near to 
the LORD to minister unto Him.’ 

47And he measured the court, a 
hundred cubits long, and a hundred 
cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar 
was before the house. 

48Then he brought me to the porch 
of the house, and measured each post 
of the porch, five cubits on this side, 
and five cubits on that side; and the 
breadth of the gate was three cubits on 
this side, and three cubits on that side. 
49The length of the porch was twenty 
cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; 
and it was by steps that it was 
ascended; and there were pillars by the 
posts, one on this side, and another on 
that side. 

41 



And he brought me to athe 
temple, and measured the 
posts, six cubits broad on the one side, 
and six cubits broad on the other side, 
which was the breadth of the tent. 
2And the breadth of the entrance was 
ten cubits; and the sides of the 
entrance were five cubits on the one 
side, and five cubits on the other side; 
and he measured the length thereof, 
forty cubits, and the breadth, twenty 
cubits. 

a That is, the holy place. 

3Then went he inward, and 
measured each post of the entrance, 
two cubits; and the entrance, six 
cubits; and the breadth of the entrance, 
seven cubits. 4And he measured the 
length thereof, twenty cubits, and the 
breadth, twenty cubits, before the 
temple; and he said unto me: ‘This is 
the most holy place.’ 

5Then he measured the wall of the 
house, six cubits; and the breadth of 
every side-chamber, four cubits, round 
about the house on every side. 6And 
the side-chambers were one over 
another, three and thirty times; and 
there were cornices in the wall which 
belonged to the house for the side-
chambers round about, that they might 
have hold therein, and not have hold in 
the wall of the house. 7And the side-
chambers were broader as they wound 
about higher and higher; for the 
winding about of the house went 


higher and higher round about the 
house; therefore the breadth of the 
house continued upward; and so one 
went up from the lowest row to the 
highest by the middle. 8I saw also that 
the house had a raised basement round 
about; the foundations of the side-
chambers were a full reed of six cubits 
to the joining. 9The breadth of the 
outer wall which belonged to the side-
chambers was five cubits; and so that 
which was left by the structure of the 
side-chambers that belonged to the 
house. 10And between the chambers 
was a breadth of twenty cubits round 
about the house on every side. 11And 
the doors of the side-chambers were 
toward the place that was left, one 
door toward the north, and another 
door toward the south; and the breadth 
of the place that was left was five 
cubits round about. 

12And the building that was before 
the separate place at the side toward 
the west was seventy cubits broad; and 
the wall of the building was five cubits 
thick round about, and the length 
thereof ninety cubits. 

13And he measured the house, a 
hundred cubits long; and the separate 
place, and the building, with the walls 
thereof, a hundred cubits long; 14also 
the breadth of the face of the house 
and of the separate place toward the 
east, a hundred cubits. 15And he 
measured the length of the building 
before the separate place which was at 
the back thereof, and the galleries 
thereof on the one side and on the 
other side, a hundred cubits. 

Now the temple, and the inner place, 
and the porches of the court, 16the 
jambs, and the narrow windows, and 
the galleries, that they three had round 
about, over against the jambs there 
was a veneering of wood round about, 
and from the ground up to the 
windows; and the windows were 
covered; 17to the space above the door, 
even unto the inner house, and 
without, and on all the wall round 
about within and without, by measure. 
18And it was made with cherubim and 
palm-trees; and a palm-tree was 
between cherub and cherub, and every 
cherub had two faces; 19so that there 
was the face of a man toward the 
palm-tree on the one side, and the face 
of a young lion toward the palm-tree 
on the other side; thus was it made 
through all the house round about. 
20From the ground unto above the door 
were cherubim and palm-trees made; 
and so on the wall of the temple. 21As 
for the temple, the jambs were 
squared; and the face of the sanctuary 
had an appearance such as is the 
appearance. 

22The altar, three cubits high, and 
the length thereof two cubits, was of 
wood, and so the corners thereof; the 
length thereof, and the walls thereof, 
were also of wood; and he said unto 
me: ‘This is the table that is before the 
LORD.’ 

23And the temple and the sanctuary 
had two doors. 24And the doors had 


two leaves [apiece], two turning 
leaves; two leaves for the one door, 
and two leaves for the other. 25And 
there were made on them, on the doors 
of the temple, cherubim and palm-
trees, like as were made upon the 
walls; and there were thick beams of 
wood upon the face of the porch 
without. 26And there were narrow 
windows and palm-trees on the one 
side and on the other side, on the sides 
of the porch; there were also the 
brackets of the house, and the thick 
beams. 

Then he brought me forth into 
the outer court, the way 
toward the north; and he brought me 
into the chamber that was over against 
the separate place, and which was over 
against the building, toward the north, 
2even to the front of the length of a 
hundred cubits, with the door on the 
north, and the breadth of fifty cubits, 
3over against the twenty cubits which 
belonged to the inner court, and over 
against the pavement which belonged 
to the outer court; with gallery against 
gallery in three stories. 4And before 
the chambers was a walk of ten cubits 
breadth inward, a way of one cubit; 
and their doors were toward the north. 
5Now the upper chambers were 
shorter; for the galleries took away 
from these, more than from the lower 
and the middlemost, in the building. 
6For they were in three stories, and 
they had not pillars as the pillars of the 
courts; therefore room was taken away 
from the lowest and the middlemost, in 
comparison with the ground. 7And the 
wall that was without by the side of 
the chambers, toward the outer court in 
front of the chambers, the length 
thereof was fifty cubits. 8For the length 
of the chambers that were toward the 
outer court was fifty cubits; and, lo, 
before the temple were a hundred 
cubits. 9And from under these 
chambers was the entry on the east 
side, as one goeth into them from the 
outer court. 10In the breadth of the wall 
of the court toward the east, before the 
separate place, and before the building, 
there were chambers, 11with a way 
before them; like the appearance of the 
chambers which were toward the 
north, as long as they, and as broad as 
they, with all their goings out, and 
according to their fashions; and as 
their doors, 12so were also the doors of 
the chambers that were toward the 
south, there was a door in the head of 
the way, even the way directly before 
the wall, toward the way from the east, 
as one entereth into them. 

13Then said he unto me: ‘The north 
chambers and the south chambers, 
which are before the separate place, 
they are the holy chambers, where the 
priests that are near unto the LORD 
shall eat the most holy things; there 
shall they lay the most holy things, and 
the meal-offering, and the sin-offering, 
and the guilt-offering; for the place is 
holy. 14When the priests enter in, then 
shall they not go out of the holy place 
into the outer court, but there they 
shall lay their garments wherein they 
42 




minister, for they are holy; and they 
shall put on other garments, and shall 
approach to that which pertaineth to 
the people.’ 

15Now when he had made an end of 
measuring the inner house, he brought 
me forth by the way of the gate whose 
prospect is toward the east, and 
measured it round about. 16He 
measured the east side with the 
measuring reed, five hundred reeds, 
with the measuring reed round about. 
17He measured the north side, five 
hundred reeds, with the measuring 
reed round about. 18He measured the 
south side, five hundred reeds, with 
the measuring reed. 19He turned about 
to the west side, and measured five 
hundred reeds with the measuring 
reed. 20He measured it by the four 
sides; it had a wall round about, the 
length five hundred, and the breadth 
five hundred, to make a separation 
between that which was holy and that 
which was common. 

Afterward he brought me to 
the gate, even the gate that 
looketh toward the east; 2and, behold, 
the glory of the God of Israel came 
from the way of the east; and His 
voice was like the sound of many 
waters; and the earth did shine with 
His glory. 3And the appearance of the 
vision which I saw was like the vision 
that I saw when I came to destroy the 
city; and the visions were like the 
vision that I saw by the river Chebar; 
and I fell upon my face. 4And the glory 
of the LORD came into the house by the 
way of the gate whose prospect is 
toward the east. 5And a spirit took me 
up, and brought me into the inner 
court; and, behold, the glory of the 
LORD filled the house. 6And I heard 
one speaking unto me out of the house; 
and a man stood by me. 7And He said 
unto me: ‘Son of man, this is the place 
of My throne, and the place of the 
soles of My feet, where I will dwell in 
the midst of the children of Israel for 
ever; and the house of Israel shall no 
more defile My holy name, neither 
they, nor their kings, by their harlotry, 
and by the carcasses of their kings in 
their high places; 8in their setting of 
their threshold by My threshold, and 
their door-post beside My door-post, 
and there was but the wall between Me 
and them; and they have defiled My 
holy name by their abominations 
which they have committed; wherefore 
I have consumed them in Mine anger. 
9Now let them put away their harlotry, 
and the carcasses of their kings, far 
from Me, and I will dwell in the midst 
of them for ever. 

10Thou, son of man, show the house 
to the house of Israel, that they may be 
ashamed of their iniquities; and let 
them measure accurately. 11And if they 
be ashamed of all that they have done, 
make known unto them the form of the 
house, and the fashion thereof, and the 
goings out thereof, and the comings in 
thereof, and all the forms thereof, and 
all the ordinances thereof, and all the 
forms thereof, and all the laws thereof, 
and write it in their sight; that they 
43 




may keep the whole form thereof, and 
all the ordinances thereof, and do 
them. 

12This is the law of the house: upon 
the top of the mountain the whole limit 
thereof round about shall be most holy. 
Behold, this is the law of the house. 

13And these are the measures of the 
altar by cubits—the cubit is a cubit and 
a handbreadth: the bottom shall be a 
cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the 
border thereof by the edge thereof 
round about a span; and this shall be 
the base of the altar. 14And from the 
bottom upon the ground to the lower 
settle shall be two cubits, and the 
breadth one cubit; and from the lesser 
settle to the greater settle shall be four 
cubits, and the breadth a cubit. 15And 
the hearth shall be four cubits; and 
from the hearth and upward there shall 
be four horns. 16And the hearth shall 
be twelve cubits long by twelve broad, 
square in the four sides thereof. 17And 
the settle shall be fourteen cubits long 
by fourteen broad in the four sides 
thereof; and the border about it shall 
be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof 
shall be a cubit about; and the steps 
thereof shall look toward the east.’ 

18And He said unto me: ‘Son of 
man, thus saith the Lord GOD: These 
are the ordinances of the altar in the 
day when they shall make it, to offer 
burnt-offerings thereon, and to dash 
blood against it. 19Thou shalt give to 
the priests the Levites that are of the 
seed of Zadok, who are near unto Me, 
to minister unto Me, saith the Lord 
GOD, a young bullock for a sin-
offering. 20And thou shalt take of the 
blood thereof, and put it on the four 
horns of it, and on the four corners of 
the settle, and upon the border round 
about; thus shalt thou purify it and 
make atonement for it. 21Thou shalt 
also take the bullock of the sin-
offering, and it shall be burnt in the 
appointed place of the house, without 
the sanctuary. 22And on the second day 
thou shalt offer a he-goat without 
blemish for a sin-offering; and they 
shall purify the altar, as they did purify 
it with the bullock. 23When thou hast 
made an end of purifying it, thou shalt 
offer a young bullock without blemish, 
and a ram out of the flock without 
blemish. 24And thou shalt present them 
before the LORD, and the priests shall 
cast salt upon them, and they shall 
offer them up for a burnt-offering unto 
the LORD. 25Seven days shalt thou 
prepare every day a goat for a sin-
offering; they shall also prepare a 
young bullock, and a ram out of the 
flock, without blemish. 26Seven days 
shall they make atonement for the altar 
and cleanse it; so shall they consecrate 
it. 27And when they have accomplished 
the days, it shall be that upon the 
eighth day, and forward, the priests 
shall make your burnt-offerings upon 
the altar, and your peace-offerings; 
and I will accept you, saith the Lord 
GOD.’ 

Then he brought me back the 
way of the outer gate of the 
sanctuary, which looketh toward the 
44 




east; and it was shut. 2And the LORD 
said unto me: ‘This gate shall be shut, 
it shall not be opened, neither shall any 
man enter in by it, for the LORD, the 
God of Israel, hath entered in by it; 
therefore it shall be shut. 3As for the 
prince, being a prince, he shall sit 
therein to eat bread before the LORD; 
he shall enter by the way of the porch 
of the gate, and shall go out by the 
way of the same.’ 

4Then he brought me the way of the 
north gate before the house; and I 
looked, and, behold, the glory of the 
LORD filled the house of the LORD; and 
I fell upon my face. 5And the LORD 
said unto me: ‘Son of man, mark well, 
and behold with thine eyes, and hear 
with thine ears all that I say unto thee 
concerning all the ordinances of the 
house of the LORD, and all the laws 
thereof; and mark well the entering in 
of the house, with every going forth of 
the sanctuary. 6And thou shalt say to 
the rebellious, even to the house of 
Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: O ye 
house of Israel, let it suffice you of all 
your abominations, 7in that ye have 
brought in aliens, uncircumcised in 
heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be 
in My sanctuary, to profane it, even 
My house, when ye offer My bread, 
the fat and the blood, and they have 
broken My covenant, to add unto all 
your abominations. 8And ye have not 
kept the charge of My holy things; but 
ye have set keepers of My charge in 
My sanctuary to please yourselves. 

9Thus saith the Lord GOD: No alien, 
uncircumcised in heart and 
uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into 
My sanctuary, even any alien that is 
among the children of Israel. 10But the 
Levites, that went far from Me, when 
Israel went astray, that went astray 
from Me after their idols, they shall 
bear their iniquity; 11and they shall be 
ministers in My sanctuary, having 
charge at the gates of the house, and 
ministering in the house: they shall 
slay the burnt-offering and the 
sacrifice for the people, and they shall 
stand before them to minister unto 
them. 12Because they ministered unto 
them before their idols, and became a 
stumblingblock of iniquity unto the 
house of Israel; therefore have I lifted 
up My hand against them, saith the 
Lord GOD, and they shall bear their 
iniquity. 13And they shall not come 
near unto Me, to minister unto Me in 
the priest’s office, nor to come near to 
any of My holy things, unto the things 
that are most holy; but they shall bear 
their shame, and their abominations 
which they have committed. 14And I 
will make them keepers of the charge 
of the house, for all the service thereof, 
and for all that shall be done therein. 

15But the priests the Levites, the 
sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of 
My sanctuary when the children of 
Israel went astray from Me, they shall 
come near to Me to minister unto Me; 
and they shall stand before Me to offer 
unto Me the fat and the blood, saith the 
Lord GOD; 16they shall enter into My 


sanctuary, and they shall come near to 
My table, to minister unto Me, and 
they shall keep My charge. 17And it 
shall be that when they enter in at the 
gates of the inner court, they shall be 
clothed with linen garments; and no 
wool shall come upon them, while 
they minister in the gates of the inner 
court, and within. 18They shall have 
linen tires upon their heads, and shall 
have linen breeches upon their loins; 
they shall not gird themselves with any 
thing that causeth sweat. 19And when 
they go forth into the outer court, even 
into the outer court to the people, they 
shall put off their garments wherein 
they minister, and lay them in the holy 
chambers, and they shall put on other 
garments, that they sanctify not the 
people with their garments. 20Neither 
shall they shave their heads, nor suffer 
their locks to grow long; they shall 
only poll their heads. 21Neither shall 
any priest drink wine, when they enter 
into the inner court. 22Neither shall 
they take for their wives a widow, nor 
her that is put away; but they shall take 
virgins of the seed of the house of 
Israel, or a widow that is the widow of 
a priest. 23And they shall teach My 
people the difference between the holy 
and the common, and cause them to 
discern between the unclean and the 
clean. 24And in a controversy they 
shall stand to judge; according to Mine 
ordinances shall they judge it; and they 
shall keep My laws and My statutes in 
all My appointed seasons, and they 
shall hallow My sabbaths. 25And they 
shall come near no dead person to 
defile themselves; but for father, or for 
mother, or for son, or for daughter, for 
brother, or for sister that hath had no 
husband, they may defile themselves. 
26And after he is cleansed, they shall 
reckon unto him seven days. 27And in 
the day that he goeth into the 
sanctuary, into the inner court, to 
minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer 
his sin-offering, saith the Lord GOD. 
28And it shall be unto them for an 
inheritance: I am their inheritance; and 
ye shall give them no possession in 
Israel: I am their possession. 29The 
meal-offering, and the sin-offering, 
and the guilt-offering, they, even they, 
shall eat; and every devoted thing in 
Israel shall be theirs. 30And the first of 
all the first-fruits of every thing, and 
every heave-offering of every thing, of 
all your offerings, shall be for the 
priests; ye shall also give unto the 
priest the first of your dough, to cause 
a blessing to rest on thy house. 31The 
priests shall not eat of any thing that 
dieth of itself, or is torn, whether it be 
fowl or beast. 

Moreover, when ye shall 
divide by lot the land for 
inheritance, ye shall set apart an 
offering unto the LORD, a holy portion 
of the land; the length shall be the 
length of five and twenty thousand 
reeds, and the breadth shall be ten 
thousand; it shall be holy in all the 
border thereof round about. 2Of this 
there shall be for the holy place five 
hundred in length by five hundred in 
45 




breadth, square round about; and fifty 
cubits for the open land round about it. 
3And of this measure shalt thou 
measure a length of five and twenty 
thousand, and a breadth of ten 
thousand; and in it shall be the 
sanctuary, which is most holy. 4It is a 
holy portion of the land; it shall be for 
the priests, the ministers of the 
sanctuary, that come near to minister 
unto the LORD; and it shall be a place 
for their houses, and a place 
consecrated for the sanctuary. 5And 
five and twenty thousand in length, 
and ten thousand in breadth, which 
shall be unto the Levites, the ministers 
of the house, for a possession unto 
themselves, for twenty chambers. 6And 
ye shall appoint the possession of the 
city five thousand broad, and five and 
twenty thousand long, side by side 
with the offering of the holy portion; it 
shall be for the whole house of Israel. 
7And for the prince, on the one side 
and on the other side of the holy 
offering and of the possession of the 
city, in front of the holy offering and 
in front of the possession of the city, 
on the west side westward, and on the 
east side eastward; and in length 
answerable unto one of the portions, 
from the west border unto the east 
border 8of the land; it shall be to him 
for a possession in Israel, and My 
princes shall no more wrong My 
people; but they shall give the land to 
the house of Israel according to their 
tribes. 

9Thus saith the Lord GOD: Let it 
suffice you, O princes of Israel; 
remove violence and spoil, and 
execute justice and righteousness; take 
away your exactions from My people, 
saith the Lord GOD. 

10Ye shall have just balances, and a 
just ephah, and a just bath. 11The 
ephah and the bath shall be of one 
measure, that the bath may contain the 
tenth part of a homer, and the ephah 
the tenth part of a homer; the measure 
thereof shall be after the homer. 12And 
the shekel shall be twenty gerahs; 
twenty shekels, five and twenty 
shekels, ten, and five shekels, shall be 
your maneh. 

13This is the offering that ye shall set 
apart: the sixth part of an ephah out of 
a homer of wheat, and ye shall give the 
sixth part of an ephah out of a homer 
of barley; 14and the set portion of oil, 
the bath of oil, shall be the tithe of the 
bath out of the cor, which is ten baths, 
even a homer; for ten baths are a 
homer; 15and one lamb of the flock, 
out of two hundred, from the well-
watered pastures of Israel; for a meal-
offering, and for a burnt-offering, and 
for peace-offerings, to make 
atonement for them, saith the Lord 
GOD. 

16All the people of the land shall 
give this offering for the prince in 
Israel. 17And it shall be the prince’s 
part to give the burnt-offerings, and 
the meal-offerings, and the drink-
offerings, in the feasts, and in the new 
moons, and in the sabbaths, in all the 


appointed seasons of the house of 
Israel; he shall prepare the sin-
offering, and the meal-offering, and 
the burnt-offering, and the peace-
offerings, to make atonement for the 
house of Israel. 

18Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the 
first month, in the first day of the 
month, thou shalt take a young bullock 
without blemish; and thou shalt purify 
the sanctuary. 19And the priest shall 
take of the blood of the sin-offering, 
and put it upon the door-posts of the 
house, and upon the four corners of the 
settle of the altar, and upon the posts 
of the gate of the inner court. 20And so 
thou shalt do on the seventh day of the 
month for every one that erreth, and 
for him that is simple; so shall ye 
make atonement for the house. 21In the 
first month, in the fourteenth day of 
the month, ye shall have the passover; 
a feast of seven days; unleavened 
bread shall be eaten. 22And upon that 
day shall the prince prepare for 
himself and for all the people of the 
land a bullock for a sin-offering. 23And 
the seven days of the feast he shall 
prepare a burnt-offering to the LORD, 
seven bullocks and seven rams without 
blemish daily the seven days; and a he-
goat daily for a sin-offering. 24And he 
shall prepare a meal-offering, an ephah 
for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, 
and a hin of oil to an ephah. 25In the 
seventh month, in the fifteenth day of 
the month, in the feast, shall he do the 
like the seven days; to the sin-offering 
as well as the burnt-offering, and the 
meal-offering as well as the oil. 

Thus saith the Lord GOD: The 
gate of the inner court that 
looketh toward the east shall be shut 
the six working days; but on the 
sabbath day it shall be opened, and in 
the day of the new moon it shall be 
opened. 2And the prince shall enter by 
the way of the porch of the gate 
without, and shall stand by the post of 
the gate, and the priests shall prepare 
his burnt-offering and his peace-
offerings, and he shall worship at the 
threshold of the gate; then he shall go 
forth; but the gate shall not be shut 
until the evening. 3Likewise the people 
of the land shall worship at the door of 
that gate before the LORD in the 
sabbaths and in the new moons. 4And 
the burnt-offering that the prince shall 
offer unto the LORD shall be in the 
sabbath day six lambs without blemish 
and a ram without blemish; 5and the 
meal-offering shall be an ephah for the 
ram, and the meal-offering for the 
lambs as he is able to give, and a hin 
of oil to an ephah. 6And in the day of 
the new moon it shall be a young 
bullock without blemish; and six 
lambs, and a ram; they shall be 
without blemish; 7and he shall prepare 
a meal-offering, an ephah for the 
bullock, and an ephah for the ram, and 
for the lambs according as his means 
suffice, and a hin of oil to an ephah. 
8And when the prince shall enter, he 
shall go in by the way of the porch of 
the gate, and he shall go forth by the 
46 




way thereof. 9But when the people of 
the land shall come before the LORD in 
the appointed seasons, he that entereth 
by the way of the north gate to 
worship shall go forth by the way of 
the south gate; and he that entereth by 
the way of the south gate shall go forth 
by the way of the north gate; he shall 
not return by the way of the gate 
whereby he came in, but shall go forth 
straight before him. 10And the prince, 
when they go in, shall go in in the 
midst of them; and when they go forth, 
they shall go forth together. 11And in 
the feasts and in the appointed seasons 
the meal-offering shall be an ephah for 
a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and 
for the lambs as he is able to give, and 
a hin of oil to an ephah. 

12And when the prince shall prepare 
a freewill-offering, a burnt-offering or 
peace-offerings as a freewill-offering 
unto the LORD, one shall open for him 
the gate that looketh toward the east, 
and he shall prepare his burnt-offering 
and his peace-offerings, as he doth on 
the sabbath day; then he shall go forth; 
and after his going forth one shall shut 
the gate. 

13And thou shalt prepare a lamb of 
the first year without blemish for a 
burnt-offering unto the LORD daily; 
morning by morning shalt thou prepare 
it. 14And thou shalt prepare a meal-
offering with it morning by morning, 
the sixth part of an ephah, and the third 
part of a hin of oil, to moisten the fine 
flour: a meal-offering unto the LORD 
continually by a perpetual ordinance. 
15Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and 
the meal-offering, and the oil, morning 
by morning, for a continual burnt-
offering. 

16Thus saith the Lord GOD: If the 
prince give a gift unto any of his sons, 
it is his inheritance, it shall belong to 
his sons; it is their possession by 
inheritance. 17But if he give of his 
inheritance a gift to one of his 
servants, it shall be his to the year of 
liberty; then it shall return to the 
prince; but as for his inheritance, it 
shall be for his sons. 18Moreover the 
prince shall not take of the people’s 
inheritance, to thrust them wrongfully 
out of their possession; he shall give 
inheritance to his sons out of his own 
possession; that My people be not 
scattered every man from his 
possession.’ 

19Then he brought me through the 
entry, which was at the side of the 
gate, into the holy chambers for the 
priests, which looked toward the north; 
and, behold, there was a place on the 
hinder part westward. 20And he said 
unto me: ‘This is the place where the 
priests shall boil the guilt-offering and 
the sin-offering, where they shall bake 
the meal-offering; that they bring them 
not forth into the outer court, to 
sanctify the people.’ 

21Then he brought me forth into the 
outer court, and caused me to pass by 
the four corners of the court; and, 
behold, in every corner of the court 
there was a court. 22In the four corners 
of the court there were courts inclosed, 


forty cubits long and thirty broad; 
these four in the corners were of one 
measure. 23And there was a row of 
masonry round about in them, round 
about the four, and it was made with 
boiling-places under the rows round 
about. 24Then said he unto me: ‘These 
are the boiling-places, where the 
ministers of the house shall boil the 
sacrifices of the people.’ 

And he brought me back unto 
the door of the house; and, 
behold, waters issued out from under 
the threshold of the house eastward, 
for the forefront of the house looked 
toward the east; and the waters came 
down from under, from the right side 
of the house, on the south of the altar. 
2Then brought he me out by the way of 
the gate northward, and led me round 
by the way without unto the outer gate, 
by the way of the gate that looketh 
toward the east; and, behold, there 
trickled forth waters on the right side. 

3When the man went forth eastward 
with the line in his hand, he measured 
a thousand cubits, and he caused me to 
pass through the waters, waters that 
were to the ankles. 4Again he 
measured a thousand, and caused me 
to pass through the waters, waters that 
were to the knees. Again he measured 
a thousand, and caused me to pass 
through waters that were to the loins. 
5Afterward he measured a thousand; 
and it was a river that I could not pass 
through; for the waters were risen, 
waters to swim in, a river that could 
not be passed through. 6And he said 
unto me: ‘Hast thou seen this, O son of 
man?’ Then he led me, and caused me 
to return to the bank of the river. 

7Now when I had been brought 
back, behold, upon the bank of the 
river were very many trees on the one 
side and on the other. 8Then said he 
unto me: ‘These waters issue forth 
toward the eastern region, and shall go 
down into the Arabah; and when they 
shall enter into the sea, into the sea of 
the putrid waters, the waters shall be 
healed. 9And it shall come to pass, that 
every living creature wherewith it 
swarmeth, whithersoever the rivers 
shall come, shall live; and there shall 
be a very great multitude of fish; for 
these waters are come thither, that all 
things be healed and may live 
whithersoever the river cometh. 10And 
it shall come to pass, that fishers shall 
stand by it from En-gedi even unto En-
eglaim; there shall be a place for the 
spreading of nets; their fish shall be 
after their kinds, as the fish of the 
Great Sea, exceeding many. 11But the 
miry places thereof, and the marshes 
thereof, shall not be healed; they shall 
be given for salt. 12And by the river 
upon the bank thereof, on this side and 
on that side, shall grow every tree for 
food, whose leaf shall not wither, 
neither shall the fruit thereof fail; it 
shall bring forth new fruit every 
month, because the waters thereof 
issue out of the sanctuary; and the fruit 
thereof shall be for food, and the leaf 
thereof for healing.’ 
47 




13Thus saith the Lord GOD: ‘This 
shall be the border, whereby ye shall 
divide the land for inheritance 
according to the twelve tribes of Israel, 
Joseph receiving two portions. 14And 
ye shall inherit it, one as well as 
another, concerning which I lifted up 
My hand to give it unto your fathers; 
and this land shall fall unto you for 
inheritance. 15And this shall be the 
border of the land: on the north side, 
from the Great Sea, by the way of 
Hethlon, unto the entrance of Zedad; 
16Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is 
between the border of Damascus and 
the border of Hamath; Hazer-hatticon, 
which is by the border of Hauran. 
17And the border from the sea shall be 
Hazar-enon at the border of Damascus, 
and on the north northward is the 
border of Hamath. This is the north 
side. 18And the east side, between 
Hauran and Damascus and Gilead, and 
the land of Israel, by the Jordan, from 
the border unto the east sea shall ye 
measure. This is the east side. 19And 
the south side southward shall be from 
Tamar as far as the waters of 
Meriboth-kadesh, to the Brook, unto 
the Great Sea. This is the south side 
southward. 20And the west side shall 
be the Great Sea, from the border as 
far as over against the entrance of 
Hamath. This is the west side. 

21So shall ye divide this land unto 
you according to the tribes of Israel. 
22And it shall come to pass, that ye 
shall divide it by lot for an inheritance 
unto you and to the strangers that 
sojourn among you, who shall beget 
children among you; and they shall be 
unto you as the home-born among the 
children of Israel; they shall have 
inheritance with you among the tribes 
of Israel. 23And it shall come to pass, 
that in what tribe the stranger 
sojourneth, there shall ye give him his 
inheritance, saith the Lord GOD. 

Now these are the names of 
the tribes: from the north end, 
beside the way of Hethlon to the 
entrance of Hamath, Hazar-enan, at the 
border of Damascus, northward, 
beside Hamath; and they shall have 
their sides east and west: Dan, one 
portion. 2And by the border of Dan, 
from the east side unto the west side: 
Asher, one portion. 3And by the border 
of Asher, from the east side even unto 
the west side: Naphtali, one portion. 
4And by the border of Naphtali, from 
the east side unto the west side: 
Manasseh, one portion. 5And by the 
border of Manasseh, from the east side 
unto the west side: Ephraim, one 
portion. 6And by the border of 
Ephraim, from the east side even unto 
the west side: Reuben, one portion. 
7And by the border of Reuben, from 
the east side unto the west side: Judah, 
one portion. 

8And by the border of Judah, from 
the east side unto the west side, shall 
be the offering which ye shall set 
aside, five and twenty thousand reeds 
in breadth, and in length as one of the 
portions, from the east side unto the 
west side; and the sanctuary shall be in 
48 




the midst of it. 9The offering that ye 
shall set apart unto the LORD shall be 
five and twenty thousand reeds in 
length, and ten thousand in breadth. 
10And for these, even for the priests, 
shall be the holy offering; toward the 
north five and twenty thousand [in 
length], and toward the west ten 
thousand in breadth, and toward the 
east ten thousand in breadth, and 
toward the south five and twenty 
thousand in length; and the sanctuary 
of the LORD shall be in the midst 
thereof. 11The sanctified portion shall 
be for the priests of the sons of Zadok, 
that have kept My charge, that went 
not astray when the children of Israel 
went astray, as the Levites went astray. 
12And it shall be unto them a portion 
set apart from the offering of the land, 
a thing most holy, by the border of the 
Levites. 13And answerable unto the 
border of the priests, the Levites shall 
have five and twenty thousand in 
length, and ten thousand in breadth; all 
the length shall be five and twenty 
thousand, and the breadth ten 
thousand. 14And they shall not sell of 
it, nor exchange, nor alienate the first 
portion of the land; for it is holy unto 
the LORD. 

15And the five thousand that are left 
in the breadth, in front of the five and 
twenty thousand, shall be for common 
use, for the city, for dwelling and for 
open land; and the city shall be in the 
midst thereof. 16And these shall be the 
measures thereof: the north side four 
thousand and five hundred, and the 
south side four thousand and five 
hundred, and on the east side four 
thousand and five hundred, and the 
west side four thousand and five 
hundred. 17And the city shall have 
open land: toward the north two 
hundred and fifty, and toward the 
south two hundred and fifty, and 
toward the east two hundred and fifty, 
and toward the west two hundred and 
fifty. 18And the residue in the length, 
answerable unto the holy offering, 
shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten 
thousand westward; and it shall be 
answerable unto the holy offering; and 
the increase thereof shall be for food 
unto them that serve the city. 19And 
they that serve the city, out of all the 
tribes of Israel, shall till it. 20All the 
offering shall be five and twenty 
thousand by five and twenty thousand; 
ye shall set apart the holy offering 
foursquare, with the possession of the 
city. 

21And the residue shall be for the 
prince, on the one side and on the 
other of the holy offering and of the 
possession of the city, in front of the 
five and twenty thousand of the 
offering toward the east border, and 
westward in front of the five and 
twenty thousand toward the west 
border, answerable unto the portions, it 
shall be for the prince; and the holy 
offering and the sanctuary of the house 
shall be in the midst thereof. 22Thus 
the possession of the Levites, and the 
possession of the city, shall be in the 
midst of that which is the prince’s; 


between the border of Judah and the 
border of Benjamin shall be the 
prince’s. 

23And as for the rest of the tribes: 
from the east side unto the west side: 
Benjamin, one portion. 24And by the 
border of Benjamin, from the east side 
unto the west side: Simeon, one 
portion. 25And by the border of 
Simeon, from the east side unto the 
west side: Issachar, one portion. 26And 
by the border of Issachar, from the east 
side unto the west side: Zebulun, one 
portion. 27And by the border of 
Zebulun, from the east side unto the 
west side: Gad, one portion. 28And by 
the border of Gad, at the south side 
southward, the border shall be even 
from Tamar unto the waters of 
Meribath-kadesh, to the Brook, unto 
the Great Sea. 29This is the land which 
ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of 
Israel for inheritance, and these are 
their portions, saith the Lord GOD. 

30And these are the goings out of the 
city: on the north side four thousand 
and five hundred reeds by measure; 
31and the gates of the city shall be after 
the names of the tribes of Israel; three 
gates northward: the gate of Reuben, 
one; the gate of Judah, one; the gate of 
Levi, one; 32and at the east side four 
thousand and five hundred reeds; and 
three gates: even the gate of Joseph, 
one; the gate of Benjamin, one; the 
gate of Dan, one; 33and at the south 
side four thousand and five hundred 
reeds by measure; and three gates: the 
gate of Simeon, one; the gate of 
Issachar, one; the gate of Zebulun, 
one; 34at the west side four thousand 
and five hundred reeds, with their 
three gates: the gate of Gad, one; the 
gate of Asher, one; the gate of 
Naphtali, one. 35It shall be eighteen 
thousand reeds round about. And the 
name of the city from that day shall be, 
The LORD is there.’ 

 




.... 

HOSEA 

 

1 

2 



The word of the LORD that came 
unto Hosea the son of Beeri, in 
the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and 
Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the 
days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, 
king of Israel. 

2When the LORD spoke at first with 
Hosea, the LORD said unto Hosea: ‘Go, 
take unto thee a wife of harlotry and 
children of harlotry; for the land doth 
commit great harlotry, departing from 
the LORD.’ 3So he went and took 
Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; and 
she conceived, and bore him a son. 
4And the LORD said unto him: ‘Call his 
name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and 
I will visit the blood of Jezreel upon 
the house of Jehu, and will cause to 
cease the kingdom of the house of 
Israel. 5And it shall come to pass at 
that day, that I will break the bow of 
Israel in the valley of Jezreel.’ 6And 
she conceived again, and bore a 
daughter. And He said unto him: ‘Call 
her name aLo-ruhamah; for I will no 
more have compassion upon the house 
of Israel, that I should in any wise 
pardon them. 7But I will have 
compassion upon the house of Judah, 
and will save them by the LORD their 
God, and will not save them by bow, 

a That is, That hath not obtained 
compassion. 

nor by sword, nor by battle, nor by 
horses, nor by horsemen.’ 8Now when 
she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she 
conceived, and bore a son. 9And He 
said: ‘Call his name bLo-ammi; for ye 
are not My people, and I will not be 
yours.’ 

b That is, Not My people. 

c That is, My people. 

d That is, That hath obtained 
compassion. 

 

Yet the number of the children of 
Israel shall be as the sand of the 
sea, which cannot be measured nor 
numbered; and it shall come to pass 
that, instead of that which was said 
unto them: ‘Ye are not My people’, it 
shall be said unto them: ‘Ye are the 
children of the living God.’ 2And the 
children of Judah and the children of 
Israel shall be gathered together, and 
they shall appoint themselves one 
head, and shall go up out of the land; 
for great shall be the day of Jezreel. 
3Say ye unto your brethren: ‘cAmmi’; 
and to your sisters, ‘dRuhamah.’ 

 

4Plead with your mother, plead; 

For she is not My wife, neither am I 
her husband; 

And let her put away her harlotries 
from her face, 


And her adulteries from between her 
breasts; 

5Lest I strip her naked, 

And set her as in the day that she 
was born, 

And make her as a wilderness, 

And set her like a dry land, 

And slay her with thirst. 

6And I will not have compassion 
upon her children; 

For they are children of harlotry. 

7For their mother hath played the 
harlot, 

She that conceived them hath done 
shamefully; 

For she said: ‘I will go after my 
lovers, 

That give me my bread and my 
water, 

My wool and my flax, mine oil and 
my drink.’ 

8Therefore, behold, I will hedge up 
thy way with thorns, 

And I will make a wall against her, 

That she shall not find her paths. 

9And she shall run after her lovers, 
but she shall not overtake them, 

And she shall seek them, but shall 
not find them; 

Then shall she say: ‘I will go and 
return to my first husband; 

For then was it better with me than 
now.’ 

10For she did not know that it was I 
that gave her 

The corn, and the wine, and the oil, 

And multiplied unto her silver and 
gold, 

Which they used for Baal. 

11Therefore will I take back My corn 
in the time thereof, 

And My wine in the season thereof, 

And will snatch away My wool and 
My flax 

Given to cover her nakedness. 

12And now will I uncover her shame 
in the sight of her lovers, 

And none shall deliver her out of 
My hand. 

13I will also cause all her mirth to 
cease, 

Her feasts, her new moons, and her 
sabbaths, 

And all her appointed seasons. 

14And I will lay waste her vines and 
her fig-trees, 

Whereof she hath said: ‘These are 
my hire 

That my lovers have given me’; 

And I will make them a forest, 

And the beasts of the field shall eat 
them. 

15And I will visit upon her the days 
of the Baalim, 

Wherein she offered unto them, 

And decked herself with her ear-
rings and her jewels, 

And went after her lovers, 

And forgot Me, saith the LORD. 

16Therefore, behold, I will allure 
her, 

And bring her into the wilderness, 

And speak tenderly unto her. 

17And I will give her her vineyards 
from thence, 


And the valley of aAchor for a door 
of hope; 

a That is, Troubling. 

b That is, My husband. 

c That is, My master. 

And she shall respond there, as in 
the days of her youth, 

And as in the day when she came up 
out of the land of Egypt. 

 

18And it shall be at that day, saith 
the LORD, 

That thou shalt call Me bIshi, 

And shalt call Me no more cBaali. 

19For I will take away the names of 
the Baalim out of her mouth, 

And they shall no more be 
mentioned by their name. 

20And in that day will I make a 
covenant for them 

With the beasts of the field, and 
with the fowls of heaven, 

And with the creeping things of the 
ground; 

And I will break the bow and the 
sword and the battle out of the 
land, 

And will make them to lie down 
safely. 

21And I will betroth thee unto Me 
for ever; 

Yea, I will betroth thee unto Me in 
righteousness, and in justice, 

And in lovingkindness, and in 
compassion. 

22And I will betroth thee unto Me in 
faithfulness; 

And thou shalt know the LORD. 

23And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

I will respond, saith the LORD, I will 
respond to the heavens, 

And they shall respond to the earth; 

24And the earth shall respond to the 
corn, and the wine, and the oil; 

And they shall respond to dJezreel. 

d That is, Whom God soweth. 

25And I will sow her unto Me in the 
land; 

And I will have compassion upon 
her that had not obtained 
compassion; 

And I will say to them that were not 
My people: ‘Thou art My 
people’; 

And they shall say: ‘Thou art my 
God.’ 

 

3 



And the LORD said unto me: ‘Go 
yet, love a woman beloved of her 
friend and an adulteress, even as the 
LORD loveth the children of Israel, 
though they turn unto other gods, and 
love cakes of raisins. 2So I bought her 
to me for fifteen pieces of silver and a 
homer of barley, and a half-homer of 
barley; 3and I said unto her: ‘Thou 
shalt sit solitary for me many days; 
thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou 
shalt not be any man’s wife; nor will I 
be thine.’ 4For the children of Israel 
shall sit solitary many days without 
king, and without prince, and without 
sacrifice, and without pillar, and 
without ephod or teraphim; 5afterward 
shall the children of Israel return, and 


seek the LORD their God, and David 
their king; and shall come trembling 
unto the LORD and to His goodness in 
the end of days. 

 

Hear the word of the LORD, ye 
children of Israel! 

For the LORD hath a controversy 
with the inhabitants of the land, 

Because there is no truth, nor mercy, 

Nor knowledge of God in the land. 

2Swearing and lying, and killing, 
and stealing, and committing 
adultery! 

They break all bounds, and blood 
toucheth blood. 

3Therefore doth the land mourn, 

And every one that dwelleth therein 
doth languish, 

With the beasts of the field, and the 
fowls of heaven; 

Yea, the fishes of the sea also are 
taken away. 

 

4Yet let no man strive, neither let 
any man reprove; 

For thy people are as they that strive 
with the priest. 

5Therefore shalt thou stumble in the 
day, 

And the prophet also shall stumble 
with thee in the night; 

And I will destroy thy mother. 

6My people are destroyed for lack of 
knowledge; 

Because thou hast rejected 
knowledge, 

I will also reject thee, that thou shalt 
be no priest to Me; 

Seeing thou hast forgotten the law 
of thy God, 

I also will forget thy children. 

 

7The more they were increased, the 
more they sinned against Me; 

I will change their glory into shame. 

8They feed on the sin of My people, 

And set their heart on their iniquity. 

9And it is like people, like priest; 

And I will punish him for his ways, 

And will recompense him his 
doings. 

10And they shall eat, and not have 
enough, 

They shall commit harlotry, and 
shall not increase; 

Because they have left off to take 
heed to the LORD. 

11Harlotry, wine, and new wine take 
away the heart. 

12My people ask counsel at their 
stock, 

And their staff declareth unto them; 

For the spirit of harlotry hath caused 
them to err, 

And they have gone astray from 
under their God. 

13They sacrifice upon the tops of the 
mountains, 

And offer upon the hills, 

Under oaks and poplars and 
terebinths, 

Because the shadow thereof is good; 

Therefore your daughters commit 
harlotry, 

And your daughters-in-law commit 
adultery. 
4 




14I will not punish your daughters 
when they commit harlotry, 

Nor your daughters-in-law when 
they commit adultery; 

For they themselves consort with 
lewd women, 

And they sacrifice with harlots; 

And the people that is without 
understanding is distraught. 

 

15Though thou, Israel, play the 
harlot, 

Yet let not Judah become guilty; 

And come not ye unto Gilgal, 

Neither go ye up to Beth-aven, 

Nor swear: ‘As the LORD liveth.’ 

16For Israel is stubborn like a 
stubborn heifer; 

Now shall the LORD feed them as a 
lamb in a large place? 

17Ephraim is joined to idols; 

Let him alone. 

18When their carouse is over, 

They take to harlotry; 

Her rulers deeply love dishonour. 

19The wind hath bound her up in her 
skirts; 

And they shall be ashamed because 
of their sacrifices. 

 

Hear this, O ye priests, 

And attend, ye house of Israel, 

And give ear, O house of the king, 

For unto you pertaineth the 
judgment; 

For ye have been a snare on Mizpah, 

And a net spread upon Tabor. 

2And they that fall away are gone 
deep in making slaughter; 

And I am rejected of them all. 

3I, even I, know Ephraim, 

And Israel is not hid from Me; 

For now, O Ephraim, thou hast 
committed harlotry, 

Israel is defiled. 

4Their doings will not suffer them 

To return unto their God; 

For the spirit of harlotry is within 
them, 

And they know not the LORD. 

5But the pride of Israel shall testify 
to his face; 

And Israel and Ephraim shall 
stumble in their iniquity, 

Judah also shall stumble with them. 

6With their flocks and with their 
herds they shall go 

To seek the LORD, but they shall not 
find Him; 

He hath withdrawn Himself from 
them. 

7They have dealt treacherously 
against the LORD, 

For they have begotten strange 
children; 

Now shall the new moon devour 
them with their portions. 

 

8Blow ye the horn in Gibeah, 

And the trumpet in Ramah; 

Sound an alarm at Beth-aven: 

‘Behind thee, O Benjamin! ’ 

9Ephraim shall be desolate in the 
day of rebuke; 

Among the tribes of Israel do I 
make known that which shall 
surely be. 
5 




10The princes of Judah are like them 
that remove the landmark; 

I will pour out My wrath upon them 
like water. 

11Oppressed is Ephraim, crushed in 
his right; 

Because he willingly walked after 
filth. 

12Therefore am I unto Ephraim as a 
moth, 

And to the house of Judah as 
rottenness. 

13And when Ephraim saw his 
sickness, 

And Judah his wound, 

Ephraim went to Assyria, 

And sent to King Contentious; 

But he is not able to heal you, 

Neither shall he cure you of your 
wound. 

14For I will be unto Ephraim as a 
lion, 

And as a young lion to the house of 
Judah; 

I, even I, will tear and go away, 

I will take away, and there shall be 
none to deliver. 

15I will go and return to My place, 

Till they acknowledge their guilt, 
and seek My face; 

In their trouble they will seek Me 
earnestly: 

’Come, and let us return unto the 
LORD; 

For He hath torn, and He will heal 
us, 

He hath smitten, and He will bind us 
up. 

2After two days will He revive us, 

On the third day He will raise us up, 
that we may live in His presence. 

3And let us know, eagerly strive to 
know the LORD, 

His going forth is sure as the 
morning; 

And He shall come unto us as the 
rain, 

As the latter rain that watereth the 
earth.’ 

 

4O Ephraim, what shall I do unto 
thee? 

O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? 

For your goodness is as a morning 
cloud, 

And as the dew that early passeth 
away. 

5Therefore have I hewed them by 
the prophets, 

I have slain them by the words of 
My mouth; 

And thy judgment goeth forth as the 
light. 

6For I desire mercy, and not 
sacrifice, 

And the knowledge of God rather 
than burnt-offerings. 

 

7But they like men have 
transgressed the covenant; 

There have they dealt treacherously 
against Me. 

8Gilead is a city of them that work 
iniquity, 

It is covered with footprints of 
blood. 

9And as troops of robbers wait for a 
man, 
6 




So doth the company of priests; 

They murder in the way toward 
Shechem; 

Yea, they commit enormity. 

10In the house of Israel I have seen a 
horrible thing; 

There harlotry is found in Ephraim, 
Israel is defiled. 

11Also, O Judah, there is a harvest 
appointed for thee! 

 

When I would turn the captivity of 
My people, 

When I would heal Israel, 

Then is the iniquity of Ephraim 
uncovered, 

And the wickedness of Samaria, 

For they commit falsehood; 

And the thief entereth in, 

And the troop of robbers maketh a 
raid without. 

2And let them not say to their 
heart— 

I remember all their wickedness; 

Now their own doings have beset 
them about, 

They are before My face. 

3They make the king glad with their 
wickedness, 

And the princes with their lies. 

4They are all adulterers, 

As an oven heated by the baker, 

Who ceaseth to stir 

From the kneading of the dough 
until it be leavened. 

5On the day of our king 

The princes make him sick with the 
heat of wine, 

He stretcheth out his hand with 
scorners. 

6For they have made ready their 
heart like an oven, while they lie 
in wait; 

Their baker sleepeth all the night, 

In the morning it burneth as a 
flaming fire. 

7They are all hot as an oven, 

And devour their judges; 

All their kings are fallen, 

There is none among them that 
calleth unto Me. 

 

8Ephraim, he mixeth himself with 
the peoples; 

Ephraim is become a cake not 
turned. 

9Strangers have devoured his 
strength, 

And he knoweth it not; 

Yea, gray hairs are here and there 
upon him, 

And he knoweth it not. 

10And the pride of Israel testifieth to 
his face; 

But they have not returned unto the 
LORD their God, 

Nor sought Him, for all this. 

11And Ephraim is become like a 
silly dove, without understanding; 

They call unto Egypt, they go to 
Assyria. 

12Even as they go, I will spread My 
net upon them; 

I will bring them down as the fowls 
of the heaven; 
7 




I will chastise them, as their 
congregation hath been made to 
hear. 

13Woe unto them! for they have 
strayed from Me; 

Destruction unto them! for they 
have transgressed against Me; 

Shall I then redeem them, 

Seeing they have spoken lies against 
Me? 

14And they have not cried unto Me 
with their heart, 

Though they wail upon their beds; 

They assemble themselves for corn 
and wine, they rebel against Me. 

15Though I have trained and 
strengthened their arms, 

Yet do they devise evil against Me. 

16They return, but not upwards; 

They are become like a deceitful 
bow; 

Their princes shall fall by the sword 
for the rage of their tongue; 

This shall be their derision in the 
land of Egypt. 

 

Set the horn to thy mouth. 

As a vulture he cometh against 
the house of the LORD; 

Because they have transgressed My 
covenant, 

And trespassed against My law. 

2Will they cry unto Me: 

‘My God, we Israel know Thee’? 

3Israel hath cast off that which is 
good; 

The enemy shall pursue him. 

4They have set up kings, but not 
from Me, 

They have made princes, and I knew 
it not; 

Of their silver and their gold have 
they made them idols, 

That they may be cut off. 

5Thy calf, O Samaria, is cast off; 

Mine anger is kindled against them; 

How long will it be ere they attain to 
innocency? 

6For from Israel is even this: 

The craftsman made it, and it is no 
God; 

Yea, the calf of Samaria shall be 
broken in shivers. 

7For they sow the wind, and they 
shall reap the whirlwind; 

It hath no stalk, the bud that shall 
yield no meal; 

If so be it yield, strangers shall 
swallow it up. 

 

8Israel is swallowed up; 

Now are they become among the 
nations 

As a vessel wherein is no value. 

9For they are gone up to Assyria, 

Like a wild ass alone by himself; 

Ephraim hath hired lovers. 

10Yea, though they hire among the 
nations, 

Now will I gather them up; 

And they begin to be minished 

By reason of the burden of king and 
princes. 

11For Ephraim hath multiplied altars 
to sin, 

Yea, altars have been unto him to 
sin. 
8 




12Though I write for him never so 
many things of My Law, 

They are accounted as a stranger’s. 

13As for the sacrifices that are made 
by fire unto Me, 

Let them sacrifice flesh and eat it, 

For the LORD accepteth them not. 

Now will He remember their 
iniquity, and punish their sins; 

They shall return to Egypt. 

14For Israel hath forgotten his 
Maker, 

And builded palaces, 

And Judah hath multiplied fortified 
cities; 

But I will send a fire upon his cities, 

And it shall devour the castles 
thereof. 

 

Rejoice not, O Israel, unto 
exultation, like the peoples, 

For thou hast gone astray from thy 
God, 

Thou hast loved a harlot’s hire upon 
every corn-floor. 

2The threshing-floor and the wine-
press shall not feed them, 

And the new wine shall fail her. 

3They shall not dwell in the LORD’S 
land; 

But Ephraim shall return to Egypt, 

And they shall eat unclean food in 
Assyria. 

4They shall not pour out wine-
offerings to the LORD, 

Neither shall they be pleasing unto 
Him; 

Their sacrifices shall be unto them 
as the bread of mourners, 

All that eat thereof shall be polluted; 

For their bread shall be for their 
appetite, 

It shall not come into the house of 
the LORD. 

5What will ye do in the day of the 
appointed season, 

And in the day of the feast of the 
LORD? 

6For, lo, they are gone away from 
destruction, 

Yet Egypt shall gather them up, 

Memphis shall bury them; 

Their precious treasures of silver, 
nettles shall possess them, 

Thorns shall be in their tents. 

7The days of visitation are come, 

The days of recompense are come, 

Israel shall know it. 

The prophet is a fool, the man of the 
spirit is mad! 

For the multitude of thine iniquity, 
the enmity is great. 

8Ephraim is a watchman with my 
God; 

As for the prophet, a fowler’s snare 
is in all his ways, 

And enmity in the house of his God. 

9They have deeply corrupted 
themselves, 

As in the days of Gibeah; 

He will remember their iniquity, 

He will punish their sins. 

 

10I found Israel like grapes in the 
wilderness, 

I saw your fathers as the first-ripe in 
the fig-tree at her first season; 
9 




But so soon as they came to Baal-
peor, 

They separated themselves unto the 
shameful thing, 

And became detestable like that 
which they loved. 

11As for Ephraim, their glory shall 
fly away like a bird; 

There shall be no birth, and none 
with child, and no conception. 

12Yea, though they bring up their 
children, 

Yet will I bereave them, that there 
be not a man left; 

Yea, woe also to them when I depart 
from them! 

13Ephraim, like as I have seen Tyre, 
is planted in a pleasant place; 

But Ephraim shall bring forth his 
children to the slayer. 

14Give them, O LORD, whatsoever 
Thou wilt give; 

Give them a miscarrying womb and 
dry breasts. 

15All their wickedness is in Gilgal, 

For there I hated them; 

Because of the wickedness of their 
doings 

I will drive them out of My house; 

I will love them no more, 

All their princes are rebellious. 

16Ephraim is smitten, 

Their root is dried up, 

They shall bear no fruit; 

Yea, though they bring forth, 

Yet will I slay the beloved fruit of 
their womb. 

17My God will cast them away, 

Because they did not hearken unto 
Him; 

And they shall be wanderers among 
the nations. 

 

Israel was a luxuriant vine, 
Which put forth fruit freely: 

As his fruit increased, 

He increased his altars; 

The more goodly his land was, 

The more goodly were his pillars. 

2Their heart is divided; 

Now shall they bear their guilt; 

He will break down their altars, 

He will spoil their pillars. 

3Surely now shall they say: 

‘We have no king; 

For we feared not the LORD; 

And the king, what can he do for 
us?’ 

4They speak words, 

They swear falsely, they make 
covenants; 

Thus judgment springeth up as 
hemlock 

In the furrows of the field. 

5The inhabitants of Samaria shall be 
in dread 

For the calves of Beth-aven; 

For the people thereof shall mourn 
over it, 

And the priests thereof shall tremble 
for it, 

For its glory, because it is departed 
from it. 

6It also shall be carried unto 
Assyria, 

For a present to King Contentious; 

Ephraim shall receive shame, 
10 




And Israel shall be ashamed of his 
own counsel. 

7As for Samaria, her king is cut off, 

As foam upon the water. 

8The high places also of Aven shall 
be destroyed, 

Even the sin of Israel. 

The thorn and the thistle shall come 
up on their altars; 

And they shall say to the mountains: 
‘Cover us’, 

And to the hills: ‘Fall on us.’ 

 

9From the days of Gibeah thou hast 
sinned, O Israel; 

There they stood; 

No battle was to overtake them in 
Gibeah, 

Nor the children of arrogancy. 

10When it is My desire, I will 
chastise them; 

And the peoples shall be gathered 
against them, 

When they are yoked to their two 
rings. 

11And Ephraim is a heifer well 
broken, 

That loveth to thresh, 

And I have passed over upon her 
fair neck; 

I will make Ephraim to ride, Judah 
shall plow, 

Jacob shall break his clods. 

12Sow to yourselves according to 
righteousness, 

Reap according to mercy, 

Break up your fallow ground; 

For it is time to seek the LORD, 

Till He come and cause 
righteousness to rain upon you. 

13Ye have plowed wickedness, ye 
have reaped iniquity, 

Ye have eaten the fruit of lies; 

For thou didst trust in thy way, 

In the multitude of thy mighty men. 

14Therefore shall a tumult arise 
among thy hosts, 

And all thy fortresses shall be 
spoiled, 

As Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel in 
the day of battle; 

The mother was dashed in pieces 
with her children. 

15So hath Beth-el done unto you 

Because of your great wickedness; 

At daybreak is the king of Israel 
utterly cut off. 

 

When Israel was a child, then I 
loved him, 

And out of Egypt I called My son. 

2The more they called them, the 
more they went from them; 

They sacrificed unto the Baalim, 

And offered to graven images. 

3And I, I taught Ephraim to walk, 

Taking them by their arms; 

But they knew not that I healed 
them. 

4I drew them with cords of a man, 

With bands of love; 

And I was to them as they that take 
off the yoke on their jaws, 

And I fed them gently. 

5He shall not return into the land of 
Egypt, 

But the Assyrian shall be his king, 
11 




Because they refused to return. 

6And the sword shall fall upon his 
cities, 

And shall consume his bars, and 
devour them, 

Because of their own counsels. 

 

7And My people are in suspense 
about returning to Me; 

And though they call them upwards, 

None at all will lift himself up. 

8How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? 

How shall I surrender thee, Israel? 

How shall I make thee as Admah? 

How shall I set thee as Zeboim? 

My heart is turned within Me, 

My compassions are kindled 
together. 

9I will not execute the fierceness of 
Mine anger, 

I will not return to destroy Ephraim; 

For I am God, and not man, 

The Holy One in the midst of thee; 

And I will not come in fury. 

10They shall walk after the LORD, 

Who shall roar like a lion; 

For He shall roar, 

And the children shall come 
trembling from the west. 

11They shall come trembling as a 
bird out of Egypt, 

And as a dove out of the land of 
Assyria; 

And I will make them to dwell in 
their houses, saith the LORD. 

 

Ephraim compasseth Me about 
with lies, 

And the house of Israel with deceit; 

And Judah is yet wayward towards 
God, 

And towards the Holy One who is 
faithful. 

2Ephraim striveth after wind, and 
followeth after the east wind; 

All the day he multiplieth lies and 
desolation; 

And they make a covenant with 
Assyria, 

And oil is carried into Egypt. 

3The LORD hath also a controversy 
with Judah, 

And will punish Jacob according to 
his ways, 

According to his doings will He 
recompense him. 

4In the womb he took his brother by 
the heel, 

And by his strength he strove with a 
godlike being; 

5So he strove with an angel, and 
prevailed; 

He wept, and made supplication 
unto him; 

At Beth-el he would find him, 

And there he would speak with us; 

6But the LORD, the God of hosts, 

The LORD is His name. 

7Therefore turn thou to thy God; 

Keep mercy and justice, 

And wait for thy God continually. 

8As for the trafficker, the balances 
of deceit are in his hand. 

He loveth to oppress. 

9And Ephraim said: ‘Surely I am 
become rich, 

I have found me wealth; 12 




In all my labours they shall find in 
me 

No iniquity that were sin.’ 

10But I am the LORD thy God 

From the land of Egypt; 

I will yet again make thee to dwell 
in tents, 

As in the days of the appointed 
season. 

11I have also spoken unto the 
prophets, 

And I have multiplied visions; 

And by the ministry of the prophets 
have I used similitudes. 

12If Gilead be given to iniquity 

Becoming altogether vanity, 

In Gilgal they sacrifice unto 
bullocks; 

Yea, their altars shall be as heaps 

In the furrows of the field. 

 

13And Jacob fled into the field of 
Aram, 

And Israel served for a wife, 

And for a wife he kept sheep. 

14And by a prophet the LORD brought 
Israel up out of Egypt, 

And by a prophet was he kept. 

15Ephraim hath provoked most 
bitterly; 

Therefore shall his blood be cast 
upon him, 

And his reproach shall his Lord 
return unto him. 

 

When Ephraim spoke, there 
was trembling, 

He exalted himself in Israel; 

But when he became guilty through 
Baal, he died. 

2And now they sin more and more, 

And have made them molten images 
of their silver, 

According to their own 
understanding, even idols, 

All of them the work of the 
craftsmen; 

Of them they say: 

‘They that sacrifice men kiss 
calves.’ 

3Therefore they shall be as the 
morning cloud, 

And as the dew that early passeth 
away, 

As the chaff that is driven with the 
wind out of the threshing-floor, 

And as the smoke out of the 
window. 

 

4Yet I am the LORD thy God 

From the land of Egypt; 

And thou knowest no God but Me, 

And beside Me there is no saviour. 

5I did know thee in the wilderness, 

In the land of great drought. 

6When they were fed, they became 
full, 

They were filled, and their heart was 
exalted; 

Therefore have they forgotten Me. 

7Therefore am I become unto them 
as a lion; 

As a leopard will I watch by the 
way; 

8I will meet them as a bear that is 
bereaved of her whelps, 
13 




And will rend the enclosure of their 
heart; 

And there will I devour them like a 
lioness; 

The wild beast shall tear them. 

 

9It is thy destruction, O Israel, 

That thou art against Me, against thy 
help. 

10Ho, now, thy king, 

That he may save thee in all thy 
cities! 

And thy judges, of whom thou 
saidst: 

‘Give me a king and princes! ’ 

11I give thee a king in Mine anger, 

And take him away in My wrath. 

 

12The iniquity of Ephraim is bound 
up; 

His sin is laid up in store. 

13The throes of a travailing woman 
shall come upon him; 

He is an unwise son; 

For it is time he should not tarry 

In the place of the breaking forth of 
children. 

14Shall I ransom them from the 
power of the nether-world? 

Shall I redeem them from death? 

Ho, thy plagues, O death! 

Ho, thy destruction, O netherworld! 

Repentance be hid from Mine eyes! 

15For though he be fruitful among 
the reed-plants, 

An east wind shall come, the wind 
of the LORD coming up from the 
wilderness, 

And his spring shall become dry, 
and his fountain shall be dried up; 

He shall spoil the treasure of all 
precious vessels. 

 

Samaria shall bear her guilt, 

For she hath rebelled against 
her God; 

They shall fall by the sword; 

Their infants shall be dashed in 
pieces, 

And their women with child shall be 
ripped up. 

2Return, O Israel, unto the LORD thy 
God; 

For thou hast stumbled in thine 
iniquity. 

3Take with you words, 

And return unto the LORD; 

Say unto Him: ‘Forgive all iniquity, 

And accept that which is good; 

So will we render for bullocks the 
offering of our lips. 

4Asshur shall not save us; 

We will not ride upon horses; 

Neither will we call any more the 
work of our hands our gods; 

For in Thee the fatherless findeth 
mercy.’ 

5I will heal their backsliding, 

I will love them freely; 

For Mine anger is turned away from 
him. 

6I will be as the dew unto Israel; 

He shall blossom as the lily, 

And cast forth his roots as Lebanon. 

7His branches shall spread, 

And his beauty shall be as the olive-
tree, 
14 




And his fragrance as Lebanon. 

8They that dwell under his shadow 
shall again 

Make corn to grow, 

And shall blossom as the vine; 

The scent thereof shall be as the 
wine of Lebanon. 

9Ephraim [shall say]: 

‘What have I to do any more with 
idols?’ 

As for Me, I respond and look on 
him; 

I am like a leafy cypress-tree; 

From Me is thy fruit found. 

10Whoso is wise, let him understand 
these things, 

Whoso is prudent, let him know 
them. 

For the ways of the LORD are right, 

And the just do walk in them; 

But transgressors do stumble 
therein. 

 

 

.... 

JOEL 

 

The word of the LORD that came 
to Joel the son of Pethuel. 

 

2Hear this, ye old men, 

And give ear, all ye inhabitants of 
the land. 

Hath this been in your days, 

Or in the days of your fathers? 

3Tell ye your children of it, 

And let your children tell their 
children, 

And their children another 
generation. 

4That which the palmer-worm hath 
left hath the locust eaten; 

And that which the locust hath left 
hath the canker-worm eaten; 

And that which the canker-worm 
hath left hath the caterpiller eaten. 

5Awake, ye drunkards, and weep, 

And wail, all ye drinkers of wine, 

Because of the sweet wine, 

For it is cut off from your mouth. 

6For a people is come up upon my 
land, 

Mighty, and without number; 

His teeth are the teeth of a lion, 

And he hath the jaw-teeth of a 
lioness. 

7He hath laid my vine waste, 

And blasted my fig-tree; 

He hath made it clean bare, and cast 
it down, 

The branches thereof are made 
white. 

 

8Lament like a virgin girded with 
sackcloth 
1 




For the husband of her youth. 

9The meal-offering and the drink-
offering is cut off 

From the house of the LORD; 

The priests mourn, 

Even the LORD’S ministers. 

10The field is wasted, 

The land mourneth; 

For the corn is wasted, 

The new wine is dried up, 

The oil languisheth. 

11Be ashamed, O ye husbandmen, 

Wail, O ye vinedressers, 

For the wheat and for the barley; 

Because the harvest of the field is 
perished. 

12The vine is withered, 

And the fig-tree languisheth; 

The pomegranate-tree, the palm-tree 
also, and the apple-tree, 

Even all the trees of the field, are 
withered; 

For joy is withered away from the 
sons of men. 

 

13Gird yourselves, and lament, ye 
priests, 

Wail, ye ministers of the altar; 

Come, lie all night in sackcloth, 

Ye ministers of my God; 

For the meal-offering and the drink-
offering is withholden 

From the house of your God. 

14Sanctify ye a fast, 

Call a solemn assembly, 

Gather the elders 

And all the inhabitants of the land 

Unto the house of the LORD your 
God, 

And cry unto the LORD. 

 

15Alas for the day! 

For the day of the LORD is at hand, 

And as a destruction from the 
Almighty shall it come. 

16Is not the food cut off 

Before our eyes, 

Yea, joy and gladness 

From the house of our God? 

17The grains shrivel under their 
hoes; 

The garners are laid desolate, 

The barns are broken down; 

For the corn is withered. 

18How do the beasts groan! 

The herds of cattle are perplexed, 

Because they have no pasture; 

Yea, the flocks of sheep are made 
desolate. 

19Unto Thee, O LORD, do I cry; 

For the fire hath devoured 

The pastures of the wilderness, 

And the flame hath set ablaze 

All the trees of the field. 

20Yea, the beasts of the field pant 
unto Thee; 

For the water brooks are dried up, 

And the fire hath devoured the 
pastures of the wilderness. 

 

Blow ye the horn in Zion, 

And sound an alarm in My holy 
mountain; 

Let all the inhabitants of the land 
tremble; 

For the day of the LORD cometh, 

For it is at hand; 

2A day of darkness and gloominess, 
2 




A day of clouds and thick darkness, 

As blackness spread upon the 
mountains; 

A great people and a mighty, 

There hath not been ever the like, 

Neither shall be any more after 
them, 

Even to the years of many 
generations. 

3A fire devoureth before them, 

And behind them a flame blazeth; 

The land is as the garden of Eden 
before them, 

And behind them a desolate 
wilderness; 

Yea, and nothing escapeth them. 

 

4The appearance of them is as the 
appearance of horses; 

And as horsemen, so do they run. 

5Like the noise of chariots, 

On the tops of the mountains do 
they leap, 

Like the noise of a flame of fire 

That devoureth the stubble, 

As a mighty people set in battle 
array. 

6At their presence the peoples are in 
anguish; 

All faces have gathered blackness. 

7They run like mighty men, 

They climb the wall like men of 
war; 

And they move on every one in his 
ways, 

And they entangle not their paths. 

8Neither doth one thrust another, 

They march every one in his 
highway; 

And they break through the 
weapons, 

And suffer no harm. 

9They leap upon the city, 

They run upon the wall, 

They climb up into the houses; 

They enter in at the windows like a 
thief. 

10Before them the earth quaketh, 

The heavens tremble; 

The sun and the moon are become 
black, 

And the stars withdraw their 
shining. 

11And the LORD uttereth His voice 
before His army; 

For His camp is very great, 

For he is mighty that executeth His 
word; 

For great is the day of the LORD and 
very terrible; 

And who can abide it? 

 

12Yet even now, saith the LORD, 

Turn ye unto Me with all your heart, 

And with fasting, and with weeping, 
and with lamentation; 

13And rend your heart, and not your 
garments, 

And turn unto the LORD your God; 

For He is gracious and 
compassionate, long-suffering, 
and abundant in mercy, 

And repenteth Him of the evil. 

14Who knoweth whether He will not 
turn and repent, 

And leave a blessing behind Him, 

Even a meal-offering and a drink-
offering 


Unto the LORD your God? 

 

15Blow the horn in Zion, 

Sanctify a fast, call a solemn 
assembly; 

16Gather the people, 

Sanctify the congregation, 

Assemble the elders, 

Gather the children, 

And those that suck the breasts; 

Let the bridegroom go forth from 
his chamber, 

And the bride out of her pavilion. 

17Let the priests, the ministers of the 
LORD, 

Weep between the porch and the 
altar, 

And let them say: ‘Spare thy people, 
O LORD, 

And give not Thy heritage to 
reproach, 

That the nations should make them a 
byword: 

Wherefore should they say among 
the peoples: 

Where is their God?’ 

18Then was the LORD jealous for His 
land, 

And had pity on His people. 

19And the LORD answered and said 
unto His people: 

‘Behold, I will send you corn, and 
wine, and oil, 

And ye shall be satisfied therewith; 

And I will no more make you a 
reproach among the nations; 

20But I will remove far off from you 
the northern one, 

And will drive him into a land 
barren and desolate, 

With his face toward the eastern sea, 

And his hinder part toward the 
western sea; 

That his foulness may come up, and 
his ill savour may come up, 

Because he hath done great things.’ 

 

21Fear not, O land, be glad and 
rejoice; 

For the LORD hath done great things. 

22Be not afraid, ye beasts of the 
field; 

For the pastures of the wilderness do 
spring, 

For the tree beareth its fruit, 

The fig-tree and the vine do yield 
their strength. 

23Be glad then, ye children of Zion, 
and rejoice 

In the LORD your God; 

For He giveth you the former rain in 
just measure, 

And He causeth to come down for 
you the rain, 

The former rain and the latter rain, 
at the first. 

24And the floors shall be full of 
corn, 

And the vats shall overflow with 
wine and oil. 

25And I will restore to you the years 
that the locust hath eaten, 

The canker-worm, and the 
caterpiller, and the palmer-worm, 

My great army which I sent among 
you. 


26And ye shall eat in plenty and be 
satisfied, 

And shall praise the name of the 
LORD your God, 

That hath dealt wondrously with 
you; 

And My people shall never be 
ashamed. 

27And ye shall know that I am in the 
midst of Israel, 

And that I am the LORD your God, 
and there is none else; 

And My people shall never be 
ashamed. 

 

And it shall come to pass 
afterward, 

That I will pour out My spirit upon 
all flesh; 

And your sons and your daughters 
shall prophesy, 

Your old men shall dream dreams, 

Your young men shall see visions; 

2And also upon the servants and 
upon the handmaids 

In those days will I pour out My 
spirit. 

3And I will shew wonders in the 
heavens and in the earth, 

Blood, and fire, and pillars of 
smoke. 

4The sun shall be turned into 
darkness, 

And the moon into blood, 

Before the great and terrible day of 
the LORD come. 

5And it shall come to pass, that 
whosoever shall call on the name 
of the LORD shall be delivered; 

For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem 
there shall be those that escape, 

As the LORD hath said, 

And among the remnant those 
whom the LORD shall call. 

 

For, behold, in those days, and in 
that time, 

When I shall bring back the 
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, 

2I will gather all nations, 

And will bring them down into the 
valley of Jehoshaphat; 

And I will enter into judgment with 
them there 

For My people and for My heritage 
Israel, 

Whom they have scattered among 
the nations, 

And divided My land. 

3And they have cast lots for My 
people; 

And have given a boy for an harlot, 

And sold a girl for wine, and have 
drunk. 

 

4And also what are ye to Me, O 
Tyre, and Zidon, and all the regions of 
Philistia? will ye render retribution on 
My behalf? and if ye render retribution 
on My behalf, swiftly, speedily will I 
return your retribution upon your own 
head. 5Forasmuch as ye have taken My 
silver and My gold, and have carried 
into your temples My goodly 
treasures; 6the children also of Judah 
and the children of Jerusalem have ye 
sold unto the sons of Jevanim, that ye 
might remove them far from their 
3 

4 




border; 7behold, I will stir them up out 
of the place whither ye have sold 
them, and will return your retribution 
upon your own head; 8and I will sell 
your sons and your daughters into the 
hand of the children of Judah, and they 
shall sell them to the men of Sheba, to 
a nation far off; for the LORD hath 
spoken. 

 

9Proclaim ye this among the nations, 

Prepare war; 

Stir up the mighty men; 

Let all the men of war draw near, 

Let them come up. 

10Beat your plowshares into swords, 

And your pruning-hooks into spears; 

Let the weak say: ‘I am strong.’ 

11Haste ye, and come, all ye nations 
round about, 

And gather yourselves together; 

Thither cause Thy mighty ones to 
come down, O LORD! 

12Let the nations be stirred up, and 
come up 

To the valley of aJehoshaphat; 

a That is, The Lord judgeth. 

For there will I sit to judge 

All the nations round about. 

13Put ye in the sickle, 

For the harvest is ripe; 

Come, tread ye, 

For the winepress is full, the vats 
overflow; 

For their wickedness is great. 

 

14Multitudes, multitudes in the 
valley of decision! 

For the day of the LORD is near in 
the valley of decision. 

15The sun and the moon are become 
black, 

And the stars withdraw their 
shining. 

16And the LORD shall roar from Zion, 

And utter His voice from Jerusalem, 

And the heavens and the earth shall 
shake; 

But the LORD will be a refuge unto 
His people, 

And a stronghold to the children of 
Israel. 

17So shall ye know that I am the 
LORD your God, 

Dwelling in Zion My holy 
mountain; 

Then shall Jerusalem be holy, 

And there shall no strangers pass 
through her any more. 

 

18And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That the mountains shall drop down 
sweet wine, 

And the hills shall flow with milk, 

And all the brooks of Judah shall 
flow with waters; 

And a fountain shall come forth of 
the house of the LORD, 

And shall water the valley of 
Shittim. 

19Egypt shall be a desolation, 

And Edom shall be a desolate 
wilderness, 

For the violence against the children 
of Judah, 


Because they have shed innocent 
blood in their land. 

20But Judah shall be inhabited for 
ever, 

And Jerusalem from generation to 
generation. 

21And I will hold as innocent their 
blood that I have not held as 
innocent; 

And the LORD dwelleth in Zion. 

 

.... 

AMOS 

 

The words of Amos, who was 
among the herdmen of Tekoa, 
which he saw concerning Israel in the 
days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in 
the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash 
king of Israel, two years before the 
earthquake. 

 

2And he said: 

The LORD roareth from Zion, 

And uttereth His voice from 
Jerusalem; and the pastures of the 
shepherds shall mourn, and the 
top of Carmel shall wither. 

 

3For thus saith the LORD: For three 
transgressions of Damascus, yea, 
for four, I will not reverse it: 
because they have threshed 
Gilead with sledges of iron. 

4So will I send a fire into the house 
of Hazael, and it shall devour the 
palaces of Ben-hadad; 

5And I will break the bar of 
Damascus, and cut off the 
inhabitant from Bikath-Aven, and 
him that holdeth the sceptre from 
Beth-eden; and the people of 
Aram shall go into captivity unto 
Kir, saith the LORD. 

 

6Thus saith the LORD: For three 
transgressions of Gaza, yea, for 
four, I will not reverse it: because 
they carried away captive a whole 
captivity, to deliver them up to 
Edom. 

7So will I send a fire on the wall of 
Gaza, and it shall devour the 
palaces thereof; 

8And I will cut off the inhabitant 
from Ashdod, and him that 
holdeth the sceptre from 
Ashkelon; and I will turn My 
hand against Ekron, and the 
remnant of the Philistines shall 
perish, saith the Lord GOD. 

 

9Thus saith the LORD: For three 
transgressions of Tyre, yea, for 
four, I will not reverse it: because 
they delivered up a whole 
1 




captivity to Edom, and 
remembered not the brotherly 
covenant. 

10So will I send a fire on the wall of 
Tyre, and it shall devour the 
palaces thereof. 

 

11Thus saith the LORD: For three 
transgressions of Edom, yea, for 
four, I will not reverse it: because 
he did pursue his brother with the 
sword, and did cast off all pity, 
and his anger did tear perpetually, 
and he kept his wrath for ever. 

12So will I send a fire upon Teman, 
and it shall devour the palaces of 
Bozrah. 

 

13Thus saith the LORD: For three 
transgressions of the children of 
Ammon, yea, for four, I will not 
reverse it: because they have 
ripped up the women with child 
of Gilead, that they might enlarge 
their border. 

14So will I kindle a fire in the wall of 
Rabbah, and it shall devour the 
palaces thereof, with shouting in 
the day of battle, with a tempest 
in the day of the whirlwind; 

15And their king shall go into 
captivity, he and his princes 
together, saith the LORD. 

 

Thus saith the LORD: 

For three transgressions of Moab, 

Yea, for four, I will not reverse it: 

Because he burned the bones of the 
king of Edom into lime. 

2So will I send a fire upon Moab, 

And it shall devour the palaces of 
Kerioth; 

And Moab shall die with tumult, 

With shouting, and with the sound 
of the horn; 

3And I will cut off the judge from 
the midst thereof, 

And will slay all the princes thereof 
with him, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

4Thus saith the LORD: 

For three transgressions of Judah, 

Yea, for four, I will not reverse it: 

Because they have rejected the law 
of the LORD, 

And have not kept His statutes, 

And their lies have caused them to 
err, 

After which their fathers did walk. 

5So will I send a fire upon Judah, 

And it shall devour the palaces of 
Jerusalem. 

 

6Thus saith the LORD: 

For three transgressions of Israel, 

Yea, for four, I will not reverse it: 

Because they sell the righteous for 
silver, 

And the needy for a pair of shoes; 

7That pant after the dust of the earth 
on the head of the poor, 

And turn aside the way of the 
humble; 

And a man and his father go unto 
the same maid, 

To profane My holy name; 
2 




8And they lay themselves down 
beside every altar 

Upon clothes taken in pledge, 

And in the house of their God they 
drink 

The wine of them that have been 
fined. 

9Yet destroyed I the Amorite before 
them, 

Whose height was like the height of 
the cedars, 

And he was strong as the oaks; 

Yet I destroyed his fruit from above, 

And his roots from beneath. 

10Also I brought you up out of the 
land of Egypt, 

And led you forty years in the 
wilderness, 

To possess the land of the Amorites. 

11And I raised up of your sons for 
prophets, 

And of your young men for 
Nazirites. 

Is it not even thus, O ye children of 
Israel? 

Saith the LORD. 

12But ye gave the Nazirites wine to 
drink; 

And commanded the prophets, 
saying: ‘Prophesy not.’ 

13Behold, I will make it creak under 
you, 

As a cart creaketh that is full of 
sheaves. 

14And flight shall fail the swift, 

And the strong shall not exert his 
strength, 

Neither shall the mighty deliver 
himself; 

15Neither shall he stand that 
handleth the bow; 

And he that is swift of foot shall not 
deliver himself; 

Neither shall he that rideth the horse 
deliver himself; 

16And he that is courageous among 
the mighty 

Shall flee away naked in that day, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

Hear this word that the LORD hath 
spoken against you, O children of 
Israel, against the whole family which 
I brought up out of the land of Egypt, 
saying: 

2You only have I known of all the 
families of the earth; 

Therefore I will visit upon you all 
your iniquities. 

 

3Will two walk together, 

Except they have agreed? 

4Will a lion roar in the forest, 

When he hath no prey? 

Will a young lion give forth his 
voice out of his den, 

If he have taken nothing? 

5Will a bird fall in a snare upon the 
earth, 

Where there is no lure for it? 

Will a snare spring up from the 
ground, 

And have taken nothing at all? 

6Shall the horn be blown in a city, 

And the people not tremble? 

Shall evil befall a city, 

And the LORD hath not done it? 

7For the Lord GOD will do nothing, 
3 




But He revealeth His counsel unto 
His servants the prophets. 

8The lion hath roared, 

Who will not fear? 

The Lord GOD hath spoken, 

Who can but prophesy? 

 

9Proclaim it upon the palaces at 
Ashdod, 

And upon the palaces in the land of 
Egypt, 

And say: ‘Assemble yourselves 
upon the mountains of Samaria, 

And behold the great confusions 
therein, 

And the oppressions in the midst 
thereof.’ 

10For they know not to do right, 
saith the LORD, 

Who store up violence and robbery 
in their palaces. 

11Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: 

An adversary, even round about the 
land! 

And he shall bring down thy 
strength from thee, 

And thy palaces shall be spoiled. 

12Thus saith the LORD: 

As the shepherd rescueth out of the 
mouth of the lion 

Two legs, or a piece of an ear, 

So shall the children of Israel that 
dwell in Samaria 

Escape with the corner of a couch, 
and the leg of a bed. 

 

13Hear ye, and testify against the 
house of Jacob, 

Saith the Lord GOD, the God of 
hosts. 

14For in the day that I shall visit the 
transgressions of Israel upon him, 

I will also punish the altars of Beth-
el, 

And the horns of the altar shall be 
cut off, 

And fall to the ground. 

15And I will smite the winter-house 
with the summer-house; 

And the houses of ivory shall perish, 

And the great houses shall have an 
end, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

Hear this word, ye kine of 
Bashan, That are in the mountain 
of Samaria, 

That oppress the poor, that crush the 
needy, 

That say unto their lords: ‘Bring, 
that we may feast.’ 

2The Lord GOD hath sworn by His 
holiness: 

Lo, surely the days shall come upon 
you, 

That ye shall be taken away with 
hooks, 

And your residue with fish-hooks. 

3And ye shall go out at the breaches, 
every one straight before her; 

And ye shall be cast into Harmon, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

4Come to Beth-el, and transgress, 

To Gilgal, and multiply 
transgression; 
4 




And bring your sacrifices in the 
morning, 

And your tithes after three days; 

5And offer a sacrifice of 
thanksgiving of that which is 
leavened, 

And proclaim freewill-offerings and 
publish them; 

For so ye love to do, O ye children 
of Israel, 

Saith the Lord GOD. 

 

6And I also have given you 

Cleanness of teeth in all your cities, 

And want of bread in all your 
places; 

Yet have ye not returned unto Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

7And I also have withholden the rain 
from you, 

When there were yet three months 
to the harvest; 

And I caused it to rain upon one 
city, 

And caused it not to rain upon 
another city; 

One piece was rained upon, 

And the piece whereupon it rained 
not withered. 

8So two or three cities wandered 
unto one city 

To drink water, and were not 
satisfied; 

Yet have ye not returned unto Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

9I have smitten you with blasting 
and mildew; 

The multitude of your gardens and 
your vineyards 

And your fig-trees and your olive-
trees 

Hath the palmer-worm devoured; 

Yet have ye not returned unto Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

10I have sent among you the 
pestilence in the way of Egypt; 

Your young men have I slain with 
the sword, 

And have carried away your horses; 

And I have made the stench of your 
camp to come up even into your 
nostrils; 

Yet have ye not returned unto Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

11I have overthrown some of you, 

As God overthrew Sodom and 
Gomorrah, 

And ye were as a brand plucked out 
of the burning; 

Yet have ye not returned unto Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

12Therefore thus will I do unto thee, 
O Israel; 

Because I will do this unto thee, 

Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. 

13For, lo, He that formeth the 
mountains, and createth the wind, 

And declareth unto man what is his 
thought, 

That maketh the morning darkness, 

And treadeth upon the high places 
of the earth; 


The LORD, the God of hosts, is His 
name. 

 

Hear ye this word which I take up 
for a lamentation over you, O 
house of Israel: 

2The virgin of Israel is fallen, 

She shall no more rise; 

She is cast down upon her land, 

There is none to raise her up. 

3For thus saith the Lord GOD: The city 
that went forth a thousand shall have a 
hundred left, and that which went forth 
a hundred shall have ten left, of the 
house of Israel. 

 

4For thus saith the LORD unto the 
house of Israel: 

Seek ye Me, and live; 

5But seek not Beth-el, 

Nor enter into Gilgal, 

And pass not to Beer-sheba; 

For Gilgal shall surely go into 
captivity, 

And Beth-el shall come to nought. 

6Seek the LORD, and live— 

Lest He break out like fire in the 
house of Joseph, 

And it devour, and there be none to 
quench it in Bethel— 

7Ye who turn judgment to 
wormwood, 

And cast righteousness to the 
ground; 

8Him that maketh the Pleiades and 
Orion, 

And bringeth on the shadow of 
death in the morning, 

And darkeneth the day into night; 

That calleth for the waters of the 
sea, 

And poureth them out upon the face 
of the earth; 

The LORD is His name; 

9That causeth destruction to flash 
upon the strong, 

So that destruction cometh upon the 
fortress. 

 

10They hate him that reproveth in 
the gate, 

And they abhor him that speaketh 
uprightly. 

11Therefore, because ye trample 
upon the poor, 

And take from him exactions of 
wheat; 

Ye have built houses of hewn stone, 

But ye shall not dwell in them, 

Ye have planted pleasant vineyards, 

But ye shall not drink wine thereof. 

12For I know how manifold are your 
transgressions, 

And how mighty are your sins; 

Ye that afflict the just, that take a 
ransom, 

And that turn aside the needy in the 
gate. 

13Therefore the prudent doth keep 
silence in such a time; 

For it is an evil time. 

 

14Seek good, and not evil, that ye 
may live; 

And so the LORD, the God of hosts, 
will be with you, as ye say. 

15Hate the evil, and love the good, 

And establish justice in the gate; 
5 




It may be that the LORD, the God of 
hosts, 

Will be gracious unto the remnant of 
Joseph. 

 

16Therefore thus saith the LORD, 

The God of hosts, the Lord: 

Lamentation shall be in all the broad 
places, 

And they shall say in all the streets: 
‘Alas! alas! ’ 

And they shall call the husbandman 
to mourning, 

And proclaim lamentation to such as 
are skilful of wailing. 

17And in all vineyards shall be 
lamentation; 

For I will pass through the midst of 
thee, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

18Woe unto you that desire the day 
of the LORD! 

Wherefore would ye have the day of 
the LORD? 

It is darkness, and not light. 

19As if a man did flee from a lion, 

And a bear met him; 

And went into the house and leaned 
his hand on the wall, 

And a serpent bit him. 

20Shall not the day of the LORD be 
darkness, and not light? 

Even very dark, and no brightness in 
it? 

21I hate, I despise your feasts, 

And I will take no delight in your 
solemn assemblies. 

22Yea, though ye offer me burnt-
offerings and your meal-
offerings, 

I will not accept them; 

Neither will I regard the peace-
offerings of your fat beasts. 

23Take thou away from Me the noise 
of thy songs; 

And let Me not hear the melody of 
thy psalteries. 

24But let justice well up as waters, 

And righteousness as a mighty 
stream. 

25Did ye bring unto Me sacrifices and 
offerings in the wilderness forty years, 
O house of Israel? 26So shall ye take 
up Siccuth your king and Chiun your 
images, the star of your god, which ye 
made to yourselves. 27Therefore will I 
cause you to go into captivity beyond 
Damascus, saith He, whose name is 
the LORD God of hosts. 

 

Woe to them that are at ease in 
Zion, 

And to them that are secure in the 
mountain of Samaria, 

The notable men of the first of the 
nations, 

To whom the house of Israel come! 

2Pass ye unto Calneh, and see, 

And from thence go ye to Hamath 
the great; 

Then go down to Gath of the 
Philistines; 

Are they better than these 
kingdoms? 

Or is their border greater than your 
border? 
6 




3Ye that put far away the evil day, 

And cause the seat of violence to 
come near; 

4That lie upon beds of ivory, 

And stretch themselves upon their 
couches, 

And eat the lambs out of the flock, 

And the calves out of the midst of 
the stall; 

5That thrum on the psaltery, 

That devise for themselves 
instruments of music, like David; 

6That drink wine in bowls, 

And anoint themselves with the 
chief ointments; 

But they are not grieved for the hurt 
of Joseph. 

7Therefore now shall they go 
captive at the head of them that 
go captive, 

And the revelry of them that 
stretched themselves shall pass 
away. 

8The Lord GOD hath sworn by 
Himself, 

Saith the LORD, the God of hosts: 

I abhor the pride of Jacob, 

And hate his palaces; 

And I will deliver up the city with 
all that is therein. 

9And it shall come to pass, if there 
remain ten men in one house, that they 
shall die. 10And when a man’s uncle 
shall take him up, even he that burneth 
him, to bring out the bones out of the 
house, and shall say unto him that is in 
the innermost parts of the house: ‘Is 
there yet any with thee?’ and he shall 
say: ‘No’; then shall he say: ‘Hold thy 
peace; for we must not make mention 
of the name of the LORD.’ 

 

11For, behold, the LORD 
commandeth, 

And the great house shall be smitten 
into splinters, 

And the little house into chips. 

12Do horses run upon the rocks? 

Doth one plow there with oxen? 

That ye have turned justice into gall, 

And the fruit of righteousness into 
wormwood; 

13Ye that rejoice in a thing of 
nought, 

That say: ‘Have we not taken to us 
horns by our own strength?’ 

14For, behold, I will raise up against 
you a nation, O house of Israel, saith 
the LORD, the God of hosts; and they 
shall afflict you from the entrance of 
Hamath unto the Brook of the Arabah. 

 

Thus the Lord GOD showed me; 
and, behold, He formed locusts in 
the beginning of the shooting up of the 
latter growth; and, lo, it was the latter 
growth after the king’s mowings. 2And 
if it had come to pass, that when they 
had made an end of eating the grass of 
the land—so I said: 

O Lord GOD, forgive, I beseech 
Thee; 

How shall Jacob stand? for he is 
small. 

3The LORD repented concerning this; ‘It 
shall not be’, saith the LORD. 

 
7 




4Thus the Lord GOD showed me; 
and, behold, the Lord GOD called to 
contend by fire; and it devoured the 
great deep, and would have eaten up 
the land. 5Then said I: 

O Lord GOD, cease, I beseech Thee; 

How shall Jacob stand? for he is 
small. 

6The LORD repented concerning this; 
‘This also shall not be’, saith the Lord 
GOD. 

 

7Thus He showed me; and, behold, 
the Lord stood beside a wall made by a 
plumbline, with a plumbline in His 
hand. 8And the LORD said unto me: 
‘Amos, what seest thou?’ And I said: 
‘A plumbline.’ Then said the Lord: 

Behold, I will set a plumbline in the 
midst of My people Israel; 

I will not again pardon them any 
more; 

9And the high places of Isaac shall 
be desolate, 

And the sanctuaries of Israel shall 
be laid waste; 

And I will rise against the house of 
Jeroboam with the sword. 

 

 10Then Amaziah the priest of Beth-
el sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, 
saying: ‘Amos hath conspired against 
thee in the midst of the house of Israel; 
the land is not able to bear all his 
words. 11For thus Amos saith: 

Jeroboam shall die by the sword, 

And Israel shall surely be led away 
captive out of his land.’ 

12Also Amaziah said unto Amos: ‘O 
thou seer, go, flee thee away into the 
land of Judah, and there eat bread, and 
prophesy there; 13but prophesy not 
again any more at Beth-el, for it is the 
king’s sanctuary, and it is a royal 
house.’ 14Then answered Amos, and 
said to Amaziah: ‘I was no prophet, 
neither was I a prophet’s son; but I 
was a herdman, and a dresser of 
sycamore-trees; 15and the LORD took 
me from following the flock, and the 
LORD said unto me: Go, prophesy unto 
My people Israel. 16Now therefore hear 
thou the word of the LORD: 

Thou sayest: Prophesy not against 
Israel, 

And preach not against the house of 
Isaac; 

17Therefore thus saith the LORD: 

Thy wife shall be a harlot in the 
city, 

And thy sons and thy daughters 
shall fall by the sword, 

And thy land shall be divided by 
line; 

And thou thyself shalt die in an 
unclean land, 

And Israel shall surely be led away 
captive out of his land.’ 

 

8 



Thus the Lord GOD showed me; 
and behold a basket of summer 
fruit. 2And He said: ‘Amos, what seest 
thou?’ And I said: ‘A basket of 
asummer fruit.’ Then said the LORD 
unto me: 

a Heb. kaiz 


The aend is come upon My people 
Israel; 

a Heb. kez 

I will not again pardon them any 
more. 

3And the songs of the palace shall 
be wailings in that day, 

Saith the Lord GOD; 

The dead bodies shall be many; 

In every place silence shall be cast. 

 

4Hear this, O ye that would swallow 
the needy, 

And destroy the poor of the land, 

5Saying: ‘When will the new moon 
be gone, that we may sell grain? 

And the sabbath, that we may set 
forth corn? 

Making the ephah small, and the 
shekel great, 

And falsifying the balances of 
deceit; 

6That we may buy the poor for 
silver, 

And the needy for a pair of shoes, 

And sell the refuse of the corn?’ 

7The LORD hath sworn by the pride 
of Jacob: 

Surely I will never forget any of 
their works. 

8Shall not the land tremble for this, 

And every one mourn that dwelleth 
therein? 

Yea, it shall rise up wholly like the 
River; 

And it shall be troubled and sink 
again, like the River of Egypt. 

9And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

Saith the Lord GOD, 

That I will cause the sun to go down 
at noon, 

And I will darken the earth in the 
clear day. 

10And I will turn your feasts into 
mourning, 

And all your songs into lamentation; 

And I will bring up sackcloth upon 
all loins, 

And baldness upon every head; 

And I will make it as the mourning 
for an only son, 

And the end thereof as a bitter day. 

 

11Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord GOD, 

That I will send a famine in the 
land, 

Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst 
for water, 

But of hearing the words of the 
LORD. 

12And they shall wander from sea to 
sea, 

And from the north even to the east; 

They shall run to and fro to seek the 
word of the LORD, 

And shall not find it. 

13In that day shall the fair virgins 

And the young men faint for thirst. 

14They that swear by the sin of 
Samaria, 

And say: ‘As thy God, O Dan, 
liveth’; 

And: ‘As the way of Beer-sheba 
liveth’; 


Even they shall fall, and never rise 
up again. 

 

I saw the Lord standing beside the 
altar; and He said: 

Smite the capitals, that the posts 
may shake; 

And break them in pieces on the 
head of all of them; 

And I will slay the residue of them 
with the sword; 

There shall not one of them flee 
away, 

And there shall not one of them 
escape. 

2Though they dig into the nether-
world, 

Thence shall My hand take them; 

And though they climb up to 
heaven, 

Thence will I bring them down. 

3And though they hide themselves 
in the top of Carmel, 

I will search and take them out 
thence; 

And though they be hid from My 
sight in the bottom of the sea, 

Thence will I command the serpent, 
and he shall bite them. 

4And though they go into captivity 
before their enemies, 

Thence will I command the sword, 
and it shall slay them; 

And I will set Mine eyes upon them 

For evil, and not for good. 

 

5For the Lord, the GOD of hosts, 

Is He that toucheth the land and it 
melteth, 

And all that dwell therein mourn; 

And it riseth up wholly like the 
River, 

And sinketh again, like the River of 
Egypt; 

6It is He that buildeth His upper 
chambers in the heaven, 

And hath founded His vault upon 
the earth; 

He that calleth for the waters of the 
sea, 

And poureth them out upon the face 
of the earth; 

The LORD is His name. 

7Are ye not as the children of the 
Ethiopians unto Me, 

O children of Israel? saith the LORD. 

Have not I brought up Israel out of 
the land of Egypt, 

And the Philistines from Caphtor, 

And Aram from Kir? 

8Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD 

Are upon the sinful kingdom, 

And I will destroy it from off the 
face of the earth; 

Saving that I will not utterly destroy 
the house of Jacob, 

Saith the LORD. 

9For, lo, I will command, and I will 
sift the house of Israel among all 
the nations, 

Like as corn is sifted in a sieve, 

Yet shall not the least grain fall 
upon the earth. 

10All the sinners of My people shall 
die by the sword, 

That say: ‘The evil shall not 
overtake nor confront us.’ 

 
9 




11In that day will I raise up 

The tabernacle of David that is 
fallen, 

And close up the breaches thereof, 

And I will raise up his ruins, 

And I will build it as in the days of 
old; 

12That they may possess the remnant 
of Edom, 

And all the nations, upon whom My 
name is called, 

Saith the LORD that doeth this. 

 

13Behold, the days come, saith the 
LORD, 

That the plowman shall overtake the 
reaper, 

And the treader of grapes him that 
soweth seed; 

And the mountains shall drop sweet 
wine, 

And all the hills shall melt. 

14And I will turn the captivity of My 
people Israel, 

And they shall build the waste 
cities, and inhabit them; 

And they shall plant vineyards, and 
drink the wine thereof; 

They shall also make gardens, and 
eat the fruit of them. 

15And I will plant them upon their 
land, 

And they shall no more be plucked 
up 

Out of their land which I have given 
them, 

Saith the LORD thy God. 

 

 

..... 

OBADIAH 

 

The vision of Obadiah. 

 

Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning 
Edom: 

We have heard a message from the 
LORD, 

And an ambassador is sent among 
the nations: 

‘Arise ye, and let us rise up against 
her in battle.’ 

2Behold, I make thee small among 
the nations; 

Thou art greatly despised. 

3The pride of thy heart hath beguiled 
thee, 

O thou that dwellest in the clefts of 
the rock, 

Thy habitation on high; 

That sayest in thy heart: 

‘Who shall bring me down to the 
ground?’ 

4Though thou make thy nest as high 
as the eagle, 

And though thou set it among the 
stars, 
1 




I will bring thee down from thence, 
saith the LORD. 

5If thieves came to thee, if robbers 
by night— 

How art thou cut off!— 

Would they not steal till they had 
enough? 

If grape-gatherers came to thee, 

Would they not leave some gleaning 
grapes? 

6How is Esau searched out! 

How are his hidden places sought 
out! 

7All the men of thy confederacy 

Have conducted thee to the border; 

The men that were at peace with 
thee 

Have beguiled thee, and prevailed 
against thee; 

They that eat thy bread lay a snare 
under thee, 

In whom there is no discernment. 

8Shall I not in that day, saith the 
LORD, 

Destroy the wise men out of Edom, 

And discernment out of the mount 
of Esau? 

9And thy mighty men, O Teman, 
shall be dismayed, 

To the end that every one may be 
cut off from the mount of Esau by 
slaughter. 

10For the violence done to thy 
brother Jacob shame shall cover 
thee, 

And thou shalt be cut off for ever. 

11In the day that thou didst stand 
aloof, 

In the day that strangers carried 
away his substance, 

And foreigners entered into his 
gates, 

And cast lots upon Jerusalem, 

Even thou wast as one of them. 

12But thou shouldest not have gazed 
on the day of thy brother 

In the day of his disaster, 

Neither shouldest thou have rejoiced 
over the children of Judah 

In the day of their destruction; 

Neither shouldest thou have spoken 
proudly 

In the day of distress. 

13Thou shouldest not have entered 
into the gate of My people 

In the day of their calamity; 

Yea, thou shouldest not have gazed 
on their affliction 

In the day of their calamity, 

Nor have laid hands on their 
substance 

In the day of their calamity. 

14Neither shouldest thou have stood 
in the crossway, 

To cut off those of his that escape; 

Neither shouldest thou have 
delivered up those of his 

That did remain in the day of 
distress. 

 

15For the day of the LORD is near 
upon all the nations; 

As thou hast done, it shall be done 
unto thee; 

Thy dealing shall return upon thine 
own head. 


16For as ye have drunk upon My 
holy mountain, 

So shall all the nations drink 
continually, 

Yea, they shall drink, and swallow 
down, 

And shall be as though they had not 
been. 

17But in mount Zion there shall be 
those that escape, 

And it shall be holy; 

And the house of Jacob shall 
possess their possessions. 

18And the house of Jacob shall be a 
fire, 

And the house of Joseph a flame, 

And the house of Esau for stubble, 

And they shall kindle in them, and 
devour them; 

And there shall not be any 
remaining of the house of Esau; 

For the LORD hath spoken. 

19And they of the South shall 
possess the mount of Esau, 

And they of the Lowland the 
Philistines; 

And they shall possess the field of 
Ephraim, 

And the field of Samaria; 

And Benjamin shall possess Gilead. 

20And the captivity of this host of 
the children of Israel, 

That are among the Canaanites, 
even unto Zarephath, 

And the captivity of Jerusalem, that 
is in Sepharad, 

Shall possess the cities of the South. 

21And saviours shall come up on 
mount Zion 

To judge the mount of Esau; 

And the kingdom shall be the 
LORD’S. 

 

 

.... 

JONAH 

 

Now the word of the LORD came 
unto Jonah the son of Amittai, 
saying: 2’Arise, go to Nineveh, that 
great city, and proclaim against it; for 
their wickedness is come up before 
Me.’ 3But Jonah rose up to flee unto 
Tarshish from the presence of the 
LORD; and he went down to Joppa, and 
found a ship going to Tarshish; so he 
paid the fare thereof, and went down 
into it, to go with them unto Tarshish, 
from the presence of the LORD. 

4But the LORD hurled a great wind 
into the sea, and there was a mighty 
tempest in the sea, so that the ship was 
like to be broken. 5And the mariners 
were afraid, and cried every man unto 
his god; and they cast forth the wares 
that were in the ship into the sea, to 
lighten it unto them. But Jonah was 
gone down into the innermost parts of 
1 




the ship; and he lay, and was fast 
asleep. 6So the shipmaster came to 
him, and said unto him: ‘What 
meanest thou that thou sleepest? arise, 
call upon thy God, if so be that God 
will think upon us, that we perish not.’ 

7And they said every one to his 
fellow: ‘Come, and let us cast lots, that 
we may know for whose cause this 
evil is upon us.’ So they cast lots, and 
the lot fell upon Jonah. 8Then said they 
unto him: ‘Tell us, we pray thee, for 
whose cause this evil is upon us: what 
is thine occupation? and whence 
comest thou? what is thy country? and 
of what people art thou?’ 9And he said 
unto them: ‘I am an Hebrew; and I fear 
the LORD, the God of heaven, who hath 
made the sea and the dry land.’ 10Then 
were the men exceedingly afraid, and 
said unto him: ‘What is this that thou 
hast done?’ For the men knew that he 
fled from the presence of the LORD, 
because he had told them. 

11Then said they unto him: ‘What 
shall we do unto thee, that the sea may 
be calm unto us?’ for the sea grew 
more and more tempestuous. 12And he 
said unto them: ‘Take me up, and cast 
me forth into the sea; so shall the sea 
be calm unto you; for I know that for 
my sake this great tempest is upon 
you.’ 13Nevertheless the men rowed 
hard to bring it to the land; but they 
could not; for the sea grew more and 
more tempestuous against them. 
14Wherefore they cried unto the LORD, 
and said: ‘We beseech Thee, O LORD, 
we beseech Thee, let us not perish for 
this man’s life, and lay not upon us 
innocent blood; for Thou, O LORD, hast 
done as it pleased Thee.’ 15So they 
took up Jonah, and cast him forth into 
the sea; and the sea ceased from its 
raging. 16Then the men feared the LORD 
exceedingly; and they offered a 
sacrifice unto the LORD, and made 
vows. 

And the LORD prepared a great 
fish to swallow up Jonah; and 
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three 
days and three nights. 2Then Jonah 
prayed unto the LORD his God out of 
the fish’s belly. 3And he said: 

I called out of mine affliction 

Unto the LORD, and He answered 
me; 

Out of the belly of the nether-world 
cried I, 

And Thou heardest my voice. 

4For Thou didst cast me into the 
depth, 

In the heart of the seas, 

And the flood was round about me; 

All Thy waves and Thy billows 

Passed over me. 

5And I said: ‘I am cast out 

From before Thine eyes’; 

Yet I will look again 

Toward Thy holy temple. 

6The waters compassed me about, 
even to the soul; 

The deep was round about me; 

The weeds were wrapped about my 
head. 

7I went down to the bottoms of the 
mountains; 
2 




The earth with her bars closed upon 
me for ever; 

Yet hast Thou brought up my life 
from the pit, 

O LORD my God. 

8When my soul fainted within me, 

I remembered the LORD; 

And my prayer came in unto Thee, 

Into Thy holy temple. 

9They that regard lying vanities 

Forsake their own mercy. 

10But I will sacrifice unto Thee 

With the voice of thanksgiving; 

That which I have vowed I will pay. 

Salvation is of the LORD. 

11And the LORD spoke unto the fish, 
and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry 
land. 

And the word of the LORD came 
unto Jonah the second time, 
saying: 2’Arise, go unto Nineveh, that 
great city, and make unto it the 
proclamation that I bid thee.’ 3So 
Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, 
according to the word of the LORD. 
Now Nineveh was an exceeding great 
city, of three days’journey. 4And Jonah 
began to enter into the city a day’s 
journey, and he proclaimed, and said: 
‘Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be 
overthrown.’ 

5And the people of Nineveh 
believed God; and they proclaimed a 
fast, and put on sackcloth, from the 
greatest of them even to the least of 
them. 6And the tidings reached the 
king of Nineveh, and he arose from his 
throne, and laid his robe from him, and 
covered him with sackcloth, and sat in 
ashes. 7And he caused it to be 
proclaimed and published through 
Nineveh by the decree of the king and 
his nobles, saying: ‘Let neither man 
nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any 
thing; let them not feed, nor drink 
water; 8but let them be covered with 
sackcloth, both man and beast, and let 
them cry mightily unto God; yea, let 
them turn every one from his evil way, 
and from the violence that is in their 
hands. 9Who knoweth whether God 
will not turn and repent, and turn away 
from His fierce anger, that we perish 
not?’ 

10And God saw their works, that 
they turned from their evil way; and 
God repented of the evil, which He 
said He would do unto them; and He 

did it not. 1But it displeased Jonah 
exceedingly, and he was angry. 
2And he prayed unto the LORD, and 
said: ‘I pray Thee, O LORD, was not 
this my saying, when I was yet in mine 
own country? Therefore I fled 
beforehand unto Tarshish; for I knew 
that Thou art a gracious God, and 
compassionate, long-suffering, and 
abundant in mercy, and repentest Thee 
of the evil. 3Therefore now, O LORD, 
take, I beseech Thee, my life from me; 
for it is better for me to die than to 
live.’ 4And the LORD said: ‘Art thou 
greatly angry?’ 

5Then Jonah went out of the city, 
and sat on the east side of the city, and 
there made him a booth, and sat under 
it in the shadow, till he might see what 
would become of the city. 6And the 
3 

4 




LORD God prepared a gourd, and made 
it to come up over Jonah, that it might 
be a shadow over his head, to deliver 
him from his evil. So Jonah was 
exceeding glad because of the gourd. 
7But God prepared a worm when the 
morning rose the next day, and it 
smote the gourd, that it withered. 8And 
it came to pass, when the sun arose, 
that God prepared a vehement east 
wind; and the sun beat upon the head 
of Jonah, that he fainted, and requested 
for himself that he might die, and said: 
‘It is better for me to die than to live.’ 
9And God said to Jonah: ‘Art thou 
greatly angry for the gourd?’ And he 
said: ‘I am greatly angry, even unto 
death.’ 10And the LORD said: ‘Thou 
hast had pity on the gourd, for which 
thou hast not laboured, neither madest 
it grow, which came up in a night, and 
perished in a night; 11and should not I 
have pity on Nineveh, that great city, 
wherein are more than sixscore 
thousand persons that cannot discern 
between their right hand and their left 
hand, and also much cattle?’ 

 

 

.... 

MICAH 

 

The word of the LORD that came 
to Micah the Morashtite in the 
days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, 
kings of Judah, which he saw 
concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. 

 

2Hear, ye peoples, all of you; 

Hearken, O earth, and all that 
therein is; 

And let the Lord GOD be witness 
against you, 

The Lord from His holy temple. 

3For, behold, the LORD cometh forth 
out of His place, 

And will come down, and tread 
upon the high places of the earth. 

4And the mountains shall be molten 
under Him, 

And the valleys shall be cleft, 

As wax before the fire, 

As waters that are poured down a 
steep place. 

 

5For the transgression of Jacob is all 
this, 

And for the sins of the house of 
Israel. 

What is the transgression of Jacob? 
Is it not Samaria? 

And what are the high places of 
Judah? are they not Jerusalem? 

 

6Therefore I will make Samaria a 
heap in the field, 

A place for the planting of 
vineyards; 
1 




And I will pour down the stones 
thereof into the valley, 

And I will uncover the foundations 
thereof. 

7And all her graven images shall be 
beaten to pieces, 

And all her hires shall be burned 
with fire, 

And all her idols will I lay desolate; 

For of the hire of a harlot hath she 
gathered them, 

And unto the hire of a harlot shall 
they return. 

 

8For this will I wail and howl, 

I will go stripped and naked; 

I will make a wailing like the 
jackals, 

And a mourning like the ostriches. 

9For her wound is incurable; 

For it is come even unto Judah; 

It reacheth unto the gate of my 
people, even to Jerusalem. 

10Tell it not in Gath, 

Weep not at all; 

At Beth-le-aphrah roll thyself in the 
dust. 

11Pass ye away, O inhabitant of 
Saphir, in nakedness and shame; 

The inhabitant of Zaanan is not 
come forth; 

The wailing of Beth-ezel shall take 
from you the standing-place 
thereof. 

12For the inhabitant of Maroth 
waiteth anxiously for good; 

Because evil is come down from the 
LORD unto the gate of Jerusalem. 

13Bind the chariots to the swift 
steeds, O inhabitant of Lachish; 

She was the beginning of sin to the 
daughter of Zion; 

For the transgressions of Israel are 
found in thee. 

14Therefore shalt thou give a parting 
gift to Moresheth-gath; 

The houses of Achzib shall be a 
deceitful thing unto the kings of 
Israel. 

15I will yet bring unto thee, O 
inhabitant of Mareshah, him that 
shall possess thee; 

The glory of Israel shall come even 
unto Adullam. 

16Make thee bald, and poll thee for 
the children of thy delight; 

Enlarge thy baldness as the vulture; 

For they are gone into captivity 
from thee. 

 

Woe to them that devise iniquity 

And work evil upon their beds! 

When the morning is light, they 
execute it, 

Because it is in the power of their 
hand. 

2And they covet fields, and seize 
them; 

And houses, and take them away; 

Thus they oppress a man and his 
house, 

Even a man and his heritage. 

3Therefore thus saith the LORD: 

Behold, against this family do I 
devise an evil, 

From which ye shall not remove 
your necks, 
2 




Neither shall ye walk upright; for it 
shall be an evil time. 

4In that day shall they take up a 
parable against you, 

And lament with a doleful 
lamentation, and say: 

‘We are utterly ruined; 

He changeth the portion of my 
people; 

How doth he remove it from me! 

Instead of restoring our fields, he 
divideth them.’ 

5Therefore thou shalt have none that 
shall cast the line by lot 

In the congregation of the LORD. 

6’Preach ye not’, they preach; 

‘They shall not preach of these 
things, 

That they shall not take shame.’ 

7Do I change, O house of Jacob? 

Is the spirit of the LORD straitened? 

Are these His doings? 

Do not My words do good to him 
that walketh uprightly? 

 

8But of late My people is risen up as 
an enemy; 

With the garment ye strip also the 
mantle 

From them that pass by securely, so 
that they are as men returning 
from war. 

9The women of My people ye cast 
out from their pleasant houses; 

From their young children ye take 
away My glory for ever. 

10Arise ye, and depart; for this is not 
your resting-place; 

Because of the uncleanness thereof, 
it shall destroy you, even with a 
sore destruction. 

 

11If a man walking in wind and 
falsehood do lie: 

‘I will preach unto thee of wine and 
of strong drink’; 

He shall even be the preacher of this 
people. 

 

12I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all 
of thee; 

I will surely gather the remnant of 
Israel; 

I will render them all as sheep in a 
fold; 

As a flock in the midst of their 
pasture; 

They shall make great noise by 
reason of the multitude of men. 

13The breaker is gone up before 
them; 

They have broken forth and passed 
on, 

By the gate, and are gone out 
thereat; 

And their king is passed on before 
them, 

And the LORD at the head of them. 

 

And I said: 

Hear, I pray you, ye heads of 
Jacob, 

And rulers of the house of Israel: 

Is it not for you to know justice? 

2Who hate the good, and love the 
evil; 

Who rob their skin from off them, 
3 




And their flesh from off their bones; 

3Who also eat the flesh of my 
people, 

And flay their skin from off them, 

And break their bones; 

Yea, they chop them in pieces, as 
that which is in the pot, 

And as flesh within the caldron. 

4Then shall they cry unto the LORD, 

But He will not answer them; 

Yea, He will hide His face from 
them at that time, 

According as they have wrought 
evil in their doings. 

 

5Thus saith the LORD concerning the 
prophets that make my people to 
err; 

That cry: ‘Peace’, when their teeth 
have any thing to bite; 

And whoso putteth not into their 
mouths, 

They even prepare war against him: 

6Therefore it shall be night unto 
you, that ye shall have no vision; 

And it shall be dark unto you, that 
ye shall not divine; 

And the sun shall go down upon the 
prophets, 

And the day shall be black over 
them. 

7And the seers shall be put to shame, 
and the diviners confounded; 

Yea, they shall all cover their upper 
lips; 

For there shall be no answer of God. 

8But I truly am full of power by the 
spirit of the LORD, 

And of justice, and of might, to 
declare unto Jacob his 
transgression, 

And to Israel his sin. 

 

9Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of 
the house of Jacob, 

And rulers of the house of Israel, 

That abhor justice, and pervert all 
equity; 

10That build up Zion with blood, 

And Jerusalem with iniquity. 

11The heads thereof judge for 
reward, 

And the priests thereof teach for 
hire, 

And the prophets thereof divine for 
money; 

Yet will they lean upon the LORD, 
and say: 

‘Is not the LORD in the midst of us? 

No evil shall come upon us’? 

12Therefore shall Zion for your sake 
be plowed as a field, 

And Jerusalem shall become heaps, 

And the mountain of the house as 
the high places of a forest. 

 

But in the end of days it shall 
come to pass, 

That the mountain of the LORD’S 
house shall be established as the 
top of the mountains, 

And it shall be exalted above the 
hills; 

And peoples shall flow unto it. 

2And many nations shall go and say: 

‘Come ye, and let us go up to the 
mountain of the LORD, 
4 




And to the house of the God of 
Jacob; 

And He will teach us of His ways, 

And we will walk in His paths’; 

For out of Zion shall go forth the 
law, 

And the word of the LORD from 
Jerusalem. 

3And He shall judge between many 
peoples, 

And shall decide concerning mighty 
nations afar off; 

And they shall beat their swords into 
plowshares, 

And their spears into pruninghooks; 

Nation shall not lift up sword 
against nation, 

Neither shall they learn war any 
more. 

4But they shall sit every man under 
his vine and under his fig-tree; 

And none shall make them afraid; 

For the mouth of the LORD of hosts 
hath spoken. 

 

5For let all the peoples walk each 
one in the name of its god, 

But we will walk in the name of the 
LORD our God for ever and ever. 

 

6In that day, saith the LORD, will I 
assemble her that halteth, 

And I will gather her that is driven 
away, 

And her that I have afflicted; 

7And I will make her that halted a 
remnant, 

And her that was cast far off a 
mighty nation; 

And the LORD shall reign over them 
in mount Zion from thenceforth 
even for ever. 

 

8And thou, Migdal-eder, the hill of 
the daughter of Zion, 

Unto thee shall it come; 

Yea, the former dominion shall 
come, 

The kingdom of the daughter of 
Jerusalem. 

9Now why dost thou cry out aloud? 
Is there no King in thee, 

Is thy Counsellor perished, 

That pangs have taken hold of thee 
as of a woman in travail? 

10Be in pain, and labour to bring 
forth, O daughter of Zion, 

Like a woman in travail; 

For now shalt thou go forth out of 
the city, 

And shalt dwell in the field, 

And shalt come even unto Babylon; 

There shalt thou be rescued; 

There shall the LORD redeem thee 
from the hand of thine enemies. 

 

11And now many nations are 
assembled against thee, 

That say: ‘Let her be defiled, and let 
our eye gaze upon Zion.’ 

12But they know not the thoughts of 
the LORD, 

Neither understand they His 
counsel; 

For He hath gathered them as the 
sheaves to the threshing-floor. 

13Arise and thresh, O daughter of 
Zion; 


For I will make thy horn iron, 

And I will make thy hoofs brass; 

And thou shalt beat in pieces many 
peoples; 

And thou shalt devote their gain 
unto the LORD, 

And their substance unto the Lord of 
the whole earth. 

 

14Now shalt thou gather thyself in 
troops, O daughter of troops; 

They have laid siege against us; 

They smite the judge of Israel with a 
rod upon the cheek. 

 

But thou, Beth-lehem Ephrathah, 
Which art little to be among the 
thousands of Judah, 

Out of thee shall one come forth 
unto Me that is to be ruler in 
Israel; 

Whose goings forth are from of old, 
from ancient days. 

2Therefore will He give them up, 

Until the time that she who 
travaileth hath brought forth; 

Then the residue of his brethren 
shall return with the children of 
Israel. 

3And he shall stand, and shall feed 
his flock in the strength of the 
LORD, 

In the majesty of the name of the 
LORD his God; 

And they shall abide, for then shall 
he be great unto the ends of the 
earth. 

4And this shall be peace: 

When the Assyrian shall come into 
our land, 

And when he shall tread in our 
palaces, 

Then shall we raise against him 
seven shepherds, 

And eight princes among men. 

5And they shall waste the land of 
Assyria with the sword, 

And the land of Nimrod with the 
keen-edged sword; 

And he shall deliver us from the 
Assyrian, when he cometh into 
our land, 

And when he treadeth within our 
border. 

 

6And the remnant of Jacob shall be 
in the midst of many peoples, 

As dew from the LORD, as showers 
upon the grass, 

That are not looked for from man, 

Nor awaited at the hands of the sons 
of men. 

7And the remnant of Jacob shall be 
among the nations, in the midst of 
many peoples, 

As a lion among the beasts of the 
forest, 

As a young lion among the flocks of 
sheep, 

Who, if he go through, treadeth 
down and teareth in pieces, 

And there is none to deliver. 

8Let Thy hand be lifted up above 
Thine adversaries, 

And let all Thine enemies be cut off. 

 
5 




9And it shall come to pass in that 
day, saith the LORD, 

That I will cut off thy horses out of 
the midst of thee, 

And will destroy thy chariots; 

10And I will cut off the cities of thy 
land, 

And will throw down all thy 
strongholds; 

11And I will cut off witchcrafts out 
of thy hand; 

And thou shalt have no more 
soothsayers; 

12And I will cut off thy graven 
images and thy pillars out of the 
midst of thee; 

And thou shalt no more worship the 
work of thy hands. 

13 And I will pluck up thy Asherim 
out of the midst of thee; 

And I will destroy thine enemies. 

14And I will execute vengeance in 
anger and fury upon the nations, 

Because they hearkened not. 

 

Hear ye now what the LORD saith: 
Arise, contend thou before the 
mountains, 

And let the hills hear thy voice. 

2Hear, O ye mountains, the LORD’S 
controversy, 

And ye enduring rocks, the 
foundations of the earth; 

For the LORD hath a controversy 
with His people, 

And He will plead with Israel. 

3O My people, what have I done 
unto thee? 

And wherein have I wearied thee? 

Testify against Me. 

4For I brought thee up out of the 
land of Egypt, 

And redeemed thee out of the house 
of bondage, 

And I sent before thee Moses, 
Aaron, and Miriam. 

5O My people, remember now what 
Balak king of Moab devised, 

And what Balaam the son of Beor 
answered him; 

From Shittim unto Gilgal, 

That ye may know the righteous acts 
of the LORD. 

6’Wherewith shall I come before the 
LORD, 

And bow myself before God on 
high? 

Shall I come before Him with burnt-
offerings, 

With calves of a year old? 

7Will the LORD be pleased with 
thousands of rams, 

With ten thousands of rivers of oil? 

Shall I give my first-born for my 
transgression, 

The fruit of my body for the sin of 
my soul?’ 

8It hath been told thee, O man, what 
is good, 

And what the LORD doth require of 
thee: 

Only to do justly, and to love mercy, 
and to walk humbly with thy 
God. 

 

9Hark! the LORD crieth unto the 
city— 
6 




And it is wisdom to have regard for 
Thy name— 

Hear ye the rod, and who hath 
appointed it. 

10Are there yet the treasures of 
wickedness in the house of the 
wicked, 

And the scant measure that is 
abominable? 

11’Shall I be pure with wicked 
balances, 

And with a bag of deceitful 
weights?’ 

12For the rich men thereof are full of 
violence, 

And the inhabitants thereof have 
spoken lies, 

And their tongue is deceitful in their 
mouth. 

13Therefore I also do smite thee with 
a grievous wound; 

I do make thee desolate because of 
thy sins. 

14Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; 

And thy sickness shall be in thine 
inward parts; 

And thou shalt conceive, but shalt 
not bring forth; 

And whomsoever thou bringest 
forth will I give up to the sword. 

15Thou shalt sow, but shalt not reap; 

Thou shalt tread the olives, but shalt 
not anoint thee with oil; 

And the vintage, but shalt not drink 
wine. 

16For the statutes of Omri are kept, 

And all the works of the house of 
Ahab, 

And ye walk in their counsels; 

That I may make thee an 
astonishment, 

And the inhabitants thereof a 
hissing; 

And ye shall bear the reproach of 
My people. 

 

Woe is me! for I am as the last of 
the summer fruits, 

As the grape gleanings of the 
vintage; 

There is no cluster to eat; 

Nor first-ripe fig which my soul 
desireth. 

2The godly man is perished out of 
the earth, 

And the upright among men is no 
more; 

They all lie in wait for blood; 

They hunt every man his brother 
with a net. 

3Their hands are upon that which is 
evil to do it diligently; 

The prince asketh, and the judge is 
ready for a reward; 

And the great man, he uttereth the 
evil desire of his soul; 

Thus they weave it together. 

4The best of them is as a brier; 

The most upright is worse than a 
thorn hedge; 

The day of thy watchmen, even thy 
visitation, is come; 

Now shall be their perplexity. 

5Trust ye not in a friend, 

Put ye not confidence in a familiar 
friend; 

Keep the doors of thy mouth from 
her that lieth in thy bosom. 
7 




6For the son dishonoureth the father, 

The daughter riseth up against her 
mother, 

The daughter-in-law against her 
mother-in-law; 

A man’s enemies are the men of his 
own house. 

 

7’But as for me, I will look unto the 
LORD; 

I will wait for the God of my 
salvation; 

My God will hear me. 

8Rejoice not against me, O mine 
enemy; 

Though I am fallen, I shall arise; 

Though I sit in darkness, the LORD is 
a light unto me. 

9I will bear the indignation of the 
LORD, 

Because I have sinned against Him; 

Until He plead my cause, and 
execute judgment for me; 

He will bring me forth to the light, 

And I shall behold His 
righteousness. 

10Then mine enemy shall see it, and 
shame shall cover her; 

Who said unto me: Where is the 
LORD thy God? 

Mine eyes shall gaze upon her; 

Now shall she be trodden down as 
the mire of the streets.’ 

11’The day for building thy walls, 
even that day, shall be far 
removed.’ 

12There shall be a day when they 
shall come unto thee, 

From Assyria even to the cities of 
Egypt, 

And from Egypt even to the River, 

And from sea to sea, and from 
mountain to mountain. 

13And the land shall be desolate for 
them that dwell therein, 

Because of the fruit of their doings. 

 

14Tend Thy people with Thy staff, 
the flock of Thy heritage, 

That dwell solitarily, as a forest in 
the midst of the fruitful field; 

Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, 
as in the days of old. 

15’As in the days of thy coming forth 
out of the land of Egypt 

Will I show unto him marvellous 
things.’ 

16The nations shall see and be put to 
shame for all their might; 

They shall lay their hand upon their 
mouth, 

Their ears shall be deaf. 

17They shall lick the dust like a 
serpent; 

Like crawling things of the earth 
they shall come trembling out of 
their close places; 

They shall come with fear unto the 
LORD our God, 

And shall be afraid because of Thee. 

18Who is a God like unto Thee, that 
pardoneth the iniquity, 

And passeth by the transgression of 
the remnant of His heritage? 

He retaineth not His anger for ever, 

Because He delighteth in mercy. 


19He will again have compassion 
upon us; 

He will subdue our iniquities; 

And Thou wilt cast all their sins into 
the depths of the sea. 

20Thou wilt show faithfulness to 
Jacob, mercy to Abraham, 

As Thou hast sworn unto our fathers 
from the days of old. 

 

 

 

.... 

NAHUM 

 

The burden of Nineveh. The book 
of the vision of Nahum the 
Elkoshite. 

2The LORD is a jealous and avenging 
God, 

The LORD avengeth and is full of 
wrath; 

The LORD taketh vengeance on His 
adversaries, 

And He reserveth wrath for His 
enemies. 

3The LORD is long-suffering, and 
great in power, 

And will by no means clear the 
guilty; 

The LORD, in the whirlwind and in 
the storm is His way, 

And the clouds are the dust of His 
feet. 

4He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it 
dry, 

And drieth up all the rivers; 

Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, 

And the flower of Lebanon 
languisheth. 

5The mountains quake at Him, 

And the hills melt; 

And the earth is upheaved at His 
presence, 

Yea, the world, and all that dwell 
therein. 

6Who can stand before His 
indignation? 

And who can abide in the fierceness 
of His anger? 

His fury is poured out like fire, 

And the rocks are broken asunder 
before Him. 

7The LORD is good, 

A stronghold in the day of trouble; 

And He knoweth them that take 
refuge in Him. 

8But with an overrunning flood 

He will make a full end of the place 
thereof, 

And darkness shall pursue His 
enemies. 

9What do ye devise against the 
LORD? 

He will make a full end; 

Trouble shall not rise up the second 
time. 
1 




10For though they be like tangled 
thorns, 

And be drunken according to their 
drink, 

They shall be devoured as stubble 
fully dry. 

11Out of thee came he forth, 

That deviseth evil against the LORD, 

That counselleth wickedness. 

12Thus saith the LORD: 

Though they be in full strength, and 
likewise many, 

Even so shall they be cut down, and 
he shall pass away; 

And though I have afflicted thee, I 
will afflict thee no more. 

13And now will I break his yoke 
from off thee, 

And will burst thy bonds in sunder. 

14And the LORD hath given 
commandment concerning thee, 

That no more of thy name be sown; 

Out of the house of thy god will I 
cut off 

The graven image and the molten 
image; 

I will make thy grave; for thou art 
become worthless. 

 

Behold upon the mountains the 
feet of him 

That bringeth good tidings, that 
announceth peace! 

Keep thy feasts, O Judah, 

Perform thy vows; 

For the wicked one shall no more 
pass through thee; 

He is utterly cut off. 

 

2A maul is come up before thy face; 

Guard the defences, 

Watch the way, make thy loins 
strong, 

Fortify thy power mightily!— 

3For the LORD restoreth the pride of 
Jacob, 

As the pride of Israel; 

For the emptiers have emptied them 
out, 

And marred their vine-branches.— 

4The shield of his mighty men is 
made red, 

The valiant men are in scarlet; 

The chariots are fire of steel in the 
day of his preparation, 

And the cypress spears are made to 
quiver. 

5The chariots rush madly in the 
streets, 

They jostle one against another in 
the broad places; 

The appearance of them is like 
torches, 

They run to and fro like the 
lightnings. 

 

6He bethinketh himself of his 
worthies; 

They stumble in their march; 

They make haste to the wall thereof, 

And the mantelet is prepared. 

7The gates of the rivers are opened, 

And the palace is dissolved. 

8And the queen is uncovered, she is 
carried away, 

And her handmaids moan as with 
the voice of doves, 

Tabering upon their breasts. 
2 




 

9But Nineveh hath been from of old 
like a pool of water; 

Yet they flee away; 

‘Stand, stand’; 

But none looketh back. 

10Take ye the spoil of silver, take the 
spoil of gold; 

For there is no end of the store, 

Rich with all precious vessels. 

11She is empty, and void, and waste; 

And the heart melteth, and the knees 
smite together, 

And convulsion is in all loins, 

And the faces of them all have 
gathered blackness. 

 

12Where is the den of the lions, 

Which was the feeding-place of the 
young lions, 

Where the lion and the lioness 
walked, and the lion’s whelp, 

And none made them afraid? 

13The lion did tear in pieces enough 
for his whelps, 

And strangled for his lionesses, 

And filled his caves with prey, 

And his dens with ravin. 

14Behold, I am against thee, saith the 
LORD of hosts, 

And I will burn her chariots in the 
smoke, 

And the sword shall devour thy 
young lions; 

And I will cut off thy prey from the 
earth, 

And the voice of thy messengers 
shall no more be heard. 

 

Woe to the bloody city! 

It is all full of lies and rapine; 

The prey departeth not. 

2Hark! the whip, and hark! the 
rattling of the wheels; 

And prancing horses, and bounding 
chariots; 

3The horseman charging, 

And the flashing sword, and the 
glittering spear; 

And a multitude of slain, and a heap 
of carcases; 

And there is no end of the corpses, 
and they stumble upon their 
corpses; 

4Because of the multitude of the 
harlotries of the well-favoured 
harlot, 

The mistress of witchcrafts, 

That selleth nations through her 
harlotries, 

And families through her 
witchcrafts. 

5Behold, I am against thee, saith the 
LORD of hosts, 

And I will uncover thy skirts upon 
thy face, 

And I will shew the nations thy 
nakedness, 

And the kingdoms thy shame. 

6And I will cast detestable things 
upon thee, and make thee vile, 

And will make thee as dung. 

7And it shall come to pass, that all 
they that look upon thee 

Shall flee from thee, 

And say: ‘Nineveh is laid waste; 

Who will bemoan her? 
3 




Whence shall I seek comforters for 
thee?’ 

8Art thou better than No-amon, 

That was situate among the rivers, 

That had the waters round about her; 

Whose rampart was the sea, and of 
the sea her wall? 

9Ethiopia and Egypt were thy 
strength, and it was infinite; 

Put and Lubim were thy helpers. 

10Yet was she carried away, 

She went into captivity; 

Her young children also were 
dashed in pieces 

At the head of all the streets; 

And they cast lots for her 
honourable men, 

And all her great men were bound in 
chains. 

11Thou also shalt be drunken, 

Thou shalt swoon; 

Thou also shalt seek a refuge 

Because of the enemy. 

 

12All thy fortresses shall be like fig-
trees with the first-ripe figs: 

If they be shaken, they fall into the 
mouth of the eater. 

13Behold, thy people in the midst of 
thee are women; 

The gates of thy land are set wide 
open unto thine enemies; 

The fire hath devoured thy bars. 

14Draw thee water for the siege, 

Strengthen thy fortresses; 

Go into the clay, and tread the 
mortar, 

Lay hold of the brickmould. 

15There shall the fire devour thee; 

The sword shall cut thee off, 

It shall devour thee like the canker-
worm; 

Make thyself many as the canker-
worm, 

Make thyself many as the locusts. 

16Thou hast multiplied thy 
merchants 

Above the stars of heaven; 

The canker-worm spreadeth itself, 
and flieth away. 

17Thy crowned are as the locusts, 

And thy marshals as the swarms of 
grasshoppers, 

Which camp in the walls in the cold 
day, 

But when the sun ariseth they flee 
away, 

And their place is not known where 
they are. 

18Thy shepherds slumber, O king of 
Assyria, 

Thy worthies are at rest; 

Thy people are scattered upon the 
mountains, 

And there is none to gather them. 

19There is no assuaging of thy hurt, 

Thy wound is grievous; 

All that hear the report of thee 

Clap the hands over thee; 

For upon whom hath not thy 
wickedness passed continually? 




..... 

HABAKKUK 

 

THE burden which Habakkuk the 
prophet did see. 

 

2How long, O LORD, shall I cry, 

And Thou wilt not hear? 

I cry out unto Thee of violence, 

And Thou wilt not save. 

3Why dost Thou show me iniquity, 

And beholdest mischief? 

And why are spoiling and violence 
before me? 

So that there is strife, and contention 
ariseth. 

4Therefore the law is slacked, 

And right doth never go forth; 

For the wicked doth beset the 
righteous; 

Therefore right goeth forth 
perverted. 

 

5Look ye among the nations, and 
behold, 

And wonder marvellously; 

For, behold, a work shall be 
wrought in your days, 

Which ye will not believe though it 
be told you. 

6For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, 

That bitter and impetuous nation, 

That march through the breadth of 
the earth, 

To possess dwelling-places that are 
not theirs. 

7They are terrible and dreadful; 

Their law and their majesty proceed 
from themselves. 

8Their horses also are swifter than 
leopards, 

And are more fierce than the wolves 
of the desert; 

And their horsemen spread 
themselves; 

Yea, their horsemen come from far, 

They fly as a vulture that hasteth to 
devour. 

9They come all of them for violence; 

Their faces are set eagerly as the 
east wind; 

And they gather captives as the 
sand. 

10And they scoff at kings, 

And princes are a derision unto 
them; 

They deride every stronghold, 

For they heap up earth, and take it. 

11Then their spirit doth pass over 
and transgress, 

And they become guilty: 

Even they who impute their might 
unto their god. 

 

12Art not Thou from everlasting, 

O LORD my God, my Holy One? 

We shall not die. 

O LORD, Thou hast ordained them 
for judgment, 

And Thou, O Rock, hast established 
them for correction. 
1 




13Thou that art of eyes too pure to 
behold evil, 

And that canst not look on mischief, 

Wherefore lookest Thou, when they 
deal treacherously, 

And holdest Thy peace, when the 
wicked swalloweth up 

The man that is more righteous than 
he; 

14And makest men as the fishes of 
the sea, 

As the creeping things, that have no 
ruler over them? 

15They take up all of them with the 
angle, 

They catch them in their net, 

And gather them in their drag; 

Therefore they rejoice and exult. 

16Therefore they sacrifice unto their 
net, 

And offer unto their drag; 

Because by them their portion is fat, 

And their food plenteous. 

17Shall they therefore empty their 
net, 

And not spare to slay the nations 
continually? 

 

I will stand upon my watch, 

And set me upon the tower, 

And will look out to see what He 
will speak by me, 

And what I shall answer when I am 
reproved. 

2And the LORD answered me, and 
said: 

‘Write the vision, and make it plain 
upon tables, 

That a man may read it swiftly. 

3For the vision is yet for the 
appointed time, 

And it declareth of the end, and doth 
not lie; 

Though it tarry, wait for it; 

Because it will surely come, it will 
not delay.’ 

 

4Behold, his soul is puffed up, it is 
not upright in him; 

But the righteous shall live by his 
faith. 

5Yea, moreover, wine is a 
treacherous dealer; 

The haughty man abideth not; 

He who enlargeth his desire as the 
nether-world, 

And is as death, and cannot be 
satisfied, 

But gathereth unto him all nations, 

And heapeth unto him all peoples. 

6Shall not all these take up a parable 
against him, 

And a taunting riddle against him, 

And say: ‘Woe to him that 
increaseth that which is not his! 

How long? and that ladeth himself 
with many pledges! ’ 

7Shall they not rise up suddenly that 
shall exact interest of thee, 

And awake that shall violently 
shake thee, 

And thou shalt be for booties unto 
them? 

8Because thou hast spoiled many 
nations, 

All the remnant of the peoples shall 
spoil thee; 
2 




Because of men’s blood, and for the 
violence done to the land, 

To the city and to all that dwell 
therein. 

 

9Woe to him that gaineth evil gains 
for his house, 

That he may set his nest on high, 

That he may be delivered from the 
power of evil! 

10Thou hast devised shame to thy 
house, 

By cutting off many peoples, 

And hast forfeited thy life. 

11For the stone shall cry out of the 
wall, 

And the beam out of the timber shall 
answer it. 

 

12Woe to him that buildeth a town 
with blood, 

And establisheth a city by iniquity! 

13Behold, is it not of the LORD of 
hosts 

That the peoples labour for the fire, 

And the nations weary themselves 
for vanity? 

14For the earth shall be filled 

With the knowledge of the glory of 
the LORD, 

As the waters cover the sea. 

 

15Woe unto him that giveth his 
neighbour drink, 

That puttest thy venom thereto, and 
makest him drunken also, 

That thou mayest look on their 
nakedness! 

16Thou art filled with shame instead 
of glory, 

Drink thou also, and be uncovered; 

The cup of the LORD’S right hand 
shall be turned unto thee, 

And filthiness shall be upon thy 
glory. 

17For the violence done to Lebanon 
shall cover thee, 

And the destruction of the beasts, 
which made them afraid; 

Because of men’s blood, and for the 
violence done to the land, 

To the city and to all that dwell 
therein. 

 

18What profiteth the graven image, 

That the maker thereof hath graven 
it, 

Even the molten image, and the 
teacher of lies; 

That the maker of his work trusteth 
therein, 

To make dumb idols? 

19Woe unto him that saith to the 
wood: ‘Awake’, 

To the dumb stone: ‘Arise! ’ 

Can this teach? 

Behold, it is overlaid with gold and 
silver, 

And there is no breath at all in the 
midst of it. 

20But the LORD is in His holy temple; 

Let all the earth keep silence before 
Him. 

 

A prayer of Habakkuk the 
prophet. Upon Shigionoth. 

 
3 




2O LORD, I have heard the report of 
Thee, and am afraid; 

O LORD, revive Thy work in the 
midst of the years, 

In the midst of the years make it 
known; 

In wrath remember compassion. 

3God cometh from Teman, 

And the Holy One from mount 
Paran. Selah 

His glory covereth the heavens, 

And the earth is full of His praise. 

4And a brightness appeareth as the 
light; 

Rays hath He at His side; 

And there is the hiding of His 
power. 

5Before him goeth the pestilence, 

And fiery bolts go forth at His feet. 

6He standeth, and shaketh the earth, 

He beholdeth, and maketh the 
nations to tremble; 

And the everlasting mountains are 
dashed in pieces, 

The ancient hills do bow; 

His goings are as of old. 

7I see the tents of Cushan in 
affliction; 

The curtains of the land of Midian 
do tremble. 

8Is it, O LORD, that against the rivers, 

Is it that Thine anger is kindled 
against the rivers, 

Or Thy wrath against the sea? 

That Thou dost ride upon Thy 
horses, 

Upon Thy chariots of victory? 

9Thy bow is made quite bare; 

Sworn are the rods of the word. 

Selah. 

Thou dost cleave the earth with 
rivers. 

10The mountains have seen Thee, 
and they tremble; 

The tempest of waters floweth over; 
the deep uttereth its voice, 

And lifteth up its hands on high. 

11The sun and moon stand still in 
their habitation; 

At the light of Thine arrows as they 
go, 

At the shining of Thy glittering 
spear. 

12Thou marchest through the earth in 
indignation, 

Thou threshest the nations in anger. 

13Thou art come forth for the 
deliverance of Thy people, 

For the deliverance of Thine 
anointed; 

Thou woundest the head out of the 
house of the wicked, 

Uncovering the foundation even 

unto the neck. Selah 

14Thou hast stricken through with 
his own rods the head of his 
rulers, 

That come as a whirlwind to scatter 
me; 

Whose rejoicing is as to devour the 
poor secretly. 

15Thou hast trodden the sea with 
Thy horses, 

The foaming of mighty waters. 

16When I heard, mine inward parts 
trembled, 

My lips quivered at the voice; 

Rottenness entereth into my bones, 


And I tremble where I stand; 

That I should wait for the day of 
trouble, 

When he cometh up against the 
people that he invadeth. 

17For though the fig-tree shall not 
blossom, 

Neither shall fruit be in the vines; 

The labour of the olive shall fail, 

And the fields shall yield no food; 

The flock shall be cut off from the 
fold, 

And there shall be no herd in the 
stalls; 

18Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, 

I will exult in the God of my 
salvation. 

19God, the Lord, is my strength, 

And He maketh my feet like 
hinds’feet, 

And He maketh me to walk upon 
my high places. 

 

For the Leader. With my string-
music. 

 

..... 

ZEPHANIAH 

 

The word of the LORD which came 
unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, 
the son of Gedaliah, the son of 
Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the 
days of Josiah the son of Amon, king 
of Judah. 

 

2I will utterly consume all things 
from off the face of the earth, 

Saith the LORD. 

3I will consume man and beast, 

I will consume the fowls of the 
heaven, and the fishes of the sea, 

And the stumblingblocks with the 
wicked; 

And I will cut off man from off the 
face of the earth, 

Saith the LORD. 

4And I will stretch out My hand 
upon Judah, 

And upon all the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; 

And I will cut off the remnant of 
Baal from this place, 

And the name of the idolatrous 
priests with the priests; 

5And them that worship the host of 
heaven upon the housetops; 

And them that worship, that swear 
to the LORD 

And swear by Malcam; 

6Them also that are turned back 
from following the LORD; 

And those that have not sought the 
LORD, nor inquired after Him. 

 
1 




7Hold thy peace at the presence of 
the Lord GOD; 

For the day of the LORD is at hand, 

For the LORD hath prepared a 
sacrifice, 

He hath consecrated His guests. 

8And it shall come to pass in the day 
of the LORD’S sacrifice, 

That I will punish the princes, and 
the king’s sons, 

And all such as are clothed with 
foreign apparel. 

9In the same day also will I punish 
all those that leap over the 
threshold, 

That fill their master’s house with 
violence and deceit. 

 

10And in that day, saith the LORD, 
Hark! a cry from the fish gate, 

And a wailing from the second 
quarter, 

And a great crashing from the hills. 

11Wail, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, 

For all the merchant people are 
undone; 

All they that were laden with silver 
are cut off. 

12And it shall come to pass at that 
time, 

That I will search Jerusalem with 
lamps; 

And I will punish the men that are 
settled on their lees, 

That say in their heart: 

‘The LORD will not do good, neither 
will He do evil.’ 

13Therefore their wealth shall 
become a booty, 

And their houses a desolation; 

Yea, they shall build houses, but 
shall not inhabit them, 

And they shall plant vineyards, but 
shall not drink the wine thereof. 

14The great day of the LORD is near, 

It is near and hasteth greatly, 

Even the voice of the day of the 
LORD, 

Wherein the mighty man crieth 
bitterly. 

15That day is a day of wrath, 

A day of trouble and distress, 

A day of wasteness and desolation, 

A day of darkness and gloominess, 

A day of clouds and thick darkness, 

16A day of the horn and alarm, 

Against the fortified cities, and 
against the high towers. 

17And I will bring distress upon 
men, 

That they shall walk like the blind, 

Because they have sinned against 
the LORD; 

And their blood shall be poured out 
as dust, 

And their flesh as dung. 

18Neither their silver nor their gold 

Shall be able to deliver them 

In the day of the LORD’S wrath; 

But the whole earth shall be 
devoured by the fire of His 
jealousy; 

For He will make and end, yea, a 
terrible end, 

Of all them that dwell in the earth. 

 

Gather yourselves together, yea, 
gather together, 2 




O shameless nation; 

2Before the decree bring forth 

The day when one passeth as the 
chaff, 

Before the fierce anger of the LORD 
come upon you, 

Before the day of the LORD’S anger 
come upon you. 

3Seek ye the LORD, all ye humble of 
the earth, 

That have executed His ordinance; 

Seek righteousness, seek humility. 

It may be ye shall be hid in the day 
of the LORD’S anger. 

4For Gaza shall be forsaken, 

And Ashkelon a desolation; 

They shall drive out Ashdod at the 
noonday, 

And Ekron shall be rooted up. 

5Woe unto the inhabitants of the 
sea-coast, 

The nation of the Cherethites! 

The word of the LORD is against you, 

O Canaan, the land of the 
Philistines; 

I will even destroy thee, that there 
shall be no inhabitant. 

6And the sea-coast shall be pastures, 

Even meadows for shepherds, and 
folds for flocks. 

7And it shall be a portion for the 
remnant of the house of Judah, 

Whereon they shall feed; 

In the houses of Ashkelon shall they 
lie down in the evening; 

For the LORD their God will 
remember them, 

And turn their captivity. 

 

8I have heard the taunt of Moab, 

And the revilings of the children of 
Ammon, 

Wherewith they have taunted My 
people, 

And spoken boastfully concerning 
their border. 

9Therefore as I live, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, the God of 
Israel: 

Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, 

And the children of Ammon as 
Gomorrah, 

Even the breeding-place of nettles, 
and saltpits, 

And a desolation, for ever; 

The residue of My people shall spoil 
them, 

And the remnant of My nation shall 
inherit them. 

10This shall they have for their pride, 

Because they have taunted and 
spoken boastfully 

Against the people of the LORD of 
hosts. 

11The LORD will be terrible unto 
them; 

For He will famish all the gods of 
the earth; 

Then shall all the isles of the nations 
worship Him, 

Every one from its place. 

12Ye Ethiopians also, 

Ye shall be slain by My sword. 

 

13And He will stretch out His hand 
against the north, 

And destroy Assyria; 


And will make Nineveh a 
desolation, 

And dry like the wilderness. 

14And all beasts of every kind 

Shall lie down in the midst of her in 
herds; 

Both the pelican and the bittern 

Shall lodge in the capitals thereof; 

Voices shall sing in the windows; 

Desolation shall be in the posts; 

For the cedar-work thereof shall be 
uncovered. 

15This is the joyous city 

That dwelt without care, 

That said in her heart: 

‘I am, and there is none else beside 
me’; 

How is she become a desolation, 

A place for beasts to lie down in! 

Every one that passeth by her 

Shall hiss, and wag his hand. 

 

Woe to her that is filthy and 
polluted, 

To the oppressing city! 

2She hearkened not the voice, 

She received not correction; 

She trusted not in the LORD, 

She drew not near to her God. 

3Her princes in the midst of her are 
roaring lions; 

Her judges are wolves of the desert, 

They leave not a bone for the 
morrow. 

4Her prophets are wanton 

And treacherous persons; 

Her priests have profaned that 
which is holy, 

They have done violence to the law. 

5The LORD who is righteous is in the 
midst of her, 

He will not do unrighteousness; 

Every morning doth He bring His 
right to light, 

It faileth not; 

But the unrighteous knoweth no 
shame. 

6I have cut off nations, 

Their corners are desolate; 

I have made their streets waste, 

So that none passeth by; 

Their cities are destroyed, so that 
there is no man, 

So that there is no inhabitant. 

7I said: ‘Surely thou wilt fear Me, 

Thou wilt receive correction; 

So her dwelling shall not be cut off, 

Despite all that I have visited upon 
her’; 

But they betimes corrupted all their 
doings. 

 

8Therefore wait ye for Me, saith the 
LORD, 

Until the day that I rise up to the 
prey; 

For My determination is to gather 
the nations, 

That I may assemble the kingdoms, 

To pour upon them Mine 
indignation, 

Even all My fierce anger; 

For all the earth shall be devoured 

With the fire of My jealousy. 

9For then will I turn to the peoples 

A pure language, 

That they may all call upon the 
name of the LORD, 
3 




To serve Him with one consent. 

10From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia 

Shall they bring My suppliants, 

Even the daughter of My dispersed, 

As Mine offering. 

11In that day shalt thou not be 
ashamed for all thy doings, 

Wherein thou hast transgressed 
against Me; 

For then I will take away out of the 
midst of thee 

Thy proudly exulting ones, 

And thou shalt no more be haughty 

In My holy mountain. 

12And I will leave in the midst of 
thee 

An afflicted and poor people, 

And they shall take refuge in the 
name of the LORD. 

13The remnant of Israel shall not do 
iniquity, 

Nor speak lies, 

Neither shall a deceitful tongue be 
found in their mouth; 

For they shall feed and lie down, 

And none shall make them afraid. 

 

14Sing, O daughter of Zion, 

Shout, O Israel; 

Be glad and rejoice with all the 
heart, 

O daughter of Jerusalem. 

15The LORD hath taken away thy 
judgments, 

He hath cast out thine enemy; 

The King of Israel, even the LORD, is 
in the midst of thee; 

Thou shalt not fear evil any more. 

16In that day it shall be said to 
Jerusalem: 

‘Fear thou not; 

O Zion, let not thy hands be slack. 

17The LORD thy God is in the midst 
of thee, 

A Mighty One who will save; 

He will rejoice over thee with joy, 

He will be silent in His love, 

He will joy over thee with singing.’ 

18I will gather them that are far from 
the appointed season, who are of 
thee, 

That hast borne the burden of 
reproach. 

19Behold, at that time 

I will deal with all them that afflict 
thee; 

And I will save her that is lame, 

And gather her that was driven 
away; 

And I will make them to be a praise 
and a name, 

Whose shame hath been in all the 
earth. 

20At that time will I bring you in, 

And at that time will I gather you; 

For I will make you to be a name 
and a praise 

Among all the peoples of the earth, 

When I turn your captivity before 
your eyes, 

Saith the LORD. 

 


... 

HAGGAI 

 

In the second year of Darius the 
king, in the sixth month, in the 
first day of the month, came the word 
of the LORD by Haggai the prophet 
unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, 
governor of Judah, and to Joshua the 
son of Jehozadak, the high priest, 
saying: 2’Thus speaketh the LORD of 
hosts, saying: This people say: The 
time is not come, the time that the 
LORD’S house should be built.’ 3Then 
came the word of the LORD by Haggai 
the prophet, saying: 4’Is it a time for 
you yourselves to dwell in your cieled 
houses, while this house lieth waste? 
5Now therefore thus saith the LORD of 
hosts: 

Consider your ways. 

6Ye have sown much, and brought 
in little, 

Ye eat, but ye have not enough, 

Ye drink, but ye are not filled with 
drink, 

Ye clothe you, but there is none 
warm; 

And he that earneth wages earneth 
wages 

For a bag with holes. 

7Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 
Consider your ways. 8Go up to the hill-
country, and bring wood, and build the 
house; and I will take pleasure in it, 
and I will be glorified, saith the LORD. 
9Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came 
to little; and when ye brought it home, 
I did blow upon it. Why? saith the 
LORD of hosts. Because of My house 
that lieth waste, while ye run every 
man for his own house. 10Therefore 
over you the heaven hath kept back, so 
that there is no dew, and the earth hath 
kept back her produce. 11And I called 
for a drought upon the land, and upon 
the mountains, and upon the corn, and 
upon the wine, and upon the oil, and 
upon that which the ground bringeth 
forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, 
and upon all the labour of the hands.’ 

12Then Zerubbabel the son of 
Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of 
Jehozadak, the high priest, with all the 
remnant of the people, hearkened unto 
the voice of the LORD their God, and 
unto the words of Haggai the prophet, 
as the LORD their God had sent him; 
and the people did fear before the 
LORD. 13Then spoke Haggai the LORD’S 
messenger in the LORD’S message unto 
the people, saying: ‘I am with you, 
saith the LORD.’ 14And the LORD stirred 
up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of 
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the 
spirit of Joshua the son of Jehozadak, 
the high priest, and the spirit of all the 
remnant of the people; and they came 
and did work in the house of the LORD 
of hosts, their God, 15in the four and 
twentieth day of the month, in the 
1 




sixth month, in the second year of 
Darius the king. 

In the seventh month, in the one 
and twentieth day of the month, 
came the word of the LORD by Haggai 
the prophet, saying: 2’Speak now to 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, 
governor of Judah, and to Joshua the 
son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and 
to the remnant of the people, saying: 
3Who is left among you that saw this 
house in its former glory? and how do 
ye see it now? is not such a one as 
nothing in your eyes? 4Yet now be 
strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the LORD; 
and be strong, O Joshua, son of 
Jehozadak, the high priest; and be 
strong, all ye people of the land, saith 
the LORD, and work; for I am with you, 
saith the LORD of hosts. 5The word that 
I covenanted with you when ye came 
out of Egypt have I established, and 
My spirit abideth among you; fear ye 
not. 6For thus saith the LORD of hosts: 
Yet once, it is a little while, and I will 
shake the heavens, and the earth, and 
the sea, and the dry land; 7and I will 
shake all nations, and the choicest 
things of all nations shall come, and I 
will fill this house with glory, saith the 
LORD of hosts. 8Mine is the silver, and 
Mine the gold, saith the LORD of hosts. 
9The glory of this latter house shall be 
greater than that of the former, saith 
the LORD of hosts; and in this place 
will I give peace, saith the LORD of 
hosts.’ 

10In the four and twentieth day of 
the ninth month, in the second year of 
Darius, came the word of the LORD by 
Haggai the prophet, saying: 11’Thus 
saith the LORD of hosts: Ask now the 
priests for instruction, saying: 12If one 
bear hallowed flesh in the skirt of his 
garment, and with his skirt do touch 
bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or 
any food, shall it be holy?’ And the 
priests answered and said: ‘No.’ 
13Then said Haggai: ‘If one that is 
unclean by a dead body touch any of 
these, shall it be unclean?’ And the 
priests answered and said: ‘It shall be 
unclean.’ 14Then answered Haggai, 
and said: ‘So is this people, and so is 
this nation before me, saith the LORD; 
and so is every work of their hands; 
and that which they offer there is 
unclean. 15And now, I pray you, 
consider from this day and forward—
before a stone was laid upon a stone in 
the temple of the LORD, 16through all 
that time, when one came to a heap of 
twenty measures, there were but ten; 
when one came to the winevat to draw 
out fifty press-measures, there were 
but twenty; 17I smote you with blasting 
and with mildew and with hail in all 
the work of your hands; yet ye turned 
not to Me, saith the LORD—18consider, 
I pray you, from this day and forward, 
from the four and twentieth day of the 
ninth month, even from the day that 
the foundation of the LORD’S temple 
was laid, consider it; 19is the seed yet 
in the barn? yea, the vine, and the fig-
tree, and the pomegranate, and the 
olive-tree hath not brought forth—
from this day will I bless you.’ 
2 




20And the word of the LORD came 
the second time unto Haggai in the 
four and twentieth day of the month, 
saying: 21’Speak to Zerubbabel, 
governor of Judah, saying: I will shake 
the heavens and the earth; 22and I will 
overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and 
I will destroy the strength of the 
kingdoms of the nations; and I will 
overthrow the chariots, and those that 
ride in them; and the horses and their 
riders shall come down, every one by 
the sword of his brother. 23In that day, 
saith the LORD of hosts, will I take 
thee, O Zerubbabel, My servant, the 
son of Shealtiel, saith the LORD, and 
will make thee as a signet; for I have 
chosen thee, saith the LORD of hosts.’ 




..... 

ZECHARIAH 

 

In the eighth month, in the second 
year of Darius, came the word of 
the LORD unto Zechariah the son of 
Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the 
prophet, saying: 2’The LORD hath been 
sore displeased with your fathers. 
3Therefore say thou unto them, Thus 
saith the LORD of hosts: Return unto 
Me, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will 
return unto you, saith the LORD of 
hosts. 4Be ye not as your fathers, unto 
whom the former prophets proclaimed, 
saying: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 
Return ye now from your evil ways, 
and from your evil doings; but they did 
not hear, nor attend unto Me, saith the 
LORD. 5Your fathers, where are they? 
and the prophets, do they live for ever? 
6But My words and My statutes, which 
I commanded My servants the 
prophets, did they not overtake your 
fathers? so that they turned and said: 
Like as the LORD of hosts purposed to 
do unto us, according to our ways, and 
according to our doings, so hath He 
dealt with us.’ 

7Upon the four and twentieth day of 
the eleventh month, which is the 
month Shebat, in the second year of 
Darius, came the word of the LORD 
unto Zechariah the son of Berechiah, 
the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying— 
8I saw in the night, and behold a man 
riding upon a red horse, and he stood 
among the myrtle-trees that were in 
the bottom; and behind him there were 
horses, red, sorrel, and white. 9Then 
said I: ‘O my lord, what are these?’ 
And the angel that spoke with me said 
unto me: ‘I will show thee what these 
are.’ 10And the man that stood among 
the myrtle-trees answered and said: 
‘These are they whom the LORD hath 
sent to walk to and fro through the 
earth.’ 11And they answered the angel 
of the LORD that stood among the 
myrtle-trees, and said: ‘We have 
walked to and fro through the earth, 
and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, 
and is at rest.’ 12Then the angel of the 
LORD spoke and said: ‘O LORD of hosts, 
how long wilt Thou not have 
compassion on Jerusalem and on the 
cities of Judah, against which Thou 
hast had indignation these threescore 
and ten years? 13And the LORD 
answered the angel that spoke with me 
with good words, even comforting 
words—14so the angel that spoke with 
me said unto me: ‘Proclaim thou, 
saying: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I 
am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion 
with a great jealousy; 15and I am very 
sore displeased with the nations that 
are at ease; for I was but a little 
displeased, and they helped for evil. 
16Therefore thus saith the LORD: I 
return to Jerusalem with compassions: 
1 




My house shall be built in it, saith the 
LORD of hosts, and a line shall be 
stretched forth over Jerusalem. 
17Again, proclaim, saying: Thus saith 
the LORD of hosts: My cities shall 
again overflow with prosperity; and 
the LORD shall yet comfort Zion, and 
shall yet choose Jerusalem.’ 

And I lifted up mine eyes, and 
saw, and behold four horns. 2And 
I said unto the angel that spoke with 
me: ‘What are these?’ And he said 
unto me: ‘These are the horns which 
have scattered Judah, Israel, and 
Jerusalem.’ 

3And the LORD showed me four 
craftsmen. 4Then said I: ‘What come 
these to do?’ And he spoke, saying: 
‘These—the horns which scattered 
Judah, so that no man did lift up his 
head—these then are come to frighten 
them, to cast down the horns of the 
nations, which lifted up their horn 
against the land of Judah to scatter it.’ 

5And I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, 
and behold a man with a measuring 
line in his hand. 6Then said I: ‘Whither 
goest thou?’ And he said unto me: ‘To 
measure Jerusalem, to see what is the 
breadth thereof, and what is the length 
thereof.’ 7And, behold, the angel that 
spoke with me went forth, and another 
angel went out to meet him, 8and said 
unto him: ‘Run, speak to this young 
man, saying: ‘Jerusalem shall be 
inhabited without walls for the 
multitude of men and cattle therein. 
9For I, saith the LORD, will be unto her 
a wall of fire round about, and I will 
be the glory in the midst of her. 

10Ho, ho, flee then from the land of 
the north, saith the LORD; for I have 
spread you abroad as the four winds of 
the heaven, saith the LORD. 11Ho, Zion, 
escape, thou that dwellest with the 
daughter of Babylon.’ 

12For thus saith the LORD of hosts 
who sent me after glory unto the 
nations which spoiled you: ‘Surely, he 
that toucheth you toucheth the apple of 
his eye. 13For, behold, I will shake My 
hand over them, and they shall be a 
spoil to those that served them’; and ye 
shall know that the LORD of hosts hath 
sent me. 

14’Sing and rejoice, O daughter of 
Zion; for, lo, I come, and I will dwell 
in the midst of thee, saith the LORD. 
15And many nations shall join 
themselves to the LORD in that day, and 
shall be My people, and I will dwell in 
the midst of thee’; and thou shalt know 
that the LORD of hosts hath sent me 
unto thee. 16 And the LORD shall inherit 
Judah as His portion in the holy land, 
and shall choose Jerusalem again. 17Be 
silent, all flesh, before the LORD; for 
He is aroused out of His holy 
habitation. 

And he showed me Joshua the 
high priest standing before the 
angel of the LORD, and Satan standing 
at his right hand to accuse him. 2And 
the LORD said unto Satan: ‘The LORD 
rebuke thee, O Satan, yea, the LORD 
that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke 
thee; is not this man a brand plucked 
2 

3 




out of the fire?’ 3Now Joshua was 
clothed with filthy garments, and stood 
before the angel. 4And he answered 
and spoke unto those that stood before 
him, saying: ‘Take the filthy garments 
from off him.’ And unto him he said: 
‘Behold, I cause thine iniquity to pass 
from thee, and I will clothe thee with 
robes.’ 5And I said: ‘Let them set a fair 
mitre upon his head.’ So they set a fair 
mitre upon his head, and clothed him 
with garments; and the angel of the 
LORD stood by. 6And the angel of the 
LORD forewarned Joshua, saying: 
7’Thus saith the LORD of hosts: If thou 
wilt walk in My ways, and if thou wilt 
keep My charge, and wilt also judge 
My house, and wilt also keep My 
courts, then I will give thee free access 
among these that stand by. 8Hear now, 
O Joshua the high priest, thou and thy 
fellows that sit before thee; for they 
are men that are a sign; for, behold, I 
will bring forth My servant the Shoot. 
9For behold the stone that I have laid 
before Joshua; upon one stone are 
seven facets; behold, I will engrave the 
graving thereof, saith the LORD of 
hosts: And I will remove the iniquity 
of that land in one day. 10In that day, 
saith the LORD of hosts, shall ye call 
every man his neighbour under the 
vine and under the fig-tree. 

And the angel that spoke with me 
returned, and waked me, as a man 
that is wakened out of his sleep. 2And 
he said unto me: ‘What seest thou?’ 
And I said: ‘I have seen, and behold a 
candlestick all of gold, with a bowl 
upon the top of it, and its seven lamps 
thereon; there are seven pipes, yea, 
seven, to the lamps, which are upon 
the top thereof; 3and two olive-trees by 
it, one upon the right side of the bowl, 
and the other upon the left side 
thereof.’ 4And I answered and spoke to 
the angel that spoke with me, saying: 
‘What are these, my lord?’ 5Then the 
angel that spoke with me answered 
and said unto me: ‘Knowest thou not 
what these are?’ And I said: ‘No, my 
lord.’ 6Then he answered and spoke 
unto me, saying: ‘This is the word of 
the LORD unto Zerubbabel, saying: Not 
by might, nor by power, but by My 
spirit, saith the LORD of hosts. 7Who art 
thou, O great mountain before 
Zerubbabel? thou shalt become a 
plain; and he shall bring forth the top 
stone with shoutings of Grace, grace, 
unto it.’ 

8Moreover the word of the LORD 
came unto me, saying: 9’The hands of 
Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of 
this house; his hands shall also finish 
it; and thou shalt know that the LORD 
of hosts hath sent me unto you. 10For 
who hath despised the day of small 
things? even they shall see with joy the 
plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, 
even these seven, which are the eyes 
of the LORD, that run to and fro through 
the whole earth.’ 

11Then answered I, and said unto 
him: ‘What are these two olive-trees 
upon the right side of the candlestick 
and upon the left side thereof?’ 12And I 
answered the second time, and said 
4 




unto him: ‘What are these two olive 
branches, which are beside the two 
golden spouts, that empty the golden 
oil out of themselves?’ 13And he 
answered me and said: ‘Knowest thou 
not what these are?’ And I said: ‘No, 
my lord.’ 14Then said he: ‘These are 
the two anointed ones, that stand by 
the Lord of the whole earth.’ 

Then again I lifted up mine eyes, 
and saw, and behold a flying roll. 
2And he said unto me: ‘What seest 
thou?’ And I answered: ‘I see a flying 
roll; the length thereof is twenty 
cubits, and the breadth thereof ten 
cubits.’ 3Then said he unto me: ‘This is 
the curse that goeth forth over the face 
of the whole land; for every one that 
stealeth shall be swept away on the 
one side like it; and every one that 
sweareth shall be swept away on the 
other side like it. 4I cause it to go forth, 
saith the LORD of hosts, and it shall 
enter into the house of the thief, and 
into the house of him that sweareth 
falsely by My name; and it shall abide 
in the midst of his house, and shall 
consume it with the timber thereof and 
the stones thereof.’ 

5Then the angel that spoke with me 
went forth, and said unto me: ‘Lift up 
now thine eyes, and see what is this 
that goeth forth.’ 6And I said: ‘What is 
it?’ And he said: ‘This is the measure 
that goeth forth.’ He said moreover: 
‘This is their eye in all the land— 7and, 
behold, there was lifted up a round 
piece of lead—and this is a woman 
sitting in the midst of the measure.’ 
8And he said: ‘This is Wickedness.’ 
And he cast her down into the midst of 
the measure, and he cast the weight of 
lead upon the mouth thereof. 

9Then lifted I up mine eyes, and 
saw, and, behold, there came forth two 
women, and the wind was in their 
wings; for they had wings like the 
wings of a stork; and they lifted up the 
measure between the earth and the 
heaven. 10Then said I to the angel that 
spoke with me: ‘Whither do these bear 
the measure?’ 11And he said unto me: 
‘To build her a house in the land of 
Shinar; and when it is prepared, she 
shall be set there in her own place. 

And again I lifted up mine eyes, 
and saw, and, behold, there came 
four chariots out from between the two 
mountains; and the mountains were 
mountains of brass. 2In the first chariot 
were red horses; and in the second 
chariot black horses; 3and in the third 
chariot white horses; and in the fourth 
chariot grizzled bay horses. 4Then I 
answered and said unto the angel that 
spoke with me: ‘What are these, my 
lord?’ 5And the angel answered and 
said unto me: ‘These chariots go forth 
to the four winds of heaven, after 
presenting themselves before the Lord 
of all the earth. 6That wherein are the 
black horses goeth forth toward the 
north country; and the white went 
forth after them; and the grizzled went 
forth toward the south country; 7and 
the bay went forth’. And they sought 
to go that they might walk to and fro 
through the earth; and he said: ‘Get 
5 

6 




you hence, walk to and fro through the 
earth.’ So they walked to and fro 
through the earth. 8Then cried he upon 
me, and spoke unto me, saying: 
‘Behold, they that go toward the north 
country have eased My spirit in the 
north country.’ 

9And the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying: 10’Take of them of 
the captivity, even of Heldai, of 
Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, that are come 
from Babylon; and come thou the 
same day, and go into the house of 
Josiah the son of Zephaniah; 11yea, 
take silver and gold, and make crowns, 
and set the one upon the head of 
Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high 
priest; 12and speak unto him, saying: 
Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, 
saying: Behold, a man whose name is 
the Shoot, and who shall shoot up out 
of his place, and build the temple of 
the LORD; 13even he shall build the 
temple of the LORD; and he shall bear 
the glory, and shall sit and rule upon 
his throne; and there shall be a priest 
before his throne; and the counsel of 
peace shall be between them both. 
14And the crowns shall be to Helem, 
and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to 
Hen the son of Zephaniah, as a 
memorial in the temple of the LORD. 
15And they that are far off shall come 
and build in the temple of the LORD, 
and ye shall know that the LORD of 
hosts hath sent me unto you. And it 
shall come to pass, if ye will diligently 
hearken to the voice of the LORD your 
God—.’ 

And it came to pass in the fourth 
year of king Darius, that the word 
of the LORD came unto Zechariah in 
the fourth day of the ninth month, even 
in Chislev; 2When Bethel-sarezer, and 
Regem-melech and his men, had sent 
to entreat the favour of the LORD, 3and 
to speak unto the priests of the house 
of the LORD of hosts, and to the 
prophets, saying: ‘Should I weep in the 
fifth month, separating myself, as I 
have done these so many years?’ 
4Then came the word of the LORD of 
hosts unto me, saying: 5’Speak unto all 
the people of the land, and to the 
priests, saying: When ye fasted and 
mourned in the fifth and in the seventh 
month, even these seventy years, did 
ye at all fast unto Me, even to Me? 
6And when ye eat, and when ye did 
drink, are ye not they that eat, and they 
that drink? 7Should ye not hearken to 
the words which the LORD hath 
proclaimed by the former prophets, 
when Jerusalem was inhabited and in 
prosperity, and the cities thereof round 
about her, and the South and the 
Lowland were inhabited?’ 

8And the word of the LORD came 
unto Zechariah, saying: 9’Thus hath 
the LORD of hosts spoken, saying: 
Execute true judgment, and show 
mercy and compassion every man to 
his brother; 10and oppress not the 
widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, 
nor the poor; and let none of you 
devise evil against his brother in your 
heart. 11But they refused to attend, and 
turned a stubborn shoulder, and 
7 




stopped their ears, that they might not 
hear. 12Yea, they made their hearts as 
an adamant stone, lest they should hear 
the law, and the words which the LORD 
of hosts had sent by His spirit by the 
hand of the former prophets; therefore 
came there great wrath from the LORD 
of hosts. 13And it came to pass that, as 
He called, and they would not hear; so 
they shall call, and I will not hear, said 
the LORD of hosts; 14but I will scatter 
them with a whirlwind among all the 
nations whom they have not known. 
Thus the land was desolate after them, 
so that no man passed through nor 
returned; for they laid the pleasant 
land desolate.’ 

And the word of the LORD of hosts 
came, saying: 2’Thus saith the 
LORD of hosts: I am jealous for Zion 
with great jealousy, and I am jealous 
for her with great fury. 

3Thus saith the LORD: I return unto 
Zion, and will dwell in the midst of 
Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be 
called The city of truth; and the 
mountain of the LORD of hosts The 
holy mountain. 

4Thus saith the LORD of hosts: There 
shall yet old men and old women sit in 
the broad places of Jerusalem, every 
man with his staff in his hand for very 
age. 5And the broad places of the city 
shall be full of boys and girls playing 
in the broad places thereof. 

6Thus saith the LORD of hosts: If it 
be marvellous in the eyes of the 
remnant of this people in those days, 
should it also be marvellous in Mine 
eyes? saith the LORD of hosts. 

7Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 
Behold, I will save My people from 
the east country, and from the west 
country; 8And I will bring them, and 
they shall dwell in the midst of 
Jerusalem; and they shall be My 
people, and I will be their God, in truth 
and in righteousness. 

9Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Let 
your hands be strong, ye that hear in 
these days these words from the mouth 
of the prophets that were in the day 
that the foundation of the house of the 
LORD of hosts was laid, even the 
temple, that it might be built. 10For 
before those days there was no hire for 
man, nor any hire for beast; neither 
was there any peace to him that went 
out or came in because of the 
adversary; for I set all men every one 
against his neighbour. 11But now I will 
not be unto the remnant of this people 
as in the former days, saith the LORD of 
hosts. 12For as the seed of peace, the 
vine shall give her fruit, and the 
ground shall give her increase, and the 
heavens shall give their dew; and I will 
cause the remnant of this people to 
inherit all these things. 13And it shall 
come to pass that, as ye were a curse 
among the nations, O house of Judah 
and house of Israel, so will I save you, 
and ye shall be a blessing; fear not, but 
let your hands be strong. 14For thus 
saith the LORD of host: As I purposed 
to do evil unto you, when your fathers 
provoked Me, saith the LORD of hosts, 
8 




and I repented not; 15so again do I 
purpose in these days to do good unto 
Jerusalem and to the house of Judah; 
fear ye not. 16These are the things that 
ye shall do: Speak ye every man the 
truth with his neighbour; execute the 
judgment of truth and peace in your 
gates; 17and let none of you devise evil 
in your hearts against his neighbour; 
and love no false oath; for all these are 
things that I hate, saith the LORD.’ 

18And the word of the LORD of hosts 
came unto me, saying: 19’Thus saith 
the LORD of hosts: The fast of the 
fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, 
and the fast of the seventh, and the fast 
of the tenth, shall be to the house of 
Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful 
seasons; therefore love ye truth and 
peace. 20Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 
It shall yet come to pass, that there 
shall come peoples, and the inhabitants 
of many cities; 21and the inhabitants of 
one city shall go to another, saying: 
Let us go speedily to entreat the favour 
of the LORD, and to seek the LORD of 
hosts; I will go also. 22Yea, many 
peoples and mighty nations shall come 
to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem, 
and to entreat the favour of the LORD. 
23Thus saith the LORD of hosts: In those 
days it shall come to pass, that ten men 
shall take hold, out of all the languages 
of the nations, shall even take hold of 
the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying: 
We will go with you, for we have 
heard that God is with you.’ 

 

The burden of the word of the 
LORD. 

 

In the land of Hadrach, 

And in Damascus shall be His 
resting-place; 

For the LORD’S is the eye of man 

And all the tribes of Israel. 

2And Hamath also shall border 
thereon; 

Tyre and Zidon, for she is very 
wise. 

3And Tyre did build herself a 
stronghold, 

And heaped up silver as the dust, 

And fine gold as the mire of the 
streets. 

4Behold, the Lord will impoverish 
her, 

And He will smite her power into 
the sea; 

And she shall be devoured with fire. 

5Ashkelon shall see it, and fear, 

Gaza also, and shall be sore pained, 

And Ekron, for her expectation shall 
be ashamed; 

And the king shall perish from 
Gaza, 

And Ashkelon shall not be 
inhabited. 

6And a bastard shall dwell in 
Ashdod, 

And I will cut off the pride of the 
Philistines. 

7And I will take away his blood out 
of his mouth, 

And his detestable things from 
between his teeth, 
9 




And he also shall be a remnant for 
our God; 

And he shall be as a chief in Judah, 

And Ekron as a Jebusite. 

8And I will encamp about My house 
against the army, 

That none pass through or return; 

And no oppressor shall pass through 
them any more; 

For now have I seen with Mine 
eyes. 

 

9Rejoice greatly, O daughter of 
Zion, 

Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; 

Behold, thy king cometh unto thee, 

He is triumphant, and victorious, 

Lowly, and riding upon an ass, 

Even upon a colt the foal of an ass. 

10And I will cut off the chariot from 
Ephraim, 

And the horse from Jerusalem, 

And the battle bow shall be cut off, 

And he shall speak peace unto the 
nations; 

And his dominion shall be from sea 
to sea, 

And from the River to the ends of 
the earth. 

11As for thee also, because of the 
blood of thy covenant 

I send forth thy prisoners out of the 
pit 

Wherein is no water. 

12Return to the stronghold, 

Ye prisoners of hope; 

Even to-day do I declare 

That I will render double unto thee. 

13For I bend Judah for Me, 

I fill the bow with Ephraim; 

And I will stir up thy sons, O Zion, 

Against thy sons, O Javan, 

And will make thee as the sword of 
a mighty man. 

14And the LORD shall be seen over 
them, 

And His arrow shall go forth as the 
lightning; 

And the Lord GOD will blow the 
horn, 

And will go with whirlwinds of the 
south. 

15The LORD of hosts will defend 
them; 

And they shall devour, and shall 
tread down the sling-stones; 

And they shall drink, and make a 
noise as through wine; 

And they shall be filled like the 
basins, like the corners of the 
altar. 

16And the LORD their God shall save 
them in that day 

As the flock of His people; 

For they shall be as the stones of a 
crown, 

Glittering over His land. 

17For how great is their goodness, 
and how great is their beauty! 

Corn shall make the young men 
flourish, 

And new wine the maids. 

 

Ask ye of the LORD rain in the 
time of the latter rain, 

Even of the LORD that maketh 
lightnings; 
10 




And He will give them showers of 
rain, 

To every one grass in the field. 

2For the teraphim have spoken 
vanity, 

And the diviners have seen a lie, 

And the dreams speak falsely, 

They comfort in vain; 

Therefore they go their way like 
sheep, 

They are afflicted, because there is 
no shepherd. 

 

3Mine anger is kindled against the 
shepherds, 

And I will punish the he-goats; 

For the LORD of hosts hath 
remembered His flock the house 
of Judah, 

And maketh them as His majestic 
horse in the battle. 

4Out of them shall come forth the 
corner-stone, 

Out of them the stake, 

Out of them the battle bow, 

Out of them every master together. 

5And they shall be as mighty men, 

Treading down in the mire of the 
streets in the battle, 

And they shall fight, because the 
LORD is with them; 

And the riders on horses shall be 
confounded. 

6And I will strengthen the house of 
Judah, 

And I will save the house of Joseph, 

And I will bring them back, for I 
have compassion upon them, 

And they shall be as though I had 
not cast them off; 

For I am the LORD their God, and I 
will hear them. 

7And they of Ephraim shall be like a 
mighty man, 

And their heart shall rejoice as 
through wine; 

Yea, their children shall see it, 

And rejoice, their heart shall be glad 
in the LORD. 

8I will hiss for them, and gather 
them, 

For I have redeemed them; 

And they shall increase as they have 
increased. 

9And I will sow them among the 
peoples, 

And they shall remember Me in far 
countries; 

And they shall live with their 
children, and shall return. 

10I will bring them back also out of 
the land of Egypt, 

And gather them out of Assyria; 

And I will bring them into the land 
of Gilead and Lebanon; 

And place shall not suffice them. 

11And over the sea affliction shall 
pass, 

And the waves shall be smitten in 
the sea, 

And all the depths of the Nile shall 
dry up; 

And the pride of Assyria shall be 
brought down, 

And the sceptre of Egypt shall 
depart away. 


12And I will strengthen them in the 
LORD; 

And they shall walk up and down in 
His name, 

Saith the LORD. 

 

Open thy doors, O Lebanon, 

That the fire may devour thy 
cedars. 

2Wail, O cypress-tree, for the cedar 
is fallen; 

Because the glorious ones are 
spoiled; 

Wail, O ye oaks of Bashan, 

For the strong forest is come down. 

3Hark! the wailing of the shepherds, 

For their glory is spoiled; 

Hark! the roaring of young lions, 

For the thickets of the Jordan are 
spoiled. 

4Thus said the LORD my God: ‘Feed 
the flock of slaughter; 5whose buyers 
slay them, and hold themselves not 
guilty; and they that sell them say: 
Blessed be the LORD, for I am rich; and 
their own shepherds pity them not. 
6For I will no more pity the inhabitants 
of the land, saith the LORD; but, lo, I 
will deliver the men every one into his 
neighbour’s hand, and into the hand of 
his king; and they shall smite the land, 
and out of their hand I will not deliver 
them.’ 7So I fed the flock of slaughter, 
verily the poor of the flock. And I took 
unto me two staves; the one I called 
Graciousness, and the other I called 
Binders; and I fed the flock. 8And I cut 
off the three shepherds in one month; 
‘for My soul became impatient of 
them, and their soul also loathed Me.’ 
9Then said I: ‘I will not feed you; that 
which dieth, let it die; and that which 
is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let 
them that are left eat every one the 
flesh of another.’ 10And I took my staff 
Graciousness, and cut it asunder, ‘that 
I might break My covenant which I 
had made with all the peoples.’ 11And 
it was broken in that day; and the poor 
of the flock that gave heed unto me 
knew of a truth that it was the word of 
the LORD. 12And I said unto them: ‘If 
ye think good, give me my hire; and if 
not, forbear.’ So they weighed for my 
hire thirty pieces of silver. 13And the 
LORD said unto me: ‘Cast it into the 
treasury, the goodly price that I was 
prized at of them.’ And I took the 
thirty pieces of silver, and cast them 
into the treasury, in the house of the 
LORD. 14Then I cut asunder mine other 
staff, even Binders, that the 
brotherhood between Judah and Israel 
might be broken. 

15And the LORD said unto me: ‘Take 
unto thee yet the instruments of a 
foolish shepherd. 16For, lo, I will raise 
up a shepherd in the land, who will not 
think of those that are cut off, neither 
will seek those that are young, nor heal 
that which is broken; neither will he 
feed that which standeth still, but he 
will eat the flesh of the fat, and will 
break their hoofs in pieces.’ 

17Woe to the worthless shepherd 

That leaveth the flock! 

The sword shall be upon his arm, 

And upon his right eye; 
11 




His arm shall be clean dried up, 

And his right eye shall be utterly 
darkened. 

 

The burden of the word of the 
LORD concerning Israel. 

 

The saying of the LORD, who 
stretched forth the heavens, 

And laid the foundation of the earth, 

And formed the spirit of man within 
him: 

2Behold, I will make Jerusalem a 
cup of staggering 

Unto all the peoples round about, 

And upon Judah also shall it fall to 
be in the siege against Jerusalem. 

3And it shall come to pass in that day, 

That I will make Jerusalem a stone 
of burden for all the peoples; 

All that burden themselves with it 
shall be sore wounded; 

And all the nations of the earth shall 
be gathered together against it. 

4In that day, saith the LORD, 

I will smite every horse with 
bewilderment, 

And his rider with madness; 

And I will open Mine eyes upon the 
house of Judah, 

And will smite every horse of the 
peoples with blindness. 

5And the chiefs of Judah shall say in 
their heart: 

‘The inhabitants of Jerusalem are 
my strength 

Through the LORD of hosts their 
God.’ 

6In that day will I make the chiefs of 
Judah 

Like a pan of fire among the wood, 

And like a torch of fire among 
sheaves; 

And they shall devour all the 
peoples round about, 

On the right hand and on the left; 

And Jerusalem shall be inhabited 
again in her own place, even in 
Jerusalem. 

7The LORD also shall save the tents 
of Judah first, 

That the glory of the house of David 

And the glory of the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem be not magnified above 
Judah. 

8In that day shall the LORD defend 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 

And he that stumbleth among them 
at that day shall be as David; 

And the house of David shall be as a 
godlike being, 

As the angel of the LORD before 
them. 

9And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That I will seek to destroy all the 
nations 

That come against Jerusalem. 

10And I will pour upon the house of 
David, 

And upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, 

The spirit of grace and of 
supplication; 
12 




And they shall look unto Me 
because athey have thrust him 
through; 

a That is, the nations. See verse 9. 

And they shall mourn for him, as 
one mourneth for his only son, 

And shall be in bitterness for him, as 
one that is in bitterness for his 
first-born. 

11In that day shall there be a great 
mourning in Jerusalem, 

As the mourning of Hadadrimmon 
in the valley of Megiddon. 

12And the land shall mourn, every 
family apart: 

The family of the house of David 
apart, and their wives apart; 

The family of the house of Nathan 
apart, and their wives apart; 

13The family of the house of Levi 
apart, and their wives apart; 

The family of the Shimeites apart, 
and their wives apart; 

14All the families that remain, 

Every family apart, and their wives 
apart. 

 

In that day there shall be a 
fountain opened 

To the house of David and to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, 

For purification and for sprinkling. 

2And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

That I will cut off the names of the 
idols out of the land, 

And they shall no more be 
remembered; 

And also I will cause the prophets 

And the unclean spirit to pass out of 
the land. 

3And it shall come to pass that, when 
any shall yet prophesy, then his father 
and his mother that begot him shall say 
unto him: ‘Thou shalt not live, for thou 
speakest lies in the name of the LORD’; 
and his father and his mother that 
begot him shall thrust him through 
when he prophesieth. 4And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that the 
prophets shall be brought to shame 
every one through his vision, when he 
prophesieth; neither shall they wear a 
hairy mantle to deceive; 5but he shall 
say: ‘I am no prophet, I am a tiller of 
the ground; for I have been made a 
bondman from my youth.’ 6And one 
shall say unto him: ‘What are these 
wounds between thy hands?’ Then he 
shall answer: ‘Those with which I was 
wounded in the house of my friends.’ 

 

7Awake, O sword, against My 
shepherd, 

And against the man that is near 
unto Me, 

Saith the LORD of hosts; 

Smite the shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered; 

And I will turn My hand upon the 
little ones. 

8And it shall come to pass, that in all 
the land, saith the LORD, 

Two parts therein shall be cut off 
and die; 
13 




But the third shall be left therein. 

9And I will bring the third part 
through the fire, 

And will refine them as silver is 
refined, 

And will try them as gold is tried; 

They shall call on My name, 

And I will answer them; 

I will say: ‘It is My people’, 

And they shall say: ‘The LORD is my 
God.’ 

 

Behold, a day of the LORD 
cometh, 

When thy spoil shall be divided in 
the midst of thee. 

2For I will gather all nations against 
Jerusalem to battle; 

And the city shall be taken, and the 
houses rifled, 

And the women ravished; 

And half of the city shall go forth 
into captivity, 

But the residue of the people shall 
not be cut off from the city. 

3Then shall the LORD go forth, 

And fight against those nations, 

As when He fighteth in the day of 
battle. 

4And His feet shall stand in that day 
upon the mount of Olives, 

Which is before Jerusalem on the 
east, 

And the mount of Olives shall cleft 
in the midst thereof 

Toward the east and toward the 
west, 

So that there shall be a very great 
valley; 

And half of the mountain shall 
remove toward the north, 

And half of it toward the south. 

5And ye shall flee to the valley of 
the mountains; 

For the valley of the mountains shall 
reach unto Azel; 

Yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled 
from before the earthquake 

In the days of Uzziah king of Judah; 

And the LORD my God shall come, 

And all the holy ones with Thee. 

6And it shall come to pass in that 
day, that there shall not be light, 

But heavy clouds and thick; 

7And there shall be one day 

Which shall be known as the 
LORD’S, 

Not day, and not night; 

But it shall come to pass, that at 
evening time there shall be light. 

8And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That living waters shall go out from 
Jerusalem: 

Half of them toward the eastern sea, 

And half of them toward the western 
sea; 

In summer and in winter shall it be. 

9And the LORD shall be King over all 
the earth; 

In that day shall the LORD be One, 
and His name one. 

10All the land shall be turned as the 
Arabah, from Geba to Rimmon south 
of Jerusalem; and she shall be lifted 
up, and inhabited in her place, from 
Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the 
first gate, unto the corner gate, and 
14 




from the tower of Hananel unto the 
king’s winepresses. 

11And men shall dwell therein, 

And there shall be no more 
extermination; 

But Jerusalem shall dwell safely. 

 

12And this shall be the plague 
wherewith the LORD will smite 

All the peoples that have warred 
against Jerusalem: 

Their flesh shall consume away 
while they stand upon their feet, 

And their eyes shall consume away 
in their sockets, 

And their tongue shall consume 
away in their mouth. 

13And it shall come to pass in that 
day, 

That a great tumult from the LORD 
shall be among them; 

And they shall lay hold every one 
on the hand of his neighbour, 

And his hand shall rise up against 
the hand of his neighbour. 

14And Judah also shall fight against 
Jerusalem; 

And the wealth of all the nations 
round about shall be gathered 
together, 

Gold, and silver, and apparel, in 
great abundance. 

15And so shall be the plague of the 
horse, 

Of the mule, of the camel, and of the 
ass, 

And of all the beasts that shall be in 
those camps, as this plague. 

 

16And it shall come to pass, that every 
one that is left of all the nations that 
came against Jerusalem shall go up 
from year to year to worship the King, 
the LORD of hosts, and to keep the feast 
of tabernacles. 17And it shall be, that 
whoso of the families of the earth 
goeth not up unto Jerusalem to 
worship the King, the LORD of hosts, 
upon them there shall be no rain. 
18And if the family of Egypt go not up, 
and come not, they shall have no 
overflow; there shall be the plague, 
wherewith the LORD will smite the 
nations that go not up to keep the feast 
of tabernacles. 19This shall be the 
punishment of Egypt, and the 
punishment of all the nations that go 
not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. 
20In that day shall there be upon the 
bells of the horses: HOLY UNTO THE LORD; 
and the pots in the LORD’S house shall 
be like the basins before the altar. 
21Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in 
Judah shall be holy unto the LORD of 
hosts; and all they that sacrifice shall 
come and take of them, and seethe 
therein; and in that day there shall be 
no more a trafficker in the house of the 
LORD of hosts. 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

..... 

MALACHI 

 

The burden of the word of the 
LORD to Israel by Malachi. 

 

2I have loved you, saith the LORD. 

Yet ye say: ‘Wherein hast Thou 
loved us?’ 

Was not Esau Jacob’s brother? 

Saith the LORD; 

Yet I loved Jacob; 

3But Esau I hated, 

And made his mountains a 
desolation, 

And gave his heritage to the jackals 
of the wilderness. 

4Whereas Edom saith: 

‘We are beaten down, 

But we will return and build the 
waste places’; 

Thus saith the LORD of hosts: 

They shall build, but I will throw 
down; 

And they shall be called The border 
of wickedness, 

And The people whom the LORD 
execrateth for ever. 

5And your eyes shall see, 

And ye shall say: 

‘The LORD is great beyond the 
border of Israel.’ 

 

6A son honoureth his father, 

And a servant his master; 

If then I be a father, 

Where is My honour? 

And if I be a master, 

Where is My fear? 

Saith the LORD of hosts 

Unto you, O priests, that despise My 
name. 

And ye say: ‘Wherein have we 
despised Thy name?’ 

7Ye offer polluted bread upon Mine 
altar. 

And ye say: ‘Wherein have we 
polluted thee?’ 

In that ye say: ‘The table of the 
LORD is contemptible.’ 

8And when ye offer the blind for 
sacrifice, is it no evil! 

And when ye offer the lame and 
sick, is it no evil! 

Present it now unto thy governor; 
will he be pleased with thee? 

Or will he accept thy person? 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

9And now, I pray you, entreat the 
favour of God 

That He may be gracious unto us!— 

This hath been of your doing.— 

Will He accept any of your persons? 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

10Oh that there were even one 
among you that would shut the 
doors, 
1 




That ye might not kindle fire on 
Mine altar in vain! 

I have no pleasure in you, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

Neither will I accept an offering at 
your hand. 

11For from the rising of the sun even 
unto the going down of the same 

My name is great among the 
nations; 

And in every place offerings are 
presented unto My name, 

Even pure oblations; 

For My name is great among the 
nations, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

12But ye profane it, 

In that ye say: 

‘The table of the LORD is polluted, 

And the fruit thereof, even the food 
thereof, is contemptible.’ 

13Ye say also: 

‘Behold, what a weariness is it!’ 

And ye have snuffed at it, 

Saith the LORD of hosts; 

And ye have brought that which was 
taken by violence, 

And the lame, and the sick; 

Thus ye bring the offering; 

Should I accept this of your hand? 

Saith the LORD. 

14But cursed be he that dealeth 
craftily, 

Whereas he hath in his flock a male, 

And voweth, and sacrificeth unto 
the Lord a blemished thing; 

For I am a great King, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

And My name is feared among the 
nations. 

 

And now, this commandment 

Is for you, O ye priests. 

2If ye will not hearken, and if ye 
will not lay it to heart, 

To give glory unto My name, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

Then will I send the curse upon you, 

And I will curse your blessings; 

Yea, I curse them, 

Because ye do not lay it to heart. 

3Behold, I will rebuke the seed for 
your hurt, 

And will spread dung upon your 
faces, 

Even the dung of your sacrifices; 

And ye shall be taken away unto it. 

4Know then that I have sent 

This commandment unto you, 

That My covenant might be with 
Levi, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

5My covenant was with him 

Of life and peace, and I gave them 
to him, 

And of fear, and he feared Me, 

And was afraid of My name. 

6The law of truth was in his mouth, 

And unrighteousness was not found 
in his lips; 

He walked with Me in peace and 
uprightness, 

And did turn many away from 
iniquity. 

7For the priest’s lips should keep 
knowledge, 
2 




And they should seek the law at his 
mouth; 

For he is the messenger of the LORD 
of hosts. 

8But ye are turned aside out of the 
way; 

Ye have caused many to stumble in 
the law; 

Ye have corrupted the covenant of 
Levi, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

9Therefore have I also made you 

Contemptible and base before all the 
people, 

According as ye have not kept My 
ways, 

But have had respect of persons in 
the law. 

 

10Have we not all one father? 

Hath not one God created us? 

Why do we deal treacherously every 
man against his brother, 

Profaning the covenant of our 
fathers? 

11Judah hath dealt treacherously, 

And an abomination is committed in 
Israel and in Jerusalem; 

For Judah hath profaned the 
holiness of the LORD which He 
loveth, 

And hath married the daughter of a 
strange god. 

12May the LORD cut off to the man 
that doeth this, 

Him that calleth and him that 
answereth out of the tents of 
Jacob, 

And him that offereth an offering 
unto the LORD of hosts. 

13And this further ye do: 

Ye cover the altar of the LORD with 
tears, 

With weeping, and with sighing, 

Insomuch that He regardeth not the 
offering any more, 

Neither receiveth it with good will 
at your hand. 

14Yet ye say: ‘Wherefore?’ 

Because the LORD hath been witness 

Between thee and the wife of thy 
youth, 

Against whom thou hast dealt 
treacherously, 

Though she is thy companion, 

And the wife of thy covenant. 

15And not one hath done so 

Who had exuberance of spirit! 

For what seeketh the one? 

A seed given of God. 

Therefore take heed to your spirit, 

And let none deal treacherously 
against the wife of his youth. 

16For I hate putting away, 

Saith the LORD, the God of Israel, 

And him that covereth his garment 
with violence, 

Saith the LORD of hosts; 

Therefore take heed to your spirit, 

That ye deal not treacherously. 

 

17Ye have wearied the LORD with 
your words. 

Yet ye say: ‘Wherein have we 
wearied Him?’ 

In that ye say: ‘Every one that doeth 
evil 


Is good in the sight of the LORD, 

And He delighteth in them; 

Or where is the God of justice?’ 

 

Behold, I send My messenger, 
And he shall clear the way before 
Me; 

And the Lord, whom ye seek, 

Will suddenly come to His temple, 

And the messenger of the covenant, 

Whom ye delight in, 

Behold, he cometh, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

2But who may abide the day of his 
coming? 

And who shall stand when he 
appeareth? 

For he is like a refiner’s fire, 

And like fullers’soap; 

3And he shall sit as a refiner and 
purifier of silver; 

And he shall purify the sons of Levi, 

And purge them as gold and silver; 

And there shall be they that shall 
offer unto the LORD 

Offerings in righteousness. 

4Then shall the offering of Judah 
and Jerusalem 

Be pleasant unto the LORD, 

As in the days of old, 

And as in ancient years. 

 

5And I will come near to you to 
judgment; 

And I will be a swift witness 

Against the sorcerers, and against 
the adulterers, 

And against false swearers; 

And against those that oppress the 
hireling in his wages, 

The widow, and the fatherless, 

And that turn aside the stranger 
from his right, 

And fear not Me, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

6For I the LORD change not; 

And ye, O sons of Jacob, are not 
consumed. 

 

7From the days of your fathers ye 
have turned aside 

From Mine ordinances, and have not 
kept them. 

Return unto Me, and I will return 
unto you, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

But ye say: ‘Wherein shall we 
return?’ 

8Will a man rob God? 

Yet ye rob Me. 

But ye say: ‘Wherein have we 
robbed Thee?’ 

In tithes and heave-offerings. 

9Ye are cursed with the curse, 

Yet ye rob Me, 

Even this whole nation. 

10Bring ye the whole tithe into the 
store-house, 

That there may be food in My 
house, 

And try Me now herewith, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

If I will not open you the windows 
of heaven, 

And pour you out a blessing, 

That there shall be more than 
sufficiency. 
3 




11And I will rebuke the devourer for 
your good, 

And he shall not destroy the fruits of 
your land; 

Neither shall your vine cast its fruit 
before the time in the field, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

12And all nations shall call you 
happy; 

For ye shall be a delightsome land, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

 

13Your words have been all too 
strong against Me, 

Saith the LORD. 

Yet ye say: ‘Wherein have we 
spoken against thee?’ 

14Ye have said: ‘It is vain to serve 
God; 

And what profit is it that we have 
kept His charge, 

And that we have walked 
mournfully 

Because of the LORD of hosts? 

15And now we call the proud happy; 

Yea, they that work wickedness are 
built up; 

Yea, they try God, and are 
delivered.’ 

16Then they that feared the LORD 

Spoke one with another; 

And the LORD hearkened, and heard, 

And a book of remembrance was 
written before Him, 

For them that feared the LORD, and 
that thought upon His name. 

17And they shall be Mine, saith the 
LORD of hosts, 

In the day that I do make, even 
Mine own treasure; 

And I will spare them, as a man 
spareth 

His own son that serveth him. 

18Then shall ye again discern 
between the righteous and the 
wicked, 

Between him that serveth God 

And him that serveth Him not. 

19For, behold, the day cometh, 

It burneth as a furnace; 

And all the proud, and all that work 
wickedness, shall be stubble; 

And the day that cometh shall set 
them ablaze, 

Saith the LORD of hosts, 

That it shall leave them neither root 
nor branch. 

20But unto you that fear My name 

Shall the sun of righteousness arise 
with healing in its wings; 

And ye shall go forth, and gambol 

As calves of the stall. 

21And ye shall tread down the 
wicked; 

For they shall be ashes under the 
soles of your feet 

In the day that I do make, 

Saith the LORD of hosts. 

 

22Remember ye the law of Moses 
My servant, 

Which I commanded unto him in 
Horeb for all Israel, 

Even statutes and ordinances. 

23Behold, I will send you 

Elijah the prophet 

Before the coming 


Of the great and terrible day of the 
LORD. 

24And he shall turn the heart of the 
fathers to the children, 

And the heart of the children to their 
fathers; 

Lest I come and smite the land with 
utter destruction. 

 

Behold, I will send you 

Elijah the prophet 

Before the coming 

Of the great and terrible day of the LORD. 


..... 

PSALMS 

 

... ..... 

BOOK I 

 

HAPPY IS the man that hath not 
walked in the counsel of the 
wicked, 

Nor stood in the way of sinners, 

Nor sat in the seat of the scornful. 

2But his delight is in the law of the 
LORD; 

And in His law doth he meditate day 
and night. 

3And he shall be like a tree planted 
by streams of water, 

That bringeth forth its fruit in its 
season, 

And whose leaf doth not wither; 

And in whatsoever he doeth he shall 
prosper. 

 

4Not so the wicked; 

But they are like the chaff which the 
wind driveth away. 

5Therefore the wicked shall not 
stand in the judgment, 

Nor sinners in the congregation of 
the righteous. 

6For the LORD regardeth the way of 
the righteous; 

But the way of the wicked shall 
perish. 

 

 

Why are the nations in an 
uproar? 

And why do the peoples mutter in 
vain? 

2 The kings of the earth stand up, 

And the rulers take counsel together, 

Against the LORD, and against His 
anointed: 

3 'Let us break their bands asunder, 

And cast away their cords from us.' 

 

4 He that sitteth in heaven laugheth, 

The Lord hath them in derision. 

5 Then will He speak unto them in 
His wrath, 

And affright them in His sore 
displeasure: 

6 'Truly it is I that have established 
My king 

Upon Zion, My holy mountain.' 

 

7 I will tell of the decree: 

The LORD said unto me: 'Thou art 
My son, 

This day have I begotten thee. 

8 Ask of Me, and I will give the 
nations for thine inheritance, 

And the ends of the earth for thy 
possession. 

9 Thou shalt break them with a rod 
of iron; 

Thou shalt dash them in pieces like 
a potter's vessel.' 
1 

2 




 

10 Now therefore, O ye kings, be 
wise; 

Be admonished, ye judges of the 
earth. 

11Serve the LORD with fear, 

And rejoice with trembling. 

12Do homage in purity, lest He be 
angry, and ye perish in the way, 

When suddenly His wrath is 
kindled. 

 

Happy are all they that take refuge 
in Him. 

 

A Psalm of David, when he fled 
from Absalom his son. 

 

2LORD, how many are mine 
adversaries become! 

Many are they that rise up against 
me. 

3Many there are that say of my soul: 

'There is no salvation for him in 
God.' Selah 

 

4But thou, O LORD, art a shield about 
me; 

My glory, and the lifter up of my 
head. 

5With my voice I call unto the LORD, 

And He answereth me out of His 
holy mountain. Selah 

 

6I lay me down, and I sleep; 

I awake, for the LORD sustaineth me. 

7I am not afraid of ten thousands of 
people, 

That have set themselves against me 
round about. 

 

8Arise, O LORD; save me, O my 
God; 

For Thou hast smitten all mine 
enemies upon the cheek, 

Thou hast broken the teeth of the 
wicked. 

 

9Salvation belongeth unto the LORD; 

Thy blessing be upon Thy people. 

Selah 

 

For the Leader; with string-music. 
A Psalm of David. 

 

2Answer me when I call, O God of 
my righteousness, 

Thou who didst set me free when I 
was in distress; 

Be gracious unto me, and hear my 
prayer. 

3O ye sons of men, how long shall 
my glory be put to shame, 

In that ye love vanity, and seek after 
falsehood? Selah 

4But know that the LORD hath set 
apart the godly man as His own; 

The LORD will hear when I call unto 
Him. 

 

5Tremble, and sin not; 

Commune with your own heart 
upon your bed, and be still. Selah 

6Offer the sacrifices of 
righteousness, 

And put your trust in the LORD. 

 
3 

4 




7Many there are that say: 'Oh that 
we could see some good!' 

LORD, lift Thou up the light of Thy 
countenance upon us. 

8Thou hast put gladness in my heart, 

More than when their corn and their 
wine increase. 

9In peace will I both lay me down 
and sleep; 

For Thou, LORD, makest me dwell 
alone in safety. 

 

For the Leader; upon the 
Nehiloth. A Psalm of David. 

 

2Give ear to my words, O LORD, 
consider my meditation. 

3Hearken unto the voice of my cry, 
my King, and my God; 

For unto Thee do I pray. 

 

4O LORD, in the morning shalt Thou 
hear my voice; 

In the morning will I order my 
prayer unto Thee, and will look 
forward. 

5For Thou art not a God that hath 
pleasure in wickedness; 

Evil shall not sojourn with Thee. 

6The boasters shall not stand in Thy 
sight; 

Thou hatest all workers of iniquity. 

7Thou destroyest them that speak 
falsehood; 

The LORD abhorreth the man of 
blood and of deceit. 

8But as for me, in the abundance of 
Thy lovingkindness will I come 
into Thy house; 

I will bow down toward Thy holy 
temple in the fear of Thee. 

 

9O LORD, lead me in Thy 
righteousness because of them 
that lie in wait for me; 

Make Thy way straight before my 
face. 

10For there is no sincerity in their 
mouth; 

Their inward part is a yawning gulf, 

Their throat is an open sepulchre; 

They make smooth their tongue. 

11Hold them guilty, O God, 

Let them fall by their own counsels; 

Cast them down in the multitude of 
their transgressions; 

For they have rebelled against Thee. 

 

12So shall all those that take refuge 
in Thee rejoice, 

They shall ever shout for joy, 

And Thou shalt shelter them; 

Let them also that love Thy name 
exult in Thee. 

13For Thou dost bless the righteous; 

O LORD, Thou dost encompass him 
with favour as with a shield. 

 

For the Leader; with string-music; 
on the Sheminith. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2O LORD, rebuke me not in Thine 
anger, 

Neither chasten me in Thy wrath. 

3Be gracious unto me, O LORD, for I 
languish away; 
5 

6 




Heal me, O LORD, for my bones are 
affrighted. 

4My soul also is sore affrighted; 

And Thou, O LORD, how long? 

 

5Return, O LORD, deliver my soul; 

Save me for Thy mercy's sake. 

6For in death there is no 
remembrance of Thee; 

In the nether-world who will give 
Thee thanks? 

7I am weary with my groaning; 

Every night make I my bed to swim; 

I melt away my couch with my 
tears. 

8Mine eye is dimmed because of 
vexation; 

It waxeth old because of all mine 
adversaries. 

 

9Depart from me, all ye workers of 
iniquity; 

For the LORD hath heard the voice of 
my weeping. 

10The LORD hath heard my 
supplication; 

The LORD receiveth my prayer. 

11All mine enemies shall be 
ashamed and sore affrighted; 

They shall turn back, they shall be 
ashamed suddenly. 

 

Shiggaion of David, which he 
sang unto the LORD, concerning 
Cush a Benjamite. 

 

2O LORD my God, in Thee have I 
taken refuge; 

Save me from all them that pursue 
me, and deliver me; 

3Lest he tear my soul like a lion, 

Rending it in pieces, while there is 
none to deliver. 

 

4O LORD my God, if I have done 
this; 

If there be iniquity in my hands; 

5If I have requited him that did evil 
unto me, 

Or spoiled mine adversary unto 
emptiness; 

6Let the enemy pursue my soul, and 
overtake it, 

And tread my life down to the earth; 

Yea, let him lay my glory in the 
dust. Selah 

 

7Arise, O LORD, in Thine anger, 

Lift up Thyself in indignation 
against mine adversaries; 

Yea, awake for me at the judgment 
which Thou hast commanded. 

8And let the congregation of the 
peoples compass Thee about, 

And over them return Thou on high. 

 

9O LORD, who ministerest judgment 
to the peoples, 

Judge me, O LORD, 

According to my righteousness, and 
according to mine integrity that is 
in me. 

10Oh that a full measure of evil 
might come upon the wicked, 

And that Thou wouldest establish 
the righteous; 
7 




For the righteous God trieth the 
heart and reins. 

11My shield is with God, 

Who saveth the upright in heart. 

12God is a righteous judge, 

Yea, a God that hath indignation 
every day: 

13If a man turn not, He will whet His 
sword, 

He hath bent His bow, and made it 
ready; 

14He hath also prepared for him the 
weapons of death, 

Yea, His arrows which He made 
sharp. 

15Behold, he travaileth with iniquity; 

Yea, he conceiveth mischief, and 
bringeth forth falsehood. 

16He hath digged a pit, and hollowed 
it, 

And is fallen into the ditch which he 
made. 

17His mischief shall return upon his 
own head, 

And his violence shall come down 
upon his own pate. 

 

18I will give thanks unto the LORD 
according to His righteousness; 

And will sing praise to the name of 
the LORD Most High. 

 

For the Leader; upon the Gittith. 
A Psalm of David. 

 

2O LORD, our Lord, 

How glorious is Thy name in all the 
earth! 

Whose majesty is rehearsed above 
the heavens. 

3Out of the mouth of babes and 
sucklings hast Thou founded 
strength, 

Because of Thine adversaries; 

That Thou mightest still the enemy 
and the avenger. 

 

4When I behold Thy heavens, the 
work of Thy fingers, 

The moon and the stars, which Thou 
hast established; 

5What is man, that Thou art mindful 
of him? 

And the son of man, that Thou 
thinkest of him? 

6Yet Thou hast made him but little 
lower than the angels, 

And hast crowned him with glory 
and honour. 

7Thou hast made him to have 
dominion over the works of Thy 
hands; 

Thou hast put all things under His 
feet: 

8Sheep and oxen, all of them, 

Yea, and the beasts of the field; 

9The fowl of the air, and the fish of 
the sea; 

Whatsoever passeth through the 
paths of the seas. 

 

10O LORD, our Lord, 

How glorious is Thy name in all the 
earth! 

 

For the Leader; upon Muthlabben. 
A Psalm of David. 
8 

9 




 

2I will give thanks unto the LORD 
with my whole heart; 

I will tell of all Thy marvellous 
works. 

3I will be glad and exult in Thee; 

I will sing praise to Thy name, O 
Most High: 

 

4When mine enemies are turned 
back, 

They stumble and perish at Thy 
presence; 

5For Thou hast maintained my right 
and my cause; 

Thou sattest upon the throne as the 
righteous Judge. 

 

6Thou hast rebuked the nations, 

Thou hast destroyed the wicked, 

Thou hast blotted out their name for 
ever and ever. 

7O thou enemy, the waste places are 
come to an end for ever; 

And the cities which thou didst 
uproot, 

Their very memorial is perished. 

 

8But the LORD is enthroned for ever; 

He hath established His throne for 
judgment. 

9And He will judge the world in 
righteousness, 

He will minister judgment to the 
peoples with equity. 

 

10The LORD also will be a high tower 
for the oppressed, 

A high tower in times of trouble; 

11And they that know Thy name will 
put their trust in Thee; 

For thou, LORD, hast not forsaken 
them that seek Thee. 

 

12Sing praises to the LORD, who 
dwelleth in Zion; 

Declare among the peoples His 
doings. 

13For He that avengeth blood hath 
remembered them; 

He hath not forgotten the cry of the 
humble. 

 

14Be gracious unto me, O LORD, 

Behold mine affliction at the hands 
of them that hate me; 

Thou that liftest me up from the 
gates of death; 

15That I may tell of all Thy praise in 
the gates of the daughter of Zion, 

That I may rejoice in Thy salvation. 

 

16The nations are sunk down in the 
pit that they made; 

In the net which they hid is their 
own foot taken. 

17The LORD hath made Himself 
known, He hath executed 
judgment, 

The wicked is snared in the work of 
his own hands. Higgaion. Selah 

 

18The wicked shall return to the 
nether-world, 

Even all the nations that forget God. 

19For the needy shall not alway be 
forgotten, 


Nor the expectation of the poor 
perish for ever. 

20Arise, O LORD, let not man prevail; 

Let the nations be judged in Thy 
sight. 

21Set terror over them, O LORD; 

Let the nations know they are but 
men. Selah 

 

Why standest Thou afar off, 
O LORD? 

Why hidest Thou Thyself in times 
of trouble? 

2Through the pride of the wicked the 
poor is hotly pursued, 

They are taken in the devices that 
they have imagined. 

 

3For the wicked boasteth of his 
heart's desire, 

And the covetous vaunteth himself, 
though he contemn the LORD. 

4The wicked, in the pride of his 
countenance [, saith]: 'He will not 
require'; 

All his thoughts are: 'There is no 
God.' 

5His ways prosper at all times; 

Thy judgments are far above out of 
his sight; 

As for all his adversaries, he puffeth 
at them. 

6He saith in his heart: 'I shall not be 
moved, 

I who to all generations shall not be 
in adversity.' 

7His mouth is full of cursing and 
deceit and oppression; 

Under his tongue is mischief and 
iniquity. 

8He sitteth in the lurking-places of 
the villages; 

In secret places doth he slay the 
innocent; 

His eyes are on the watch for the 
helpless. 

9He lieth in wait in a secret place as 
a lion in his lair, 

He lieth in wait to catch the poor; 

He doth catch the poor, when he 
draweth him up in his net. 

10He croucheth, he boweth down, 

And the helpless fall into his mighty 
claws. 

11He hath said in his heart: 'God 
hath forgotten; 

He hideth His face; He will never 
see.' 

 

12Arise, O LORD; O God, lift up Thy 
hand; 

Forget not the humble. 

13Wherefore doth the wicked 
contemn God, 

And say in his heart: 'Thou wilt not 
require'? 

14Thou hast seen; for Thou 
beholdest trouble and vexation, to 
requite them with Thy hand; 

Unto Thee the helpless committeth 
himself; 

Thou hast been the helper of the 
fatherless. 

 

15Break Thou the arm of the wicked; 
10 




And as for the evil man, search out 
his wickedness, till none be 
found. 

16The LORD is King for ever and 
ever; 

The nations are perished out of His 
land. 

 

17LORD, Thou hast heard the desire 
of the humble: 

Thou wilt direct their heart, Thou 
wilt cause Thine ear to attend; 

18To right the fatherless and the 
oppressed, 

That man who is of the earth may be 
terrible no more. 

 

For the Leader. [A Psalm] of 
David. 

 

In the LORD have I taken refuge; 

How say ye to my soul: 

'Flee thou! to your mountain, ye 
birds'? 

 

2For, lo, the wicked bend the bow, 

They have made ready their arrow 
upon the string, 

That they may shoot in darkness at 
the upright in heart. 

3When the foundations are 
destroyed, 

What hath the righteous wrought? 

 

4The LORD is in His holy temple, 

The LORD, His throne is in heaven; 

His eyes behold, His eyelids try, the 
children of men. 

5The LORD trieth the righteous; 

But the wicked and him that loveth 
violence His soul hateth. 

6Upon the wicked He will cause to 
rain coals; 

Fire and brimstone and burning 
wind shall be the portion of their 
cup. 

 

7For the LORD is righteous, He 
loveth righteousness; 

The upright shall behold His face. 

 

For the Leader; on the 
Sheminith. A Psalm of David. 

 

2Help, LORD; for the godly man 
ceaseth; 

For the faithful fail from among the 
children of men. 

3They speak falsehood every one 
with his neighbour; 

With flattering lip, and with a 
double heart, do they speak. 

 

4May the LORD cut off all flattering 
lips, 

The tongue that speaketh proud 
things! 

5Who have said: 'Our tongue will we 
make mighty; 

Our lips are with us: who is lord 
over us?' 

 

6'For the oppression of the poor, for 
the sighing of the needy, 

Now will I arise', saith the LORD; 

'I will set him in safety at whom 
they puff.' 

 
11 

12 




7The words of the LORD are pure 
words, 

As silver tried in a crucible on the 
earth, refined seven times. 

 

8Thou wilt keep them, O LORD; 

Thou wilt preserve us from this 
generation for ever. 

9The wicked walk on every side, 

When vileness is exalted among the 
sons of men. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2How long, O LORD, wilt Thou 
forget me for ever? 

How long wilt Thou hide Thy face 
from me? 

3How long shall I take counsel in 
my soul, having sorrow in my 
heart by day? 

How long shall mine enemy be 
exalted over me? 

4Behold Thou, and answer me, O 
LORD my God; 

Lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the 
sleep of death; 

5Lest mine enemy say: 'I have 
prevailed against him'; 

Lest mine adversaries rejoice when I 
am moved. 

 

6But as for me, in Thy mercy do I 
trust; 

My heart shall rejoice in Thy 
salvation. 

6I will sing unto the LORD, 

Because He hath dealt bountifully 
with me. 

 

For the Leader. [A Psalm] of 
David. 

 

The fool hath said in his heart: 
'There is no God'; 

They have dealt corruptly, they have 
done abominably; 

There is none that doeth good. 

2The LORD looked forth from heaven 
upon the children of men, 

To see if there were any man of 
understanding, that did seek after 
God. 

3They are all corrupt, they are 
together become impure; 

There is none that doeth good, no, 
not one. 

 

4’Shall not all the workers of 
iniquity know it, 

Who eat up My people as they eat 
bread, 

And call not upon the LORD?' 

5There are they in great fear; 

For God is with the righteous 
generation. 

6Ye would put to shame the counsel 
of the poor, 

But the LORD is his refuge. 

7Oh that the salvation of Israel were 
come out of Zion! 

When the LORD turneth the captivity 
of His people, 

Let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad. 

 
13 

14 




A Psalm of David. 

 

LORD, who shall sojourn in Thy 
tabernacle? 

Who shall dwell upon Thy holy 
mountain? 

2He that walketh uprightly, and 
worketh righteousness, 

And speaketh truth in his heart; 

3That hath no slander upon his 
tongue, 

Nor doeth evil to his fellow, 

Nor taketh up a reproach against his 
neighbour; 

4In whose eyes a vile person is 
despised, 

But he honoureth them that fear the 
LORD; 

He that sweareth to his own hurt, 
and changeth not; 

5He that putteth not out his money 
on interest, 

Nor taketh a bribe against the 
innocent. 

He that doeth these things shall 
never be moved. 

 

Michtam of David. 

 

Keep me, O God; for I have taken 
refuge in Thee. 

2I have said unto the LORD: 'Thou art 
my Lord; 

I have no good but in Thee'; 

3As for the holy that are in the earth, 

They are the excellent in whom is 
all my delight. 

4Let the idols of them be multiplied 
that make suit unto another; 

Their drink-offerings of blood will I 
not offer, 

Nor take their names upon my lips. 

5O LORD, the portion of mine 
inheritance and of my cup, 

Thou maintainest my lot. 

 

6The lines are fallen unto me in 
pleasant places; 

Yea, I have a goodly heritage. 

7I will bless the LORD, who hath 
given me counsel; 

Yea, in the night seasons my reins 
instruct me. 

8I have set the LORD always before 
me; 

Surely He is at my right hand, I 
shall not be moved. 

9Therefore my heart is glad, and my 
glory rejoiceth; my flesh also 
dwelleth in safety; 

10For Thou wilt not abandon my 
soul to the nether-world; 

Neither wilt Thou suffer Thy godly 
one to see the pit. 

11Thou makest me to know the path 
of life; 

In Thy presence is fulness of joy, 

In Thy right hand bliss for 
evermore. 

 

A Prayer of David. 

 

Hear the right, O LORD, attend unto 
my cry; 

Give ear unto my prayer from lips 
without deceit. 

2Let my judgment come forth from 
Thy presence; 
15 

16 

17 




Let Thine eyes behold equity. 

3Thou hast tried my heart, Thou hast 
visited it in the night; 

Thou hast tested me, and Thou 
findest not 

That I had a thought which should 
not pass my mouth. 

4As for the doings of men, by the 
word of Thy lips 

I have kept me from the ways of the 
violent. 

5My steps have held fast to Thy 
paths, 

My feet have not slipped. 

 

6As for me, I call upon Thee, for 
Thou wilt answer me, O God; 

Incline Thine ear unto me, hear my 
speech. 

7Make passing great Thy mercies, O 
Thou that savest by Thy right 
hand 

From assailants them that take 
refuge in Thee. 

8Keep me as the apple of the eye, 

Hide me in the shadow of Thy 
wings, 

9From the wicked that oppress, 

My deadly enemies, that compass 
me about. 

10Their gross heart they have shut 
tight, 

With their mouth they speak 
proudly. 

11At our every step they have now 
encompassed us; 

They set their eyes to cast us down 
to the earth. 

12He is like a lion that is eager to 
tear in pieces, 

And like a young lion lurking in 
secret places. 

 

13Arise, O LORD, confront him, cast 
him down; 

Deliver my soul from the wicked, 
by Thy sword; 

14From men, by Thy hand, O LORD, 

From men of the world, whose 
portion is in this life, 

And whose belly Thou fillest with 
Thy treasure; 

Who have children in plenty, 

And leave their abundance to their 
babes. 

15As for me, I shall behold Thy face 
in righteousness; 

I shall be satisfied, when I awake, 
with Thy likeness. 

 

For the Leader. [A Psalm] of 
David the servant of the LORD, 
who spoke unto the LORD the words of 
this song in the day that the LORD 
delivered him from the hand of all his 
enemies, and from the hand of Saul; 
2And he said: 

I love thee, O LORD, my strength. 

3The LORD is my rock, and my 
fortress, and my deliverer; 

My God, my rock, in Him I take 
refuge; 

My shield, and my horn of 
salvation, my high tower. 

4Praised, I cry, is the LORD, 

And I am saved from mine enemies. 

 
18 




5The cords of Death compassed me, 

And the floods of aBelial assailed 
me. 

a That is, the nether-world. 

6The cords of aSheol surrounded me; 

The snares of Death confronted me. 

7In my distress I called upon the 
LORD, 

And cried unto my God; 

Out of His temple He heard my 
voice, 

And my cry came before Him unto 
His ears. 

 

8Then the earth did shake and 
quake, 

The foundations also of the 
mountains did tremble; 

They were shaken, because He was 
wroth. 

9Smoke arose up in His nostrils, 

And fire out of His mouth did 
devour; 

Coals flamed forth from Him. 

10He bowed the heavens also, and 
came down; 

And thick darkness was under His 
feet. 

11And He rode upon a cherub, and 
did fly; 

Yea, He did swoop down upon the 
wings of the wind. 

12He made darkness His hiding-
place, His pavilion round about 
Him; 

Darkness of waters, thick clouds of 
the skies. 

13At the brightness before Him, 
there passed through His thick 
clouds 

Hailstones and coals of fire. 

14The LORD also thundered in the 
heavens, 

And the Most High gave forth His 
voice; 

Hailstones and coals of fire. 

15And He sent out His arrows, and 
scattered them; 

And He shot forth lightnings, and 
discomfited them. 

16And the channels of waters 
appeared, 

And the foundations of the world 
were laid bare, 

At Thy rebuke, O LORD, 

At the blast of the breath of Thy 
nostrils. 

 

17He sent from on high, He took me; 

He drew me out of many waters. 

18He delivered me from mine enemy 

 most strong, 

And from them that hated me, for 
they were too mighty for me. 

19They confronted me in the day of 
my calamity; 

But the LORD was a stay unto me. 

20He brought me forth also into a 
large place; 

He delivered me, because He 
delighted in me. 

21The LORD rewarded me according 
to my righteousness; 

According to the cleanness of my 
hands hath He recompensed me. 

 


22For I have kept the ways of the 
LORD, 

And have not wickedly departed 
from my God. 

23For all His ordinances were before 
me, 

And I put not away His statutes 
from me. 

24And I was single-hearted with 
Him, 

And I kept myself from mine 
iniquity. 

25Therefore hath the LORD 
recompensed me according to my 
righteousness, 

According to the cleanness of my 
hands in His eyes. 

26With the merciful Thou dost show 
Thyself merciful, 

With the upright man Thou dost 
show Thyself upright; 

27With the pure Thou dost show 
Thyself pure; 

And with the crooked Thou dost 
show Thyself subtle. 

28For Thou dost save the afflicted 
people; 

But the haughty eyes Thou dost 
humble. 

 

29For Thou dost light my lamp; 

The LORD my God doth lighten my 
darkness. 

30For by Thee I run upon a troop; 

And by my God do I scale a wall. 

31As for God, His way is perfect; 

The word of the LORD is tried; 

He is a shield unto all them that take 
refuge in Him. 

 

32For who is God, save the LORD? 

And who is a Rock, except our 
God? 

33The God that girdeth me with 
strength, 

And maketh my way straight; 

34Who maketh my feet like hinds', 

And setteth me upon my high 
places; 

35Who traineth my hands for war, 

So that mine arms do bend a bow of 
brass. 

36Thou hast also given me Thy 
shield of salvation, 

And Thy right hand hath holden me 
up; 

And Thy condescension hath made 
me great. 

37Thou hast enlarged my steps under 
me, 

And my feet have not slipped. 

 

38I have pursued mine enemies, and 
overtaken them; 

Neither did I turn back till they were 
consumed. 

39I have smitten them through, so 
that they are not able to rise; 

They are fallen under my feet. 

40For Thou hast girded me with 
strength unto the battle; 

Thou hast subdued under me those 
that rose up against me. 

41Thou hast also made mine enemies 
turn their backs unto me, 

And I did cut off them that hate me. 

42They cried, but there was none to 
save; 


Even unto the LORD, but He 
answered them not. 

43Then did I beat them small as the 
dust before the wind; 

I did cast them out as the mire of the 
streets. 

44Thou hast delivered me from the 
contentions of the people; 

Thou hast made me the head of the 
nations; 

A people whom I have not known 
serve me. 

45As soon as they hear of me, they 
obey me; 

The sons of the stranger dwindle 
away before me. 

46The sons of the stranger fade 
away, 

And come trembling out of their 
close places. 

 

47The LORD liveth, and blessed be 
my Rock; 

And exalted be the God of my 
salvation; 

48Even the God that executeth 
vengeance for me, 

And subdueth peoples under me. 

49He delivereth me from mine 
enemies; 

Yea, Thou liftest me up above them 
that rise up against me; 

Thou deliverest me from the violent 
man. 

50Therefore I will give thanks unto 
Thee, O LORD, among the nations, 

And will sing praises unto Thy 
name. 

51Great salvation giveth He to His 
king; 

And showeth mercy to His anointed, 

To David and to his seed, for 
evermore. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2The heavens declare the glory of 
God, 

And the firmament showeth His 
handiwork; 

3Day unto day uttereth speech, 

And night unto night revealeth 
knowledge; 

4There is no speech, there are no 
words, 

Neither is their voice heard. 

5Their line is gone out through all 
the earth, 

And their words to the end of the 
world. 

In them hath He set a tent for the 
sun, 

6Which is as a bridegroom coming 
out of his chamber, 

And rejoiceth as a strong man to run 
his course. 

7His going forth is from the end of 
the heaven, 

And his circuit unto the ends of it; 

And there is nothing hid from the 
heat thereof. 

 

8The law of the LORD is perfect, 
restoring the soul; 

The testimony of the LORD is sure, 
making wise the simple. 
19 




9The precepts of the LORD are right, 
rejoicing the heart; 

The commandment of the LORD is 
pure, enlightening the eyes. 

10The fear of the LORD is clean, 
enduring for ever; 

The ordinances of the LORD are true, 
they are righteous altogether; 

11More to be desired are they than 
gold, yea, than much fine gold; 

Sweeter also than honey and the 
honeycomb. 

12Moreover by them is Thy servant 
warned; 

In keeping of them there is great 
reward. 

13Who can discern his errors? 

Clear Thou me from hidden faults. 

14Keep back Thy servant also from 
presumptuous sins, 

That they may not have dominion 
over me; then shall I be faultless, 

And I shall be clear from great 
transgression. 

15Let the words of my mouth and the 
meditation of my heart be 
acceptable before Thee, 

O LORD, my Rock, and my 
Redeemer. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2The LORD answer thee in the day of 
trouble; 

The name of the God of Jacob set 
thee up on high; 

3Send forth thy help from the 
sanctuary, 

And support thee out of Zion; 

4Receive the memorial of all thy 
meal-offerings, 

And accept the fat of thy burnt-
sacrifice; Selah 

5Grant thee according to thine own 
heart, 

And fulfil all thy counsel. 

6We will shout for joy in thy 
victory, 

And in the name of our God we will 
set up our standards; 

The LORD fulfil all thy petitions. 

 

7Now know I that the LORD saveth 
His anointed; 

He will answer him from His holy 
heaven 

With the mighty acts of His saving 
right hand. 

8Some trust in chariots, and some in 
horses; 

But we will make mention of the 
name of the LORD our God. 

9They are bowed down and fallen; 

But we are risen, and stand upright. 

10Save, LORD; 

Let the King answer us in the day 
that we call. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2O LORD, in Thy strength the king 
rejoiceth; 

And in Thy salvation how greatly 
doth he exult! 

3Thou hast given him his heart's 
desire, 
20 

21 




And the request of his lips Thou 
hast not withholden. Selah 

4For Thou meetest him with 
choicest blessings; 

Thou settest a crown of fine gold on 
his head. 

5He asked life of Thee, Thou gavest 
it him; 

Even length of days for ever and 
ever. 

6His glory is great through Thy 
salvation; 

Honour and majesty dost Thou lay 
upon him. 

7For Thou makest him most blessed 
for ever; 

Thou makest him glad with joy in 
Thy presence. 

8For the king trusteth in the LORD, 

Yea, in the mercy of the Most High; 
he shall not be moved. 

 

9Thy hand shall be equal to all thine 
enemies; 

Thy right hand shall overtake those 
that hate thee. 

10Thou shalt make them as a fiery 
furnace in the time of thine anger; 

The LORD shall swallow them up in 
His wrath, 

And the fire shall devour them. 

11Their fruit shalt thou destroy from 
the earth, 

And their seed from among the 
children of men. 

12For they intended evil against thee, 

They imagined a device, wherewith 
they shall not prevail. 

13For thou shalt make them turn 
their back, 

Thou shalt make ready with thy 
bowstrings against the face of 
them. 

 

14Be Thou exalted, O LORD, in Thy 
strength; 

So will we sing and praise Thy 
power. 

 

For the Leader; upon Aijeleth 
ha-Shahar. A Psalm of David. 

 

2My God, my God, why hast Thou 
forsaken me, 

And art far from my help at the 
words of my cry? 

3O my God, I call by day, but Thou 
answerest not; 

And at night, and there is no 
surcease for me. 

4Yet Thou art holy, 

O Thou that art enthroned upon the 
praises of Israel. 

5In Thee did our fathers trust; 

They trusted, and Thou didst deliver 
them. 

6Unto Thee they cried, and escaped; 

In Thee did they trust, and were not 
ashamed. 

7But I am a worm, and no man; 

A reproach of men, and despised of 
the people. 

8All they that see me laugh me to 
scorn; 

They shoot out the lip, they shake 
the head: 
22 




9'Let him commit himself unto the 
LORD! let Him rescue him; 

Let Him deliver him, seeing He 
delighteth in him.' 

 

10For Thou art He that took me out 
of the womb; 

Thou madest me trust when I was 
upon my mother's breasts. 

11Upon Thee I have been cast from 
my birth; 

Thou art my God from my mother's 
womb. 

12Be not far from me; for trouble is 
near; 

For there is none to help. 

13Many bulls have encompassed me; 

Strong bulls of Bashan have beset 
me round. 

14They open wide their mouth 
against me, 

As a ravening and a roaring lion. 

15I am poured out like water, 

And all my bones are out of joint; 

My heart is become like wax; 

It is melted in mine inmost parts. 

16My strength is dried up like a 
potsherd; 

And my tongue cleaveth to my 
throat; 

And Thou layest me in the dust of 
death. 

17For dogs have encompassed me; 

A company of evil-doers have 
inclosed me; 

Like a lion, they are at my hands 
and my feet. 

18I may count all my bones; 

They look and gloat over me. 

19They part my garments among 
them, 

And for my vesture do they cast 
lots. 

20But Thou, O LORD, be not far off; 

O Thou my strength, hasten to help 
me. 

21Deliver my soul from the sword; 

Mine only one from the power of 
the dog. 

22Save me from the lion's mouth; 

Yea, from the horns of the wild-
oxen do Thou answer me. 

 

23I will declare Thy name unto my 
brethren; 

In the midst of the congregation will 
I praise Thee. 

24'Ye that fear the LORD, praise Him; 

All ye the seed of Jacob, glorify 
Him; 

And stand in awe of Him, all ye the 
seed of Israel. 

25For He hath not despised nor 
abhorred the lowliness of the 
poor; 

Neither hath He hid His face from 
him; 

But when he cried unto Him, He 
heard.' 

26From Thee cometh my praise in 
the great congregation; 

I will pay my vows before them that 
fear Him. 

27Let the humble eat and be 
satisfied; 

Let them praise the LORD that seek 
after Him; 


May your heart be quickened for 
ever! 

28All the ends of the earth shall 
remember and turn unto the LORD; 

And all the kindreds of the nations 
shall worship before Thee. 

29For the kingdom is the LORD’S; 

And He is the ruler over the nations. 

30All the fat ones of the earth shall 
eat and worship; 

All they that go down to the dust 
shall kneel before Him, 

Even he that cannot keep his soul 
alive. 

31A seed shall serve him; 

It shall be told of the Lord unto the 
next generation. 

32They shall come and shall declare 
His righteousness 

Unto a people that shall be born, 
that He hath done it. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 

The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not 
want. 

2He maketh me to lie down in green 
pastures; 

He leadeth me beside the still 
waters. 

3He restoreth my soul; 

He guideth me in straight paths for 
His name's sake. 

4Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death, 

I will fear no evil, for Thou art with 
me; 

Thy rod and Thy staff, they comfort 
me. 

5Thou preparest a table before me in 
the presence of mine enemies; 

Thou hast anointed my head with 
oil; my cup runneth over. 

6Surely goodness and mercy shall 
follow me all the days of my life; 

And I shall dwell in the house of the 
LORD for ever. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 

The earth is the LORD’S, and the 
fulness thereof; 

The world, and they that dwell 
therein. 

2For He hath founded it upon the 
seas, 

And established it upon the floods. 

3Who shall ascend into the mountain 
of the LORD? 

And who shall stand in His holy 
place? 

4He that hath clean hands, and a 
pure heart; 

Who hath not taken My name in 
vain, 

And hath not sworn deceitfully. 

5He shall receive a blessing from the 
LORD, 

And righteousness from the God of 
his salvation. 

6Such is the generation of them that 
seek after Him, 

That seek Thy face, even Jacob. 

 Selah 

 

7Lift up your heads, O ye gates, 

And be ye lifted up, ye everlasting 
doors; 
23 

24 




That the King of glory may come in. 

8'Who is the King of glory?' 

'The LORD strong and mighty, 

The LORD mighty in battle.' 

9Lift up your heads, O ye gates, 

Yea, lift them up, ye everlasting 
doors; 

That the King of glory may come in. 

10'Who then is the King of glory?' 

'The LORD of hosts; 

He is the King of glory.' Selah 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

. Unto Thee, O LORD, do I lift up my 
soul. 

. 2O my God, in Thee have I trusted, 
let me not be ashamed; 

 Let not mine enemies triumph over 
me. 

. 3Yea, none that wait for Thee shall 
be ashamed; 

 They shall be ashamed that deal 
treacherously without cause. 

. 4Show me Thy ways, O LORD; 

 teach me Thy paths. 

.. 5Guide me in Thy truth, and teach 
me; 

 For Thou art the God of my 
salvation; 

 For Thee do I wait all the day. 

. 6Remember, O LORD, Thy 
compassions and Thy mercies; 

 For they have been from of old. 

. 7Remember not the sins of my 
youth, nor my transgressions; 

 According to Thy mercy remember 
Thou me, 

 For Thy goodness' sake, O LORD. 

. 8Good and upright is the LORD; 

 Therefore doth He instruct sinners 
in the way. 

. 9He guideth The humble in justice; 

 And He teacheth the humble His 
way. 

. 10All the paths of the LORD are 
mercy and truth 

 Unto such as keep His covenant and 
His testimonies. 

. 11For Thy name's sake, O LORD, 

 Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. 

. 12What man is he that feareth the 
LORD? 

 Him will He instruct in the way that 
He should choose. 

. 13His soul shall abide in prosperity; 

 And his seed shall inherit the land. 

. 14The counsel of the LORD is with 
them that fear Him; 

 And His covenant, to make them 
know it. 

. 15Mine eyes are ever toward the 
LORD; 

 For He will bring forth my feet out 
of the net. 

. 16Turn Thee unto me, and be 
gracious unto me; 

 For I am solitary and afflicted. 

. 17The troubles of my heart are 
enlarged; 

 O bring Thou me out of my 
distresses. 

. 18See mine affliction and my travail; 
And forgive all my sins. 

 19Consider how many are mine 
enemies, 

 And the cruel hatred wherewith they 
hate me. 
25 




. 20O keep my soul, and deliver me; 

 Let me not be ashamed, for I have 
taken refuge in Thee. 

. 21Let integrity and uprightness 
preserve me, 

 Because I wait for Thee. 

 

22Redeem Israel, O God, out of all 
his troubles. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

Judge me, O LORD, for I have 
walked in mine integrity, 

And I have trusted in the LORD 
without wavering. 

2Examine me, O LORD, and try me; 

Test my reins and my heart. 

3For Thy mercy is before mine eyes; 

And I have walked in Thy truth. 

4I have not sat with men of 
falsehood; 

Neither will I go in with 
dissemblers. 

5I hate the gathering of evil doers, 

And will not sit with the wicked. 

6I will wash my hands in innocency; 

So will I compass Thine altar, O 
LORD, 

7That I may make the voice of 
thanksgiving to be heard, 

And tell of all Thy wondrous works. 

 

8LORD, I love the habitation of Thy 
house, 

And the place where Thy glory 
dwelleth. 

9Gather not my soul with sinners, 

Nor my life with men of blood; 

10In whose hands is craftiness, 

And their right hand is full of bribes. 

11But as for me, I will walk in mine 
integrity; 

Redeem me, and be gracious unto 
me. 

12My foot standeth in an even place; 

In the congregations will I bless the 
LORD. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

The LORD is my light and my 
salvation; whom shall I fear? 

The LORD is the stronghold of my 
life; of whom shall I be afraid? 

2When evil-doers came upon me to 
eat up my flesh, 

Even mine adversaries and my foes, 
they stumbled and fell. 

3Though a host should encamp 
against me, 

My heart shall not fear; 

Though war should rise up against 
me, 

Even then will I be confident. 

 

4One thing have I asked of the LORD, 
that will I seek after: 

That I may dwell in the house of the 
LORD all the days of my life, 

To behold the graciousness of the 
LORD, and to visit early in His 
temple. 

5For He concealeth me in His 
pavilion in the day of evil; 

He hideth me in the covert of His 
tent; 

He lifteth me up upon a rock. 
26 

27 




6And now shall my head be lifted up 
above mine enemies round about 
me; 

And I will offer in His tabernacle 
sacrifices with trumpet-sound; 

I will sing, yea, I will sing praises 
unto the LORD. 

 

7Hear, O LORD, when I call with my 
voice, 

And be gracious unto me, and 
answer me. 

8In Thy behalf my heart hath said: 
‘Seek ye My face'; 

Thy face, LORD, will I seek. 

9Hide not Thy face far from me; 

Put not Thy servant away in anger; 

Thou hast been my help; 

Cast me not off, neither forsake me, 
O God of my salvation. 

10For though my father and my 
mother have forsaken me, 

The LORD will take me up. 

 

11Teach me Thy way, O LORD; 

And lead me in an even path, 

Because of them that lie in wait for 
me. 

12Deliver me not over unto the will 
of mine adversaries; 

For false witnesses are risen up 
against me, and such as breathe 
out violence. 

13If I had not believed to look upon 
the goodness of the LORD 

In the land of the living!— 

14Wait on the LORD; 

Be strong, and let thy heart take 
courage; 

Yea, wait thou for the LORD. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

Unto thee, O LORD, do I call; 

My Rock, be not Thou deaf unto 
me; 

Lest, if Thou be silent unto me, 

I become like them that go down 
into the pit. 

2Hear the voice of my supplications, 
when I cry unto Thee, 

When I lift up my hands toward Thy 
holy Sanctuary. 

 

3Draw me not away with the 
wicked, 

And with the workers of iniquity; 

Who speak peace with their 
neighbours, 

But evil is in their hearts. 

4Give them according to their deeds, 
and according to the evil of their 
endeavours; 

Give them after the work of their 
hands; 

Render to them their desert. 

5Because they give no heed to the 
works of the LORD, 

Nor to the operation of His hands; 

He will break them down and not 
build them up. 

 

6Blessed be the LORD, 

Because He hath heard the voice of 
my supplications. 

7The LORD is my strength and my 
shield, 

In Him hath my heart trusted, 
28 




And I am helped; 

Therefore my heart greatly 
rejoiceth, 

And with my song will I praise Him. 

 

8The LORD is a strength unto them; 

And He is a stronghold of salvation 
to His anointed. 

9Save Thy people, and bless Thine 
inheritance; 

And tend them, and carry them for 
ever. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 

Ascribe unto the LORD, O ye sons of 
might, 

Ascribe unto the LORD glory and 
strength. 

2Ascribe unto the LORD the glory 
due unto His name; 

Worship the LORD in the beauty of 
holiness. 

 

3The voice of the LORD is upon the 
waters; 

The God of glory thundereth, 

Even the LORD upon many waters. 

4The voice of the LORD is powerful; 

The voice of the LORD is full of 
majesty. 

5The voice of the LORD breaketh the 
cedars; yea, the LORD breaketh in 
pieces the cedars of Lebanon. 

6He maketh them also to skip like a 
calf; 

Lebanon and Sirion like a young 
wild-ox. 

7The voice of the LORD heweth out 
flames of fire. 

8The voice of the LORD shaketh the 
wilderness; 

The LORD shaketh the wilderness of 
Kadesh. 

9The voice of the LORD maketh the 
hinds to calve, 

And strippeth the forests bare; 

And in His temple all say: 'Glory.' 

 

10The LORD sat enthroned at the 
flood; 

Yea, the LORD sitteth as King for 
ever. 

11The LORD will give strength unto 
His people; 

The LORD will bless his people with 
peace. 

 

A Psalm; a Song at the 
Dedication of the House; of 
David. 

 

2I will extol thee, O LORD, for Thou 
hast raised me up, 

And hast not suffered mine enemies 
to rejoice over me. 

3O LORD my God, 

I cried unto Thee, and Thou didst 
heal me; 

4O LORD, Thou broughtest up my 
soul from the nether-world; 

Thou didst kept me alive, that I 
should not go down to the pit. 

5Sing praise unto the LORD, O ye His 
godly ones, 

And give thanks to His holy name. 

6For His anger is but for a moment, 
29 

30 




His favour is for a life-time; 

Weeping may tarry for the night, 

But joy cometh in the morning. 

 

7Now I had said in my security: ' 

I shall never be moved.' 

8Thou hadst established, O LORD, in 
Thy favour my mountain as a 
stronghold— 

Thou didst hide Thy face; I was 
affrighted. 

9Unto Thee, O LORD, did I call, 

And unto the LORD I made 
supplication: 

10'What profit is there in my blood, 
when I go down to the pit? 

Shall the dust praise Thee? shall it 
declare Thy truth? 

11Hear, O LORD, and be gracious 
unto me; 

LORD, be Thou my helper.' 

 

12Thou didst turn for me my 
mourning into dancing; 

Thou didst loose my sackcloth, and 
gird me with gladness; 

13So that my glory may sing praise 
to Thee, and not be silent; 

O LORD my God, I will give thanks 
unto Thee for ever. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2In thee, O LORD, have I taken 
refuge; let me never be ashamed; 

Deliver me in Thy righteousness. 

3Incline Thine ear unto me, deliver 
me speedily; 

Be Thou to me a rock of refuge, 
even a fortress of defence, to save 
me. 

4For Thou art my rock and my 
fortress; 

Therefore for Thy name's sake lead 
me and guide me. 

5Bring me forth out of the net that 
they have hidden for me; 

For Thou art my stronghold. 

6Into Thy hand I commit my spirit; 

Thou hast redeemed me, O LORD, 
Thou God of truth. 

7I hate them that regard lying 
vanities; 

But I trust in the LORD. 

8I will be glad and rejoice in Thy 
lovingkindness; 

For Thou hast seen mine affliction, 

Thou hast taken cognizance of the 
troubles of my soul, 

9And Thou hast not given me over 
into the hand of the enemy; 

Thou hast set my feet in a broad 
place. 

 

10Be gracious unto me, O LORD, for I 
am in distress; 

Mine eye wasteth away with 
vexation, yea, my soul and my 
body. 

11For my life is spent in sorrow, and 
my years in sighing; 

My strength faileth because of mine 
iniquity, and my bones are wasted 
away. 

12Because of all mine adversaries I 
am become a reproach, 
31 




Yea, unto my neighbours 
exceedingly, and a dread to mine 
acquaintance; 

They that see me without flee from 
me. 

13I am forgotten as a dead man out 
of mind; 

I am like a useless vessel. 

14For I have heard the whispering of 
many, 

Terror on every side; 

While they took counsel together 
against me, 

They devised to take away my life. 

 

15But as for me, I have trusted in 
Thee, O LORD; 

I have said: 'Thou art my God.' 

16My times are in Thy hand; 

Deliver me from the hand of mine 
enemies, and from them that 
persecute me. 

17Make Thy face to shine upon Thy 
servant; 

Save me in Thy lovingkindness. 

18O LORD, let me not be ashamed, 
for I have called upon Thee; 

Let the wicked be ashamed, let them 
be put to silence in the nether-
world. 

19Let the lying lips be dumb, 

Which speak arrogantly against the 
righteous, 

With pride and contempt. 

 

20Oh how abundant is Thy 
goodness, which Thou hast laid 
up for them that fear Thee; 

Which Thou hast wrought for them 
that take their refuge in Thee, in 
the sight of the sons of men! 

21Thou hidest them in the covert of 
Thy presence from the plottings 
of man; 

Thou concealest them in a pavilion 
from the strife of tongues. 

22Blessed be the LORD; 

For He hath shown me His 
wondrous lovingkindness in an 
entrenched city. 

23As for me, I said in my haste: 'I am 
cut off from before Thine eyes'; 

Nevertheless Thou heardest the 
voice of my supplications when I 
cried unto Thee. 

 

24O love the LORD, all ye His godly 
ones; 

The LORD preserveth the faithful, 

And plentifully repayeth him that 
acteth haughtily. 

25Be strong, and let your heart take 
courage, 

All ye that wait for the LORD. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. Maschil. 

 

Happy is he whose transgression is 
forgiven, whose sin is pardoned. 

2Happy is the man unto whom the 
LORD counteth not iniquity, 

And in whose spirit there is no 
guile. 

 

3When I kept silence, my bones 
wore away 
32 




Through my groaning all the day 
long. 

4For day and night Thy hand was 
heavy upon me; 

My sap was turned as in the 
droughts of summer. Selah 

5I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, 
and mine iniquity have I not hid; 

I said: 'I will make confession 
concerning my transgressions 
unto the LORD' — 

And Thou, Thou forgavest the 
iniquity of my sin. Selah 

 

6For this let every one that is godly 
pray unto Thee in a time when 
Thou mayest be found; 

Surely, when the great waters 
overflow, they will not reach unto 
him. 

7Thou art my hiding-place; Thou 
wilt preserve me from the 
adversary; 

With songs of deliverance Thou wilt 
compass me about. Selah 

8'I will instruct thee and teach thee 
in the way which thou shalt go; 

I will give counsel, Mine eye being 
upon thee.' 

9Be ye not as the horse, or as the 
mule, which have no 
understanding; 

Whose mouth must be held in with 
bit and bridle, 

That they come not near unto thee. 

 

10Many are the sorrows of the 
wicked; 

But he that trusteth in the LORD, 
mercy compasseth him about. 

11Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice, 
ye righteous; 

And shout for joy, all ye that are 
upright in heart. 

 

Rejoice in the LORD, O ye 
righteous, 

Praise is comely for the upright. 

2Give thanks unto the LORD with 
harp, 

Sing praises unto Him with the 
psaltery of ten strings. 

3Sing unto Him a new song; 

Play skilfully amid shouts of joy. 

 

4For the word of the LORD is upright; 

And all His work is done in 
faithfulness. 

5He loveth righteousness and 
justice; 

The earth is full of the 
lovingkindness of the LORD. 

6By the word of the LORD were the 
heavens made; 

And all the host of them by the 
breath of His mouth. 

7He gathereth the waters of the sea 
together as a heap; 

He layeth up the deeps in 
storehouses. 

8Let all the earth fear the LORD; 

Let all the inhabitants of the world 
stand in awe of Him. 

9For He spoke, and it was; 

He commanded, and it stood. 

10The LORD bringeth the counsel of 
the nations to nought; 
33 




He maketh the thoughts of the 
peoples to be of no effect. 

11The counsel of the LORD standeth 
for ever, 

The thoughts of His heart to all 
generations. 

 

12Happy is the nation whose God is 
the LORD; 

The people whom He hath chosen 
for His own inheritance. 

13The LORD looketh from heaven; 

He beholdeth all the sons of men; 

14From the place of His habitation 
He looketh intently 

Upon all the inhabitants of the earth; 

15He that fashioneth the hearts of 
them all, 

That considereth all their doings. 

16A king is not saved by the 
multitude of a host; 

A mighty man is not delivered by 
great strength. 

17A horse is a vain thing for safety; 

Neither doth it afford escape by its 
great strength. 

18Behold, the eye of the LORD is 
toward them that fear Him, 

Toward them that wait for His 
mercy; 

19To deliver their soul from death, 

And to keep them alive in famine. 

 

20Our soul hath waited for the LORD; 

He is our help and our shield. 

21For in Him doth our heart rejoice, 

Because we have trusted in His holy 
name. 

22Let Thy mercy, O LORD, be upon 
us, 

According as we have waited for 
Thee. 

 

[A Psalm] of David; when he 
changed his demeanour before 
Abimelech, who drove him away, and 
he departed. 

 

. 2I will bless the LORD at all times; 

 His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. 

. 3My soul shall glory in the LORD; 
The humble shall hear thereof, 
and be glad. 

. 4O magnify the LORD with me, 

 And let us exalt His name together. 

. 5I sought the LORD, and He answered 
me, 

 And delivered me from all my 
fears. 

. 6They looked unto Him, and were 
radiant; 

. And their faces shall never be 
abashed. 

. 7This poor man cried, and the 
LORD heard, 

 And saved him out of all his 
troubles. 

. 8The angel of the LORD encampeth 
round about them that fear Him, 

 And delivereth them. 

. 9O consider and see that the LORD is 
good; 

 Happy is the man that taketh refuge 
in Him. 

. 10O fear the LORD, ye His holy ones; 
34 




 For there is no want to them that 
fear Him. 

. 11The young lions do lack, and 
suffer hunger; 

 But they that seek the LORD want not 
any good thing. 

. 12Come, ye children, hearken unto 
me; 

 I will teach you the fear of the 
LORD. 

. 13Who is the man that desireth life, 
and loveth days, 

 That he may see good therein? 

. 14Keep thy tongue from evil, 

 And thy lips from speaking guile. 

. 15Depart from evil, and do good; 
Seek peace, and pursue it. 

. 16The eyes of the LORD are toward 
the righteous, 

 And His ears are open unto their 
cry. 

. 17The face of the LORD is against 
them that do evil, 

 To cut off the remembrance of them 
from the earth. 

. 18 aThey cried, and the LORD heard, 

a That is, the righteous. 

 And delivered them out of all their 
troubles. 

. 19The LORD is nigh unto them that 
are of a broken heart, 

 And saveth such as are of a contrite 
spirit. 

. 20Many are the ills of the righteous, 

 But the LORD delivereth him out of 
them all. 

. 21He keepeth all his bones; 

 Not one of them is broken. 

. 22Evil shall kill the wicked; 

 And they that hate the righteous 
shall be held guilty. 

 

23The LORD redeemeth the soul of 
His servants; 

And none of them that take refuge 
in Him shall be desolate. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

Strive, O LORD, with them that strive 
with me; 

Fight against them that fight against 
me. 

2Take hold of shield and buckler, 

And rise up to my help. 

3Draw out also the spear, and the 
battle-axe, against them that 
pursue me; 

Say unto my soul: 'I am Thy 
salvation.' 

4Let them be ashamed and brought 
to confusion that seek after my 
soul; 

Let them be turned back and be 
abashed that devise my hurt. 

5Let them be as chaff before the 
wind, 

The angel of the LORD thrusting 
them. 

6Let their way be dark and slippery, 

The angel of the LORD pursuing 
them. 

7For without cause have they hid for 
me the pit, even their net, 

Without cause have they digged for 
my soul. 
35 




8Let destruction come upon him 
unawares; 

And let his net that he hath hid catch 
himself; 

With destruction let him fall therein. 

9And my soul shall be joyful in the 
LORD; 

It shall rejoice in His salvation. 

10All my bones shall say: 'LORD, who 
is like unto Thee, 

Who deliverest the poor from him 
that is too strong for him, 

Yea, the poor and the needy from 
him that spoileth him?' 

 

11Unrighteous witnesses rise up; 

They ask me of things that I know 
not. 

12They repay me evil for good; 

Bereavement is come to my soul. 

13But as for me, when they were 
sick, my clothing was sackcloth, 

I afflicted my soul with fasting; 

And my prayer, may it return into 
mine own bosom. 

14I went about as though it had been 
my friend or my brother; 

I bowed down mournful, as one that 
mourneth for his mother. 

15But when I halt they rejoice, and 
gather themselves together; 

The abjects gather themselves 
together against me, and those 
whom I know not; 

They tear me, and cease not; 

16With the profanest mockeries of 
backbiting 

They gnash at me with their teeth. 

 

17Lord, how long wilt Thou look on? 

Rescue my soul from their 
destructions, 

Mine only one from the lions. 

18I will give Thee thanks in the great 
congregation; 

I will praise Thee among a 
numerous people. 

19Let not them that are wrongfully 
mine enemies rejoice over me; 

Neither let them wink with the eye 
that hate me without a cause. 

20For they speak not peace; 

But they devise deceitful matters 
against them that are quiet in the 
land. 

21Yea, they open their mouth wide 
against me; 

They say: 'Aha, aha, our eye hath 
seen it.' 

22Thou hast seen, O LORD; keep not 
silence; 

O Lord, be not far from me. 

23Rouse Thee, and awake to my 
judgment, 

Even unto my cause, my God and 
my Lord. 

24Judge me, O LORD my God, 
according to Thy righteousness; 

And let them not rejoice over me. 

25Let them not say in their heart: 
'Aha, we have our desire'; 

Let them not say: 'We have 
swallowed him up.' 

26Let them be ashamed and abashed 
together that rejoice at my hurt; 

Let them be clothed with shame and 
confusion that magnify 
themselves against me. 


27Let them shout for joy, and be 
glad, that delight in my 
righteousness; 

Yea, let them say continually: 
'Magnified be the LORD, 

Who delighteth in the peace of His 
servant.' 

28And my tongue shall speak of Thy 
righteousness, 

And of Thy praise all the day. 

 

For the Leader. [A Psalm] of 
David the servant of the LORD. 

 

2Transgression speaketh to the 
wicked, methinks— 

There is no fear of God before his 
eyes. 

3For it flattereth him in his eyes, 

Until his iniquity be found, and he 
be hated. 

4The words of his mouth are iniquity 
and deceit; 

He hath left off to be wise, to do 
good. 

5He deviseth iniquity upon his bed; 

He setteth himself in a way that is 
not good; 

He abhorreth not evil. 

 

6Thy lovingkindness, O LORD, is in 
the heavens; 

Thy faithfulness reacheth unto the 
skies. 

7Thy righteousness is like the 
mighty mountains; 

Thy judgments are like the great 
deep; 

Man and beast Thou preservest, O 
LORD. 

8How precious is Thy 
lovingkindness, O God! 

And the children of men take refuge 
in the shadow of Thy wings. 

9They are abundantly satisfied with 
the fatness of Thy house; 

And Thou makest them drink of the 
river of Thy pleasures. 

10For with Thee is the fountain of 
life; 

In Thy light do we see light. 

 

11O continue Thy lovingkindness 
unto them that know Thee; 

And Thy righteousness to the 
upright in heart. 

12Let not the foot of pride overtake 
me, 

And let not the hand of the wicked 
drive me away. 

13There are the workers of iniquity 
fallen; 

They are thrust down, and are not 
able to rise. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

. Fret not thyself because of evil-
doers, 

 Neither be thou envious against 
them that work unrighteousness. 

 2For they shall soon wither like the 
grass, 

 And fade as the green herb. 

 

. 3Trust in the LORD, and do good; 
36 

37 




 Dwell in the land, and cherish 
faithfulness. 

 4So shalt thou delight thyself in the 
LORD; 

 And He shall give thee the petitions 
of thy heart. 

 

. 5Commit thy way unto the LORD; 

 Trust also in Him, and He will bring 
it to pass. 

 6And He will make thy righteous-
ness to go forth as the light, 

 And thy right as the noonday. 

 

. 7Resign thyself unto the LORD, and 
wait patiently for Him; 

 Fret not thyself because of him who 
prospereth in his way, 

 Because of the man who bringeth 
wicked devices to pass. 

 

. 8Cease from anger, and forsake 
wrath; 

 Fret not thyself, it tendeth only to 
evil-doing. 

 9For evil-doers shall be cut off; 

 But those that wait for the LORD, 
they shall inherit the land. 

 

. 10And yet a little while, and the 
wicked is no more; 

 Yea, thou shalt look well at his 
place, and he is not. 

 11But the humble shall inherit the 
land, 

 And delight themselves in the 
abundance of peace. 

 

. 12The wicked plotteth against the 
righteous, 

 And gnasheth at him with his teeth. 

 13The Lord doth laugh at him; 

 For He seeth that his day is coming. 

 

. 14The wicked have drawn out the 
sword, and have bent their bow; 

 To cast down the poor and needy, 

 To slay such as are upright in the 
way; 

 15Their sword shall enter into their 
own heart, 

 And their bows shall be broken. 

 

. 16Better is a little that the righteous 
hath 

 Than the abundance of many 
wicked. 

 17For the arms of the wicked shall be 
broken; 

 But the LORD upholdeth the 
righteous. 

 

. 18The LORD knoweth the days of 
them that are wholehearted; 

 And their inheritance shall be for 
ever. 

 19They shall not be ashamed in the 
time of evil; 

 And in the days of famine they shall 
be satisfied. 

 

. 20For the wicked shall perish, 

 And the enemies of the LORD shall 
be as the fat of lambs— 

 They shall pass away in smoke, they 
shall pass away. 

 


. 21The wicked borroweth, and payeth 
not; 

 But the righteous dealeth graciously, 
and giveth. 

 22For such as are blessed of Him 
shall inherit the land; 

 And they that are cursed of Him 
shall be cut off. 

 

. 23It is of the LORD that a man's 
goings are established; 

 And He delighted in his way. 

 24Though he fall, he shall not be 
utterly cast down; 

 For the LORD upholdeth his hand. 

 

. 25I have been young, and now am 
old; 

 Yet have I not seen the righteous 
forsaken, 

 Nor his seed begging bread. 

 26All the day long he dealeth 
graciously, and lendeth; 

 And his seed is blessed. 

 

. 27Depart from evil, and do good; 

 And dwell for evermore. 

 28For the LORD loveth justice, 

 And forsaketh not His saints; 

 They are preserved for ever; 

 But the seed of the wicked shall be 
cut off. 

 29The righteous shall inherit the 
land, 

 And dwell therein for ever. 

 

. 30The mouth of the righteous 
uttereth wisdom, 

 And his tongue speaketh justice. 

 31The law of his God is in his heart; 

 None of his steps slide. 

 

. 32The wicked watcheth the 
righteous, 

 And seeketh to slay him. 

 33The LORD will not leave him in his 
hand, 

 Nor suffer him to be condemned 
when he is judged. 

 

. 34Wait for the LORD, and keep His 
way, 

 And He will exalt thee to inherit the 
land; 

 When the wicked are cut off, thou 
shalt see it. 

 

. 35I have seen the wicked in great 
power, 

 And spreading himself like a leafy 
tree in its native soil. 

 36But one passed by, and, lo, he was 
not; 

 Yea, I sought him, but he could not 
be found. 

 

. 37Mark the man of integrity, and 
behold the upright; 

 For there is a future for the man of 
peace. 

 38But transgressors shall be 
destroyed together; 

 The future of the wicked shall be cut 
off. 

 

. 39But the salvation of the righteous 
is of the LORD; 


He is their stronghold in the time of 
trouble. 

40And the LORD helpeth them, and 
delivereth them; 

He delivereth them from the 
wicked, and saveth them, 

Because they have taken refuge in 
Him. 

 

A Psalm of David, to make 
memorial. 

 

2O LORD, rebuke me not in Thine 
anger; 

Neither chasten me in Thy wrath. 

3For Thine arrows are gone deep 
into me, 

And Thy hand is come down upon 
me. 

4There is no soundness in my flesh 
because of Thine indignation; 

Neither is there any health in my 
bones because of my sin. 

5For mine iniquities are gone over 
my head; 

As a heavy burden they are too 
heavy for me. 

6My wounds are noisome, they 
fester, 

Because of my foolishness. 

7I am bent and bowed down greatly; 

I go mourning all the day. 

8For my loins are filled with 
burning; 

And there is no soundness in my 
flesh. 

9I am benumbed and sore crushed; 

I groan by reason of the moaning of 
my heart. 

 

10Lord, all my desire is before Thee; 

And my sighing is not hid from 
Thee. 

11My heart fluttereth, my strength 
faileth me; 

As for the light of mine eyes, it also 
is gone from me. 

12My friends and my companions 
stand aloof from my plague; 

And my kinsmen stand afar off. 

13They also that seek after my life 
lay snares for me; 

And they that seek my hurt speak 
crafty devices, 

And utter deceits all the day. 

14But I am as a deaf man, I hear not; 

And I am as a dumb man that 
openeth not his mouth. 

15Yea, I am become as a man that 
heareth not, 

And in whose mouth are no 
arguments. 

 

16For in Thee, O LORD, do I hope; 

Thou wilt answer, O Lord my God. 

17For I said: 'Lest they rejoice over 
me; 

When my foot slippeth, they 
magnify themselves against me.' 

18For I am ready to halt, 

And my pain is continually before 
me. 

19For I do declare mine iniquity; 

I am full of care because of my sin. 

20But mine enemies are strong in 
health; 

And they that hate me wrongfully 
are multiplied. 
38 




21They also that repay evil for good 

Are adversaries unto me, because I 
follow the thing that is good. 

22Forsake me not, O LORD; 

O my God, be not far from me. 

23Make haste to help me, 

O Lord, my salvation. 

 

For the Leader, for Jeduthun. 
A Psalm of David. 

 

2I said: 'I will take heed to my ways, 

That I sin not with my tongue; 

I will keep a curb upon my mouth, 

While the wicked is before me.' 

3I was dumb with silence; I held my 
peace, had no comfort; 

And my pain was held in check. 

4My heart waxed hot within me; 

While I was musing, the fire 
kindled; 

Then spoke I with my tongue: 

 

5'LORD, make me to know mine end, 

And the measure of my days, what it 
is; 

Let me know how short-lived I am. 

6Behold, Thou hast made my days 
as hand-breadths; 

And mine age is as nothing before 
Thee; 

Surely every man at his best estate 
is altogether vanity. Selah 

7Surely man walketh as a mere 
semblance; 

Surely for vanity they are in turmoil; 

He heapeth up riches, and knoweth 
not who shall gather them. 

 

8And now, Lord, what wait I for? 

My hope, it is in Thee. 

9Deliver me from all my 
transgressions; 

Make me not the reproach of the 
base. 

10I am dumb, I open not my mouth; 

Because Thou hast done it. 

11Remove Thy stroke from off me; 

I am consumed by the blow of Thy 
hand. 

12With rebukes dost Thou chasten 
man for iniquity, 

And like a moth Thou makest his 
beauty to consume away; 

Surely every man is vanity. Selah 

 

13Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give 
ear unto my cry; 

Keep not silence at my tears; 

For I am a stranger with Thee, 

A sojourner, as all my fathers were. 

14Look away from me, that I may 
take comfort, 

Before I go hence, and be no more.' 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2I waited patiently for the LORD; 

And He inclined unto me, and heard 
my cry. 

3He brought me up also out of the 
tumultuous pit, out of the miry 
clay; 

And He set my feet upon a rock, He 
established my goings. 

4And He hath put a new song in my 
mouth, even praise unto our God; 
39 

40 




Many shall see, and fear, 

And shall trust in the LORD. 

 

5Happy is the man that hath made 
the LORD his trust, 

And hath not turned unto the 
arrogant, nor unto such as fall 
away treacherously. 

6Many things hast Thou done, O 
LORD my God, 

Even Thy wonderful works, and 
Thy thoughts toward us; 

There is none to be compared unto 
Thee! 

If I would declare and speak of 
them, 

They are more than can be told. 

7Sacrifice and meal-offering Thou 
hast no delight in; 

Mine ears hast Thou opened; 

Burnt-offering and sin-offering hast 
Thou not required. 

8Then said I: 'Lo, I am come 

With the roll of a book which is 
prescribed for me; 

9I delight to do Thy will, O my God; 

Yea, Thy law is in my inmost parts.' 

10I have preached righteousness in 
the great congregation, 

Lo, I did not refrain my lips; 

O LORD, Thou knowest. 

11I have not hid Thy righteousness 
within my heart; 

I have declared Thy faithfulness and 
Thy salvation; 

I have not concealed Thy mercy and 
Thy truth from the great 
congregation. 

12Thou, O LORD, wilt not withhold 
Thy compassions from me; 

Let Thy mercy and Thy truth 
continually preserve me. 

 

13For innumerable evils have 
compassed me about, 

Mine iniquities have overtaken me, 
so that I am not able to look up; 

They are more than the hairs of my 
head, and my heart hath failed 
me. 

14Be pleased, O LORD, to deliver me; 

O LORD, make haste to help me. 

15Let them be ashamed and abashed 
together 

That seek after my soul to sweep it 
away; 

Let them be turned backward and 
brought to confusion 

That delight in my hurt. 

16Let them be appalled by reason of 
their shame 

That say unto me: 'Aha, aha.' 

17Let all those that seek Thee rejoice 
and be glad in Thee; 

Let such as love Thy salvation say 
continually: 

'The LORD be magnified.' 

18But, as for me, that am poor and 
needy, 

The Lord will account it unto me; 

Thou art my help and my deliverer; 

O my God, tarry not. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 
41 




2Happy is he that considereth the 
poor; 

The LORD will deliver him in the day 
of evil. 

3The LORD preserve him, and keep 
him alive, let him be called happy 
in the land; 

And deliver not Thou him unto the 
greed of his enemies. 

4The LORD support him upon the bed 
of illness; 

Mayest Thou turn all his lying down 
in his sickness. 

 

5As for me, I said: 'O LORD, be 
gracious unto me; 

Heal my soul; for I have sinned 
against Thee.' 

6Mine enemies speak evil of me: 

'When shall he die, and his name 
perish?' 

7And if one come to see me, he 
speaketh falsehood; 

His heart gathereth iniquity to itself; 

When he goeth abroad, he speaketh 
of it. 

8All that hate me whisper together 
against me, 

Against me do they devise my hurt: 

9'An evil thing cleaveth fast unto 
him; 

And now that he lieth, he shall rise 
up no more.' 

10Yea, mine own familiar friend, in 
whom I trusted, who did eat of 
my bread, 

Hath lifted up his heel against me. 

 

11But Thou, O LORD, be gracious 
unto me, and raise me up, 

That I may requite them. 

12By this I know that Thou 
delightest in me, 

That mine enemy doth not triumph 
over me. 

13And as for me, Thou upholdest me 
because of mine integrity, 

And settest me before Thy face for 
ever. 

14Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, 

From everlasting and to everlasting. 

Amen, and Amen. 

 

..... . 

BOOK II 

 

For the Leader; Maschil of the 
sons of Korah. 

 

2As the hart panteth after the water 
brooks, 

So panteth my soul after Thee, O 
God. 

3My soul thirsteth for God, for the 
living God: 

'When shall I come and appear 
before God?' 

4My tears have been my food day 
and night, 

While they say unto me all the day: 
'Where is Thy God?' 

5These things I remember, and pour 
out my soul within me, 
42 




How I passed on with the throng, 
and led them to the house of God, 

With the voice of joy and praise, a 
multitude keeping holyday. 

6Why art thou cast down, O my 
soul? 

And why moanest thou within me? 
Hope thou in God; for I shall yet 
praise Him 

For the salvation of His 
countenance. 

 

7O my God, my soul is cast down 
within me; 

Therefore do I remember Thee from 
the land of Jordan, 

And the Hermons, from the hill 
Mizar. 

8Deep calleth unto deep at the voice 
of Thy cataracts; 

All Thy waves and Thy billows are 
gone over me. 

9By day the LORD will command His 
lovingkindness, 

And in the night His song shall be 
with me, 

Even a prayer unto the God of my 
life. 

10I will say unto God my Rock: 
'Why hast Thou forgotten me? 

Why go I mourning under the 
oppression of the enemy?' 

11As with a crushing in my bones, 
mine adversaries taunt me; 

While they say unto me all the day: 
'Where is Thy God?' 

12Why art thou cast down, O my 
soul? 

And why moanest thou within me? 

Hope thou in God; for I shall yet 
praise Him, 

The salvation of my countenance, 
and my God. 

 

Be Thou my judge, O God, 
and plead my cause against 
an ungodly nation; 

O deliver me from the deceitful and 
unjust man. 

2For Thou art the God of my 
strength; why hast Thou cast me 
off? 

Why go I mourning under the 
oppression of the enemy? 

3O send out Thy light and Thy truth; 
let them lead me; 

Let them bring me unto Thy holy 
mountain, and to Thy dwelling-
places. 

4Then will I go unto the altar of 
God, unto God, my exceeding 
joy; 

And praise Thee upon the harp, O 
God, my God. 

5Why art thou cast down, O my 
soul? 

And why moanest thou within me? 

Hope thou in God; for I shall yet 
praise Him, 

The salvation of my countenance, 
and my God. 

 

For the Leader; [a Psalm] of 
the sons of Korah. Maschil. 

 

2O God, we have heard with our 
ears, our fathers have told us; 
43 

44 




A work Thou didst in their days, in 
the days of old. 

3Thou with Thy hand didst drive out 
the nations, and didst plant them 
in; 

Thou didst break the peoples, and 
didst spread them abroad. 

4For not by their own sword did 
they get the land in possession, 

Neither did their own arm save 
them; 

But Thy right hand, and Thine arm, 
and the light of Thy countenance, 

Because Thou wast favourable unto 
them. 

 

5Thou art my King, O God; 

Command the salvation of Jacob. 

6Through Thee do we push down 
our adversaries; 

Through Thy name do we tread 
them under that rise up against us. 

7For I trust not in my bow, 

Neither can my sword save me. 

8But Thou hast saved us from our 
adversaries, 

And hast put them to shame that 
hate us. 

9In God have we gloried all the day, 

And we will give thanks unto Thy 
name for ever. Selah 

 

10Yet Thou hast cast off, and 
brought us to confusion; 

And goest not forth with our hosts. 

11Thou makest us to turn back from 
the adversary; 

And they that hate us spoil at their 
will. 

12Thou hast given us like sheep to be 
eaten; 

And hast scattered us among the 
nations. 

13Thou sellest Thy people for small 
gain, 

And hast not set their prices high. 

14Thou makest us a taunt to our 
neighbours, 

A scorn and a derision to them that 
are round about us. 

15Thou makest us a byword among 
the nations, 

A shaking of the head among the 
peoples. 

16All the day is my confusion before 
me, 

And the shame of my face hath 
covered me, 

17For the voice of him that taunteth 
and blasphemeth; 

By reason of the enemy and the 
revengeful. 

 

18All this is come upon us; yet have 
we not forgotten Thee, 

Neither have we been false to Thy 
covenant. 

19Our heart is not turned back, 

Neither have our steps declined 
from Thy path; 

20Though Thou hast crushed us into 
a place of jackals, 

And covered us with the shadow of 
death. 

21If we had forgotten the name of 
our God, 

Or spread forth our hands to a 
strange god; 


22Would not God search this out? 

For He knoweth the secrets of the 
heart. 

23Nay, but for Thy sake are we 
killed all the day; 

We are accounted as sheep for the 
slaughter. 

 

24Awake, why sleepest Thou, O 
Lord? 

Arouse Thyself, cast not off for 
ever. 

25Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face, 

And forgettest our affliction and our 
oppression? 

26For our soul is bowed down to the 
dust; 

Our belly cleaveth unto the earth. 

27Arise for our help, 

And redeem us for Thy mercy's 
sake. 

 

For the Leader; upon 
Shoshannim; [a Psalm] of the 
sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of 
loves. 

 

2My heart overfloweth with a 
goodly matter; 

I say: 'My work is concerning a 
king'; 

My tongue is the pen of a ready 
writer. 

 

3Thou art fairer than the children of 
men; 

Grace is poured upon thy lips; 

Therefore God hath blessed thee for 
ever. 

4Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O 
mighty one, 

Thy glory and thy majesty. 

5And in thy majesty prosper, ride 
on, 

In behalf of truth and meekness and 
righteousness; 

And let thy right hand teach thee 
tremendous things. 

6Thine arrows are sharp— 

The peoples fall under thee— 

[They sink] into the heart of the 
king's enemies. 

7Thy throne given of God is for ever 
and ever; 

A sceptre of equity is the sceptre of 
thy kingdom. 

8Thou hast loved righteousness, and 
hated wickedness; 

Therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee 

With the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows. 

9Myrrh, and aloes, and cassia are all 
thy garments; 

Out of ivory palaces stringed 
instruments have made thee glad. 

10Kings' daughters are among thy 
favourites; 

At thy right hand doth stand the 
queen in gold of Ophir. 

11'Hearken, O daughter, and 
consider, and incline thine ear; 

Forget also thine own people, and 
thy father's house; 

12So shall the king desire thy beauty; 

For he is thy lord; and do homage 
unto him. 
45 




13And, O daughter of Tyre, the 
richest of the people 

Shall entreat thy favour with a gift.' 

14All glorious is the king's daughter 
within the palace; 

Her raiment is of chequer work 
inwrought with gold. 

15She shall be led unto the king on 
richly woven stuff; 

The virgins her companions in her 
train being brought unto thee. 

16They shall be led with gladness 
and rejoicing; 

They shall enter into the king's 
palace. 

17Instead of thy fathers shall be thy 
sons, 

Whom thou shalt make princes in all 
the land. 

18I will make thy name to be 
remembered in all generations; 

Therefore shall the peoples praise 
thee for ever and ever. 

 

For the Leader; [a Psalm] of 
the sons of Korah; upon 
Alamoth. A Song. 

 

2God is our refuge and strength, 

A very present help in trouble. 

3Therefore will we not fear, though 
the earth do change, 

And though the mountains be 
moved into the heart of the seas; 

4Though the waters thereof roar and 
foam, 

Though the mountains shake at the 
swelling thereof. Selah 

 

5There is a river, the streams 
whereof make glad the city of 
God, 

The holiest dwelling-place of the 
Most High. 

6God is in the midst of her, she shall 
not be moved; 

God shall help her, at the approach 
of morning. 

7Nations were in tumult, kingdoms 
were moved; 

He uttered His voice, the earth 
melted. 

8The LORD of hosts is with us; 

The God of Jacob is our high tower. 
Selah 

 

9Come, behold the works of the 
LORD, 

Who hath made desolations in the 
earth. 

10He maketh wars to cease unto the 
end of the earth; 

He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the 
spear in sunder; 

He burneth the chariots in the fire. 

11'Let be, and know that I am God; 

I will be exalted among the nations, 
I will be exalted in the earth.' 

12The LORD of hosts is with us; 

The God of Jacob is our high tower. 

 Selah 

 

For the Leader; a Psalm of the 
sons of Korah. 

 

2O clap your hands, all ye peoples; 

Shout unto God with the voice of 
triumph. 
46 

47 




3For the LORD is most high, awful; 

A great King over all the earth. 

4He subdueth peoples under us, 

And nations under our feet. 

5He chooseth our inheritance for us, 

The pride of Jacob whom He loveth. 
Selah 

 

6God is gone up amidst shouting, 

The LORD amidst the sound of the 
horn. 

7Sing praises to God, sing praises; 

Sing praises unto our King, sing 
praises. 

 

8For God is the King of all the earth; 

Sing ye praises in a skilful song. 

9God reigneth over the nations; 

God sitteth upon His holy throne. 

 

10The princes of the peoples are 
gathered together, 

The people of the God of Abraham; 

For unto God belong the shields of 
the earth; 

He is greatly exalted. 

 

A Song; a Psalm of the sons of 
Korah. 

 

2Great is the LORD, and highly to be 
praised, 

In the city of our God, His holy 
mountain, 

3Fair in situation, the joy of the 
whole earth; 

Even mount Zion, the uttermost 
parts of the north, 

The city of the great King. 

4God in her palaces 

Hath made Himself known for a 
stronghold. 

 

5For, lo, the kings assembled 
themselves, 

They came onward together. 

6They saw, straightway they were 
amazed; 

They were affrighted, they hasted 
away. 

7Trembling took hold of them there, 

Pangs, as of a woman in travail. 

8With the east wind 

Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish. 

9As we have heard, so have we seen 

In the city of the LORD of hosts, in 
the city of our God— 

God establish it for ever. Selah 

 

10We have thought on Thy 
lovingkindness, O God, 

In the midst of Thy temple. 

11As is Thy name, O God, 

So is Thy praise unto the ends of the 
earth; 

Thy right hand is full of 
righteousness. 

12Let mount Zion be glad, 

Let the daughters of Judah rejoice, 

Because of Thy judgments. 

13Walk about Zion, and go round 
about her; 

Count the towers thereof. 

14Mark ye well her ramparts, 

Traverse her palaces; 

That ye may tell it to the generation 
following. 
48 




15For such is God, our God, for ever 
and ever; 

He will guide us eternally. 

 

For the Leader; a Psalm of the 
sons of Korah. 

 

2Hear this, all ye peoples; 

Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the 
world, 

3Both low and high, 

Rich and poor together. 

4My mouth shall speak wisdom, 

And the meditation of my heart shall 
be understanding. 

5I will incline mine ear to a parable; 

I will open my dark saying upon the 
harp. 

 

6Wherefore should I fear in the days 
of evil, 

When the iniquity of my supplanters 
compasseth me about, 

7Of them that trust in their wealth, 

And boast themselves in the 
multitude of their riches? 

8No man can by any means redeem 
his brother, 

Nor give to God a ransom for him— 

9For too costly is the redemption of 
their soul, 

And must be let alone for ever— 

10That he should still live alway, 

That he should not see the pit. 

11For he seeth that wise men die, 

The fool and the brutish together 
perish, 

And leave their wealth to others. 

12Their inward thought is, that their 
houses shall continue for ever, 

And their dwelling-places to all 
generations; 

They call their lands after their own 
names. 

13But man abideth not in honour; 

He is like the beasts that perish. 

 

14This is the way of them that are 
foolish, 

And of those who after them 
approve their sayings. Selah 

15Like sheep they are appointed for 
the nether-world; 

Death shall be their shepherd; 

And the upright shall have dominion 
over them in the morning; 

And their form shall be for the 
nether-world to wear away, 

That there be no habitation for it. 

16But God will redeem my soul from 
the power of the nether-world; 

For He shall receive me. Selah 

17Be not thou afraid when one 
waxeth rich, 

When the wealth of his house is 
increased; 

18For when he dieth he shall carry 
nothing away; 

His wealth shall not descend after 
him. 

19Though while he lived he blessed 
his soul: 

'Men will praise thee, when thou 
shalt do well to thyself'; 

20It shall go to the generation of his 
fathers; 

They shall never see the light. 
49 




21Man that is in honour 
understandeth not; 

He is like the beasts that perish. 

 

A Psalm of Asaph. 

 

God, God, the LORD, hath spoken, 
and called the earth 

From the rising of the sun unto the 
going down thereof. 

 

2Out of Zion, the perfection of 
beauty, 

God hath shined forth. 

3Our God cometh, and doth not keep 
silence; 

A fire devoureth before Him, 

And round about Him it stormeth 
mightily. 

4He calleth to the heavens above, 

And to the earth, that He may judge 
His people: 

5'Gather My saints together unto 
Me; 

Those that have made a covenant 
with Me by sacrifice.' 

6And the heavens declare His 
righteousness; 

For God, He is judge. Selah 

7'Hear, O My people, and I will 
speak; 

O Israel, and I will testify against 
thee: 

God, thy God, am I. 

8I will not reprove thee for thy 
sacrifices; 

And thy burnt-offerings are 
continually before Me. 

9I will take no bullock out of thy 
house, 

Nor he-goats out of thy folds. 

10For every beast of the forest is 
Mine, 

And the cattle upon a thousand hills. 

11I know all the fowls of the 
mountains; 

And the wild beasts of the field are 
Mine. 

12If I were hungry, I would not tell 
thee; 

For the world is Mine, and the 
fulness thereof. 

13Do I eat the flesh of bulls, 

Or drink the blood of goats? 

14Offer unto God the sacrifice of 
thanksgiving; 

And pay thy vows unto the Most 
High; 

15And call upon Me in the day of 
trouble; 

I will deliver thee, and thou shalt 
honour Me.' 

 

16But unto the wicked God saith: 

'What hast thou to do to declare My 
statutes, 

And that thou hast taken My 
covenant in thy mouth? 

17Seeing thou hatest instruction, 

And castest My words behind thee. 

18When thou sawest a thief, thou 
hadst company with him, 

And with adulterers was thy portion. 

19Thou hast let loose thy mouth for 
evil, 

And thy tongue frameth deceit. 
50 




20Thou sittest and speakest against 
thy brother; 

Thou slanderest thine own mother's 
son. 

21These things hast thou done, and 
should I have kept silence? 

Thou hadst thought that I was 
altogether such a one as thyself; 

But I will reprove thee, and set the 
cause before thine eyes. 

 

22Now consider this, ye that forget 
God, 

Lest I tear in pieces, and there be 
none to deliver. 

23Whoso offereth the sacrifice of 
thanksgiving honoureth Me; 

And to him that ordereth his way 
aright 

Will I show the salvation of God.' 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David; 2when Nathan the 
prophet came unto him, after he had 
gone in to Bath-sheba. 

 

3Be gracious unto me, O God, 
according to Thy mercy; 

According to the multitude of Thy 
compassions blot out my 
transgressions. 

4Wash me thoroughly from mine 
iniquity, 

And cleanse me from my sin. 

5For I know my transgressions; 

And my sin is ever before me. 

6Against Thee, Thee only, have I 
sinned, 

And done that which is evil in Thy 
sight; 

That Thou mayest be justified when 
Thou speakest, 

And be in the right when Thou 
judgest. 

 

7Behold, I was brought forth in 
iniquity, 

And in sin did my mother conceive 
me. 

8Behold, Thou desirest truth in the 
inward parts; 

Make me, therefore, to know 
wisdom in mine inmost heart. 

9Purge me with hyssop, and I shall 
be clean; 

Wash me, and I shall be whiter than 
snow. 

10Make me to hear joy and gladness; 

That the bones which Thou hast 
crushed may rejoice. 

11Hide Thy face from my sins, 

Aand blot out all mine iniquities. 

12Create me a clean heart, O God; 

And renew a stedfast spirit within 
me. 

13Cast me not away from Thy 
presence; 

And take not Thy holy spirit from 
me. 

14Restore unto me the joy of Thy 
salvation; 

And let a willing spirit uphold me. 

15Then will I teach transgressors 
Thy ways; 

And sinners shall return unto Thee. 
51 




16Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, 
O God, Thou God of my 
salvation; 

So shall my tongue sing aloud of 
Thy righteousness. 

17O Lord, open Thou my lips; 

And my mouth shall declare Thy 
praise. 

18For Thou delightest not in 
sacrifice, else would I give it; 

Thou hast no pleasure in burnt-
offering. 

19The sacrifices of God are a broken 
spirit; 

A broken and a contrite heart, O 
God, Thou wilt not despise. 

 

20Do good in Thy favour unto Zion; 

Build Thou the walls of Jerusalem. 

21Then wilt Thou delight in the 
sacrifices of righteousness, in 
burnt-offering and whole 
offering; 

Then will they offer bullocks upon 
Thine altar. 

 

For the Leader. Maschil of 
David; 2when Doeg the 
Edomite came and told Saul, and said 
unto him: 'David is come to the house 
of Ahimelech.' 

 

3Why boastest thou thyself of evil, 
O mighty man? 

The mercy of God endureth 
continually. 

4Thy tongue deviseth destruction; 

Like a sharp razor, working 
deceitfully. 

 

5Thou lovest evil more than good; 

Falsehood rather than speaking 
righteousness. Selah 

6Thou lovest all devouring words, 

The deceitful tongue. 

7God will likewise break thee for 
ever, 

He will take thee up, and pluck thee 
out of thy tent, 

And root thee out of the land of the 
living. Selah 

 

8The righteous also shall see, and 
fear, 

And shall laugh at him: 

9'Lo, this is the man that made not 
God his stronghold; 

But trusted in the abundance of his 
riches, 

And strengthened himself in his 
wickedness.' 

10But as for me, I am like a leafy 
olive-tree in the house of God; 

I trust in the mercy of God for ever 
and ever. 

11I will give Thee thanks for ever, 
because Thou hast done it; 

And I will wait for Thy name, for it 
is good, in the presence of Thy 
saints. 

 

For the Leader; upon 
Mahalath. Maschil of David. 

 

2The fool hath said in his heart: 
'There is no God'; 

They have dealt corruptly, and have 
done abominable iniquity; 
52 

53 




There is none that doeth good. 

3God looked forth from heaven 
upon the children of men, 

To see if there were any man of 
understanding, that did seek after 
God. 

4Every one of them is unclean, they 
are together become impure; 

There is none that doeth good, no, 
not one. 

 

5’Shall not the workers of iniquity 
know it, 

Who eat up My people as they eat 
bread, 

And call not upon God?' 

6There are they in great fear, where 
no fear was; 

For God hath scattered the bones of 
him that encampeth against thee; 

Thou hast put them to shame, 
because God hath rejected them. 

 

7Oh that the salvation of Israel were 
come out of Zion! 

When God turneth the captivity of 
His people, 

Let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad. 

 

For the Leader; with string-
music. Maschil of David: 
2when the Ziphites came and said to 
Saul: 'Doth not David hide himself 
with us?' 

 

3O God, save me by Thy name, 

And right me by Thy might. 

4O God, hear my prayer; give ear to 
the words of my mouth. 

5For strangers are risen up against 
me, 

And violent men have sought after 
my soul; 

They have not set God before them. 
Selah 

6Behold, God is my helper; 

The Lord is for me as the upholder 
of my soul. 

7He will requite the evil unto them 
that lie in wait for me; 

Destroy Thou them in Thy truth. 

8With a freewill-offering will I 
sacrifice unto Thee; 

I will give thanks unto Thy name, O 
LORD, for it is good. 

9For He hath delivered me out of all 
trouble; 

And mine eye hath gazed upon mine 
enemies. 

 

For the Leader; with string-
music. Maschil of David. 

 

2Give ear, O God, to my prayer; 

And hide not Thyself from my 
supplication. 

3Attend unto me, and answer me; 

I am distraught in my complaint, 
and will moan; 

4Because of the voice of the enemy, 

Because of the oppression of the 
wicked; 

For they cast mischief upon me, 

And in anger they persecute me. 

5My heart doth writhe within me; 

And the terrors of death are fallen 
upon me. 

6Fear and trembling come upon me, 
54 

55 




And horror hath overwhelmed me. 

7And I said: 'Oh that I had wings 
like a dove! 

Then would I fly away, and be at 
rest. 

8Lo, then would I wander far off, 

I would lodge in the wilderness. 

Selah 

9I would haste me to a shelter 

From the stormy wind and tempest.' 

10Destroy, O Lord, and divide their 
tongue; 

For I have seen violence and strife 
in the city. 

11Day and night they go about it 
upon the walls thereof; 

Iniquity also and mischief are in the 
midst of it. 

12Wickedness is in the midst thereof; 

Oppression and guile depart not 
from her broad place. 

13For it was not an enemy that 
taunted me, 

Then I could have borne it; 

Neither was it mine adversary that 
did magnify himself against me, 

Then I would have hid myself from 
him. 

14But it was thou, a man mine equal, 

My companion, and my familiar 
friend; 

15We took sweet counsel together, 

In the house of God we walked with 
the throng. 

16May He incite death against them, 

Let them go down alive into the 
nether-world; 

For evil is in their dwelling, and 
within them. 

 

17As for me, I will call upon God; 

And the LORD shall save me. 

18Evening, and morning, and at 
noon, will I complain, and moan; 

And He hath heard my voice. 

19He hath redeemed my soul in 
peace so that none came nigh me; 

For they were many that strove with 
me. 

20God shall hear, and humble them, 

Even He that is enthroned of old, 

Selah 

Such as have no changes, 

And fear not God. 

21He hath put forth his hands against 
them that were at peace with him; 

He hath profaned his covenant. 

22Smoother than cream were the 
speeches of his mouth, 

But his heart was war; 

His words were softer than oil, 

Yet were they keen-edged swords. 

 

23Cast thy burden upon the LORD, 
and He will sustain thee; 

He will never suffer the righteous to 
be moved. 

24But Thou, O God, wilt bring them 
down into the nethermost pit; 

Men of blood and deceit shall not 
live out half their days; 

But as for me, I will trust in Thee. 

 

For the Leader; upon Jonath-
elem-rehokim. [A Psalm] of 
David; Michtam; when the Philistines 
took him in Gath. 

 
56 




2Be gracious unto me, O God, for 
man would swallow me up; 

All the day he fighting oppresseth 
me. 

3They that lie in wait for me would 
swallow me up all the day; 

For they are many that fight against 
me, O Most High, 

4In the day that I am afraid, 

I will put my trust in Thee. 

5In God—I will praise His word— 

In God do I trust, I will not be 
afraid; 

What can flesh do unto me? 

 

6All the day they trouble mine 
affairs; 

All their thoughts are against me for 
evil. 

7They gather themselves together, 
they hide themselves, 

They mark my steps; 

According as they have waited for 
my soul. 

8Because of iniquity cast them out; 

In anger bring down the peoples, O 
God. 

9Thou has counted my wanderings; 

Put Thou my tears into Thy bottle; 

Are they not in Thy book? 

10Then shall mine enemies turn back 
in the day that I call; 

This I know, that God is for me. 

11In God—I will praise His word— 

In the LORD—I will praise His 
word— 

12In God do I trust, I will not be 
afraid; 

What can man do unto me? 

 

13Thy vows are upon me, O God; 

I will render thank-offerings unto 
Thee. 

14For thou hast delivered my soul 
from death; 

Hast Thou not delivered my feet 
from stumbling? 

That I may walk before God in the 
light of the living? 

 

For the Leader; Al-tashheth. 
[A Psalm] of David; Michtam; 
when he fled from Saul, in the cave. 

 

2Be gracious unto me, O God, be 
gracious unto me, 

For in Thee hath my soul taken 
refuge; 

Yea, in the shadow of Thy wings 
will I take refuge, 

Until calamities be overpast. 

3I will cry unto God Most high; 

Unto God that accomplisheth it for 
me. 

4He will send from heaven, and save 
me, 

When he that would swallow me up 
taunteth, Selah 

God shall send forth His mercy and 
His truth. 

5My soul is among lions, I do lie 
down among them that are 
aflame; 

Even the sons of men, whose teeth 
are spears and arrows, 

And their tongue a sharp sword. 

6Be Thou exalted, O God, above the 
heavens; 
57 




Thy glory be above all the earth. 

7They have prepared a net for my 
steps, 

My soul is bowed down; 

They have digged a pit before me, 

They are fallen into the midst 
thereof themselves. Selah 

8My heart is stedfast, O God, my 
heart is stedfast; 

I will sing, yea, I will sing praises. 

9Awake, my glory; awake, psaltery 
and harp; 

I will awake the dawn. 

10I will give thanks unto Thee, O 
Lord, among the peoples; 

I will sing praises unto Thee among 
the nations. 

11For Thy mercy is great unto the 
heavens, 

And Thy truth unto the skies. 

12Be Thou exalted, O God, above 
the heavens; 

Thy glory be above all the earth. 

 

For the Leader; Al-tashheth. 
[A Psalm] of David; Michtam. 

 

2Do ye indeed speak as a righteous 
company? 

Do ye judge with equity the sons of 
men? 

3Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; 

Ye weigh out in the earth the 
violence of your hands. 

4The wicked are estranged from the 
womb; 

The speakers of lies go astray as 
soon as they are born. 

5Their venom is like the venom of a 
serpent; 

They are like the deaf asp that 
stoppeth her ear; 

6Which hearkeneth not to the voice 
of charmers, 

Or of the most cunning binder of 
spells. 

 

7Break their teeth, O God, in their 
mouth; 

Break out the cheek-teeth of the 
young lions, O LORD. 

8Let them melt away as water that 
runneth apace; 

When he aimeth his arrows, let them 
be as though they were cut off. 

9Let them be as a snail which 
melteth and passeth away; 

Like the untimely births of a 
woman, that have not seen the 
sun. 

10Before your pots can feel the 
thorns, 

He will sweep it away with a 
whirlwind, the raw and the 
burning alike. 

 

11The righteous shall rejoice when 
he seeth the vengeance; 

He shall wash his feet in the blood 
of the wicked. 

12And men shall say: 'Verily there is 
a reward for the righteous; 

Verily there is a God that judgeth in 
the earth.' 

 

For the Leader; Al-tashheth. 
[A Psalm] of David; Michtam; 
58 

59 




when Saul sent, and they watched the 
house to kill him. 

 

2Deliver me from mine enemies, O 
my God; 

Set me on high from them that rise 
up against me. 

3Deliver me from the workers of 
iniquity, 

And save me from the men of blood. 

4For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul; 

The impudent gather themselves 
together against me; 

Not for my transgression, nor for 
my sin, O LORD. 

5Without my fault, they run and 
prepare themselves; 

Awake Thou to help me, and 
behold. 

6Thou therefore, O LORD God of 
hosts, the God of Israel, 

Arouse Thyself to punish all the 
nations; 

Show no mercy to any iniquitous 
traitors. Selah 

 

7They return at evening, they howl 
like a dog, 

And go round about the city. 

8Behold, they belch out with their 
mouth; 

Swords are in their lips: 

'For who doth hear?' 

9But Thou, O LORD, shalt laugh at 
them; 

Thou shalt have all the nations in 
derision. 

10Because of his strength, I will wait 
for Thee; 

For God is my high tower. 

 

11The God of my mercy will come 
to meet me; 

God will let me gaze upon mine 
adversaries. 

12Slay them not, lest my people 
forget, 

Make them wander to and fro by 
Thy power, and bring them down, 

O Lord our shield. 

13For the sin of their mouth, and the 
words of their lips, 

Let them even be taken in their 
pride, 

And for cursing and lying which 
they speak. 

14Consume them in wrath, consume 
them, that they be no more; 

And let them know that God ruleth 
in Jacob, 

Unto the ends of the earth. Selah 

 

15And they return at evening, they 
howl like a dog, 

And go round about the city; 

16They wander up and down to 
devour, 

And tarry all night if they have not 
their fill. 

17But as for me, I will sing of Thy 
strength; 

Yea, I will sing aloud of Thy mercy 
in the morning; 

For Thou hast been my high tower, 

And a refuge in the day of my 
distress. 

18O my strength, unto Thee will I 
sing praises; 


For God is my high tower, the God 
of my mercy. 

 

For the Leader; upon Shushan 
Eduth; Michtam of David, to 
teach; 2when he strove with Aram-
naharaim and with Aram-zobah, and 
Joab returned, and smote of Edom in 
the Valley of Salt twelve thousand. 

 

3O God, Thou hast cast us off, Thou 
hast broken us down; 

Thou hast been angry; O restore us. 

4Thou hast made the land to shake, 
Thou hast cleft it; 

Heal the breaches thereof; for it 
tottereth. 

5Thou hast made Thy people to see 
hard things; 

Thou hast made us to drink the wine 
of staggering. 

6Thou hast given a banner to them 
that fear Thee, 

That it may be displayed because of 
the truth. Selah 

7That Thy beloved may be 
delivered, 

Save with Thy right hand, and 
answer me. 

 

8God spoke in His holiness, that I 
would exult; 

That I would divide Shechem, and 
mete out the valley of Succoth. 

9Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is 
mine; 

Ephraim also is the defence of my 
head; 

Judah is my sceptre. 

10Moab is my washpot; 

Upon Edom do I cast my shoe; 

Philistia, cry aloud because of me! 

 

11Who will bring me into the 
fortified city? 

Who will lead me unto Edom? 

12Hast not Thou, O God, cast us off? 

And Thou goest not forth, O God, 
with our hosts. 

13Give us help against the adversary; 

For vain is the help of man. 

14Through God we shall do 
valiantly; 

For He it is that will tread down our 
adversaries. 

 

For the Leader; with string-
music. [A Psalm] of David. 

 

2Hear my cry, O God; 

Attend unto my prayer. 

3From the end of the earth will I call 
unto Thee, when my heart 
fainteth; 

Lead me to a rock that is too high 
for me. 

4For Thou hast been a refuge for me, 

A tower of strength in the face of 
the enemy. 

 

5I will dwell in Thy Tent for ever; 

I will take refuge in the covert of 
Thy wings. Selah 

6For Thou, O God, hast heard my 
vows; 

Thou hast granted the heritage of 
those that fear Thy name. 

 
60 

61 




7Mayest Thou add days unto the 
king's days! 

May his years be as many 
generations! 

8May he be enthroned before God 
for ever! 

Appoint mercy and truth, that they 
may preserve him. 

 

9So will I sing praise unto Thy name 
for ever, 

That I may daily perform my vows. 

 

For the Leader; for Jeduthun. 
A Psalm of David. 

 

2Only for God doth my soul wait in 
stillness; 

From Him cometh my salvation. 

3He only is my rock and my 
salvation, 

My high tower, I shall not be greatly 
moved. 

4How long will ye set upon a man, 

That ye may slay him, all of you, 

As a leaning wall, a tottering fence? 

5They only devise to thrust him 
down from his height, delighting 
in lies; 

They bless with their mouth, but 
they curse inwardly. Selah 

 

6Only for God wait thou in stillness, 
my soul; 

For from Him cometh my hope. 

7He only is my rock and my 
salvation, 

My high tower, I shall not be 
moved. 

8Upon God resteth my salvation and 
my glory; 

The rock of my strength, and my 
refuge, is in God. 

9Trust in Him at all times, ye 
people; 

Pour out your heart before Him; 

God is a refuge for us. Selah 

 

10Men of low degree are vanity, and 
men of high degree are a lie; 

If they be laid in the balances, they 
are together lighter than vanity. 

11Trust not in oppression, 

And put not vain hope in robbery; 

If riches increase, set not your heart 
thereon. 

12God hath spoken once, 

Twice have I heard this: 

That strength belongeth unto God; 

13Also unto Thee, O Lord, belongeth 
mercy; 

For Thou renderest to every man 
according to his work. 

 

A Psalm of David, when he 
was in the wilderness of 
Judah. 

 

2O God, Thou art my God, earnestly 
will I seek Thee; 

My soul thirsteth for Thee, my flesh 
longeth for Thee, 

In a dry and weary land, where no 
water is. 

3So have I looked for Thee in the 
sanctuary, 

To see Thy power and Thy glory. 

 
62 

63 




4For Thy lovingkindness is better 
than life; 

My lips shall praise Thee. 

5So will I bless Thee as long as I 
live; 

In Thy name will I lift up my hands. 

 

6My soul is satisfied as with marrow 
and fatness; 

And my mouth doth praise Thee 
with joyful lips; 

7When I remember Thee upon my 
couch, 

And meditate on Thee in the night-
watches. 

 

8For Thou hast been my help, 

And in the shadow of Thy wings do 
I rejoice. 

9My soul cleaveth unto Thee; 

Thy right hand holdeth me fast. 

 

10But those that seek my soul, to 
destroy it, 

Shall go into the nethermost parts of 
the earth. 

11They shall be hurled to the power 
of the sword; 

They shall be a portion for foxes. 

12But the king shall rejoice in God; 

Every one that sweareth by Him 
shall glory; 

For the mouth of them that speak 
lies shall be stopped. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2Hear my voice, O God, in my 
complaint; 

Preserve my life from the terror of 
the enemy. 

3Hide me from the council of evil-
doers; 

From the tumult of the workers of 
iniquity; 

4Who have whet their tongue like a 
sword, 

And have aimed their arrow, a 
poisoned word; 

5That they may shoot in secret 
places at the blameless; 

Suddenly do they shoot at him, and 
fear not. 

6They encourage one another in an 
evil matter; 

They converse of laying snares 
secretly; 

They ask, who would see them. 

7They search out iniquities, they 
have accomplished a diligent 
search; 

Even in the inward thought of every 
one, and the deep heart. 

 

8But God doth shoot at them with an 
arrow suddenly; 

Thence are their wounds. 

9So they make their own tongue a 
stumbling unto themselves; 

All that see them shake the head. 

10And all men fear; 

And they declare the work of God, 

And understand His doing. 

11The righteous shall be glad in the 
LORD, and shall take refuge in 
Him; 
64 




And all the upright in heart shall 
glory. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm. 

A Song of David. 

 

2Praise waiteth for Thee, O God, in 
Zion; 

And unto Thee the vow is 
performed. 

3O Thou that hearest prayer, 

Unto Thee doth all flesh come. 

4The tale of iniquities is too heavy 
for me; 

As for our transgressions, Thou wilt 
pardon them. 

5Happy is the man whom Thou 
choosest, and bringest near, 

That he may dwell in Thy courts; 

May we be satisfied with the 
goodness of Thy house, 

The holy place of Thy temple! 

 

6With wondrous works dost Thou 
answer us in righteousness, 

O God of our salvation; 

Thou the confidence of all the ends 
of the earth, 

And of the far distant seas; 

7Who by Thy strength settest fast 
the mountains, 

Who art girded about with might; 

8Who stillest the roaring of the seas, 
the roaring of their waves, 

And the tumult of the peoples; 

9So that they that dwell in the 
uttermost parts stand in awe of 
Thy signs; 

Thou makest the outgoings of the 
morning and evening to rejoice. 

 

10Thou hast remembered the earth, 
and watered her, greatly enriching 
her, 

With the river of God that is full of 
water; 

Thou preparest them corn, for so 
preparest Thou her. 

11Watering her ridges abundantly, 

Settling down the furrows thereof, 

Thou makest her soft with showers; 

Thou blessest the growth thereof. 

12Thou crownest the year with Thy 
goodness; 

And Thy paths drop fatness. 

13The pastures of the wilderness do 
drop; 

And the hills are girded with joy. 

14The meadows are clothed with 
flocks; 

The valleys also are covered over 
with corn; 

They shout for joy, yea, they sing. 

 

For the Leader. A Song, a 
Psalm. 

 

Shout unto God, all the earth; 

2Sing praises unto the glory of His 
name; 

Make His praise glorious. 

3Say unto God: 'How tremendous is 
Thy work! 

Through the greatness of Thy power 
shall Thine enemies dwindle 
away before Thee. 

4All the earth shall worship Thee, 
65 

66 




And shall sing praises unto Thee; 

They shall sing praises to Thy 
name.' Selah 

 

5Come, and see the works of God; 

He is terrible in His doing toward 
the children of men. 

6He turned the sea into dry land; 

They went through the river on foot; 

There let us rejoice in Him! 

7Who ruleth by His might for ever; 

His eyes keep watch upon the 
nations; 

Let not the rebellious exalt 
themselves. Selah 

 

8Bless our God, ye peoples, 

And make the voice of His praise to 
be heard; 

9Who hath set our soul in life, 

And suffered not our foot to be 
moved, 

10For Thou, O God, hast tried us; 

Thou hast refined us, as silver is 
refined. 

11Thou didst bring us into the hold; 

Thou didst lay constraint upon our 
loins. 

12Thou hast caused men to ride over 
our heads; 

We went through fire and through 
water; 

But Thou didst bring us out unto 
abundance. 

 

13I will come into Thy house with 
burnt-offerings, 

I will perform unto Thee my vows, 

14Which my lips have uttered, 

And my mouth hath spoken, when I 
was in distress. 

15I will offer unto Thee burnt-
offerings of fatlings, 

With the sweet smoke of rams; 

I will offer bullocks with goats. 

Selah 

16Come, and hearken, all ye that fear 
God, 

And I will declare what He hath 
done for my soul. 

17I cried unto Him with my mouth, 

And He was extolled with my 
tongue. 

18If I had regarded iniquity in my 
heart, 

The Lord would not hear; 

19But verily God hath heard; 

He hath attended to the voice of my 
prayer. 

20Blessed be God, 

Who hath not turned away my 
prayer, nor His mercy from me. 

 

For the Leader; with string-
music. A Psalm, a Song. 

 

2God be gracious unto us, and bless 
us; 

May He cause His face to shine 
toward us; Selah 

3That Thy way may be known upon 
earth, 

Thy salvation among all nations. 

 

4Let the peoples give thanks unto 
Thee, O God; 

Let the peoples give thanks unto 
Thee, all of them. 
67 




5O let the nations be glad and sing 
for joy; 

For Thou wilt judge the peoples 
with equity, 

And lead the nations upon earth. 

Selah 

 

6Let the peoples give thanks unto 
Thee, O God; 

Let the peoples give thanks unto 
Thee, all of them. 

7The earth hath yielded her increase; 

May God, our own God, bless us. 

8May God bless us; 

And let all the ends of the earth fear 
Him. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David, a Song. 

 

2Let God arise, let His enemies be 
scattered; 

And let them that hate Him flee 
before Him. 

3As smoke is driven away, so drive 
them away; 

As wax melteth before the fire, 

So let the wicked perish at the 
presence of God. 

4But let the righteous be glad, let 
them exult before God; 

Yea, let them rejoice with gladness. 

 

5Sing unto God, sing praises to His 
name; 

Extol Him that rideth upon the 
skies, whose name is the LORD; 

And exult ye before Him. 

6A father of the fatherless, and a 
judge of the widows, 

Is God in His holy habitation. 

7God maketh the solitary to dwell in 
a house; 

He bringeth out the prisoners into 
prosperity; 

The rebellious dwell but in a 
parched land. 

8O God, when Thou wentest forth 
before Thy people, 

When Thou didst march through the 
wilderness; Selah 

9The earth trembled, the heavens 
also dropped at the presence of 
God; 

Even yon Sinai trembled at the 
presence of God, the God of 
Israel. 

10A bounteous rain didst Thou pour 
down, O God; 

When Thine inheritance was weary, 
Thou didst confirm it. 

11Thy flock settled therein; 

Thou didst prepare in Thy goodness 
for the poor, O God. 

 

12The Lord giveth the word; 

The women that proclaim the 
tidings are a great host. 

13Kings of armies flee, they flee; 

And she that tarrieth at home 
divideth the spoil. 

14When ye lie among the sheepfolds, 

The wings of the dove are covered 
with silver, 

And her pinions with the shimmer 
of gold. 
68 




15When the Almighty scattereth 
kings therein, 

It snoweth in Zalmon. 

 

16A mountain of God is the 
mountain of Bashan; 

A mountain of peaks is the 
mountain of Bashan. 

17Why look ye askance, ye 
mountains of peaks, 

At the mountain which God hath 
desired for His abode? 

Yea, the LORD will dwell therein for 
ever. 

18The chariots of God are myriads, 
even thousands upon thousands; 

The Lord is among them, as in 
Sinai, in holiness. 

19Thou hast ascended on high, Thou 
hast led captivity captive; 

Thou hast received gifts among 
men, 

Yea, among the rebellious also, that 
the LORD God might dwell there. 

20Blessed be the Lord, day by day 
He beareth our burden, 

Even the God who is our salvation. 

Selah 

21God is unto us a God of 
deliverances; 

And unto GOD the Lord belong the 
issues of death. 

22Surely God will smite through the 
head of His enemies, 

The hairy scalp of him that goeth 
about in his guiltiness. 

23The Lord said: 'I will bring back 
from Bashan, 

I will bring them back from the 
depths of the sea; 

24That thy foot may wade through 
blood, 

That the tongue of thy dogs may 
have its portion from thine 
enemies.' 

 

25They see Thy goings, O God, 

Even the goings of my God, my 
King, in holiness. 

26The singers go before, the 
minstrels follow after, 

In the midst of damsels playing 
upon timbrels. 

27'Bless ye God in full assemblies, 

Even the Lord, ye that are from the 
fountain of Israel.' 

28There is Benjamin, the youngest, 
ruling them, 

The princes of Judah their council, 

The princes of Zebulun, the princes 
of Naphtali. 

29Thy God hath commanded thy 
strength; 

Be strong, O God, Thou that hast 
wrought for us 

30Out of Thy temple at Jerusalem, 

Whither kings shall bring presents 
unto Thee. 

31Rebuke the wild beast of the reeds, 

The multitude of the bulls, with the 
calves of the peoples, 

Every one submitting himself with 
pieces of silver; 

He hath scattered the peoples that 
delight in war! 

32Nobles shall come out of Egypt; 


Ethiopia shall hasten to stretch out 
her hands unto God. 

 

33Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the 
earth; 

O sing praises unto the Lord; 

Selah 

34To Him that rideth upon the 
heavens of heavens, which are of 
old; 

Lo, He uttereth His voice, a mighty 
voice. 

35Ascribe ye strength unto God; 

His majesty is over Israel, 

And His strength is in the skies. 

36Awful is God out of thy holy 
places; 

The God of Israel, He giveth 
strength and power unto the 
people; 

Blessed be God. 

 

For the Leader; upon 
Shoshannim. [A Psalm] of 
David. 

 

2Save me, O God; 

For the waters are come in even 
unto the soul. 

3I am sunk in deep mire, where there 
is no standing; 

I am come into deep waters, and the 
flood overwhelmeth me. 

4I am weary of my crying; my throat 
is dried; 

Mine eyes fail while I wait for my 
God. 

5They that hate me without a cause 
are more than the hairs of my 
head; 

They that would cut me off, being 
mine enemies wrongfully, are 
many; 

Should I restore that which I took 
not away? 

6O God, Thou knowest my folly; 

And my trespasses are not hid from 
Thee. 

7Let not them that wait for Thee be 
ashamed through me, O Lord GOD 
of hosts; 

Let not those that seek Thee be 
brought to confusion through me, 
O God of Israel. 

 

8Because for Thy sake I have borne 
reproach; 

Confusion hath covered my face. 

9I am become a stranger unto my 
brethren, 

And an alien unto my mother's 
children. 

10Because zeal for Thy house hath 
eaten me up, 

And the reproaches of them that 
reproach Thee are fallen upon me. 

11And I wept with my soul with 
fasting, 

And that became unto me a 
reproach. 

12I made sackcloth also my garment, 

And I became a byword unto them. 

13They that sit in the gate talk of me; 

And I am the song of the drunkards. 

 
69 




14But as for me, let my prayer be 
unto Thee, O LORD, in an 
acceptable time; 

O God, in the abundance of Thy 
mercy, 

Answer me with the truth of Thy 
salvation. 

15Deliver me out of the mire, and let 
me not sink; 

Let me be delivered from them that 
hate me, and out of the deep 
waters. 

16Let not the waterflood overwhelm 
me, 

Neither let the deep swallow me up; 

And let not the pit shut her mouth 
upon me. 

17Answer me, O LORD, for Thy 
mercy is good; 

According to the multitude of Thy 
compassions turn Thou unto me. 

18And hide not Thy face from Thy 
servant; 

For I am in distress; answer me 
speedily. 

19Draw nigh unto my soul, and 
redeem it; 

Ransom me because of mine 
enemies. 

 

20Thou knowest my reproach, and 
my shame, and my confusion; 

Mine adversaries are all before 
Thee. 

21Reproach hath broken my heart; 
and I am sore sick; 

And I looked for some to show 
compassion, but there was none; 

And for comforters, but I found 
none. 

22Yea, they put poison into my food; 

And in my thirst they gave me 
vinegar to drink. 

 

23Let their table before them become 
a snare; 

And when they are in peace, let it 
become a trap. 

24Let their eyes be darkened, that 
they see not; 

And make their loins continually to 
totter. 

25Pour out Thine indignation upon 
them, 

And let the fierceness of Thine 
anger overtake them. 

26Let their encampment be desolate; 

Let none dwell in their tents. 

27For they persecute him whom 
Thou hast smitten; 

And they tell of the pain of those 
whom Thou hast wounded. 

28Add iniquity unto their iniquity; 

And let them not come into Thy 
righteousness. 

29Let them be blotted out of the 
book of the living, 

And not be written with the 
righteous. 

30But I am afflicted and in pain; 

Let Thy salvation, O God, set me up 
on high. 

31I will praise the name of God with 
a song, 

And will magnify Him with 
thanksgiving. 


32And it shall please the LORD better 
than a bullock 

That hath horns and hoofs. 

33The humble shall see it, and be 
glad; 

Ye that seek after God, let your 
heart revive. 

34For the LORD hearkeneth unto the 
needy, 

And despiseth not His prisoners. 

35Let heaven and earth praise Him, 

The seas, and every thing that 
moveth therein. 

36For God will save Zion, and build 
the cities of Judah; 

And they shall abide there, and have 
it in possession. 

37The seed also of His servants shall 
inherit it; 

And they that love His name shall 
dwell therein. 

 

For the Leader. [A Psalm] of 
David; to make memorial. 

 

O God, to deliver me, 

O LORD, to help me, make haste. 

2Let them be ashamed and abashed 

That seek after my soul; 

Let them be turned backward and 
brought to confusion 

That delight in my hurt. 

3Let them be turned back by reason 
of their shame 

That say: 'Aha, aha.' 

4Let all those that seek Thee rejoice 
and be glad in Thee; 

And let such as love Thy salvation 
say continually: 

'Let God be magnified.' 

5But I am poor and needy; 

O God, make haste unto me; 

Thou art my help and my deliverer; 

O LORD, tarry not. 

 

In Thee, O LORD, have I taken 
refuge; 

Let me never be ashamed. 

2Deliver me in Thy righteousness, 
and rescue me; 

Incline Thine ear unto me, and save 
me. 

3Be Thou to me a sheltering rock, 
whereunto I may continually 
resort, 

Which Thou hast appointed to save 
me; 

For Thou art my rock and my 
fortress. 

 

4O my God, rescue me out of the 
hand of the wicked, 

Out of the grasp of the unrighteous 
and ruthless man. 

5For Thou art my hope; 

O Lord GOD, my trust from my 
youth. 

6Upon Thee have I stayed myself 
from birth; 

Thou art he that took me out of my 
mother's womb; 

My praise is continually of Thee. 

7I am as a wonder unto many; 

But Thou art my strong refuge. 

8My mouth shall be filled with Thy 
praise, 

And with Thy glory all the day. 
70 

71 




9Cast me not off in the time of old 
age; 

When my strength faileth, forsake 
me not. 

10For mine enemies speak 
concerning me, 

And they that watch for my soul 
take counsel together, 

11Saying: 'God hath forsaken him; 

Pursue and take him; for there is 
none to deliver.' 

12O God, be not far from me; 

O my God, make haste to help me. 

13Let them be ashamed and 
consumed that are adversaries to 
my soul; 

Let them be covered with reproach 
and confusion that seek my hurt. 

 

14But as for me, I will hope 
continually, 

And will praise Thee yet more and 
more. 

15My mouth shall tell of Thy 
righteousness, 

And of Thy salvation all the day; 

For I know not the numbers thereof. 

16I will come with Thy mighty acts, 
O Lord GOD; 

I will make mention of Thy 
righteousness, even of Thine 
only. 

17O God, Thou hast taught me from 
my youth; 

And until now do I declare Thy 
wondrous works. 

18And even unto old age and hoary 
hairs, O God, forsake me not; 

Until I have declared Thy strength 
unto the next generation, 

Thy might to every one that is to 
come. 

19Thy righteousness also, O God, 
which reacheth unto high heaven; 

Thou who hast done great things, 

O God, who is like unto Thee? 

20Thou, who hast made me to see 
many and sore troubles, 

Wilt quicken me again, and bring 
me up again from the depths of 
the earth. 

21Thou wilt increase my greatness, 

And turn and comfort me. 

22I also will give thanks unto Thee 
with the psaltery, 

Even unto Thy truth, O my God; 

I will sing praises unto Thee with 
the harp, 

O Thou Holy One of Israel. 

23My lips shall greatly rejoice when 
I sing praises unto Thee; 

And my soul, which Thou hast 
redeemed. 

24My tongue also shall tell of Thy 
righteousness all the day; 

For they are ashamed, for they are 
abashed, that seek my hurt. 

 

[A Psalm] of Solomon. 

 

Give the king Thy judgments, O 
God, 

And Thy righteousness unto the 
king's son; 

2That he may judge Thy people with 
righteousness, 

And Thy poor with justice. 
72 




3Let the mountains bear peace to the 
people, 

And the hills, through righteousness. 

4May he judge the poor of the 
people, 

And save the children of the needy, 

And crush the oppressor. 

5They shall fear Thee while the sun 
endureth, 

And so long as the moon, 
throughout all generations. 

6May he come down like rain upon 
the mown grass, 

As showers that water the earth. 

7In his days let the righteous 
flourish, 

And abundance of peace, till the 
moon be no more. 

 

8May he have dominion also from 
sea to sea, 

And from the River unto the ends of 
the earth. 

9Let them that dwell in the 
wilderness bow before him; 

And his enemies lick the dust. 

10The kings of Tarshish and of the 
isles shall render tribute; 

The kings of Sheba and Seba shall 
offer gifts. 

11Yea, all kings shall prostrate 
themselves before him; 

All nations shall serve him. 

12For he will deliver the needy when 
he crieth; the poor also, and him 
that hath no helper. 

13He will have pity on the poor and 
needy, 

And the souls of the needy he will 
save. 

14He will redeem their soul from 
oppression and violence, 

And precious will their blood be in 
his sight. 

15That they may live, and that he 
may give them of the gold of 
Sheba, 

That they may pray for him 
continually, 

Yea, bless him all the day. 

16May he be as a rich cornfield in 
the land upon the top of the 
mountains; 

May his fruit rustle like Lebanon; 

And may they blossom out of the 
city like grass of the earth. 

17May his name endure for ever; 

May his name be continued as long 
as the sun; 

May men also bless themselves by 
him; 

May all nations call him happy. 

 

18Blessed be the LORD God, the God 
of Israel, 

Who only doeth wondrous things; 

19And blessed be His glorious name 
for ever; 

And let the whole earth be filled 
with His glory. 

Amen, and Amen. 

 

20The prayers of David the son of 
Jesse are ended. 

 

 


..... ... 

BOOK III 

 

A Psalm of Asaph. 

 

Surely God is good to Israel, 

Even to such as are pure in heart. 

2But as for me, my feet were almost 
gone; 

My steps had well nigh slipped. 

3For I was envious at the arrogant, 

When I saw the prosperity of the 
wicked. 

4For there are no pangs at their 
death, 

And their body is sound. 

5In the trouble of man they are not; 

Neither are they plagued like men. 

6Therefore pride is as a chain about 
their neck; 

Violence covereth them as a 
garment. 

7Their eyes stand forth from fatness; 

They are gone beyond the 
imaginations of their heart. 

8They scoff, and in wickedness utter 
oppression; 

They speak as if there were none on 
high. 

9They have set their mouth against 
the heavens, 

And their tongue walketh through 
the earth. 

10Therefore His people return hither; 

And waters of fullness are drained 
out by them. 

11And they say: 'How doth God 
know? 

And is there knowledge in the Most 
High?' 

12Behold, such are the wicked; 

And they that are always at ease 
increase riches. 

13Surely in vain have I cleansed my 
heart, 

And washed my hands in 
innocency; 

14For all the day have I been 
plagued, 

And my chastisement came every 
morning. 

 

15If I had said: 'I will speak thus', 

Behold, I had been faithless to the 
generation of Thy children. 

16And when I pondered how I might 
know this, 

It was wearisome in mine eyes; 

17Until I entered into the sanctuary 
of God, 

And considered their end. 

18Surely Thou settest them in 
slippery places; 

Thou hurlest them down to utter 
ruin. 

19How are they become a desolation 
in a moment! 

They are wholly consumed by 
terrors. 

20As a dream when one awaketh, 

So, O Lord, when Thou arousest 
Thyself, Thou wilt despise their 
semblance. 

21For my heart was in a ferment, 

And I was pricked in my reins. 
73 




22But I was brutish, and ignorant; 

I was as a beast before Thee. 

 

23Nevertheless I am continually with 
Thee; 

Thou holdest my right hand. 

24Thou wilt guide me with Thy 
counsel, 

And afterward receive me with 
glory. 

25Whom have I in heaven but Thee? 

And beside Thee I desire none upon 
earth. 

26My flesh and my heart faileth; 

But God is the rock of my heart and 
my portion for ever. 

27For, lo, they that go far from Thee 
shall perish; 

Thou dost destroy all them that go 
astray from Thee. 

28But as for me, the nearness of God 
is my good; 

I have made the Lord GOD my 
refuge, 

That I may tell of all Thy works. 

 

Maschil of Asaph. 

 

Why, O God, hast Thou cast us off 
for ever? 

Why doth Thine anger smoke 
against the flock of Thy pasture? 

2Remember Thy congregation, 
which Thou hast gotten of old, 

Which Thou hast redeemed to be the 
tribe of Thine inheritance; 

And mount Zion, wherein Thou hast 
dwelt. 

3Lift up Thy steps because of the 
perpetual ruins, 

Even all the evil that the enemy hath 
done in the sanctuary. 

4Thine adversaries have roared in 
the midst of Thy meeting-place; 

They have set up their own signs for 
signs. 

5It seemed as when men wield 
upwards 

Axes in a thicket of trees. 

6And now all the carved work 
thereof together 

They strike down with hatchet and 
hammers. 

7They have set Thy sanctuary on 
fire; 

They have profaned the dwelling-
place of Thy name even to the 
ground. 

8They said in their heart: 'Let us 
make havoc of them altogether'; 

They have burned up all the 
meeting-places of God in the 
land. 

9We see not our signs; 

There is no more any prophet; 

Neither is there among us any that 
knoweth how long. 

10How long, O God, shall the 
adversary reproach? 

Shall the enemy blaspheme Thy 
name for ever? 

11Why withdrawest Thou Thy hand, 
even Thy right hand? 

Draw it out of Thy bosom and 
consume them. 

 

12Yet God is my King of old, 
74 




Working salvation in the midst of 
the earth. 

13Thou didst break the sea in pieces 
by Thy strength; 

Thou didst shatter the heads of the 
sea-monsters in the waters. 

14Thou didst crush the heads of 
leviathan, 

Thou gavest him to be food to the 
folk inhabiting the wilderness. 

15Thou didst cleave fountain and 
brook; 

Thou driedst up ever-flowing rivers. 

16Thine is the day, Thine also the 
night; 

Thou hast established luminary and 
sun. 

17Thou hast set all the borders of the 
earth; 

Thou hast made summer and winter. 

 

18Remember this, how the enemy 
hath reproached the LORD, 

And how a base people have 
blasphemed Thy name. 

19O deliver not the soul of Thy 
turtle-dove unto the wild beast; 

Forget not the life of Thy poor for 
ever. 

20Look upon the covenant; 

For the dark places of the land are 
full of the habitations of violence. 

21O let not the oppressed turn back 
in confusion; 

Let the poor and needy praise Thy 
name. 

22Arise, O God, plead Thine own 
cause; 

Remember Thy reproach all the day 
at the hand of the base man. 

23Forget not the voice of Thine 
adversaries, 

The tumult of those that rise up 
against Thee which ascendeth 
continually. 

 

For the Leader; Al-tashheth. A 
Psalm of Asaph, a Song. 

 

2We give thanks unto Thee, O God, 

We give thanks, and Thy name is 
near; 

Men tell of Thy wondrous works. 

3'When I take the appointed time, 

I Myself will judge with equity. 

4When the earth and all the 
inhabitants thereof are dissolved, 

I Myself establish the pillars of it.' 

Selah 

 

5I say unto the arrogant 'Deal not 
arrogantly'; 

And to the wicked 'Lift not up the 
horn.' 

6Lift not up your horn on high; 

Speak not insolence with a haughty 
neck. 

7For neither from the east, nor from 
the west, 

Nor yet from the wilderness, cometh 
lifting up. 

8For God is judge; 

He putteth down one, and lifteth up 
another. 

9For in the hand of the LORD there is 
a cup, with foaming wine, full of 
mixture, 
75 




And He poureth out of the same; 

Surely the dregs thereof, all the 
wicked of the earth shall drain 
them, and drink them. 

 

10But as for me, I will declare for 
ever, 

I will sing praises to the God of 
Jacob. 

11All the horns of the wicked also 
will I cut off; 

But the horns of the righteous shall 
be lifted up. 

 

For the Leader; with string-
music. A Psalm of Asaph, a 
Song. 

 

2In Judah is God known; 

His name is great in Israel. 

3In Salem also is set His tabernacle, 

And His dwelling-place in Zion. 

4There He broke the fiery shafts of 
the bow; 

The shield, and the sword, and the 
battle. Selah 

 

5Glorious art Thou and excellent, 
coming down from the mountains 
of prey. 

6The stout-hearted are bereft of 
sense, they sleep their sleep; 

And none of the men of might have 
found their hands. 

7At Thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, 

They are cast into a dead sleep, the 
riders also and the horses. 

 

8Thou, even Thou, art terrible; 

And who may stand in Thy sight 
when once Thou art angry? 

9Thou didst cause sentence to be 
heard from heaven; 

The earth feared, and was still, 

10When God arose to judgment, 

To save all the humble of the earth. 

Selah 

 

11Surely the wrath of man shall 
praise Thee; 

The residue of wrath shalt Thou gird 
upon Thee. 

12Vow, and pay unto the LORD your 
God; 

Let all that are round about Him 
bring presents unto Him that is to 
be feared; 

13He minisheth the spirit of princes; 

He is terrible to the kings of the 
earth. 

 

For the Leader; for Jeduthun. 
A Psalm of Asaph. 

 

2I will lift up my voice unto God, an 
cry; 

I will lift up my voice unto God, 
that He may give ear unto me. 

3In the day of my trouble I seek the 
Lord; 

With my hand uplifted, [mine eye] 
streameth in the night without 
ceasing; 

My soul refuseth to be comforted. 

4When I think thereon, O God, I 
must moan; 

When I muse thereon, my spirit 
fainteth. Selah 
76 

77 




5Thou holdest fast the lids of mine 
eyes; 

I am troubled, and cannot speak. 

6I have pondered the days of old, the 
years of ancient times. 

7In the night I will call to 
remembrance my song; 

I will commune with mine own 
heart; 

And my spirit maketh diligent 
search 

8'Will the Lord cast off for ever? 

And will He be favourable no more? 

9Is His mercy clean gone for ever? 

Is His promise come to an end for 
evermore? 

10Hath God forgotten to be 
gracious? 

Hath He in anger shut up his 
compassions?' Selah 

11And I say 'This is my weakness, 

That the right hand of the Most 
High could change. 

12I will make mention of the deeds 
of the LORD; 

Yea, I will remember Thy wonders 
of old. 

13I will meditate also upon all Thy 
work, 

And muse on Thy doings.' 

14O God, Thy way is in holiness; 

Who is a great god like unto God? 

15Thou art the God that doest 
wonders; 

Thou hast made known Thy strength 
among the peoples. 

16Thou hast with Thine arm 
redeemed Thy people, 

The sons of Jacob and Joseph. 

Selah 

17The waters saw Thee, O God; 

The waters saw Thee, they were in 
pain; 

The depths also trembled. 

18The clouds flooded forth waters; 

The skies sent out a sound; 

Thine arrows also went abroad. 

19The voice of Thy thunder was in 
the whirlwind; 

The lightnings lighted up the world; 

The earth trembled and shook. 

20Thy way was in the sea, 

And Thy path in the great waters, 

And Thy footsteps were not known. 

21Thou didst lead Thy people like a 
flock, 

By the hand of Moses and Aaron. 

 

Maschil of Asaph. 

 

Give ear, O my people, to my 
teaching; 

Incline your ears to the words of my 
mouth. 

2I will open my mouth with a 
parable; 

I will utter dark sayings concerning 
days of old; 

3That which we have heard and 
known, 

And our fathers have told us, 

4We will not hide from their 
children, 

Telling to the generation to come 
the praises of the LORD, 

And His strength, and His wondrous 
works that He hath done. 

 
78 




5For He established a testimony in 
Jacob, 

And appointed a law in Israel, 

Which He commanded our fathers, 

That they should make them known 
to their children; 

6That the generation to come might 
know them, even the children that 
should be born; 

Who should arise and tell them to 
their children, 

7That they might put their 
confidence in God, 

And not forget the works of God, 

But keep His commandments; 

8And might not be as their fathers, 

A stubborn and rebellious 
generation; 

A generation that set not their heart 
aright, 

And whose spirit was not stedfast 
with God. 

 

9The children of Ephraim were as 
archers handling the bow, 

That turned back in the day of 
battle. 

10They kept not the covenant of 
God, 

And refused to walk in His law; 

11And they forgot His doings, 

And His wondrous works that He 
had shown them. 

12Marvellous things did He in the 
sight of their fathers, 

In the land of Egypt, in the field of 
Zoan. 

13He cleaved the sea, and caused 
them to pass through; 

And He made the waters to stand as 
a heap. 

14By day also He led them with a 
cloud, 

And all the night with a light of fire. 

15He cleaved rocks in the 
wilderness, 

And gave them drink abundantly as 
out of the great deep. 

16He brought streams also out of the 
rock, 

And caused waters to run down like 
rivers. 

 

17Yet went they on still to sin 
against Him, 

To rebel against the Most High in 
the desert. 

18And they tried God in their heart 

By asking food for their craving. 

19Yea, they spoke against God; 

They said 'Can God prepare a table 
in the wilderness? 

20Behold, He smote the rock, that 
waters gushed out, 

And streams overflowed; 

Can He give bread also? 

Or will He provide flesh for His 
people?' 

21Therefore the LORD heard, and was 
wroth; 

And a fire was kindled against 
Jacob, 

And anger also went up against 
Israel; 

22Because they believed not in God, 

And trusted not in His salvation. 

23And He commanded the skies 
above, 


And opened the doors of heaven; 

24And He caused manna to rain 
upon them for food, 

And gave them of the corn of 
heaven. 

25Man did eat the bread of the 
mighty; 

He sent them provisions to the full. 

26He caused the east wind to set 
forth in heaven; 

And by His power He brought on 
the south wind. 

27He caused flesh also to rain upon 
them as the dust, 

And winged fowl as the sand of the 
seas; 

28And He let it fall in the midst of 
their camp, 

Round about their dwellings. 

29So they did eat, and were well 
filled; 

And He gave them that which they 
craved. 

30They were not estranged from 
their craving, 

Their food was yet in their mouths, 

31When the anger of God went up 
against them, 

And slew of the lustieth among 
them, 

And smote down the young men of 
Israel. 

 

32For all this they sinned still, 

And believed not in His wondrous 
works. 

33Therefore He ended their days as a 
breath, 

And their years in terror. 

34When He slew them, then they 
would inquire after Him, 

And turn back and seek God 
earnestly. 

35And they remembered that God 
was their Rock, 

And the Most High God their 
redeemer. 

36But they beguiled Him with their 
mouth, 

And lied unto Him with their 
tongue. 

37For their heart was not stedfast 
with Him, 

Neither were they faithful in His 
covenant. 

38But He, being full of compassion, 
forgiveth iniquity, and destroyeth 
not; 

Yea, many a time doth He turn His 
anger away, 

And doth not stir up all His wrath. 

39So He remembered that they were 
but flesh, 

A wind that passeth away, and 
cometh not again. 

 

40How oft did they rebel against 
Him in the wilderness, 

And grieve Him in the desert! 

41And still again they tried God, 

And set bounds to the Holy One of 
Israel. 

42They remembered not His hand, 

Nor the day when He redeemed 
them from the adversary. 

43How He set His signs in Egypt, 

And His wonders in the field of 
Zoan; 


44And turned their rivers into blood, 

So that they could not drink their 
streams. 

45He sent among them swarms of 
flies, which devoured them; 

And frogs, which destroyed them. 

46He gave also their increase unto 
the caterpillar, 

And their labour unto the locust. 

47He destroyed their vines with hail, 

And their sycamore-trees with frost. 

48He gave over their cattle also to 
the hail, 

And their flocks to fiery bolts. 

49He sent forth upon them the 
fierceness of His anger, 

Wrath, and indignation, and trouble, 

A sending of messengers of evil. 

50He levelled a path for His anger; 

He spared not their soul from death, 

But gave their life over to the 
pestilence; 

51And smote all the first-born in 
Egypt, 

The first-fruits of their strength in 
the tents of Ham; 

52But He made His own people to go 
forth like sheep, 

And guided them in the wilderness 
like a flock. 

53And He led them safely, and they 
feared not; 

But the sea overwhelmed their 
enemies. 

54And He brought them to His holy 
border, 

To the mountain, which His right 
hand had gotten. 

55He drove out the nations also 
before them, 

And allotted them for an inheritance 
by line, 

And made the tribes of Israel to 
dwell in their tents. 

 

56Yet they tried and provoked God, 
the Most High, 

And kept not His testimonies; 

57But turned back, and dealt 
treacherously like their fathers; 

They were turned aside like a 
deceitful bow. 

58For they provoked Him with their 
high places, 

And moved Him to jealousy with 
their graven images. 

59God heard, and was wroth, 

And He greatly abhorred Israel; 

60And He forsook the tabernacle of 
Shiloh, 

The tent which He had made to 
dwell among men; 

61And delivered His strength into 
captivity, 

And His glory into the adversary's 
hand. 

62He gave His people over also unto 
the sword; 

And was wroth with His inheritance. 

63Fire devoured their young men; 

And their virgins had no marriage-
song. 

64Their priests fell by the sword; 

And their widows made no 
lamentation. 

 


65Then the Lord awaked as one 
asleep, 

Like a mighty man recovering from 
wine. 

66And He smote His adversaries 
backward; 

He put upon them a perpetual 
reproach. 

67Moreover He abhorred the tent of 
Joseph, 

And chose not the tribe of Ephraim; 

68But chose the tribe of Judah, 

The mount Zion which He loved. 

69And He built His sanctuary like 
the heights, 

Like the earth which He hath 
founded for ever. 

70He chose David also His servant, 

And took him from the sheepfolds; 

71From following the ewes that give 
suck He brought him, 

To be shepherd over Jacob His 
people, and Israel His inheritance. 

72So he shepherded them according 
to the integrity of his heart; 

And lead them by the skilfulness of 
his hands. 

 

A Psalm of Asaph. 

 

O God, the heathen are come into 
Thine inheritance; 

They have defiled Thy holy temple; 

They have made Jerusalem into 
heaps. 

2They have given the dead bodies of 
Thy servants to be food unto the 
fowls of the heaven, 

The flesh of Thy saints unto the 
beasts of the earth. 

3They have shed their blood like 
water 

Round about Jerusalem, with none 
to bury them. 

4We are become a taunt to our 
neighbours, 

A scorn and derision to them that 
are round about us. 

 

5How long, O LORD, wilt Thou be 
angry for ever? 

How long will Thy jealousy burn 
like fire? 

6Pour out Thy wrath upon the 
nations that know Thee not, 

And upon the kingdoms that call not 
upon Thy name. 

7For they have devoured Jacob, 

And laid waste his habitation. 

8Remember not against us the 
iniquities of our forefathers; 

Let Thy compassions speedily come 
to meet us; 

For we are brought very low. 

 

9Help us, O God of our salvation, 
for the sake of the glory of Thy 
name; 

And deliver us, and forgive our sins, 
for Thy name's sake. 

10Wherefore should the nations say: 
'Where is their God?' 

Let the avenging of Thy servants' 
blood that is shed 

Be made known among the nations 
in our sight. 
79 




11Let the groaning of the prisoner 
come before Thee; 

According to the greatness of Thy 
power set free those that are 
appointed to death; 

12And render unto our neighbours 
sevenfold into their bosom 

Their reproach, wherewith they 
have reproached Thee, O Lord. 

13So we that are Thy people and the 
flock of Thy pasture 

Will give Thee thanks for ever; 

We will tell of Thy praise to all 
generations. 

 

For the Leader; upon 
Shoshannim. A testimony. A 
Psalm of Asaph. 

 

2Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, 

Thou that leadest Joseph like a 
flock; 

Thou that art enthroned upon the 
cherubim, shine forth. 

3Before Ephraim and Benjamin and 
Manasseh, stir up Thy might, 

And come to save us. 

4O God, restore us; 

And cause Thy face to shine, and we 
shall be saved. 

 

5O LORD God of hosts, 

How long wilt Thou be angry 
against the prayer of Thy people? 

6Thou hast fed them with the bread 
of tears, 

And given them tears to drink in 
large measure. 

7Thou makest us a strife unto our 
neighbours; 

And our enemies mock as they 
please. 

8O God of hosts, restore us; 

And cause Thy face to shine, and we 
shall be saved. 

 

9Thou didst pluck up a vine out of 
Egypt; 

Thou didst drive out the nations, and 
didst plant it. 

10Thou didst clear a place before it, 

And it took deep root, and filled the 
land. 

11The mountains were covered with 
the shadow of it, 

And the mighty cedars with the 
boughs thereof. 

12She sent out her branches unto the 
sea, 

And her shoots unto the River. 

13Why hast Thou broken down her 
fences, 

So that all they that pass by the way 
do pluck her? 

14The boar out of the wood doth 
ravage it, 

That which moveth in the field 
feedeth on it. 

15O God of hosts, return, we beseech 
Thee; 

Look from heaven, and behold, and 
be mindful of this vine, 

16And of the stock which Thy right 
hand hath planted, 

And the branch that Thou madest 
strong for Thyself. 
80 




17It is burned with fire, it is cut 
down; 

They perish at the rebuke of Thy 
countenance. 

18Let Thy hand be upon the man of 
Thy right hand, 

Upon the son of man whom Thou 
madest strong for Thyself. 

19So shall we not turn back from 
Thee; 

Quicken Thou us, and we will call 
upon Thy name. 

20O LORD God of hosts, restore us; 

Cause Thy face to shine, and we 
shall be saved. 

 

For the Leader; upon the 
Gittith. [A Psalm] of Asaph. 

 

2Sing aloud unto God our strength; 

Shout unto the God of Jacob. 

3Take up the melody, and sound the 
timbrel, 

The sweet harp with the psaltery. 

4Blow the horn at the new moon, 

At the full moon for our feast-day. 

5For it is a statute for Israel, 

An ordinance of the God of Jacob. 

6He appointed it in Joseph for a 
testimony, 

When He went forth against the land 
of Egypt. 

The speech of one that I knew not 
did I hear: 

 

7'I removed his shoulder from the 
burden; His hands were freed 
from the basket. 

8Thou didst call in trouble, and I 
rescued thee; I answered thee in 
the secret place of thunder; I 
proved thee at the waters of 
Meribah. Selah 

9Hear, O My people, and I will 
admonish thee: O Israel, if thou 
wouldest hearken unto Me! 

10There shall no strange god be in 
thee; neither shalt thou worship 
any foreign god. 

11I am the LORD thy God, who 
brought thee up out of the land of 
Egypt; open thy mouth wide, and 
I will fill it. 

 

12But My people hearkened not to 
My voice; 

And Israel would none of Me. 

13So I let them go after the 
stubbornness of their heart, 

That they might walk in their own 
counsels. 

14Oh that My people would hearken 
unto Me, 

That Israel would walk in My ways! 

15I would soon subdue their 
enemies, 

And turn My hand against their 
adversaries. 

16The haters of the LORD should 
dwindle away before Him; 

And their punishment should endure 
for ever. 

17They should also be fed with the 
fat of wheat; 

And with honey out of the rock 
would I satisfy thee.' 

 
81 




A Psalm of Asaph. 

 

God standeth in the congregation of 
God; 

In the midst of the judges He 
judgeth: 

2'How long will ye judge unjustly, 

And respect the persons of the 
wicked? Selah 

3Judge the poor and fatherless; 

Do justice to the afflicted and 
destitute. 

4Rescue the poor and needy; 

Deliver them out of the hand of the 
wicked. 

5They know not, neither do they 
understand; 

They go about in darkness; 

All the foundations of the earth are 
moved. 

6I said: Ye are godlike beings, 

And all of you sons of the Most 
High. 

7Nevertheless ye shall die like men, 

And fall like one of the princes.' 

 

8Arise, O God, judge the earth; 

For Thou shalt possess all the 
nations. 

 

A Song, a Psalm of Asaph. 

 

2O God, keep not Thou silence; 

Hold not Thy peace, and be not still, 
O God. 

3For, lo, Thine enemies are in an 
uproar; 

And they that hate Thee have lifted 
up the head. 

4They hold crafty converse against 
Thy people, 

And take counsel against Thy 
treasured ones. 

5They have said: 'Come, and let us 
cut them off from being a nation; 

That the name of Israel may be no 
more in remembrance.' 

6For they have consulted together 
with one consent; 

Against Thee do they make a 
covenant; 

7The tents of Edom and the 
Ishmaelites; 

Moab, and the Hagrites; 

8Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; 

Philistia with the inhabitants of 
Tyre; 

9Assyria also is joined with them; 

They have been an arm to the 
children of Lot. Selah 

 

10Do Thou unto them as unto 
Midian; 

As to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the 
brook Kishon; 

11Who were destroyed at En-dor; 

They became as dung for the earth. 

12Make their nobles like Oreb and 
Zeeb, 

And like Zebah and Zalmunna all 
their princes; 

13Who said: 'Let us take to ourselves 
in possession 

The habitations of God.' 

14O my God, make them like the 
whirling dust; 

As stubble before the wind. 

15As the fire that burneth the forest, 
82 

83 




And as the flame that setteth the 
mountains ablaze; 

16So pursue them with Thy tempest, 

And affright them with Thy storm. 

17Fill their faces with shame; 

That they may seek Thy name, O 
LORD. 

18Let them be ashamed and 
affrighted for ever; 

Yea, let them be abashed and perish; 

19That they may know that it is Thou 
alone whose name is the LORD, 

The Most High over all the earth. 

 

For the Leader; upon the 
Gittith. A Psalm of the sons of 
Korah. 

 

2How lovely are Thy tabernacles, O 
LORD of hosts! 

3My soul yearneth, yea, even pineth 
for the courts of the LORD; 

My heart and my flesh sing for joy 
unto the living God. 

4Yea, the sparrow hath found a 
house, and the swallow a nest for 
herself, 

Where she may lay her young; 

Thine altars, O LORD of hosts, 

My King, and my God— 

5Happy are they that dwell in Thy 
house, 

They are ever praising Thee. Selah 

 

6Happy is the man whose strength is 
in Thee; 

In whose heart are the highways. 

7Passing through the valley of Baca 
they make it a place of springs; 

Yea, the early rain clotheth it with 
blessings. 

8They go from strength to strength, 

Every one of them appeareth before 
God in Zion. 

 

9O LORD God of hosts, hear my 
prayer; 

Give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah 

10Behold, O God our shield, 

And look upon the face of Thine 
anointed. 

11For a day in Thy courts is better 
than a thousand; 

I had rather stand at the threshold of 
the house of my God, 

Than to dwell in the tents of 
wickedness. 

12For the LORD God is a sun and a 
shield; 

The LORD giveth grace and glory; 

No good thing will He withhold 
from them that walk uprightly. 

13O LORD of hosts, 

Happy is the man that trusteth in 
Thee. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of the 
sons of Korah. 

 

2LORD, Thou hast been favourable 
unto Thy land, 

Thou hast turned the captivity of 
Jacob. 

3Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of 
Thy people, 

Thou hast pardoned all their sin. 

Selah 
84 

85 




4Thou hast withdrawn all Thy 
wrath; 

Thou hast turned from the fierceness 
of Thine anger. 

5Restore us, O God of our salvation, 

And cause Thine indignation toward 
us to cease. 

6Wilt Thou be angry with us for 
ever? 

Wilt Thou draw out Thine anger to 
all generations? 

7Wilt Thou not quicken us again, 

That Thy people may rejoice in 
Thee? 

8Show us Thy mercy, O LORD, 

And grant us Thy salvation. 

 

9I will hear what God the LORD will 
speak; 

For He will speak peace unto His 
people, and to His saints; 

But let them not turn back to folly. 

10Surely His salvation is nigh them 
that fear Him; 

That glory may dwell in our land. 

11Mercy and truth are met together; 

Righteousness and peace have 
kissed each other. 

12Truth springeth out of the earth; 

And righteousness hath looked 
down from heaven. 

13Yea, the LORD will give that which 
is good; 

And our land shall yield her 
produce. 

14Righteousness shall go before 
Him, 

And shall make His footsteps a way. 

 

A Prayer of David. 

 

Incline Thine ear, O LORD, and 
answer me; 

For I am poor and needy. 

2Keep my soul, for I am godly; 

O Thou my God, save Thy servant 
that trusteth in Thee. 

3Be gracious unto me, O Lord; 

For unto Thee do I cry all the day. 

4Rejoice the soul of Thy servant; 

For unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift up 
my soul. 

5For Thou, Lord, art good, and 
ready to pardon, 

And plenteous in mercy unto all 
them that call upon Thee. 

 

6Give ear, O LORD, unto my prayer; 

And attend unto the voice of my 
supplications. 

7In the day of my trouble I call upon 
Thee; 

For Thou wilt answer me. 

8There is none like unto Thee 
among the gods, O Lord, 

And there are no works like Thine. 

9All nations whom Thou hast made 
shall come and prostrate 
themselves before Thee, O Lord; 

And they shall glorify Thy name. 

10For Thou art great, and doest 
wondrous things; 

Thou art God alone. 

 

11Teach me, O LORD, Thy way, that I 
may walk in Thy truth; 

Make one my heart to fear Thy 
name. 
86 




12I will thank Thee, O Lord my God, 
with my whole heart; 

And I will glorify Thy name for 
evermore. 

13For great is Thy mercy toward me; 

And Thou hast delivered my soul 
from the lowest nether-world. 

 

14O God, the proud are risen up 
against me, 

And the company of violent men 
have sought after my soul, 

And have not set Thee before them. 

15But Thou, O Lord, art a God full 
of compassion and gracious, 

Slow to anger, and plenteous in 
mercy and truth. 

16O turn unto me, and be gracious 
unto me; 

Give Thy strength unto Thy servant, 

And save the son of Thy handmaid. 

17Work in my behalf a sign for 
good; 

That they that hate me may see it, 
and be put to shame, 

Because Thou, LORD, hast helped 
me, and comforted me. 

 

A Psalm of the sons of Korah; 
a Song. 

 

His foundation is in the holy 
mountains. 

2The LORD loveth the gates of Zion 

More than all the dwellings of 
Jacob. 

3Glorious things are spoken of Thee, 

O city of God. Selah 

4'I will make mention of Rahab and 
Babylon as among them that 
know Me; 

Behold Philistia, and Tyre, with 
Ethiopia; 

This one was born there.' 

5But of Zion it shall be said: 'This 
man and that was born in her; 

And the Most High Himself doth 
establish her.' 

6The LORD shall count in the register 
of the peoples: 

'This one was born there.' Selah 

7And whether they sing or dance, 

All my thoughts are in Thee. 

 

A Song, a Psalm of the sons of 
Korah; for the Leader; upon 
Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil of 
Heman the Ezrahite. 

 

2O LORD, God of my salvation, 

What time I cry in the night before 
Thee, 

3Let my prayer come before Thee, 

Incline Thine ear unto my cry. 

 

4For my soul is sated with troubles, 

And my life draweth nigh unto the 
grave. 

5I am counted with them that go 
down into the pit; 

I am become as a man that hath no 
help; 

6Set apart among the dead, 

Like the slain that lie in the grave, 

Whom Thou rememberest no more; 

And they are cut off from Thy hand. 

 
87 

88 




7Thou hast laid me in the nether-
most pit, 

In dark places, in the deeps. 

8Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, 

And all Thy waves Thou pressest 
down. Selah 

9Thou hast put mine acquaintance 
far from me; 

Thou hast made me an abomination 
unto them; 

I am shut up, and I cannot come 
forth. 

 

10Mine eye languisheth by reason of 
affliction; 

I have called upon Thee, O LORD, 
every day, 

I have spread forth my hands unto 
Thee. 

11Wilt Thou work wonders for the 
dead? 

Or shall the shades arise and give 
Thee thanks? Selah 

12Shall Thy mercy be declared in the 
grave? 

Or Thy faithfulness in destruction? 

13Shall Thy wonders be known in 
the dark? 

And Thy righteousness in the land 
of forgetfulness? 

 

14But as for me, unto Thee, O LORD, 
do I cry, 

And in the morning doth my prayer 
come to meet Thee. 

15LORD, why castest Thou off my 
soul? 

Why hidest Thou Thy face from 
me? 

16I am afflicted and at the point of 
death from my youth up; 

I have borne Thy terrors, I am 
distracted. 

17Thy fierce wrath is gone over me; 

Thy terrors have cut me off. 

18They came round about me like 
water all the day; 

They compassed me about together. 

19Friend and companion hast Thou 
put far from me, 

And mine acquaintance into 
darkness. 

 

Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite. 

 

2I will sing of the mercies of the 
LORD for ever; 

To all generations will I make 
known Thy faithfulness with my 
mouth. 

3For I have said: 'For ever is mercy 
built; 

In the very heavens Thou dost 
establish Thy faithfulness. 

4I have made a covenant with My 
chosen, 

I have sworn unto David My 
servant: 

5For ever will I establish thy seed, 

And build up thy throne to all 
generations.' Selah 

 

6So shall the heavens praise Thy 
wonders, O LORD, 

Thy faithfulness also in the 
assembly of the holy ones. 

7For who in the skies can be 
compared unto the LORD, 
89 




Who among the sons of might can 
be likened unto the LORD, 

8A God dreaded in the great council 
of the holy ones, 

And feared of all them that are 
about Him? 

9O LORD God of hosts, 

Who is a mighty one, like unto 
Thee, O LORD? 

And Thy faithfulness is round about 
Thee. 

10Thou rulest the proud swelling of 
the sea; 

When the waves thereof arise, Thou 
stillest them. 

11Thou didst crush Rahab, as one 
that is slain; 

Thou didst scattered Thine enemies 
with the arm of Thy strength. 

12Thine are the heavens, Thine also 
the earth; 

The world and the fulness thereof, 
Thou hast founded them. 

13The north and the south, Thou hast 
created them; 

Tabor and Hermon rejoice in Thy 
name. 

14Thine is an arm with might; 

Strong is Thy hand, and exalted is 
Thy right hand. 

15Righteousness and justice are the 
foundation of Thy throne; 

Mercy and truth go before Thee. 

16Happy is the people that know the 
joyful shout; 

They walk, O LORD, in the light of 
Thy countenance. 

17In Thy name do they rejoice all the 
day; 

And through Thy righteousness are 
they exalted. 

18For Thou art the glory of their 
strength; 

And in Thy favour our horn is 
exalted. 

19For of the LORD is our shield; 

And the Holy One of Israel is our 
king. 

 

20Then Thou spokest in vision to 
Thy godly ones, 

And saidst: 'I have laid help upon 
one that is mighty; 

I have exalted one chosen out of the 
people. 

21I have found David My servant; 

With My holy oil have I anointed 
him; 

22With whom My hand shall be 
established; 

Mine arm also shall strengthen him. 

23The enemy shall not exact from 
him; 

Nor the son of wickedness afflict 
him. 

24And I will beat to pieces his 
adversaries before him, 

And smite them that hate him. 

25But My faithfulness and My mercy 
shall be with him; 

And through My name shall his 
horn be exalted. 

26I will set his hand also on the sea, 

And his right hand on the rivers. 

27He shall call unto Me: Thou art my 
Father, 

My God, and the rock of my 
salvation. 


28I also will appoint him first-born, 

The highest of the kings of the earth. 

29For ever will I keep for him My 
mercy, 

And My covenant shall stand fast 
with him. 

30His seed also will I make to endure 
for ever, 

And his throne as the days of 
heaven. 

31If his children forsake My law, 

And walk not in Mine ordinances; 

:32If they profane My statutes, 

And keep not My commandments; 

33Then will I visit their transgression 
with the rod, 

And their iniquity with strokes. 

34But My mercy will I not break off 
from him, 

Nor will I be false to My 
faithfulness. 

35My covenant will I not profane, 

Nor alter that which is gone out of 
My lips. 

36Once have I sworn by My 
holiness: 

Surely I will not be false unto 
David; 

37His seed shall endure for ever, 

And his throne as the sun before 
Me. 

38It shall be established for ever as 
the moon; 

And be stedfast as the witness in 
sky.' Selah 

 

39But Thou hast cast off and 
rejected, 

Thou hast been wroth with Thine 
anointed. 

40Thou hast abhorred the covenant 
of Thy servant; 

Thou hast profaned his crown even 
to the ground. 

41Thou hast broken down all his 
fences; 

Thou hast brought his strongholds to 
ruin. 

42All that pass by the way spoil him; 

He is become a taunt to his 
neighbours. 

43Thou hast exalted the right hand of 
his adversaries; 

Thou hast made all his enemies to 
rejoice. 

44Yea, Thou turnest back the edge of 
his sword, 

And hast not made him to stand in 
the battle. 

45Thou hast made his brightness to 
cease, 

And cast his throne down to the 
ground. 

46The days of his youth hast Thou 
shortened; 

Thou hast covered him with shame. 

Selah 

47How long, O LORD, wilt Thou hide 
Thyself for ever? 

How long shall Thy wrath burn like 
fire? 

48O remember how short my time is; 

For what vanity hast Thou created 
all the children of men! 

49What man is he that liveth and 
shall not see death, 


That shall deliver his soul from the 
power of the grave? Selah 

50Where are Thy former mercies, O 
Lord, 

Which Thou didst swear unto David 
in Thy faithfulness? 

51Remember, Lord, the taunt of Thy 
servants; 

How I do bear in my bosom [the 
taunt of] so many peoples; 

52Wherewith Thine enemies have 
taunted, O LORD, 

Wherewith they have taunted the 
footsteps of Thine anointed. 

53Blessed be the LORD for evermore. 

Amen, and Amen. 

 

... ..... 

BOOK IV 

 

A Prayer of Moses the man of 
God. 

 

Lord, Thou hast been our dwelling-
place in all generations. 

2Before the mountains were brought 
forth, 

Or ever Thou hadst formed the earth 
and the world, 

Even from everlasting to 
everlasting, Thou art God. 

3Thou turnest man to contrition; 

And sayest: 'Return, ye children of 
men.' 

4For a thousand years in Thy sight 

Are but as yesterday when it is past, 

And as a watch in the night. 

5Thou carriest them away as with a 
flood; they are as a sleep; 

In the morning they are like grass 
which groweth up. 

6In the morning it flourisheth, and 
groweth up; 

In the evening it is cut down, and 
withereth. 

 

7For we are consumed in Thine 
anger, 

And by Thy wrath are we hurried 
away. 

8Thou hast set our iniquities before 
Thee, 

Our secret sins in the light of Thy 
countenance. 

9For all our days are passed away in 
Thy wrath; 

We bring our years to an end as a 
tale that is told. 

10The days of our years are 
threescore years and ten, 

Or even by reason of strength 
fourscore years; 

Yet is their pride but travail and 
vanity; 

For it is speedily gone, and we fly 
away. 

11Who knoweth the power of Thine 
anger, 

And Thy wrath according to the fear 
that is due unto Thee? 

12So teach us to number our days, 

That we may get us a heart of 
wisdom. 

 

13Return, O LORD; how long? 
90 




And let it repent Thee concerning 
Thy servants. 

14O satisfy us in the morning with 
Thy mercy; 

That we may rejoice and be glad all 
our days. 

15Make us glad according to the 
days wherein Thou hast afflicted 
us, 

According to the years wherein we 
have seen evil. 

16Let Thy work appear unto Thy 
servants, 

And Thy glory upon their children. 

17And let the graciousness of the 
Lord our God be upon us; 

Establish Thou also upon us the 
work of our hands; 

Yea, the work of our hands establish 
Thou it. 

 

O thou that dwellest in the 
covert of the Most High, 

And abidest in the shadow of the 
Almighty; 

2I will say of the LORD, who is my 
refuge and my fortress, 

My God, in whom I trust, 

3That He will deliver thee from the 
snare of the fowler, 

And from the noisome pestilence. 

4He will cover thee with His 
pinions, 

And under His wings shalt thou take 
refuge; 

His truth is a shield and a buckler. 

 

5Thou shalt not be afraid of the 
terror by night, 

Nor of the arrow that flieth by day; 

6Of the pestilence that walketh in 
darkness, 

Nor of the destruction that wasteth 
at noonday. 

 

7A thousand may fall at Thy side, 

And ten thousand at Thy right hand; 

It shall not come nigh thee. 

8Only with thine eyes shalt thou 
behold, 

And see the recompense of the 
wicked. 

 

9For thou hast made the LORD who is 
my refuge, 

Even the Most High, thy habitation. 

10There shall no evil befall thee, 

Neither shall any plague come nigh 
thy tent. 

 

11For He will give His angels charge 
over thee, 

To keep thee in all thy ways. 

12They shall bear thee upon their 
hands, 

Lest thou dash thy foot against a 
stone. 

13Thou shalt tread upon the lion and 
asp; 

The young lion and the serpent shalt 
thou trample under feet. 

 

14'Because he hath set his love upon 
Me, therefore will I deliver him; 

I will set him on high, because he 
hath known My name. 

15He shall call upon Me, and I will 
answer him; 
91 




I will be with him in trouble; 

I will rescue him, and bring him to 
honour. 

16With long life will I satisfy him, 

And make Him to behold My 
salvation.' 

 

A Psalm, a Song. For the 
sabbath day. 

 

2It is a good thing to give thanks 
unto the LORD, 

And to sing praises unto Thy name, 
O Most High; 

3To declare Thy lovingkindness in 
the morning, 

And Thy faithfulness in the night 
seasons, 

4With an instrument of ten strings, 
and with the psaltery; 

With a solemn sound upon the harp. 

 

5For Thou, LORD, hast made me glad 
through Thy work; 

I will exult in the works of Thy 
hands. 

6How great are Thy works, O LORD! 

Thy thoughts are very deep. 

7A brutish man knoweth not, 

Neither doth a fool understand this. 

8When the wicked spring up as the 
grass, 

And when all the workers of 
iniquity do flourish; 

It is that they may be destroyed for 
ever. 

 

9But Thou, O LORD, art on high for 
evermore. 

10For, lo, Thine enemies, O LORD, 

For, lo, Thine enemies shall perish: 

All the workers of iniquity shall be 
scattered. 

11But my horn hast Thou exalted 
like the horn of the wild-ox; 

I am anointed with rich oil. 

12Mine eye also hath gazed on them 
that lie in wait for me, 

Mine ears have heard my desire of 
the evil-doers that rise up against 
me. 

 

13The righteous shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; 

He shall grow like a cedar in 
Lebanon. 

14Planted in the house of the LORD, 

They shall flourish in the courts of 
our God. 

15They shall still bring forth fruit in 
old age; 

They shall be full of sap and 
richness; 

16To declare that the LORD is upright, 

My Rock, in whom there is no 
unrighteousness. 

 

The LORD reigneth; He is 
clothed in majesty; 

The LORD is clothed, He hath girded 
Himself with strength; 

Yea, the world is established, that it 
cannot be moved. 

2Thy throne is established of old; 

Thou art from everlasting. 

 

3The floods have lifted up, O LORD, 
92 

93 




The floods have lifted up their 
voice; 

The floods lift up their roaring. 

4Above the voices of many waters, 

The mighty breakers of the sea, 

The LORD on high is mighty. 

 

5Thy testimonies are very sure, 

Holiness becometh Thy house, 

O LORD, for evermore. 

 

O LORD, Thou God to whom 
vengeance belongeth, 

Thou God to whom vengeance 
belongeth, shine forth. 

2Lift up Thyself, Thou Judge of the 
earth; 

Render to the proud their 
recompense. 

 

3LORD, how long shall the wicked, 

How long shall the wicked exult? 

4They gush out, they speak 
arrogancy; 

All the workers of iniquity bear 
themselves loftily. 

5They crush Thy people, O LORD, 

And afflict Thy heritage. 

6They slay the widow and the 
stranger, 

And murder the fatherless. 

7And they say: 'The LORD will not 
see, 

Neither will the God of Jacob give 
heed.' 

 

8Consider, ye brutish among the 
people; 

And ye fools, when will ye 
understand? 

9He that planted the ear, shall He not 
hear? 

He that formed the eye, shall He not 
see? 

10He that instructeth nations, shall 
not He correct? 

Even He that teacheth man 
knowledge? 

11The LORD knoweth the thoughts of 
man, 

That they are vanity. 

 

12Happy is the man whom Thou 
instructest, O LORD, 

And teachest out of Thy law; 

13That Thou mayest give him rest 
from the days of evil, 

Until the pit be digged for the 
wicked. 

14For the LORD will not cast off His 
people, 

Neither will He forsake His 
inheritance. 

15For right shall return unto justice, 

And all the upright in heart shall 
follow it. 

 

16Who will rise up for me against 
the evil-doers? 

Who will stand up for me against 
the workers of iniquity? 

17Unless the LORD had been my help, 

My soul had soon dwelt in silence. 

18If I say: 'My foot slippeth', 

Thy mercy, O LORD, holdeth me up. 

19When my cares are many within 
me, 
94 




Thy comforts delight my soul. 

 

20Shall the seat of wickedness have 
fellowship with Thee, 

Which frameth mischief by statute? 

21They gather themselves together 
against the soul of the righteous, 

And condemn innocent blood. 

22But the LORD hath been my high 
tower, 

And my God the rock of my refuge. 

23And He hath brought upon them 
their own iniquity, 

And will cut them off in their own 
evil; 

The LORD our God will cut them off. 

 

95 

96 



O come, let us sing unto the 
LORD; 

Let us shout for joy to the Rock of 
our salvation. 

2Let us come before His presence 
with thanksgiving, 

Let us shout for joy unto Him with 
psalms. 

3For the LORD is a great God, 

And a great King above all gods; 

4In whose hand are the depths of the 
earth; 

The heights of the mountains are 
His also. 

5The sea is His, and He made it; 

And His hands formed the dry land. 

6O come, let us bow down and bend 
the knee; 

Let us kneel before the LORD our 
Maker; 

7For He is our God, 

And we are the people of His 
pasture, and the flock of His 
hand. 

To-day, if ye would but hearken to 
His voice! 

8'Harden not your heart, as at 
Meribah, 

As in the day of Massah in the 
wilderness; 

9When your fathers tried Me, 

Proved Me, even though they saw 
My work. 

10For forty years was I wearied with 
that generation, 

And said: It is a people that do err in 
their heart, 

And they have not known My ways; 

11Wherefore I swore in My wrath, 

That they should not enter into My 
arest.' 

a See Deut. xii, 9. 

 

O sing unto the LORD a new 
song; 

Sing unto the LORD, all the earth. 

2Sing unto the LORD, bless His 
name; 

Proclaim His salvation from day to 
day. 

3Declare His glory among the 
nations, 

His marvellous works among all the 
peoples. 

 

4For great is the LORD, and highly to 
be praised; 

He is to be feared above all gods. 


5For all the gods of the peoples are 
things of nought; 

But the LORD made the heavens. 

6Honour and majesty are before 
Him; 

Strength and beauty are in His 
sanctuary. 

 

7Ascribe unto the LORD, ye kindreds 
of the peoples, 

Ascribe unto the LORD glory and 
strength. 

8Ascribe unto the LORD the glory 
due unto His name; 

Bring an offering, and come into 
His courts. 

9O worship the LORD in the beauty 
of holiness; 

Tremble before Him, all the earth. 

 

10Say among the nations: 'The LORD 
reigneth.' 

The world also is established that it 
cannot be moved; 

He will judge the peoples with 
equity. 

11Let the heavens be glad, and let 
the earth rejoice; 

Let the sea roar, and the fulness 
thereof; 

12Let the field exult; and all that is 
therein; 

Then shall all the trees of the wood 
sing for joy; 

13Before the LORD, for He is come; 

For He is come to judge the earth; 

He will judge the world with 
righteousness, 

And the peoples in His faithfulness. 

 

The LORD reigneth; let the 
earth rejoice; 

Let the multitude of isles be glad. 

2Clouds and darkness are round 
about Him; 

Righteousness and justice are the 
foundation of His throne. 

3A fire goeth before Him, 

And burneth up His adversaries 
round about. 

 

4His lightnings lighted up the world; 

The earth saw, and trembled. 

5The mountains melted like wax at 
the presence of the LORD, 

At the presence of the Lord of the 
whole earth. 

6The heavens declared His 
righteousness, 

And all the peoples saw His glory. 

 

7Ashamed be all they that serve 
graven images, 

That boast themselves of things of 
nought; 

Bow down to Him, all ye gods. 

8Zion heard and was glad, 

And the daughters of Judah 
rejoiced; 

Because of Thy judgments, O LORD. 

9For Thou, LORD, art most high 
above all the earth; 

Thou art exalted far above all gods. 

 

10O ye that love the LORD, hate evil; 

He preserveth the souls of His 
saints; 
97 




He delivered them out of the hand 
of the wicked. 

11Light is sown for the righteous, 

And gladness for the upright in 
heart. 

12Be glad in the LORD, ye righteous; 

And give thanks to His holy name. 

 

A Psalm. 

 

O sing unto the LORD a new song; 

For He hath done marvellous things; 

His right hand, and His holy arm, 
hath wrought salvation for Him. 

2The LORD hath made known His 
salvation; 

His righteousness hath He revealed 
in the sight of the nations. 

3He hath remembered His mercy 
and His faithfulness toward the 
house of Israel; 

All the ends of the earth have seen 
the salvation of our God. 

 

4Shout unto the LORD, all the earth; 

Break forth and sing for joy, yea, 
sing praises. 

5Sing praises unto the LORD with the 
harp; 

With the harp and the voice of 
melody. 

6With trumpets and sound of the 
horn 

Shout ye before the King, the LORD. 

 

7Let the sea roar, and the fulness 
thereof; 

The world, and they that dwell 
therein; 

8Let the floods clap their hands; 

Let the mountains sing for joy 
together; 

9Before the LORD, for He is come to 
judge the earth; 

He will judge the world with 
righteousness, 

And the peoples with equity. 

 

The LORD reigneth; let the 
peoples tremble; 

He is enthroned upon the cherubim; 
let the earth quake. 

2The LORD is great in Zion; 

And He is high above all the 
peoples. 

3Let them praise Thy name as great 
and awful; 

Holy is He. 

 

4The strength also of the king who 
loveth justice— 

Thou hast established equity, 

Thou hast executed justice and 
righteousness in Jacob. 

5Exalt ye the LORD our God, 

And prostrate yourselves at His 
footstool; 

Holy is He. 

 

6Moses and Aaron among His 
priests, 

And Samuel among them that call 
upon His name, 

Did call upon the LORD, and He 
answered them. 

7He spoke unto them in the pillar of 
cloud; 
98 

99 




They kept His testimonies, and the 
statute that He gave them. 

8O LORD our God, Thou didst 
answer them; 

A forgiving God wast Thou unto 
them, 

Though Thou tookest vengeance of 
their misdeeds. 

9Exalt ye the LORD our God, 

And worship at His holy hill; 

For the LORD our God is holy. 

 

A Psalm of thanksgiving. 

 

Shout unto the LORD, all the earth. 

2Serve the LORD with gladness; 

Come before His presence with 
singing. 

3Know ye that the LORD He is God; 

It is He that hath made us, and we 
are His, 

His people, and the flock of His 
pasture. 

4Enter into His gates with 
thanksgiving, 

And into His courts with praise; 

Give thanks unto Him, and bless His 
name. 

5For the LORD is good; His mercy 
endureth for ever; 

And His faithfulness unto all 
generations. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 

I will sing of mercy and justice; 

Unto Thee, O LORD, will I sing 
praises. 

2I will give heed unto the way of 
integrity; 

Oh when wilt Thou come unto me? 

I will walk within my house in the 
integrity of my heart. 

 

3I will set no base thing before mine 
eyes; 

I hate the doing of things crooked; it 
shall not cleave unto me. 

4A perverse heart shall depart from 
me; 

I will know no evil thing. 

 

5Whoso slandereth his neighbour in 
secret, him will I destroy; 

Whoso is haughty of eye and proud 
of heart, him will I not suffer. 

6Mine eyes are upon the faithful of 
the land, that they may dwell with 
me; 

He that walketh in a way of 
integrity, he shall minister unto 
me. 

 

7He that worketh deceit shall not 
dwell within my house; 

He that speaketh falsehood shall not 
be established before mine eyes. 

8Morning by morning will I destroy 
all the wicked of the land; 

To cut off all the workers of iniquity 
from the city of the LORD. 

 

A Prayer of the afflicted, 
when he fainteth, and 
poureth out his complaint before the 
LORD. 

 
100 

101 

102 




2O LORD, hear my prayer, 

And let my cry come unto Thee. 

3Hide not Thy face from me in the 
day of my distress; 

Incline Thine ear unto me; 

In the day when I call answer me 
speedily. 

 

4For my days are consumed like 
smoke, 

And my bones are burned as a 
hearth. 

5My heart is smitten like grass, and 
withered; 

For I forget to eat my bread. 

6By reason of the voice of my 
sighing 

My bones cleave to my flesh. 

7I am like a pelican of the 
wilderness; 

I am become as an owl of the waste 
places. 

8I watch, and am become 

Like a sparrow that is alone upon 
the housetop. 

9Mine enemies taunt me all the day; 

They that are mad against me do 
curse by me. 

10For I have eaten ashes like bread, 

And mingled my drink with 
weeping, 

11Because of Thine indignation and 
Thy wrath; 

For Thou hast taken me up, and cast 
me away. 

12My days are like a lengthening 
shadow; 

And I am withered like grass. 

 

13But Thou, O LORD, sittest 
enthroned for ever; 

And Thy name is unto all 
generations. 

14Thou wilt arise, and have 
compassion upon Zion; 

For it is time to be gracious unto 
her, for the appointed time is 
come. 

15For Thy servants take pleasure in 
her stones, 

And love her dust. 

16So the nations will fear the name 
of the LORD, 

And all the kings of the earth Thy 
glory; 

17When the LORD hath built up Zion, 

When He hath appeared in His 
glory; 

18When He hath regarded the prayer 
of the destitute, 

And hath not despised their prayer. 

 

19This shall be written for the 
generation to come; 

And a people which shall be created 
shall praise the LORD. 

20For He hath looked down from the 
height of His sanctuary; 

From heaven did the LORD behold 
the earth; 

21To hear the groaning of the 
prisoner; 

To loose those that are appointed to 
death; 

22That men may tell of the name of 
the LORD in Zion, 

And His praise in Jerusalem; 


23When the peoples are gathered 
together, 

And the kingdoms, to serve the 
LORD. 

 

24He weakened my strength in the 
way; 

He shortened my days. 

25I say: 'O my God, take me not 
away in the midst of my days, 

Thou whose years endure 
throughout all generations. 

26Of old Thou didst lay the 
foundation of the earth; 

And the heavens are the work of 
Thy hands. 

27They shall perish, but Thou shalt 
endure; 

Yea, all of them shall wax old like a 
garment; 

As a vesture shalt Thou change 
them, and they shall pass away; 

28But Thou art the selfsame, 

And Thy years shall have no end. 

29The children of Thy servants shall 
dwell securely, 

And their seed shall be established 
before Thee.' 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

Bless the LORD, O my soul; 

And all that is within me, bless His 
holy name. 

2Bless the LORD, O my soul, 

And forget not all His benefits; 

3Who forgiveth all thine iniquity; 

Who healeth all Thy diseases; 

4Who redeemeth Thy life from the 
pit; 

Who encompasseth thee with 
lovingkindness and tender 
mercies; 

5Who satisfieth thine old age with 
good things; 

So that Thy youth is renewed like 
the eagle. 

 

6The LORD executeth righteousness, 

And acts of justice for all that are 
oppressed. 

7He made known His ways unto 
Moses, 

His doings unto the children of 
Israel. 

8The LORD is full of compassion and 
gracious, 

Slow to anger, and plenteous in 
mercy. 

9He will not always contend; 

Neither will He keep His anger for 
ever. 

10He hath not dealt with us after our 
sins, 

Nor requited us according to our 
iniquities. 

11For as the heaven is high above the 
earth, 

So great is His mercy toward them 
that fear Him. 

12As far as the east is from the west, 

So far hath He removed our 
transgressions from us. 

13Like as a father hath compassion 
upon his children, 

So hath the LORD compassion upon 
them that fear Him. 
103 




14For He knoweth our frame; 

He remembereth that we are dust. 

15As for man, his days are as grass; 

As a flower of the field, so he 
flourisheth. 

16For the wind passeth over it, and it 
is gone; 

And the place thereof knoweth it no 
more. 

17But the mercy of the LORD is from 
everlasting to everlasting upon 
them that fear Him, 

And His righteousness unto 
children's children; 

18To such as keep His covenant, 

And to those that remember His 
precepts to do them. 

 

19The LORD hath established His 
throne in the heavens; 

And His kingdom ruleth over all. 

20Bless the LORD, ye angels of His, 

Ye mighty in strength, that fulfil His 
word, 

Hearkening unto the voice of His 
word. 

21Bless the LORD, all ye His hosts; 

Ye ministers of His, that do His 
pleasure. 

22Bless the LORD, all ye His works, 

In all places of His dominion; 

Bless the LORD, O my soul. 

 

Bless the LORD, O my 
soul. 

O LORD my God, Thou art very 
great; 

Thou art clothed with glory and 
majesty. 

2Who coverest Thyself with light as 
with a garment, 

Who stretchest out the heavens like 
a curtain; 

3Who layest the beams of Thine 
upper chambers in the waters, 

Who makest the clouds Thy chariot, 

Who walkest upon the wings of the 
wind; 

4Who makest winds Thy 
messengers, 

The flaming fire Thy ministers. 

 

5Who didst establish the earth upon 
its foundations, 

That it should not be moved for ever 
and ever; 

6Thou didst cover it with the deep as 
with a vesture; 

The waters stood above the 
mountains. 

7At Thy rebuke they fled, 

At the voice of Thy thunder they 
hasted away— 

8The mountains rose, the valleys 
sank down— 

Unto the place which Thou hadst 
founded for them; 

9Thou didst set a bound which they 
should not pass over, 

That they might not return to cover 
the earth. 

 

10Who sendest forth springs into the 
valleys; 

They run between the mountains; 

11They give drink to every beast of 
the field, 

The wild asses quench their thirst. 
104 




12Beside them dwell the fowl of the 
heaven, 

From among the branches they sing. 

13Who waterest the mountains from 
Thine upper chambers; 

The earth is full of the fruit of Thy 
works. 

 

14Who causeth the grass to spring up 
for the cattle, 

And herb for the service of man; 

To bring forth bread out of the earth, 

15And wine that maketh glad the 
heart of man, 

Making the face brighter than oil, 

And bread that stayeth man's heart. 

16The trees of the LORD have their 
fill, 

The cedars of Lebanon, which He 
hath planted; 

17Wherein the birds make their 
nests; 

As for the stork, the fir-trees are her 
house. 

18The high mountains are for the 
wild goats; 

The rocks are a refuge for the 
conies. 

 

19Who appointedst the moon for 
seasons; 

The sun knoweth his going down. 

20Thou makest darkness, and it is 
night, 

Wherein all the beasts of the forest 
do creep forth. 

21The young lions roar after their 
prey, 

And seek their food from God. 

22The sun ariseth, they slink away, 

And couch in their dens. 

23Man goeth forth unto his work 

And to his labour until the evening. 

 

24How manifold are Thy works, O 
LORD! 

In wisdom hast Thou made them all; 

The earth is full of Thy creatures. 

25Yonder sea, great and wide, 

Therein are creeping things 
innumerable, 

Living creatures, both small and 
great. 

26There go the ships; 

There is leviathan, whom Thou hast 
formed to sport therein. 

27All of them wait for Thee, 

That Thou mayest give them their 
food in due season. 

28Thou givest it unto them, they 
gather it; 

Thou openest Thy hand, they are 
satisfied with good. 

29Thou hidest Thy face, they vanish; 

Thou withdrawest their breath, they 
perish, 

And return to their dust. 

30Thou sendest forth Thy spirit, they 
are created; 

And Thou renewest the face of the 
earth. 

 

31May the glory of the LORD endure 
for ever; 

Let the LORD rejoice in His works! 

32Who looketh on the earth, and it 
trembleth; 


He toucheth the mountains, and they 
smoke. 

33I will sing unto the LORD as long as 
I live; 

I will sing praise to my God while I 
have any being. 

34Let my musing be sweet unto 
Him; 

As for me, I will rejoice in the LORD. 

35Let sinners cease out of the earth, 

And let the wicked be no more. 

Bless the LORD, O my soul. 

aHallelujah. 

a That is, Praise ye the LORD. 

 

O give thanks unto the 
LORD, call upon His 
name; 

Make known His doings among the 
peoples. 

2Sing unto Him, sing praises unto 
Him; 

Speak ye of all His marvellous 
works. 

3Glory ye in His holy name; 

Let the heart of them rejoice that 
seek the LORD. 

4Seek ye the LORD and His strength; 

Seek His face continually. 

5Remember His marvellous works 
that He hath done, 

His wonders, and the judgments of 
His mouth; 

6O ye seed of Abraham His servant, 

Ye children of Jacob, His chosen 
ones. 

 

7He is the LORD our God; 

His judgments are in all the earth. 

8He hath remembered His covenant 
for ever, 

The word which He commanded to 
a thousand generations; 

9[The covenant] which He made 
with Abraham, 

And His oath unto Isaac; 

10And He established it unto Jacob 
for a statute, 

To Israel for an everlasting 
covenant; 

11Saying: 'Unto thee will I give the 
land of Canaan, 

The lot of your inheritance.' 

 

12When they were but a few men in 
number. 

Yea, very few, and sojourners in it, 

13And when they went about from 
nation to nation, 

From one kingdom to another 
people, 

14He suffered no man to do them 
wrong, 

Yea, for their sake He reproved 
kings: 

15'Touch not Mine anointed ones, 

And do My prophets no harm.' 

 

16And He called a famine upon the 
land; 

He broke the whole staff of bread. 

17He sent a man before them; 

Joseph was sold for a servant; 

18His feet they hurt with fetters, 

His person was laid in iron; 

19Until the time that his word came 
to pass, 
105 




The word of the LORD tested him. 

20The king sent and loosed him; 

Even the ruler of the peoples, and 
set him free. 

21He made him lord of his house, 

And ruler of all his possessions; 

22To bind his princes at his pleasure, 

And teach his elders wisdom. 

 

23Israel also came into Egypt; 

And Jacob sojourned in the land of 
Ham. 

24And He increased His people 
greatly, 

And made them too mighty for their 
adversaries. 

25He turned their heart to hate His 
people, 

To deal craftily with His servants. 

26He sent Moses His servant, 

And Aaron whom He had chosen. 

27They wrought among them His 
manifold signs, 

And wonders in the land of Ham. 

28He sent darkness, and it was dark; 

And they rebelled not against His 
word. 

29He turned their waters into blood, 

And slew their fish. 

30Their land swarmed with frogs, 

In the chambers of their kings. 

31He spoke, and there came swarms 
of flies, 

And gnats in all their borders. 

32He gave them hail for rain, 

And flaming fire in their land. 

33He smote their vines also and their 
fig-trees; 

And broke the trees of their borders. 

34He spoke, and the locust came, 

And the canker-worm without 
number, 

35And did eat up every herb in their 
land, 

And did eat up the fruit of their 
ground. 

36He smote also all the first-born in 
their land, 

The first-fruits of all their strength. 

37And He brought them forth with 
silver and gold; 

And there was none that stumbled 
among His tribes. 

38Egypt was glad when they 
departed; 

For the fear of them had fallen upon 
them. 

 

39He spread a cloud for a screen; 

And fire to give light in the night. 

40They asked, and He brought 
quails, 

And gave them in plenty the bread 
of heaven. 

41He opened the rock, and waters 
gushed out; 

They ran, a river in the dry places. 

42For He remembered His holy word 

Unto Abraham His servant; 

43And He brought forth His people 
with joy, 

His chosen ones with singing. 

44And He gave them the lands of the 
nations, 

And they took the labour of the 
peoples in possession; 

45That they might keep His statutes, 

And observe His laws. 


Hallelujah. 

 

Hallelujah. 

O give thanks unto the 
LORD; for He is good; 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

2Who can express the mighty acts of 
the LORD, 

Or make all His praise to be heard? 

3Happy are they that keep justice, 

That do righteousness at all times. 

4Remember me, O LORD, when Thou 
favourest Thy people; 

O think of me at Thy salvation; 

5That I may behold the prosperity of 
Thy chosen, 

That I may rejoice in the gladness of 
Thy nation, 

That I may glory with Thine 
inheritance. 

 

6We have sinned with our fathers, 

We have done iniquitously, we have 
dealt wickedly. 

7Our fathers in Egypt gave no heed 
unto Thy wonders; 

They remembered not the multitude 
of Thy mercies; 

But were rebellious at the sea, even 
at the Red Sea. 

8Nevertheless He saved them for 
His name's sake, 

That He might make His mighty 
power to be known. 

9And He rebuked the Red Sea, and it 
was dried up; 

And He led them through the 
depths, as through a wilderness. 

10And He saved them from the hand 
of him that hated them, 

And redeemed them from the hand 
of the enemy. 

11And the waters covered their 
adversaries; 

There was not one of them left. 

12Then believed they His words; 

They sang His praise. 

 

13They soon forgot His works; 

They waited not for His counsel; 

14But lusted exceedingly in the 
wilderness, 

And tried God in the desert. 

15And He gave them their request; 

But sent leanness into their soul. 

 

16They were jealous also of Moses 
in the camp, 

And of Aaron the holy one of the 
LORD. 

17The earth opened and swallowed 
up Dathan, 

And covered the company of 
Abiram. 

18And a fire was kindled in their 
company; 

The flame burned up the wicked. 

 

19They made a calf in Horeb, 

And worshipped a molten image. 

20Thus they exchanged their glory 

For the likeness of an ox that eateth 
grass. 

21They forgot God their saviour, 

Who had done great things in Egypt; 

22Wondrous works in the land of 
Ham, 
106 




Terrible things by the Red Sea. 

23Therefore He said that He would 
destroy them, 

Had not Moses His chosen stood 
before Him in the breach, 

To turn back His wrath, lest He 
should destroy them. 

 

24Moreover, they scorned the 
desirable land, 

They believed not His word; 

25And they murmured in their tents, 

They hearkened not unto the voice 
of the LORD. 

26Therefore He swore concerning 
them, 

That He would overthrow them in 
the wilderness; 

27And that He would cast out their 
seed among the nations, 

And scatter them in the lands. 

 

28They joined themselves also unto 
Baal of Peor, 

And ate the sacrifices of the dead. 

29Thus they provoked Him with 
their doings, 

And the plague broke in upon them. 

30Then stood up Phinehas, and 
wrought judgment, 

And so the plague was stayed. 

31And that was counted unto him for 
righteousness, 

Unto all generations for ever. 

 

32They angered Him also at the 
waters of Meribah, 

And it went ill with Moses because 
of them; 

33For they embittered his spirit, 

And he spoke rashly with his lips. 

 

34They did not destroy the peoples, 

As the LORD commanded them; 

35But mingled themselves with the 
nations, 

And learned their works; 

36And they served their idols, 

Which became a snare unto them; 

37Yea, they sacrificed their sons and 
their daughters unto demons, 

38And shed innocent blood, even the 
blood of their sons and of their 
daughters, 

Whom they sacrificed unto the idols 
of Canaan; 

And the land was polluted with 
blood. 

39Thus were they defiled with their 
works, 

And went astray in their doings. 

40Therefore was the wrath of the 
LORD kindled against His people, 

And He abhorred His inheritance. 

41And He gave them into the hand of 
the nations; 

And they that hated them ruled over 
them. 

42Their enemies also oppressed 
them, 

And they were subdued under their 
hand. 

43Many times did He deliver them; 

But they were rebellious in their 
counsel, 

And sank low through their iniquity. 

44Nevertheless He looked upon their 
distress, 


When He heard their cry; 

45And He remembered for them His 
covenant, 

And repented according to the 
multitude of His mercies. 

46He made them also to be pitied 

Of all those that carried them 
captive. 

 

47Save us, O LORD our God, 

And gather us from among the 
nations, 

That we may give thanks unto Thy 
holy name, 

That we may triumph in Thy praise. 

 

48Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, 

From everlasting even to 
everlasting, 

And let all the people say: 'Amen.' 
Hallelujah. 

 

..... ... 

BOOK V 

 

'O give thanks unto the 
LORD, for He is good, 

For His mercy endureth for ever.' 

2So let the redeemed of the LORD 
say, 

Whom He hath redeemed from the 
hand of the adversary; 

3And gathered them out of the lands, 

From the east and from the west, 

From the north and from the sea. 

 

4They wandered in the wilderness in 
a desert way; 

They found no city of habitation. 

5Hungry and thirsty, 

Their soul fainted in them. 

6Then they cried unto the LORD in 
their trouble, 

And He delivered them out of their 
distresses. 

7And He led them by a straight way, 

That they might go to a city of 
habitation. 

8Let them give thanks unto the LORD 
for His mercy, 

And for His wonderful works to the 
children of men! 

9For He hath satisfied the longing 
soul, 

And the hungry soul He hath filled 
with good. 

 

10Such as sat in darkness and in the 
shadow of death, 

Being bound in affliction and iron— 

11Because they rebelled against the 
words of God, 

And contemned the counsel of the 
Most High. 

12Therefore He humbled their heart 
with travail, 

They stumbled, and there was none 
to help— 

13They cried unto the LORD in their 
trouble, 

And He saved them out of their 
distresses. 

14He brought them out of darkness 
and the shadow of death, 

And broke their bands in sunder. 
107 




15Let them give thanks unto the 
LORD for His mercy, 

And for His wonderful works to the 
children of men! 

16For He hath broken the gates of 
brass, 

And cut the bars of iron in sunder. 

 

17Crazed because of the way of their 
transgression, 

And afflicted because of their 
iniquities— 

18Their soul abhorred all manner of 
food, 

And they drew near unto the gates 
of death— 

19They cried unto the LORD in their 
trouble, 

And He saved them out of their 
distresses; 

20He sent His word, and healed 
them, 

And delivered them from their 
graves. 

21Let them give thanks unto the 
LORD for His mercy, 

And for His wonderful works to the 
children of men! 

22And let them offer the sacrifices of 
thanksgiving, 

And declare His works with singing. 

 

23They that go down to the sea in 
ships, 

That do business in great waters— 

24These saw the works of the LORD, 

And His wonders in the deep; 

25For He commanded, and raised the 
stormy wind, 

Which lifted up the waves thereof; 

26They mounted up to the heaven, 
they went down to the deeps; 

Their soul melted away because of 
trouble; 

27They reeled to and fro, and 
staggered like a drunken man, 

And all their wisdom was 
swallowed up— 

28They cried unto the LORD in their 
trouble, 

And He brought them out of their 
distresses. 

29He made the storm a calm, 

So that the waves thereof were still. 

30Then were they glad because they 
were quiet, 

And He led them unto their desired 
haven. 

31Let them give thanks unto the 
LORD for His mercy, 

And for His wonderful works to the 
children of men! 

32Let them exalt Him also in the 
assembly of the people, 

And praise Him in the seat of the 
elders. 

33He turneth rivers into a wilderness, 

And watersprings into a thirsty 
ground; 

34A fruitful land into a salt waste, 

For the wickedness of them that 
dwell therein. 

 

35He turneth a wilderness into a pool 
of water, 

And a dry land into watersprings. 

36And there He maketh the hungry 
to dwell, 


And they establish a city of 
habitation; 

37And sow fields, and plant 
vineyards, 

Which yield fruits of increase. 

38He blesseth them also, so that they 
are multiplied greatly, 

And suffereth not their cattle to 
decrease. 

 

39Again, they are minished and 
dwindle away 

Through oppression of evil and 
sorrow. 

40He poureth contempt upon princes, 

And causeth them to wander in the 
waste, where there is no way. 

41Yet setteth He the needy on high 
from affliction, 

And maketh his families like a 
flock. 

42The upright see it, and are glad; 

And all iniquity stoppeth her mouth. 

 

43Whoso is wise, let him observe 
these things, 

And let them consider the mercies 
of the LORD. 

 

A Song, a Psalm of David. 

 

2My heart is steadfast, O God; 

I will sing, yea, I will sing praises, 
even with my glory. 

3Awake, psaltery and harp; 

I will awake the dawn. 

4I will give thanks unto Thee, O 
LORD, among the peoples; 

And I will sing praises unto Thee 
among the nations. 

5For Thy mercy is great above the 
heavens, 

And Thy truth reacheth unto the 
skies. 

6Be Thou exalted, O God, above the 
heavens; 

And Thy glory be above all the 
earth. 

7That Thy beloved may be 
delivered, 

Save with Thy right hand, and 
answer me. 

 

8God spoke in His holiness, that I 
would exult; 

That I would divide Shechem, and 
mete out the valley of Succoth. 

9Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine; 

Ephraim also is the defence of my 
head; 

Judah is my sceptre. 

10Moab is my washpot; 

Upon Edom do I cast my shoe; 

Over Philistia do I cry aloud. 

11Who will bring me into the 
fortified city? 

Who will lead me unto Edom? 

12Hast not Thou cast us off, O God? 

And Thou goest not forth, O God, 
with our hosts? 

13Give us help against the adversary; 

For vain is the help of man. 

14Through God we shall do 
valiantly; 

For He it is that will tread down our 
adversaries. 

 
108 




For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

O God of my praise, keep not 
silence; 

2For the mouth of the wicked and 
the mouth of deceit have they 
opened against me; 

They have spoken unto me with a 
lying tongue. 

3They compassed me about also 
with words of hatred, 

And fought against me without a 
cause. 

4In return for my love they are my 
adversaries; 

But I am all prayer. 

5And they have laid upon me evil 
for good, 

And hatred for my love: 

 

6’Set Thou a wicked man over him; 

And let an adversary stand at his 
right hand. 

7When he is judged, let him go forth 
condemned; 

And let his prayer be turned into sin. 

8Let his days be few; 

Let another take his charge. 

9Let his children be fatherless, 

And his wife a widow. 

10Let his children be vagabonds, and 
beg; 

And let them seek their bread out of 
their desolate places. 

11Let the creditor distrain all that he 
hath; 

And let strangers make spoil of his 
labour. 

12Let there be none to extend 
kindness unto him; 

Neither let there be any to be 
gracious unto his fatherless 
children. 

13Let his posterity be cut off; 

In the generation following let their 
name be blotted out. 

14Let the iniquity of his fathers be 
brought to remembrance unto the 
LORD; 

And let not the sin of his mother be 
blotted out. 

15Let them be before the LORD 
continually, 

That He may cut off the memory of 
them from the earth. 

16Because that he remembered not to 
do kindness, 

But persecuted the poor and needy 
man, 

And the broken in heart he was 
ready to slay. 

17Yea, he loved cursing, and it came 
unto him; 

And he delighted not in blessing, 
and it is far from him. 

18He clothed himself also with 
cursing as with his raiment, 

And it is come into his inward parts 
like water, 

And like oil into his bones. 

19Let it be unto him as the garment 
which he putteth on, 

And for the girdle wherewith he is 
girded continually.' 

 

20This would mine adversaries effect 
from the LORD, 
109 




And they that speak evil against my 
soul. 

21But Thou, O GOD the Lord, deal 
with me for Thy name's sake; 

Because Thy mercy is good, deliver 
Thou me. 

22For I am poor and needy, 

And my heart is wounded within 
me. 

23I am gone like the shadow when it 
lengtheneth; 

I am shaken off as the locust. 

24My knees totter through fasting; 

And my flesh is lean, and hath no 
fatness. 

25I am become also a taunt unto 
them; 

When they see me, they shake their 
head. 

 

26Help me, O LORD my God; 

O save me according to Thy mercy; 

27That they may know that this is 
Thy hand; 

That Thou, LORD, hast done it. 

28Let them curse, but bless Thou; 

When they arise, they shall be put to 
shame, but Thy servant shall 
rejoice. 

29Mine adversaries shall be clothed 
with confusion, 

And shall put on their own shame as 
a robe. 

30I will give great thanks unto the 
LORD with my mouth; 

Yea, I will praise Him among the 
multitude; 

31Because He standeth at the right 
hand of the needy, 

To save him from them that judge 
his soul. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 

The LORD saith unto my lord: ‘Sit 
thou at My right hand, 

Until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool.' 

2The rod of Thy strength the LORD 
will send out of Zion: 

'Rule thou in the midst of thine 
enemies.' 

3Thy people offer themselves 
willingly in the day of thy 
warfare; 

In adornments of holiness, from the 
womb of the dawn, 

Thine is the dew of thy youth. 

 

4The LORD hath sworn, and will not 
repent: 

'Thou art a priest for ever 

After the manner of Melchizedek.' 

5The Lord at thy right hand 

Doth crush kings in the day of His 
wrath. 

6He will judge among the nations; 

He filleth it with the dead bodies, 

He crusheth the head over a wide 
land. 

7He will drink of the brook in the 
way; 

Therefore will he lift up the head. 

 

Hallelujah. 

 

. I will give thanks unto the LORD 
with my whole heart, 
110 

111 




. In the council of the upright, and in 
the congregation. 

. 2The works of the LORD are great, 

. Sought out of all them that have 
delight therein. 

. 3His work is glory and majesty; 

. And His righteousness endureth for 
ever. 

. 4He hath made a memorial for His 
wonderful works; 

. The LORD is gracious and full of 
compassion. 

. 5He hath given food unto them that 
fear Him; 

. He will ever be mindful of His 
covenant. 

. 6He hath declared to His people the 
power of His works, 

. In giving them the heritage of the 
nations. 

. 7The works of His hands are truth 
and justice; 

. All His precepts are sure. 

. 8They are established for ever and 
ever, 

. They are done in truth and 
uprightness. 

. 9He hath sent redemption unto His 
people; 

. He hath commanded His covenant 
for ever; 

. Holy and awful is His name. 

. 10The fear of the LORD is the 
beginning of wisdom; 

. A good understanding have all they 
that do thereafter; 

. His praise endureth for ever. 

 

Hallelujah. 

 

. Happy is the man that feareth the 
LORD, 

. That delighteth greatly in His 
commandments. 

. 2His seed shall be mighty upon 
earth; 

. The generation of the upright shall 
be blessed. 

. 3Wealth and riches are in his house; 

. And his merit endureth for ever. 

. 4Unto the upright He shineth as a 
light in the darkness, 

. Gracious, and full of compassion, 
and righteous. 

. 5Well is it with the man that dealeth 
graciously and lendeth, 

. That ordereth his affairs rightfully. 

. 6For he shall never be moved; 

. The righteous shall be had in 
everlasting remembrance. 

. 7He shall not be afraid of evil 
tidings; 

. His heart is stedfast, trusting in the 
LORD. 

. 8His heart is established, he shall not 
be afraid, 

. Until he gaze upon his adversaries. 

. 9He hath scattered abroad, he hath 
given to the needy; 

. His righteousness endureth for ever; 

. His horn shall be exalted in honour. 

. 10The wicked shall see it, and be 
vexed; 

. He shall gnash with his teeth, and 
melt away; 

. The desire of the wicked shall 
perish. 
112 




 

Hallelujah. 

Praise, O ye servants of the 
LORD, 

Praise the name of the LORD. 

2Blessed be the name of the LORD 

From this time forth and for ever. 

3From the rising of the sun unto the 
going down thereof 

The LORD'S name is to be praised. 

 

4The LORD is high above all nations, 

His glory is above the heavens. 

5Who is like unto the LORD our God, 

That is enthroned on high, 

6That looketh down low 

Upon heaven and upon the earth? 

 

7Who raiseth up the poor out of the 
dust, 

And lifteth up the needy out of the 
dunghill; 

8That He may set him with princes, 

Even with the princes of His people. 

9Who maketh the barren woman to 
dwell in her house 

As a joyful mother of children. 

Hallelujah. 

 

When Israel came forth out 
of Egypt, 

The house of Jacob from a people of 
strange language; 

2Judah became His sanctuary, 

Israel His dominion. 

 

3The sea saw it, and fled; 

The Jordan turned backward. 

4The mountains skipped like rams, 

The hills like young sheep. 

 

5What aileth thee, O thou sea, that 
thou fleest? 

Thou Jordan, that thou turnest 
backward? 

6Ye mountains, that ye skip like 
rams; 

Ye hills, like young sheep? 

7Tremble, thou earth, at the presence 
of the Lord, 

At the presence of the God of Jacob; 

8Who turned the rock into a pool of 
water, 

The flint into a fountain of waters. 

 

Not unto us, O LORD, not 
unto us, 

But unto Thy name give glory, 

For Thy mercy, and for Thy truth's 
sake. 

2Wherefore should the nations say: 

'Where is now their God?' 

 

3But our God is in the heavens; 

Whatsoever pleased Him He hath 
done. 

4Their idols are silver and gold, 

The work of men's hands. 

5They have mouths, but they speak 
not; 

Eyes have they, but they see not; 

6They have ears, but they hear not; 

Noses have they, but they smell not; 

7They have hands, but they handle 
not; 

Feet have they, but they walk not; 

Neither speak they with their throat. 
113 

114 

115 




8They that make them shall be like 
unto them; 

Yea, every one that trusteth in them. 

 

9O Israel, trust thou in the LORD! 

He is their help and their shield! 

10O house of Aaron, trust ye in the 
LORD! 

He is their help and their shield! 

11Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the 
LORD! 

He is their help and their shield. 

 

12The LORD hath been mindful of us, 
He will bless— 

He will bless the house of Israel; 

He will bless the house of Aaron. 

13He will bless them that fear the 
LORD, 

Both small and great. 

14The LORD increase you more and 
more, 

You and your children. 

15Blessed be ye of the LORD 

Who made heaven and earth. 

 

16The heavens are the heavens of the 
LORD; 

But the earth hath He given to the 
children of men. 

17The dead praise not the LORD, 

Neither any that go down into 
silence; 

18But we will bless the LORD 

From this time forth and for ever. 

Hallelujah. 

 

I love that the LORD should 
hear 

Mmy voice and my supplications. 

2Because He hath inclined His ear 
unto me, 

Therefore will I call upon Him all 
my days. 

 

3The cords of death compassed me, 

And the straits of the nether-world 
got hold upon me; 

I found trouble and sorrow. 

4But I called upon the name of the 
LORD: 

'I beseech thee, O LORD, deliver my 
soul.' 

5Gracious is the LORD, and 
righteous; 

Yea, our God is compassionate. 

6The LORD preserveth the simple; 

I was brought low, and He saved 
me. 

 

7Return, O my soul, unto Thy rest; 

For the LORD hath dealt bountifully 
with thee. 

8For thou hast delivered my soul 
from death, 

Mine eyes from tears, 

And my feet from stumbling. 

9I shall walk before the LORD 

In the lands of the living. 

10I trusted even when I spoke: 

'I am greatly afflicted.' 

11I said in my haste: 

'All men are liars.' 

 

12How can I repay unto the LORD 

All His bountiful dealings toward 
me? 

13I will lift up the cup of salvation, 116 




And call upon the name of the LORD. 

14My vows will I pay unto the LORD, 

Yea, in the presence of all His 
people. 

 

15Precious in the sight of the LORD 

Is the death of His saints. 

16I beseech Thee, O LORD, for I am 
Thy servant; 

I am Thy servant, the son of Thy 
handmaid; 

Thou hast loosed my bands. 

17I will offer to thee the sacrifice of 
thanksgiving, 

And will call upon the name of the 
LORD. 

18I will pay my vows unto the LORD, 

Yea, in the presence of all His 
people; 

19In the courts of the LORD’S house, 

In the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. 

Hallelujah. 

 

O praise the LORD, all ye 
nations; 

Laud Him, all ye peoples. 

2For His mercy is great toward us; 

And the truth of the LORD endureth 
for ever. 

Hallelujah. 

 

'O give thanks unto the 
LORD, for He is good, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

2So let Israel now say, 

For His mercy endureth for ever, 

3So let the house of Aaron now say, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

4So let them now that fear the LORD 
say, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

5Out of my straits I called upon the 
LORD; 

He answered me with great 
enlargement. 

6The LORD is for me; I will not fear; 

What can man do unto me? 

7The LORD is for me as my helper; 

And I shall gaze upon them that hate 
me. 

8It is better to take refuge in the 
LORD 

Than to trust in man. 

9It is better to take refuge in the 
LORD 

Than to trust in princes. 

10All nations compass me about; 

Verily, in the name of the LORD I 
will cut them off. 

11They compass me about, yea, they 
compass me about; 

Verily, in the name of the LORD I 
will cut them off. 

12They compass me about like bees; 

They are quenched as the fire of 
thorns; 

Verily, in the name of the LORD I 
will cut them off. 

13Thou didst thrust sore at me that I 
might fall; 

But the LORD helped me. 

14The LORD is my strength and song; 

And He is become my salvation. 

15The voice of rejoicing and 
salvation is in the tents of the 
righteous; 
117 

118 




The right hand of the LORD doeth 
valiantly. 

16The right hand of the LORD is 
exalted; 

The right hand of the LORD doeth 
valiantly. 

17I shall not die, but live, 

And declare the works of the LORD. 

18The LORD hath chastened me sore; 

But He hath not given me over unto 
death. 

19Open to me the gates of 
righteousness; 

I will enter into them, I will give 
thanks unto the LORD. 

20This is the gate of the LORD; 

The righteous shall enter into it. 

21I will give thanks unto Thee, for 
Thou hast answered me, 

And art become my salvation. 

 

22The stone which the builders 
rejected 

Is become the chief corner-stone. 

 

23This is the LORD’S doing; 

It is marvellous in our eyes. 

 

24This is the day which the LORD 
hath made; 

We will rejoice and be glad in it. 

 

25We beseech Thee, O LORD, save 
now! 

We beseech Thee, O LORD, make us 
now to prosper! 

 

26Blessed be he that cometh in the 
name of the LORD; 

We bless you out of the house of the 
LORD. 

 

27The LORD is God, and hath given 
us light; 

Order the festival procession with 
boughs, even unto the horns of 
the altar. 

 

28Thou art my God, and I will give 
thanks unto Thee; 

Thou art my God, I will exalt Thee. 

 

29O give thanks unto the LORD, for 
He is good, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

 

. ALEPH. 

Happy are they that are upright in 
the way, 

Who walk in the law of the LORD. 

2Happy are they that keep His 
testimonies, 

That seek Him with the whole heart. 

3Yea, they do no unrighteousness; 

They walk in His ways. 

4Thou hast ordained Thy precepts, 

That we should observe them 
diligently. 

5Oh that my ways were directed 

To observe Thy statutes! 

6Then should I not be ashamed, 

When I have regard unto all Thy 
commandments. 

7I will give thanks unto Thee with 
uprightness of heart, 

When I learn Thy righteous 
ordinances. 
119 




8I will observe Thy statutes; 

O forsake me not utterly. 

 

 . BETH. 

9Wherewithal shall a young man 
keep his way pure? 

By taking heed thereto according to 
Thy word. 

10With my whole heart have I 
sought Thee; 

O let me not err from Thy 
commandments. 

11Thy word have I laid up in my 
heart, 

That I might not sin against Thee. 

12Blessed art Thou, O LORD; 

Teach me Thy statutes. 

13With my lips have I told 

All the ordinances of Thy mouth. 

14I have rejoiced in the way of Thy 
testimonies, 

As much as in all riches. 

15I will meditate in Thy precepts, 

And have respect unto Thy ways. 

16I will delight myself in Thy 
statutes; 

I will not forget Thy word. 

 

 . GIMEL. 

17Deal bountifully with Thy servant 
that I may live, 

And I will observe Thy word. 

18Open Thou mine eyes, that I may 
behold 

Wondrous things out of Thy law. 

19I am a sojourner in the earth; 

Hide not Thy commandments from 
me. 

20My soul breaketh for the longing 

That it hath unto Thine ordinances 
at all times. 

21Thou hast rebuked the proud that 
are cursed, 

That do err from Thy 
commandments. 

22Take away from me reproach and 
contempt; 

For I have kept Thy testimonies. 

23Even though princes sit and talk 
against me, 

Thy servant doth meditate in Thy 
statutes. 

24Yea, Thy testimonies are my 
delight, 

They are my counsellors. 

 

. DALETH. 

25My soul cleaveth unto the dust; 

Quicken Thou me according to Thy 
word. 

26I told of my ways, and Thou didst 
answer me; 

Teach me Thy statutes. 

27Make me to understand the way of 
Thy precepts, 

That I may talk of Thy wondrous 
works. 

28My soul melteth away for 
heaviness; 

Sustain me according unto Thy 
word. 

29Remove from me the way of 
falsehood; 

And grant me Thy law graciously. 

30I have chosen the way of 
faithfulness; 


Thine ordinances have I set [before 
me]. 

31I cleave unto Thy testimonies; 

O LORD, put me not to shame. 

32I will run the way of Thy 
commandments, 

For Thou dost enlarge my heart. 

 

. HE. 

33Teach me, O LORD, the way of Thy 
statutes; 

And I will keep it at every step. 

34Give me understanding, that I keep 
Thy law 

And observe it with my whole heart. 

35Make me to tread in the path of 
Thy commandments; 

For therein do I delight. 

36Incline my heart unto Thy 
testimonies, 

And not to covetousness. 

37Turn away mine eyes from 
beholding vanity, 

And quicken me in Thy ways. 

38Confirm Thy word unto Thy 
servant, 

Which pertaineth unto the fear of 
Thee. 

39Turn away my reproach which I 
dread; 

For Thine ordinances are good. 

40Behold, I have longed after Thy 
precepts; 

Quicken me in Thy righteousness. 

 

. VAU. 

41Let Thy mercies also come unto 
me, O LORD, 

Even Thy salvation, according to 
Thy word; 

42That I may have an answer for him 
that taunteth me; 

For I trust in Thy word. 

43And take not the word of truth 
utterly out of my mouth; 

For I hope in Thine ordinances; 

44So shall I observe Thy law 
continually 

For ever and ever; 

45And I will walk at ease, 

For I have sought Thy precepts; 

46I will also speak of Thy 
testimonies before kings, 

And will not be ashamed. 

47And I will delight myself in Thy 
commandments, 

Which I have loved. 

48I will lift up my hands also unto 
Thy commandments, which I 
have loved; 

And I will meditate in Thy statutes. 

. ZAIN. 

49Remember the word unto Thy 
servant, 

Because Thou hast made me to 
hope. 

50This is my comfort in my 
affliction, 

That Thy word hath quickened me. 

51The proud have had me greatly in 
derision; 

Yet have I not turned aside from 
Thy law. 

52I have remembered Thine 
ordinances which are of old, O 
LORD, 

And have comforted myself. 


53Burning indignation hath taken 
hold upon me, because of the 
wicked 

That forsake Thy law. 

54Thy statutes have been my songs 

In the house of my pilgrimage. 

55I have remembered Thy name, O 
LORD, in the night, 

And have observed Thy law. 

56This I have had, 

That I have kept Thy precepts. 

 

. HETH. 

57My portion is the LORD, 

I have said that I would observe Thy 
words. 

58I have entreated Thy favour with 
my whole heart; 

Be gracious unto me according to 
Thy word. 

59I considered my ways, 

And turned my feet unto Thy 
testimonies. 

60I made haste, and delayed not, 

To observe Thy commandments. 

61The bands of the wicked have 
enclosed me; 

But I have not forgotten Thy law. 

62At midnight I will rise to give 
thanks unto Thee 

Because of Thy righteous 
ordinances. 

63I am a companion of all them that 
fear Thee, 

And of them that observe Thy 
precepts. 

64The earth, O LORD, is full of Thy 
mercy; 

Teach me Thy statutes. 

. TETH. 

65Thou hast dealt well with Thy 
servant, 

O LORD, according unto Thy word. 

66Teach me good discernment and 
knowledge; 

For I have believed in Thy 
commandments. 

67Before I was afflicted, I did err; 

But now I observe Thy word. 

68Thou art good, and doest good; 

Teach me Thy statutes. 

69The proud have forged a lie 
against me; 

But I with my whole heart will keep 
Thy precepts. 

70Their heart is gross like fat; 

But I delight in Thy law. 

71It is good for me that I have been 
afflicted, 

In order that I might learn Thy 
statutes. 

72The law of Thy mouth is better 
unto me 

Than thousands of gold and silver. 

 

. IOD. 

73Thy hands have made me and 
fashioned me; 

Give me understanding, that I may 
learn Thy commandments. 

74They that fear Thee shall see me 
and be glad, 

Because I have hope in Thy word. 

75I know, O LORD, that Thy 
judgments are righteous, 

And that in faithfulness Thou hast 
afflicted me. 


76Let, I pray Thee, Thy 
lovingkindness be ready to 
comfort me, 

According to Thy promise unto Thy 
servant. 

77Let Thy tender mercies come unto 
me, that I may live; 

For Thy law is my delight. 

78Let the proud be put to shame, for 
they have distorted my cause with 
falsehood; 

But I will meditate in Thy precepts. 

79Let those that fear Thee return 
unto me, 

And they that know Thy 
testimonies. 

80Let my heart be undivided in Thy 
statutes, 

In order that I may not be put to 
shame. 

 

. CAPH. 

81My soul pineth for Thy salvation; 

In Thy word do I hope. 

82Mine eyes fail for Thy word, 

Saying: 'When wilt Thou comfort 
me?' 

83For I am become like a wine-skin 
in the smoke; 

Yet do I not forget Thy statutes. 

84How many are the days of Thy 
servant? 

When wilt Thou execute judgment 
on them that persecute me? 

85The proud have digged pits for me, 

Which is not according to Thy law. 

86All Thy commandments are 
faithful; 

They persecute me for nought; help 
Thou me. 

87They had almost consumed me 
upon earth; 

But as for me, I forsook not Thy 
precepts. 

88Quicken me after Thy 
lovingkindness, 

And I will observe the testimony of 
Thy mouth. 

 

. LAMED. 

89For ever, O LORD, 

Thy word standeth fast in heaven. 

90Thy faithfulness is unto all 
generations; 

Thou hast established the earth, and 
it standeth. 

91They stand this day according to 
Thine ordinances; 

For all things are Thy servants. 

92Unless Thy law had been my 
delight, 

I should then have perished in mine 
affliction. 

93I will never forget Thy precepts; 

For with them Thou hast quickened 
me. 

94I am Thine, save me; 

For I have sought Thy precepts. 

95The wicked have waited for me to 
destroy me; 

But I will consider Thy testimonies. 

96I have seen an end to every 
purpose; 

But Thy commandment is exceeding 
broad. 

 


. MEM. 

97O how love I Thy law! 

It is my meditation all the day. 

98Thy commandments make me 
wiser than mine enemies: 

For they are ever with me. 

99I have more understanding than all 
my teachers; 

For Thy testimonies are my 
meditation. 

100I understand more than mine 
elders, 

Because I have keep Thy precepts. 

101I have refrained my feet from 
every evil way, 

In order that I might observe Thy 
word. 

102I have not turned aside from 
Thine ordinances; 

For Thou hast instructed me. 

103How sweet are Thy words unto 
my palate! 

Yea, sweeter than honey to my 
mouth! 

104From Thy precepts I get 
understanding; 

Therefore I hate every false way. 

 

. NUN. 

105Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, 

And a light unto my path. 

106I have sworn, and have confirmed 
it, 

To observe Thy righteous 
ordinances. 

107I am afflicted very much; 

Quicken me, O LORD, according 
unto Thy word. 

108Accept, I beseech Thee, the 
freewill-offerings of my mouth, O 
LORD, 

And teach me Thine ordinances. 

109My soul is continually in my 
hand; 

Yet have I not forgotten Thy law. 

110The wicked have laid a snare for 
me; 

Yet went I not astray from Thy 
precepts. 

111Thy testimonies have I taken as a 
heritage for ever; 

For they are the rejoicing of my 
heart. 

112I have inclined my heart to 
perform Thy statutes, 

For ever, at every step. 

 

. SAMECH. 

113I hate them that are of a double 
mind; 

But Thy law do I love. 

114Thou art my covert and my 
shield; 

In Thy word do I hope. 

115Depart from me, ye evildoers; 

That I may keep the commandments 
of my God. 

116Uphold me according unto Thy 
word, that I may live; 

And put me not to shame in my 
hope. 

117Support Thou me, and I shall be 
saved; 

And I will occupy myself with Thy 
statutes continually. 

118Thou hast made light of all them 
that err from Thy statutes; 


For their deceit is vain. 

119Thou puttest away all the wicked 
of the earth like dross; 

Therefore I love Thy testimonies. 

120My flesh shuddereth for fear of 
Thee; 

And I am afraid of Thy judgments. 

 

. AIN. 

121I have done justice and 
righteousness; 

Leave me not to mine oppressors. 

122Be surety for Thy servant for 
good; 

Let not the proud oppress me. 

123Mine eyes fail for Thy salvation, 

And for Thy righteous word. 

124Deal with Thy servant according 
unto Thy mercy, 

And teach me Thy statutes. 

125I am Thy servant, give me 
understanding, 

That I may know Thy testimonies. 

126It is time for the LORD to work; 

They have made void Thy law. 

127Therefore I love Thy 
commandments 

Above gold, yea, above fine gold. 

128Therefore I esteem all [Thy] 
precepts concerning all things to 
be right; 

Every false way I hate. 

 

. PE. 

129Thy testimonies are wonderful; 

Therefore doth my soul keep them. 

130The opening of Thy words giveth 
light; 

It giveth understanding unto the 
simple. 

131I opened wide my mouth, and 
panted; 

For I longed for Thy 
commandments. 

132Turn Thee towards me, and be 
gracious unto me, 

As is Thy wont to do unto those that 
love Thy name. 

133Order my footsteps by Thy word; 

And let not any iniquity have 
dominion over me. 

134Redeem me from the oppression 
of man, 

And I will observe Thy precepts. 

135Make Thy face to shine upon Thy 
servant; 

And teach me Thy statutes. 

136Mine eyes run down with rivers 
of water, 

Because they observe not Thy law. 

 

. TZADE. 

137Righteous art Thou, O LORD, 

And upright are Thy judgments. 

138Thou hast commanded Thy 
testimonies in righteousness 

And exceeding faithfulness. 

139My zeal hath undone me, 

Because mine adversaries have 
forgotten Thy words. 

140Thy word is tried to the uttermost, 

And Thy servant loveth it. 

141I am small and despised; 

Yet have I not forgotten Thy 
precepts. 

142Thy righteousness is an 
everlasting righteousness, 


And Thy law is truth. 

143Trouble and anguish have 
overtaken me; 

Yet Thy commandments are my 
delight. 

144Thy testimonies are righteous for 
ever; 

Give me understanding, and I shall 
live. 

 

. KOPH. 

145I have called with my whole 
heart; answer me, O LORD; 

I will keep Thy statutes. 

146I have called Thee, save me, 

And I will observe Thy testimonies. 

147I rose early at dawn, and cried; 

I hoped in Thy word. 

148Mine eyes forestalled the night-
watches, 

That I might meditate in Thy word. 

149Hear my voice according unto 
Thy lovingkindness; 

Quicken me, O LORD, as Thou art 
wont. 

150They draw nigh that follow after 
wickedness; 

They are far from Thy law. 

151Thou art nigh, O LORD; 

And all Thy commandments are 
truth. 

152Of old have I known from Thy 
testimonies 

That Thou hast founded them for 
ever. 

 

 

 

. RESH. 

53O see mine affliction, and rescue 
me; 

For I do not forget Thy law. 

154Plead Thou my cause, and redeem 
me; 

Quicken me according to Thy word. 

155Salvation is far from the wicked; 

For they seek not Thy statutes. 

156Great are Thy compassions, O 
LORD; 

Quicken me as Thou art wont. 

157Many are my persecutors and 
mine adversaries; 

Yet have I not turned aside from 
Thy testimonies. 

158I beheld them that were faithless, 
and strove with them; 

Because they observed not Thy 
word. 

159O see how I love Thy precepts; 

Quicken me, O LORD, according to 
Thy lovingkindness. 

160The beginning of Thy word is 
truth; 

And all Thy righteous ordinance 
endureth for ever. 

 

. SHIN. 

161Princes have persecuted me 
without a cause; 

But my heart standeth in awe of Thy 
words. 

162I rejoice at Thy word, 

As one that findeth great spoil. 

163I hate and abhor falsehood; 

Thy law do I love. 


164Seven times a day do I praise 
Thee, 

Because of Thy righteous 
ordinances. 

165Great peace have they that love 
Thy law; 

And there is no stumbling for them. 

166I have hoped for Thy salvation, O 
LORD, 

And have done Thy 
commandments. 

167My soul hath observed Thy 
testimonies; 

And I love them exceedingly. 

168I have observed Thy precepts and 
Thy testimonies; 

For all my ways are before Thee. 

 

. TAU. 

169Let my cry come near before 
Thee, O LORD; 

Give me understanding according to 
Thy word. 

170Let my supplication come before 
Thee; 

Deliver me according to Thy word. 

171Let my lips utter praise: 

Because Thou teachest me Thy 
statutes. 

172Let my tongue sing of Thy word; 

For all Thy commandments are 
righteousness. 

173Let Thy hand be ready to help 
me; 

For I have chosen Thy precepts. 

174I have longed for Thy salvation, 
O LORD; 

And Thy law is my delight. 

175Let my soul live, and it shall 
praise Thee; 

And let Thine ordinances help me. 

176I have gone astray like a lost 
sheep; seek Thy servant; 

For I have not forgotten Thy 
commandments. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

In my distress I called unto the 
LORD, 

And He answered me. 

2O LORD, deliver my soul from lying 
lips, 

From a deceitful tongue. 

3What shall be given unto thee, and 
what shall be done more unto 
thee, 

Thou deceitful tongue? 

4Sharp arrows of the mighty, 

With coals of broom. 

 

5Woe is me, that I sojourn with 
Meshech, 

That I dwell beside the tents of 
Kedar! 

6My soul hath full long had her 
dwelling 

With him that hateth peace. 

7I am all peace; 

But when I speak, they are for war. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

I will lift up mine eyes unto the 
mountains: 

From whence shall my help come? 

2My help cometh from the LORD, 
120 

121 




Who made heaven and earth. 

 

3He will not suffer thy foot to be 
moved; 

He that keepeth thee will not 
slumber. 

4Behold, He that keepeth Israel 

Doth neither slumber nor sleep. 

 

5The LORD is thy keeper; 

The LORD is thy shade upon thy right 
hand. 

6The sun shall not smite thee by day, 

Nor the moon by night. 

 

7The LORD shall keep thee from all 
evil; 

He shall keep thy soul. 

8The LORD shall guard thy going out 
and thy coming in, 

From this time forth and for ever. 

 

A Song of Ascents; of 
David. 

 

I rejoiced when they said unto me: 

'Let us go unto the house of the 
LORD.' 

2Our feet are standing 

Within thy gates, O Jerusalem; 

3Jerusalem, that art builded 

As a city that is compact together; 

4Whither the tribes went up, even 
the tribes of the LORD, 

As a testimony unto Israel, 

To give thanks unto the name of the 
LORD. 

5For there were set thrones for 
judgment, 

The thrones of the house of David. 

 

6Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; 

May they prosper that love thee. 

7Peace be within thy walls, 

And prosperity within thy palaces. 

8For my brethren and companions' 
sakes, 

I will now say: 'Peace be within 
thee.' 

9For the sake of the house of the 
LORD our God 

I will seek thy good. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

Unto Thee I lift up mine eyes, 

O Thou that art enthroned in the 
heavens. 

2Behold, as the eyes of servants unto 
the hand of their master, 

As the eyes of a maiden unto the 
hand of her mistress; 

So our eyes look unto the LORD our 
God, 

Until He be gracious unto us. 

 

3Be gracious unto us, O LORD, be 
gracious unto us; 

For we are full sated with contempt. 

4Our soul is full sated 

With the scorning of those that are 
at ease, 

And with the contempt of the proud 
oppressors. 

 

A Song of Ascents; of 
David. 

 
122 

123 

124 




'If it had not been the LORD who was 
for us', 

Let Israel now say; 

2'If it had not been the LORD who 
was for us, 

When men rose up against us, 

3Then they had swallowed us up 
alive, 

When their wrath was kindled 
against us; 

4Then the waters had overwhelmed 
us, 

The stream had gone over our soul; 

5Then the proud waters 

Had gone over our soul.' 

 

6Blessed be the LORD, 

Wo hath not given us as a prey to 
their teeth. 

7Our soul is escaped as a bird out of 
the snare of the fowlers; 

The snare is broken, and we are 
escaped. 

8Our help is in the name of the 
LORD, 

Who made heaven and earth. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

They that trust in the LORD 

Are as mount Zion, which cannot be 
moved, but abideth for ever. 

2As the mountains are round about 
Jerusalem, 

So the LORD is round about His 
people, 

From this time forth and for ever. 

 

3For the rod of wickedness shall not 
rest upon the lot of the righteous; 

That the righteous put not forth their 
hands unto iniquity. 

 

4Do good, O LORD, unto the good, 

And to them that are upright in their 
hearts. 

5But as for such as turn aside unto 
their crooked ways, 

The LORD will lead them away with 
the workers of iniquity. 

Peace be upon Israel. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

When the LORD brought back those 
that returned to Zion, 

We were like unto them that dream. 

2Then was our mouth filled with 
laughter, 

And our tongue with singing; 

Then said they among the nations: 

'The LORD hath done great things 
with these.' 

3The LORD hath done great things 
with us; 

We are rejoiced. 

 

4Turn our captivity, O LORD, 

As the streams in the dry land. 

5They that sow in tears 

Shall reap in joy. 

6Though he goeth on his way 
weeping that beareth the measure 
of seed, 

He shall come home with joy, 
bearing his sheaves. 

 
125 

126 




A Song of Ascents; of 
Solomon. 

 

Except the LORD build the house, 

They labour in vain that build it; 

Except the LORD keep the city, 

The watchman waketh but in vain. 

2It is vain for you that ye rise early, 
and sit up late, 

Ye that eat the bread of toil; 

So He giveth unto His beloved in 
sleep. 

 

3Lo, children are a heritage of the 
LORD; 

The fruit of the womb is a reward. 

4As arrows in the hand of a mighty 
man, 

So are the children of one's youth. 

5Happy is the man that hath his 
quiver full of them; 

They shall not be put to shame, 

When they speak with their enemies 
in the gate. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

Happy is every one that feareth the 
LORD, 

That walketh in His ways. 

2When thou eatest the labour of thy 
hands, 

Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be 
well with thee. 

3Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, 
in the innermost parts of thy 
house; 

Thy children like olive plants, round 
about thy table. 

4Behold, surely thus shall the man 
be blessed 

That feareth the LORD. 

 

5The LORD bless thee out of Zion; 

And see thou the good of Jerusalem 
all the days of thy life; 

6And see thy children's children. 

Peace be upon Israel! 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

'Much have they afflicted me from 
my youth up', 

Let Israel now say; 

2'Much have they afflicted me from 
my youth up; 

But they have not prevailed against 
me. 

3The plowers plowed upon my back; 

They made long their furrows. 

4The LORD is righteous; 

He hath cut asunder the cords of the 
wicked.' 

 

5Let them be ashamed and turned 
backward, 

All they that hate Zion. 

6Let them be as the grass upon the 
housetops, 

Which withereth afore it springeth 
up; 

7Wherewith the reaper filleth not his 
hand, 

Nor he that bindeth sheaves his 
bosom. 

8Neither do they that go by say: 

‘The blessing of the LORD be upon 
you; 
127 

128 

129 




We bless you in the name of the 
LORD.' 

 

130 

131 

132 



A Song of Ascents. 

 

Out of the depths have I called 
Thee, O LORD. 

2Lord, hearken unto my voice; 

Let Thine ears be attentive 

To the voice of my supplications. 

 

3If Thou, LORD, shouldest mark 
iniquities, 

O Lord, who could stand? 

4For with Thee there is forgiveness, 

That Thou mayest be feared. 

 

5I wait for the LORD, my soul doth 
wait, 

And in His word do I hope. 

6My soul waiteth for the Lord, 

More than watchmen for the 
morning; 

Yea, more than watchmen for the 
morning. 

 

7O Israel, hope in the LORD; 

For with the LORD there is mercy, 

And with Him is plenteous 
redemption. 

8And He will redeem Israel 

From all his iniquities. 

 

A Song of Ascents; of 
David. 

 

LORD, my heart is not haughty, nor 
mine eyes lofty; 

Neither do I exercise myself in 
things too great, or in things too 
wonderful for me. 

2Surely I have stilled and quieted 
my soul; 

Like a weaned child with his 
mother; 

My soul is with me like a weaned 
child. 

 

3O Israel, hope in the LORD 

From this time forth and for ever. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

LORD, remember unto David 

All his affliction; 

2How he swore unto the LORD, 

And vowed unto the Mighty One of 
Jacob: 

3‘Surely I will not come into the tent 
of my house, 

Nor go up into the bed that is spread 
for me; 

4I will not give sleep to mine eyes, 

Nor slumber to mine eyelids; 

5Until I find out a place for the 
LORD, 

A dwelling-place for the Mighty 
One of Jacob.' 

 

6Lo, we heard of it as being in 
Ephrath; 

We found it in the field of athe 
wood. 

a Heb. Joar. See 1 Chr, xiii. 5. 

7Let us go into His dwelling-place; 

Let us worship at His footstool. 


8Arise, O LORD, unto Thy resting-
place; 

Thou, and the ark of Thy strength. 

9Let Thy priests be clothed with 
righteousness; 

And let Thy saints shout for joy. 

10For Thy servant David's sake 

Turn not away the face of Thine 
anointed. 

 

11The LORD swore unto David in 
truth; 

He will not turn back from it: 

'Of the fruit of thy body will I set 
upon thy throne. 

12If thy children keep My covenant 

And My testimony that I shall teach 
them, 

Their children also for ever shall sit 
upon thy throne.' 

13For the LORD hath chosen Zion; 

He hath desired it for His habitation: 

14'This is My resting-place for ever; 

Here will I dwell; for I have desired 
it. 

15I will abundantly bless her 
provision; 

I will give her needy bread in 
plenty. 

16Her priests also will I clothe with 
salvation; 

And her saints shall shout aloud for 
joy. 

17There will I make a horn to shoot 
up unto David, 

There have I ordered a lamp for 
Mine anointed. 

18His enemies will I clothe with 
shame; 

But upon himself shall his crown 
shine.' 

 

A Song of Ascents; of 
David. 

 

Behold, how good and how pleasant 
it is 

For brethren to dwell together in 
unity! 

2It is like the precious oil upon the 
head, 

Coming down upon the beard; 

Even Aaron's beard, 

That cometh down upon the collar 
of his garments; 

3Like the dew of Hermon, 

That cometh down upon the 
mountains of Zion; 

For there the LORD commanded the 
blessing, 

Even life for ever. 

 

A Song of Ascents. 

 

Behold, bless ye the LORD, all ye 
servants of the LORD, 

That stand in the house of the LORD 
in the night seasons. 

2Lift up your hands to the sanctuary, 

And bless ye the LORD. 

 

3The LORD bless thee out of Zion; 

Even He that made heaven and 
earth. 

 

Hallelujah. 

Praise ye the name of the 
LORD; 
133 

134 

135 




Give praise, O ye servants of the 
LORD, 

2Ye that stand in the house of the 
LORD, 

In the courts of the house of our 
God. 

3Praise ye the LORD, for the LORD is 
good; 

Sing praises unto His name, for it is 
pleasant. 

4For the LORD hath chosen Jacob 
unto Himself, 

And Israel for His own treasure. 

 

5For I know that the LORD is great, 

And that our Lord is above all gods. 

6Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that 
hath He done, 

In heaven and in earth, in the seas 
and in all deeps; 

7Who causeth the vapours to ascend 
from the ends of the earth; 

He maketh lightnings for the rain; 

He bringeth forth the wind out of 
His treasuries. 

 

8Who smote the first-born of Egypt, 

Both of man and beast. 

9He sent signs and wonders into the 
midst of thee, O Egypt, 

Upon Pharaoh, and upon all his 
servants. 

 

10Who smote many nations, 

And slew mighty kings: 

11Sihon king of the Amorites, 

And Og king of Bashan, 

And all the kingdoms of Canaan; 

12And gave their land for a heritage, 

A heritage unto Israel His people. 

 

13O LORD, Thy name endureth for 
ever; 

Thy memorial, O LORD, throughout 
all generations. 

14For the LORD will judge His 
people, 

And repent Himself for His 
servants. 

15The idols of the nations are silver 
and gold, 

The work of men's hands. 

16They have mouths, but they speak 
not; 

Eyes have they, but they see not; 

17They have ears, but they hear not; 

Neither is there any breath in their 
mouths. 

18They that make them shall be like 
unto them; 

Yea, every one that trusteth in them. 

 

19O house of Israel, bless ye the 
LORD; 

O house of Aaron, bless ye the 
LORD; 

20O house of Levi, bless ye the 
LORD; 

Ye that fear the LORD, bless ye the 
LORD. 

21Blessed be the LORD out of Zion, 

Who dwelleth at Jerusalem. 

Hallelujah. 

 

O give thanks unto the 
LORD, for He is good, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 
136 




2O give thanks unto the God of 
gods, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

3O give thanks unto the Lord of 
lords, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

4To Him who alone doeth great 
wonders, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

5To Him that by understanding 
made the heavens, for His mercy 
endureth for ever. 

6To Him that spread forth the earth 
above the waters, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

7To Him that made great lights, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

8The sun to rule by day, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

9The moon and stars to rule by 
night, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

10To Him that smote Egypt in their 
first-born, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

11And brought out Israel from 
among them, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

12With a strong hand, and with an 
outstretched arm, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

13To Him who divided the Red Sea 
in sunder, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

14And made Israel to pass through 
the midst of it, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

15But overthrew Pharaoh and his 
host in the Red Sea, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

16To Him that led His people 
through the wilderness, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

17To Him that smote great kings; 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

18And slew mighty kings, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

19Sihon king of the Amorites, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

20And Og king of Bashan, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

21And gave their land for a heritage, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

22Even a heritage unto Israel His 
servant, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

23Who remembered us in our low 
estate, 

For His mercy endureth for ever; 

24And hath delivered us from our 
adversaries, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

25Who giveth food to all flesh, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

26O give thanks unto the God of 
heaven, 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

 

By the rivers of Babylon, 

There we sat down, yea, we 
wept, 

When we remembered Zion. 

2Upon the willows in the midst 
thereof 
137 




We hanged up our harps. 

3For there they that led us captive 
asked of us words of song, 

And our tormentors asked of us 
mirth: 

‘Sing us one of the songs of Zion.' 

4How shall we sing the LORD’S song 

In a foreign land? 

5If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, 

Let my right hand forget her 
cunning. 

6Let my tongue cleave to the roof of 
my mouth, 

If I remember thee not; 

If I set not Jerusalem 

Above my chiefest joy. 

 

7Remember, O LORD, against the 
children of Edom 

The day of Jerusalem; 

Who said: 'Rase it, rase it, 

Even to the foundation thereof.' 

8O daughter of Babylon, that art to 
be destroyed; 

Happy shall he be, that repayeth 
thee 

As thou hast served us. 

9Happy shall he be, that taketh and 
dasheth thy little ones 

Against the rock. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

I will give Thee thanks with my 
whole heart, 

In the presence of the mighty will I 
sing praises unto Thee. 

2I will bow down toward Thy holy 
temple, 

And give thanks unto Thy name for 
Thy mercy and for Thy truth; 

For Thou hast magnified Thy word 
above all Thy name. 

3In the day that I called, Thou didst 
answer me; 

Thou didst encourage me in my soul 
with strength. 

 

4All the kings of the earth shall give 
Thee thanks, O LORD, 

For they have heard the words of 
Thy mouth. 

5Yea, they shall sing of the ways of 
the LORD; 

For great is the glory of the LORD. 

6For though the LORD be high, yet 
regardeth He the lowly, 

And the haughty He knoweth from 
afar. 

7Though I walk in the midst of 
trouble, Thou quickenest me; 

Thou stretchest forth Thy hand 
against the wrath of mine 
enemies, 

And Thy right hand doth save me. 

8The LORD will accomplish that 
which concerneth me; 

Thy mercy, O LORD, endureth for 
ever; 

Forsake not the work of Thine own 
hands. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

O LORD, Thou hast searched me, and 
known me. 
138 

139 




2Thou knowest my downsitting and 
mine uprising, 

Thou understandest my thought afar 
off. 

3Thou measurest my going about 
and my lying down, 

And art acquainted with all my 
ways. 

4For there is not a word in my 
tongue, 

But, lo, O LORD, Thou knowest it 
altogether. 

5Thou hast hemmed me in behind 
and before, 

And laid Thy hand upon me. 

6Such knowledge is too wonderful 
for me; 

Too high, I cannot attain unto it. 

 

7Whither shall I go from Thy spirit? 

Or whither shall I flee from Thy 
presence? 

8If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art 
there; 

If I make my bed in the nether-
world, behold, Thou art there. 

9If I take the wings of the morning, 

And dwell in the uttermost parts of 
the sea; 

10Even there would Thy hand lead 
me, 

And Thy right hand would hold me. 

11And if I say: ‘Surely the darkness 
shall envelop me, 

And the light about me shall be 
night'; 

12Even the darkness is not too dark 
for Thee, 

But the night shineth as the day; 

The darkness is even as the light. 

 

13For Thou hast made my reins; 

Thou hast knit me together in my 
mother's womb. 

14I will give thanks unto Thee, for I 
am fearfully and wonderfully 
made; 

Wonderful are Thy works; and that 
my soul knoweth right well. 

15My frame was not hidden from 
Thee, 

When I was made in secret, 

And curiously wrought in the lowest 
parts of the earth. 

16Thine eyes did see mine unformed 
substance, 

And in Thy book they were all 
written— 

Even the days that were fashioned, 

When as yet there was none of 
them. 

17How weighty also are Thy 
thoughts unto me, O God! 

How great is the sum of them! 

18If I would count them, they are 
more in number than the sand; 

Were I to come to the end of them, I 
would still be with Thee. 

 

19If Thou but wouldest slay the 
wicked, O God— 

Depart from me therefore, ye men 
of blood; 

20Who utter Thy name with wicked 
thought, 

They take it for falsehood, even 
Thine enemies— 


21Do not I hate them, O LORD, that 
hate Thee? 

And do not I strive with those that 
rise up against Thee? 

22I hate them with utmost hatred; 

I count them mine enemies. 

23Search me, O God, and know my 
heart, 

Try me, and know my thoughts; 

24And see if there be any way in me 
that is grievous, 

And lead me in the way everlasting. 

 

For the Leader. A Psalm of 
David. 

 

2Deliver me, O LORD, from the evil 
man; 

Preserve me from the violent man; 

3Who devise evil things in their 
heart; 

Every day do they stir up wars. 

4They have sharpened their tongue 
like a serpent; 

Vipers' venom is under their lips. 

Selah 

 

5Keep me, O LORD, from the hands 
of the wicked; 

Preserve me from the violent man; 

Who have purposed to make my 
steps slip. 

6The proud have hid a snare for me, 
and cords; 

They have spread a net by the 
wayside; 

They have set gins for me. Selah 

 

7I have said unto the LORD: 'Thou art 
my God'; 

Give ear, O LORD, unto the voice of 
my supplications. 

8O GOD the Lord, the strength of my 
salvation, 

Who hast screened my head in the 
day of battle, 

9Grant not, O LORD, the desires of 
the wicked; 

Further not his evil device, so that 
they exalt themselves. Selah 

 

10As for the head of those that 
compass me about, 

Let the mischief of their own lips 
cover them. 

11Let burning coals fall upon them; 

Let them be cast into the fire, 

Into deep pits, that they rise not up 
again. 

12A slanderer shall not be 
established in the earth; 

The violent and evil man shall be 
hunted with thrust upon thrust. 

 

13I know that the LORD will maintain 
the cause of the poor, 

And the right of the needy. 

14Surely the righteous shall give 
thanks unto Thy name; 

The upright shall dwell in Thy 
presence. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 

LORD, I have called Thee; make 
haste unto me; 
140 

141 




Give ear unto my voice, when I call 
unto Thee. 

2Let my prayer be set forth as 
incense before Thee, 

The lifting up of my hands as the 
evening sacrifice. 

3Set a guard, O LORD, to my mouth; 

Keep watch at the door of my lips. 

4Incline not my heart to any evil 
thing, 

To be occupied in deeds of 
wickedness 

With men that work iniquity; 

And let me not eat of their dainties. 

 

5Let the righteous smite me in 
kindness, and correct me; 

Oil so choice let not my head refuse; 

For still is my prayer because of 
their wickedness. 

6Their judges are thrown down by 
the sides of the rock; 

And they shall hear my words, that 
they are sweet. 

7As when one cleaveth and breaketh 
up the earth, 

Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth. 

 

8For mine eyes are unto Thee, O 
GOD the Lord; 

In Thee have I taken refuge, O pour 
not out my soul. 

9Keep me from the snare which they 
have laid for me, 

And from the gins of the workers of 
iniquity. 

10Let the wicked fall into their own 
nets, 

Whilst I withal escape. 

 

Maschil of David, when he 
was in the cave; a Prayer. 

 

2With my voice I cry unto the LORD; 

With my voice I make supplication 
unto the LORD. 

3I pour out my complaint before 
Him, 

I declare before Him my trouble; 

4When my spirit fainteth within 
me— 

Thou knowest my path— 

In the way wherein I walk 

Have they hidden a snare for me. 

5Look on my right hand, and see, 

For there is no man that knoweth 
me; 

I have no way to flee; 

No man careth for my soul. 

 

6I have cried unto Thee, O LORD; 

I have said: 'Thou art my refuge, 

My portion in the land of the living.' 

7Attend unto my cry; 

For I am brought very low; 

Deliver me from my persecutors; 

For they are too strong for me. 

8Bring my soul out of prison, 

That I may give thanks unto Thy 
name; 

The righteous shall crown 
themselves because of me; 

For Thou wilt deal bountifully with 
me. 

 

A Psalm of David. 

 
142 

143 




O LORD, hear my prayer, give ear to 
my supplications; 

In Thy faithfulness answer me, and 
in Thy righteousness. 

2And enter not into judgment with 
Thy servant; 

For in Thy sight shall no man living 
be justified. 

 

3For the enemy hath persecuted my 
soul; 

He hath crushed my life down to the 
ground; 

He hath made me to dwell in 
darkness, as those that have been 
long dead. 

4And my spirit fainteth within me; 

My heart within me is appalled. 

 

5I remember the days of old; 

I meditate on all Thy doing; 

I muse on the work of Thy hands. 

6I spread forth my hands unto Thee; 

My soul [thirsteth] after Thee, as a 
weary land. Selah 

 

7Answer me speedily, O LORD, 

My spirit faileth; 

Hide not Thy face from me; 

Lest I become like them that go 
down into the pit. 

8Cause me to hear Thy 
lovingkindness in the morning, 

For in Thee do I trust; 

Cause me to know the way wherein 
I should walk, 

For unto Thee have I lifted up my 
soul. 

 

9Deliver me from mine enemies, O 
LORD; 

With Thee have I hidden myself. 

10Teach me to do Thy will, 

For Thou art my God; 

Let Thy good spirit 

Lead me in an even land. 

11For Thy name's sake, O LORD, 
quicken me; 

In Thy righteousness bring my soul 
out of trouble. 

12And in Thy mercy cut off mine 
enemies, 

And destroy all them that harass my 
soul; 

For I am Thy servant. 

 

[A Psalm] of David. 

 

Blessed be the LORD my Rock, 

Who traineth my hands for war, 

And my fingers for battle; 

2My lovingkindness, and my 
fortress, 

My high tower, and my deliverer; 

My shield, and He in whom I take 
refuge; 

Who subdueth my people under me. 

 

3LORD, what is man, that Thou takest 
knowledge of him? 

Or the son of man, that Thou makest 
account of him? 

4Man is like unto a breath; 

His days are as a shadow that 
passeth away. 

5O LORD, bow Thy heavens, and 
come down; 
144 




Touch the mountains, that they may 
smoke. 

6Cast forth lightning, and scatter 
them; 

Send out Thine arrows, and 
discomfit them. 

7Stretch forth Thy hands from on 
high; 

Rescue me, and deliver me out of 
many waters, 

Out of the hand of strangers; 

8Whose mouth speaketh falsehood, 

And their right hand is a right hand 
of lying. 

 

9O God, I will sing a new song unto 
Thee, 

Upon a psaltery of ten strings will I 
sing praises unto Thee; 

10Who givest salvation unto kings, 

Who rescuest David Thy servant 
from the hurtful sword. 

11Rescue me, and deliver me out of 
the hand of strangers, 

Whose mouth speaketh falsehood, 

And their right hand is a right hand 
of lying. 

 

12We whose sons are as plants 
grown up in their youth; 

Whose daughters are as corner-
pillars carved after the fashion of 
a palace; 

13Whose garners are full, affording 
all manner of store; 

Whose sheep increase by thousands 
and ten thousands in our fields; 

14Whose oxen are well laden; 

With no breach, and no going forth, 

And no outcry in our broad places; 

15Happy is the people that is in such 
a case. 

Yea, happy is the people whose God 
is the LORD. 

 

[A Psalm of] praise; of 
David. 

 

. I will extol Thee, my God, O 

 King; 

 And I will bless Thy name for ever 
and ever. 

. 2Every day will I bless Thee; 

 And I will praise Thy name for ever 
and ever. 

. 3Great is the LORD, and highly to be 
praised; 

 And His greatness is unsearchable. 

. 
4One generation shall laud Thy 
works to another, 

 And shall declare Thy mighty acts. 

. 
5The glorious splendour of Thy 
majesty, 

 And Thy wondrous works, will I 
rehearse. 

. 
6And men shall speak of the might 
of Thy tremendous acts; 

 And I will tell of Thy greatness. 

. 
7They shall utter the fame of Thy 
great goodness, 

 And shall sing of Thy righteousness. 

. 
8The LORD is gracious, and full of 
compassion; 

 Slow to anger, and of great mercy. 

. 
9The LORD is good to all; 
145 




 And His tender mercies are over all 
His works. 

. 
10All Thy works shall praise Thee, O 
LORD; 

 And Thy saints shall bless Thee. 

. 
11They shall speak of the glory of 
Thy kingdom, 

 And talk of Thy might; 

. 
12To make known to the sons of men 
His mighty acts, 

 And the glory of the majesty of His 
kingdom. 

. 
13Thy kingdom is a kingdom for all 
ages, 

 And Thy dominion endureth 
throughout all generations. 

. 
14The LORD upholdeth all that fall, 

 And raiseth up all those that are 
bowed down. 

. 
15The eyes of all wait for Thee, 

 And Thou givest them their food in 
due season. 

. 
16Thou openest Thy hand, 

 And satisfiest every living thing 
with favour. 

. 
17The LORD is righteous in all His 
ways, 

 And gracious in all His works. 

. 
18The LORD is nigh unto all them that 
call upon Him, 

 To all that call upon Him in truth. 

. 
19He will fulfil the desire of them 
that fear Him; 

 He also will hear their cry, and will 
save them. 

. 
20The LORD preserveth all them that 
love Him; 

 But all the wicked will He destroy. 

. 
21My mouth shall speak the praise of 
the LORD; 

And let all flesh bless His holy 
name for ever and ever. 

 

Hallelujah. 

Praise the LORD, O my soul. 

2I will praise the LORD while I live; 

I will sing praises unto my God 
while I have my being. 

 

3Put not your trust in princes, 

Nor in the son of man, in whom 
there is no help. 

4His breath goeth forth, he returneth 
to his dust; 

In that very day his thoughts perish. 

5Happy is he whose help is the God 
of Jacob, 

Whose hope is in the LORD his God, 

6Who made heaven and earth, 

The sea, and all that in them is; 

Who keepeth truth for ever; 

7Who executeth justice for the 
oppressed; 

Who giveth bread to the hungry. 

 

The LORD looseth the prisoners; 

8The LORD openeth the eyes of the 
blind; 

The LORD raiseth up them that are 
bowed down; 

The LORD loveth the righteous; 

9The LORD preserveth the strangers; 

He upholdeth the fatherless and the 
widow; 
146 




But the way of the wicked He 
maketh crooked. 

10The LORD will reign for ever, 

Thy God, O Zion, unto all 
generations. 

Hallelujah. 

 

Hallelujah; 

For it is good to sing 
praises unto our God; 

For it is pleasant, and praise is 
comely. 

2The LORD doth build up Jerusalem, 

He gathereth together the dispersed 
of Israel; 

3Who healeth the broken in heart, 

And bindeth up their wounds. 

4He counteth the number of the 
stars; 

He giveth them all their names. 

5Great is our Lord, and mighty in 
power; 

His understanding is infinite. 

6The LORD upholdeth the humble; 

He bringeth the wicked down to the 
ground. 

7Sing unto the LORD with 
thanksgiving, 

Sing praises upon the harp unto our 
God; 

8Who covereth the heaven with 
clouds, 

Who prepareth rain for the earth, 

Who maketh the mountains to 
spring with grass. 

9He giveth to the beast his food, 

And to the young ravens which cry. 

10He delighteth not in the strength of 
the horse; 

He taketh no pleasure in the legs of 
a man. 

11The LORD taketh pleasure in them 
that fear Him, 

In those that wait for His mercy. 

 

12Glorify the LORD, O Jerusalem; 

Praise thy God, O Zion. 

13For He hath made strong the bars 
of thy gates; 

He hath blessed thy children within 
thee. 

14He maketh thy borders peace; 

He giveth thee in plenty the fat of 
wheat. 

15He sendeth out His commandment 
upon earth; 

His word runneth very swiftly. 

16He giveth snow like wool; 

He scattereth the hoar-frost like 
ashes. 

17He casteth forth His ice like 
crumbs; 

Who can stand before His cold? 

18He sendeth forth His word, and 
melteth them; 

He causeth His wind to blow, and 
the waters flow. 

19He declareth His word unto Jacob, 

His statutes and His ordinances unto 
Israel. 

20He hath not dealt so with any 
nation; 

And as for His ordinances, they 
have not known them. 

Hallelujah. 

 

Hallelujah. 

Praise ye the LORD from the 
147 

148 




 heavens; 

Praise Him in the heights. 

2Praise ye Him, all His angels; 

Praise ye Him, all His hosts. 

3Praise ye Him, sun and moon; 

Praise Him, all ye stars of light. 

4Praise Him, ye heavens of heavens, 

And ye waters that are above the 
heavens. 

5Let them praise the name of the 
LORD; 

For He commanded, and they were 
created. 

6He hath also established them for 
ever and ever; 

He hath made a decree which shall 
not be transgressed. 

 

7Praise the LORD from the earth, 

Ye sea-monsters, and all deeps; 

8Fire and hail, snow and vapour, 

Stormy wind, fulfilling His word; 

9Mountains and all hills, 

Fruitful trees and all cedars; 

10Beasts and all cattle, 

Creeping things and winged fowl; 

11Kings of the earth and all peoples, 

Princes and all judges of the earth; 

12Both young men and maidens, 

Old men and children; 

13Let them praise the name of the 
LORD, 

For His name alone is exalted; 

His glory is above the earth and 
heaven. 

14And He hath lifted up a horn for 
His people, 

A praise for all His saints, 

Even for the children of Israel, a 
people near unto Him. 

Hallelujah. 

 

Hallelujah. 

Sing unto the LORD a new 
song, 

And His praise in the assembly of 
the saints. 

2Let Israel rejoice in his Maker; 

Let the children of Zion be joyful in 
their King. 

3Let them praise His name in the 
dance; 

Let them sing praises unto Him with 
the timbrel and harp. 

4For the LORD taketh pleasure in His 
people; 

He adorneth the humble with 
salvation. 

 

5Let the saints exult in glory; 

Let them sing for joy upon their 
beds. 

6Let the high praises of God be in 
their mouth, 

And a two-edged sword in their 
hand; 

7To execute vengeance upon the 
nations, 

And chastisements upon the 
peoples; 

8To bind their kings with chains, 

And their nobles with fetters of iron; 

9To execute upon them the 
judgment written; 

He is the glory of all His saints. 

Hallelujah. 

 
149 




Hallelujah. 

Praise God in His 
sanctuary; 

Praise Him in the firmament of His 
power. 

2Praise Him for His mighty acts; 

Praise Him according to His 
abundant greatness. 

3Praise Him with the blast of the 
horn; 

Praise Him with the psaltery and 
harp. 

4Praise Him with the timbrel and 
dance; 

Praise Him with stringed 
instruments and the pipe. 

5Praise Him with the loud-sounding 
cymbals; 

Praise Him with the clanging 
cymbals. 

6Let every thing that hath breath 
praise the LORD. 

Hallelujah. 

150 




.... 

PROVERBS 

 

The proverbs of Solomon the son 
of David, king of Israel; 

2To know wisdom and instruction; 

To comprehend the words of 
understanding; 

3To receive the discipline of 
wisdom, 

Justice, and right, and equity; 

4To give prudence to the simple, 

To the young man knowledge and 
discretion; 

5That the wise man may hear, and 
increase in learning, 

And the man of understanding may 
attain unto wise counsels; 

6To understand a proverb, and a 
figure; 

The words of the wise, and their 
dark sayings. 

 

7The fear of the LORD is the 
beginning of knowledge; 

But the foolish despise wisdom and 
discipline. 

 

8Hear, my son, the instruction of thy 
father, 

And forsake not the teaching of thy 
mother; 

9For they shall be a chaplet of grace 
unto thy head, 

And chains about thy neck. 

 

10My son, if sinners entice thee, 

Consent thou not. 

11If they say: ‘Come with us, 

Let us lie in wait for blood, 

Let us lurk for the innocent without 
cause; 

12Let us swallow them up alive as 
the grave, 

And whole, as those that go down 
into the pit; 

13We shall find all precious 
substance, 

We shall fill our houses with spoil; 

14Cast in thy lot among us; 

Let us all have one purse’— 

15My son, walk not thou in the way 
with them, 

Restrain thy foot from their path; 

16For their feet run to evil, 

A nd they make haste to shed blood. 

17For in vain the net is spread 

In the eyes of any bird; 

18And these lie in wait for their own 
blood, 

They lurk for their own lives. 

19So are the ways of every one that 
is greedy of gain; 

It taketh away the life of the owners 
thereof. 

 

20Wisdom crieth aloud in the streets, 

She uttereth her voice in the broad 
places; 

21She calleth at the head of the noisy 
streets, 
1 




At the entrances of the gates, in the 
city, she uttereth her words: 

22’How long, ye thoughtless, will ye 
love thoughtlessness? 

And how long will scorners delight 
them in scorning, 

And fools hate knowledge? 

23Turn you at my reproof; 

Behold, I will pour out my spirit 
unto you, 

I will make known my words unto 
you. 

24Because I have called, and ye 
refused, 

I have stretched out my hand, and 
no man attended, 

25But ye have set at nought all my 
counsel, 

And would none of my reproof; 

26I also, in your calamity, will laugh, 

I will mock when your dread 
cometh; 

27When your dread cometh as a 
storm, 

And your calamity cometh on as a 
whirlwind; 

When trouble and distress come 
upon you. 

28Then will they call me, but I will 
not answer, 

They will seek me earnestly, but 
they shall not find me. 

29For that they hated knowledge, 

And did not choose the fear of the 
LORD; 

30They would none of my counsel, 

They despised all my reproof. 

31Therefore shall they eat of the fruit 
of their own way, 

And be filled with their own 
devices. 

32For the waywardness of the 
thoughtless shall slay them, 

And the confidence of fools shall 
destroy them. 

33But whoso hearkeneth unto me 
shall dwell securely, 

And shall be quiet without fear of 
evil.’ 

 

My son, if thou wilt receive my 
words, 

And lay up my commandments with 
thee; 

2So that thou make thine ear attend 
unto wisdom, 

And thy heart incline to 
discernment; 

3Yea, if thou call for understanding, 

And lift up thy voice for 
discernment; 

4If thou seek her as silver, 

And search for her as for hid 
treasures; 

5Then shalt thou understand the fear 
of the LORD, 

And find the knowledge of God. 

6For the LORD giveth wisdom, 

Out of His mouth cometh 
knowledge and discernment; 

7He layeth up sound wisdom for the 
upright, 

He is a shield to them that walk in 
integrity; 

8That He may guard the paths of 
justice, 

And preserve the way of His godly 
ones. 
2 




9Then shalt thou understand 
righteousness and justice, 

And equity, yea, every good path. 

10For wisdom shall enter into thy 
heart, 

And knowledge shall be pleasant 
unto thy soul; 

11Discretion shall watch over thee, 

Discernment shall guard thee; 

12To deliver thee from the way of 
evil, 

From the men that speak froward 
things; 

13Who leave the paths of 
uprightness, 

To walk in the ways of darkness; 

14Who rejoice to do evil, 

And delight in the frowardness of 
evil; 

15Who are crooked in their ways, 

And perverse in their paths; 

16To deliver thee from the strange 
woman, 

Even from the alien woman that 
maketh smooth her words; 

17That forsaketh the lord of her 
youth, 

And forgetteth the covenant of her 
God. 

18For her house sinketh down unto 
death, 

And her paths unto the shades; 

19None that go unto her return, 

Neither do they attain unto the paths 
of life; 

20That thou mayest walk in the way 
of good men, 

And keep the paths of the righteous. 

21For the upright shall dwell in the 
land, 

And the whole-hearted shall remain 
in it. 

22But the wicked shall be cut off 
from the land, 

And the faithless shall be plucked 
up out of it. 

 

My son, forget not my teaching; 

But let thy heart keep my 
commandments; 

2For length of days, and years of 
life, 

And peace, will they add to thee. 

3Let not kindness and truth forsake 
thee; 

Bind them about thy neck, write 
them upon the table of thy heart; 

4So shalt thou find grace and good 
favour 

In the sight of God and man. 

 

5Trust in the LORD with all thy heart, 

And lean not upon thine own 
understanding. 

6In all thy ways acknowledge Him, 

And He will direct thy paths. 

 

7Be not wise in thine own eyes; 

Fear the LORD, and depart from evil; 

8It shall be health to thy navel, 

And marrow to thy bones. 

 

9Honour the LORD with thy 
substance, 

And with the first-fruits of all thine 
increase; 
3 




10So shall thy barns be filled with 
plenty, 

And thy vats shall overflow with 
new wine. 

11My son, despise not the chastening 
of the LORD, 

Neither spurn thou His correction; 

12For whom the LORD loveth He 
correcteth, 

Even as a father the son in whom he 
delighteth. 

 

13Happy is the man that findeth 
wisdom, 

And the man that obtaineth 
understanding. 

14For the merchandise of it is better 
than the merchandise of silver, 

And the gain thereof than fine gold. 

15She is more precious than rubies; 

And all the things thou canst desire 
are not to be compared unto her. 

16Length of days is in her right hand; 

In her left hand are riches and 
honour. 

17Her ways are ways of 
pleasantness, 

And all her paths are peace. 

18She is a tree of life to them that lay 
hold upon her, 

And happy is every one that holdest 
her fast. 

 

19The LORD by wisdom founded the 
earth; 

By understanding He established the 
heavens. 

20By His knowledge the depths were 
broken up, 

And the skies drop down the dew. 

 

21My son, let not them depart from 
thine eyes; 

Keep sound wisdom and discretion; 

22So shall they be life unto thy soul, 

And grace to thy neck. 

23Then shalt thou walk in thy way 
securely, 

And thou shalt not dash thy foot. 

24When thou liest down, thou shalt 
not be afraid; 

Yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy 
sleep shall be sweet. 

 

25Be not afraid of sudden terror, 

Neither of the destruction of the 
wicked, when it cometh; 

26For the LORD will be thy 
confidence, 

And will keep thy foot from being 
caught. 

 

27Withhold not good from him to 
whom it is due, 

When it is in the power of thy hand 
to do it. 

28Say not unto thy neighbour: ‘Go, 
and come again, 

And to-morrow I will give’; when 
thou hast it by thee. 

 

29Devise not evil against thy 
neighbour, 

Seeing he dwelleth securely by thee. 

30Strive not with a man without 
cause, 

If he have done thee no harm. 

 


31Envy thou not the man of violence, 

And choose none of his ways. 

32For the perverse is an abomination 
to the LORD; 

But His counsel is with the upright. 

 

33The curse of the LORD is in the 
house of the wicked; 

But He blesseth the habitation of the 
righteous. 

34If it concerneth the scorners, He 
scorneth them, 

But unto the humble He giveth 
grace. 

35The wise shall inherit honour; 

But as for the fools, they carry away 
shame. 

 

Hear, ye children, the instruction 
of a father, 

And attend to know understanding. 

2For I give you good doctrine; 

Forsake ye not my teaching. 

3For I was a son unto my father, 

Tender and an only one in the sight 
of my mother. 

4And he taught me, and said unto 
me: 

‘Let thy heart hold fast my words, 

Keep my commandments, and live; 

5Get wisdom, get understanding; 

Forget not, neither decline from the 
words of my mouth; 

6Forsake her not, and she will 
preserve thee; 

Love her, and she will keep thee. 

7The beginning of wisdom is: Get 
wisdom; 

Yea, with all thy getting get 
understanding. 

8Extol her, and she will exalt thee; 

She will bring thee to honour, when 
thou dost embrace her. 

9She will give to thy head a chaplet 
of grace; 

A crown of glory will she bestow on 
thee.’ 

10Hear, O my son, and receive my 
sayings; 

And the years of thy life shall be 
many. 

11I have taught thee in the way of 
wisdom; 

I have led thee in paths of 
uprightness. 

12When thou goest, thy step shall not 
be straitened; 

And if thou runnest, thou shalt not 
stumble. 

13Take fast hold of instruction, let 
her not go; 

Keep her, for she is thy life. 

 

14Enter not into the path of the 
wicked, 

And walk not in the way of evil 
men. 

15Avoid it, pass not by it; 

Turn from it, and pass on. 

16For they sleep not, except they 
have done evil; 

And their sleep is taken away, 
unless they cause some to fall. 

17For they eat the bread of 
wickedness, 

And drink the wine of violence. 
4 




18But the path of the righteous is as 
the light of dawn, 

That shineth more and more unto 
the perfect day. 

19The way of the wicked is as 
darkness; 

They know not at what they 
stumble. 

 

20My son, attend to my words; 

Incline thine ear unto my sayings. 

21Let them not depart from thine 
eyes; 

Keep them in the midst of thy heart. 

22For they are life unto those that 
find them, 

And health to all their flesh. 

23Above all that thou guardest keep 
thy heart; 

For out of it are the issues of life. 

24Put away from thee a froward 
mouth, 

And perverse lips put far from thee. 

25Let thine eyes look right on, 

And let thine eyelids look straight 
before thee. 

26Make plain the path of thy feet, 

And let all thy ways be established. 

27Turn not to the right hand nor to 
the left; 

Remove thy foot from evil. 

 

My son, attend unto my wisdom; 

Incline thine ear to my 
understanding; 

2That thou mayest preserve 
discretion, 

And that thy lips may keep 
knowledge. 

3For the lips of a strange woman 
drop honey, 

And her mouth is smoother than oil; 

4But her end is bitter as wormwood, 

Sharp as a two-edged sword. 

5Her feet go down to death; 

Her steps take hold on the nether-
world; 

6Lest she should walk the even path 
of life, 

Her ways wander, but she knoweth 
it not. 

 

7Now therefore, O ye children, 
hearken unto me, 

And depart not from the words of 
my mouth. 

8Remove thy way far from her, 

And come not nigh the door of her 
house; 

9Lest thou give thy vigour unto 
others, 

And thy years unto the cruel; 

10Lest strangers be filled with thy 
strength, 

And thy labours be in the house of 
an alien; 

11And thou moan, when thine end 
cometh, 

When thy flesh and thy body are 
consumed, 

12And say: ‘How have I hated 
instruction, 

And my heart despised reproof; 

13Neither have I hearkened to the 
voice of my teachers, 

Nor inclined mine ear to them that 
instructed me! 

14I was well nigh in all evil 
5 




In the midst of the congregation and 
assembly.’ 

 

15Drink waters out of thine own 
cistern, 

And running waters out of thine 
own well. 

16Let thy springs be dispersed 
abroad, 

And courses of water in the streets. 

17Let them be only thine own, 

And not strangers’with thee. 

18Let thy fountain be blessed; 

And have joy of the wife of thy 
youth. 

19A lovely hind and a graceful doe, 

Let her breasts satisfy thee at all 
times; 

With her love be thou ravished 
always. 

20Why then wilt thou, my son, be 
ravished with a strange woman, 

And embrace the bosom of an alien? 

 

21For the ways of man are before the 
eyes of the LORD, 

And He maketh even all his paths. 

22His own iniquities shall ensnare 
the wicked, 

And he shall be holden with the 
cords of his sin. 

23He shall die for lack of instruction; 

And in the greatness of his folly he 
shall reel. 

 

My son, if thou art become surety 
for thy neighbour, 

If thou hast struck thy hands for a 
stranger— 

2Thou art snared by the words of thy 
mouth, 

Thou art caught by the words of thy 
mouth— 

3Do this now, my son, and deliver 
thyself, 

Seeing thou art come into the hand 
of thy neighbour; 

Go, humble thyself, and urge thy 
neighbour. 

4Give not sleep to thine eyes, 

 nor slumber to thine eyelids. 

5Deliver thyself as a gazelle from 
the hand [of the hunter], 

And as a bird from the hand of the 
fowler. 

 

6Go to the ant, thou sluggard; 

Consider her ways, and be wise; 

7Which having no chief, 

Overseer, or ruler, 

8Provideth her bread in the summer, 

And gatherest her food in the 
harvest. 

9How long wilt thou sleep, O 
sluggard? 

When wilt thou arise out of thy 
sleep? 

10’Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, 

A little folding of the hands to 
sleep’— 

11So shall thy poverty come as a 
runner, 

And thy want as an armed man. 

 

12A base person, a man of iniquity, 

Is he that walketh with a froward 
mouth; 
6 




13That winketh with his eyes, that 
scrapeth with his feet, 

That pointeth with his fingers; 

14Frowardness is in his heart, he 
deviseth evil continually; 

He soweth discord. 

15Therefore shall his calamity come 
suddenly; 

On a sudden shall he be broken, and 
that without remedy. 

 

16There are six things which the 
LORD hateth, 

Yea, seven which are an 
abomination unto Him: 

17Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, 

And hands that shed innocent blood; 

18A heart that deviseth wicked 
thoughts, 

Feet that are swift in running to evil; 

19A false witness that breatheth out 
lies, 

And he that soweth discord among 
brethren. 

 

20My son, keep the commandment 
of thy father, 

And forsake not the teaching of thy 
mother; 

21Bind them continually upon thy 
heart, 

Tie them about thy neck. 

22When thou walkest, it shall lead 
thee, 

When thou liest down, it shall watch 
over thee; 

And when thou awakest, it shall talk 
with thee. 

23For the commandment is a lamp, 
and the teaching is light, 

And reproofs of instruction are the 
way of life; 

24To keep thee from the evil woman, 

From the smoothness of the alien 
tongue. 

25Lust not after her beauty in thy 
heart; 

Neither let her captivate thee with 
her eyelids. 

26For on account of a harlot a man is 
brought to a loaf of bread, 

But the adulteress hunteth for the 
precious life. 

27Can a man take fire in his bosom, 

And his clothes not be burned? 

28Or can one walk upon hot coals, 

And his feet not be scorched? 

29So he that goeth in to his 
neighbour’s wife; 

Whosoever toucheth her shall not go 
unpunished. 

30Men do not despise a thief, if he 
steal 

To satisfy his soul when he is 
hungry; 

31But if he be found, he must restore 
sevenfold, 

He must give all the substance of his 
house. 

32He that committeth adultery with a 
woman lacketh understanding; 

He doeth it that would destroy his 
own soul. 

33Wounds and dishonour shall he 
get, 

And his reproach shall not be wiped 
away. 


34For jealousy is the rage of a man, 

And he will not spare in the day of 
vengeance. 

35He will not regard any ransom; 

Neither will he rest content, though 
thou givest many gifts. 

 

My son, keep my words, 

And lay up my commandments 
with thee. 

2Keep my commandments and live, 

And my teaching as the apple of 
thine eye. 

3Bind them upon thy fingers, 

Write them upon the table of thy 
heart. 

4Say unto wisdom: ‘Thou art my 
sister’, 

And call understanding thy 
kinswoman; 

5That they may keep thee from the 
strange woman, 

From the alien woman that maketh 
smooth her words. 

 

6For at the window of my house 

I looked forth through my lattice; 

7And I beheld among the 
thoughtless ones, 

I discerned among the youths, 

A young man void of understanding, 

8Passing through the street near her 
corner, 

And he went the way to her house; 

9In the twilight, in the evening of the 
day, 

In the blackness of night and the 
darkness. 

10And, behold, there met him a 
woman 

With the attire of a harlot, and wily 
of heart. 

11She is riotous and rebellious, 

Her feet abide not in her house; 

12Now she is in the streets, now in 
the broad places, 

And lieth in wait at every corner. 

13So she caught him, and kissed 
him, 

And with an impudent face she said 
unto him: 

14’Sacrifices of peace-offerings were 
due from me; 

This day have I paid my vows. 

15Therefore came I forth to meet 
thee, 

To seek thy face, and I have found 
thee. 

16I have decked my couch with 
coverlets, 

With striped cloths of the yarn of 
Egypt. 

17I have perfumed my bed 

With myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. 

18Come, let us take our fill of love 
until the morning; 

Let us solace ourselves with loves. 

19For my husband is not at home, 

He is gone a long journey; 

20He hath taken the bag of money 
with him; 

He will come home at the full 
moon.’ 

 

21With her much fair speech she 
causeth him to yield, 
7 




With the blandishment of her lips 
she enticeth him away. 

22He goeth after her straightway, 

As an ox that goeth to the slaughter, 

Or as one in fetters to the correction 
of the fool; 

23Till an arrow strike through his 
liver; 

As a bird hasteneth to the snare— 

And knoweth not that it is at the cost 
of his life. 

 

24Now therefore, O ye children, 
hearken unto me, 

And attend to the words of my 
mouth. 

25Let not thy heart decline to her 
ways, 

Go not astray in her paths. 

26For she hath cast down many 
wounded; 

Yea, a mighty host are all her slain. 

27Her house is the way to the nether-
world, 

Going down to the chambers of 
death. 

 

Doth not wisdom call, 

And understanding put forth her 
voice? 

2In the top of high places by the 
way, 

Where the paths meet, she standeth; 

3Beside the gates, at the entry of the 
city, 

At the coming in at the doors, she 
crieth aloud: 

4’Unto you, O men, I call, 

And my voice is to the sons of men. 

5O ye thoughtless, understand 
prudence, 

And, ye fools, be ye of an 
understanding heart. 

6Hear, for I will speak excellent 
things, 

And the opening of my lips shall be 
right things. 

7For my mouth shall utter truth, 

And wickedness is an abomination 
to my lips. 

8All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness, 

There is nothing perverse or 
crooked in them. 

9They are all plain to him that 
understandeth, 

And right to them that find 
knowledge. 

10Receive my instruction, and not 
silver, 

And knowledge rather than choice 
gold. 

11For wisdom is better than rubies, 

And all things desirable are not to 
be compared unto her. 

12I wisdom dwell with prudence, 

And find out knowledge of devices. 

13The fear of the LORD is to hate evil; 

Pride, and arrogancy, and the evil 
way, 

And the froward mouth, do I hate. 

14Counsel is mine, and sound 
wisdom; 

I am understanding, power is mine. 

15By me kings reign, 

And princes decree justice. 

16By me princes rule, 
8 




And nobles, even all the judges of 
the earth. 

17I love them that love me, 

And those that seek me earnestly 
shall find me. 

18Riches and honour are with me; 

Yea, enduring riches and 
righteousness. 

19My fruit is better than gold, yea, 
than fine gold; 

And my produce than choice silver. 

20I walk in the way of righteousness, 

In the midst of the paths of justice; 

21That I may cause those that love 
me to inherit substance, 

And that I may fill their treasuries. 

 

22The LORD made me as the 
beginning of His way, 

The first of His works of old. 

23I was set up from everlasting, from 
the beginning, 

Or ever the earth was. 

24When there were no depths, I was 
brought forth; 

When there were no fountains 
abounding with water. 

25Before the mountains were settled, 

Before the hills was I brought forth; 

26While as yet He had not made the 
earth, nor the fields, 

Nor the beginning of the dust of the 
world. 

27When He established the heavens, 
I was there; 

When He set a circle upon the face 
of the deep, 

28When He made firm the skies 
above, 

When the fountains of the deep 
showed their might, 

29When He gave to the sea His 
decree, 

That the waters should not 
transgress His commandment, 

When He appointed the foundations 
of the earth; 

30Then I was by Him, as a nursling; 

And I was daily all delight, 

Playing always before Him, 

31Playing in His habitable earth, 

And my delights are with the sons 
of men. 

 

32Now therefore, ye children, 
hearken unto me; 

For happy are they that keep my 
ways. 

33Hear instruction, and be wise, 

And refuse it not. 

34Happy is the man that hearkeneth 
to me, 

Watching daily at my gates, waiting 
at the posts of my doors. 

35For whoso findeth me findeth life, 

And obtaineth favour of the LORD. 

36But he that misseth me wrongeth 
his own soul; 

All they that hate me love death.’ 

 

Wisdom hath builded her house, 

She hath hewn out her seven 
pillars; 

2She hath prepared her meat, she 
hath mingled her wine; 

She hath also furnished her table. 

3She hath sent forth her maidens, 
she calleth, 
9 




Upon the highest places of the city: 

4’Whoso is thoughtless, let him turn 
in hither’; 

As for him that lacketh 
understanding, she saith to him: 

5’Come, eat of my bread, 

And drink of the wine which I have 
mingled. 

6Forsake all thoughtlessness, and 
live; 

And walk in the way of 
understanding. 

7He that correcteth a scorner getteth 
to himself shame, 

And he that reproveth a wicked 
man, it becometh unto him a blot. 

8Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate 
thee; 

Reprove a wise man, and he will 
love thee. 

9Give to a wise man, and he will be 
yet wiser; 

Teach a righteous man, and he will 
increase in learning. 

10The fear of the LORD is the 
beginning of wisdom, 

And the knowledge of the All-holy 
is understanding. 

11For by me thy days shall be 
multiplied, 

And the years of thy life shall be 
increased. 

12If thou art wise, thou art wise for 
thyself; 

And if thou scornest, thou alone 
shalt bear it.’ 

 

13The woman Folly is riotous; 

She is thoughtless, and knoweth 
nothing. 

14And she sitteth at the door of her 
house, 

On a seat in the high places of the 
city, 

15To call to them that pass by, 

Who go right on their ways: 

16’Whoso is thoughtless, let him turn 
in hither’; 

And as for him that lacketh 
understanding, she saith to him: 

17’Stolen waters are sweet, 

And bread eaten in secret is 
pleasant.’ 

18But he knoweth not that the shades 
are there; 

That her guests are in the depths of 
the nether-world. 

 

The proverbs of Solomon. 

 

A wise son maketh a glad father; 

But a foolish son is the grief of his 
mother. 

 

2Treasures of wickedness profit 
nothing; 

But righteousness delivereth from 
death. 

 

3The LORD will not suffer the soul of 
the righteous to famish; 

But He thrusteth away the desire of 
the wicked. 

 

4He becometh poor that dealeth with 
a slack hand; 
10 




But the hand of the diligent maketh 
rich. 

 

5A wise son gathereth in summer; 

But a son that doeth shamefully 
sleepeth in harvest. 

 

6Blessings are upon the head of the 
righteous; 

But the mouth of the wicked 
concealeth violence. 

 

7The memory of the righteous shall 
be for a blessing; 

But the name of the wicked shall 
rot. 

 

8The wise in heart will receive 
commandments; 

But a prating fool shall fall. 

 

9He that walketh uprightly walketh 
securely; 

But he that perverteth his ways shall 
be found out. 

 

10He that winketh with the eye 
causeth sorrow; 

And a prating fool shall fall. 

 

11The mouth of the righteous is a 
fountain of life; 

But the mouth of the wicked 
concealeth violence. 

 

12Hatred stirreth up strifes; 

But love covereth all transgressions. 

 

13In the lips of him that hath 
discernment wisdom is found; 

But a rod is for the back of him that 
is void of understanding. 

 

14Wise men lay up knowledge; 

But the mouth of the foolish is an 
imminent ruin. 

15The rich man’s wealth is his strong 
city; 

The ruin of the poor is their poverty. 

 

16The wages of the righteous is life; 

The increase of the wicked is sin. 

 

17He is in the way of life that 
heedeth instruction; 

But he that forsaketh reproof erreth. 

 

18He that hideth hatred is of lying 
lips; 

And he that uttereth a slander is a 
fool. 

 

19In the multitude of words there 
wanteth not transgression; 

But he that refraineth his lips is 
wise. 

 

20The tongue of the righteous is as 
choice silver; 

The heart of the wicked is little 
worth. 

 

21The lips of the righteous feed 
many; 

But the foolish die for want of 
understanding. 

 


22The blessing of the LORD, it 
maketh rich, 

And toil addeth nothing thereto. 

 

23It is as sport to a fool to do 
wickedness, 

And so is wisdom to a man of 
discernment. 

 

24The fear of the wicked, it shall 
come upon him; 

And the desire of the righteous shall 
be granted. 

 

25When the whirlwind passeth, the 
wicked is no more; 

But the righteous is an everlasting 
foundation. 

 

26As vinegar to the teeth, and as 
smoke to the eyes, 

So is the sluggard to them that send 
him. 

 

27The fear of the LORD prolongeth 
days; 

But the years of the wicked shall be 
shortened. 

 

28The hope of the righteous is 
gladness; 

But the expectation of the wicked 
shall perish. 

 

29The way of the LORD is a 
stronghold to the upright, 

But ruin to the workers of iniquity. 

 

30The righteous shall never be 
moved; 

But the wicked shall not inhabit the 
land. 

 

31The mouth of the righteous 
buddeth with wisdom; 

But the froward tongue shall be cut 
off. 

 

32The lips of the righteous know 
what is acceptable; 

But the mouth of the wicked is all 
frowardness. 

 

A false balance is an 
abomination to the LORD; 

But a perfect weight is His delight. 

 

2When pride cometh, then cometh 
shame; 

But with the lowly is wisdom. 

 

3The integrity of the upright shall 
guide them; 

But the perverseness of the faithless 
shall destroy them. 

 

4Riches profit not in the day of 
wrath; 

But righteousness delivereth from 
death. 

 

5The righteousness of the sincere 
shall make straight his way; 

But the wicked shall fall by his own 
wickedness. 

 
11 




6The righteousness of the upright 
shall deliver them; 

But the faithless shall be trapped in 
their own crafty device. 

 

7When a wicked man dieth, his 
expectation shall perish, 

And the hope of strength perisheth. 

 

8The righteous is delivered out of 
trouble, 

And the wicked cometh in his stead. 

 

9With his mouth the impious man 
destroyeth his neighbour; 

But through knowledge shall the 
righteous be delivered. 

 

10When it goeth well with the 
righteous, the city rejoiceth; 

And when the wicked perish, there 
is joy. 

 

11By the blessing of the upright a 
city is exalted; 

But it is overthrown by the mouth of 
the wicked. 

 

12He that despiseth his neighbour 
lacketh understanding; 

But a man of discernment holdeth 
his peace. 

 

13He that goeth about as a talebearer 
revealeth secrets; 

But he that is of a faithful spirit 
concealeth a matter. 

 

14Where no wise direction is, a 
people falleth; 

But in the multitude of counsellors 
there is safety. 

 

15He that is surety for a stranger 
shall smart for it; 

But he that hateth them that strike 
hands is secure. 

 

16A gracious woman obtaineth 
honour; 

And strong men obtain riches. 

 

17The merciful man doeth good to 
his own soul; 

But he that is cruel troubleth his 
own flesh. 

 

18The wicked earneth deceitful 
wages; 

But he that soweth righteousness 
hath a sure reward. 

 

19Stedfast righteousness tendeth to 
life; 

But he that pursueth evil pursueth it 
to his own death. 

 

20They that are perverse in heart are 
an abomination to the LORD; 

But such as are upright in their way 
are His delight. 

 

21My hand upon it! the evil man 
shall not be unpunished; 

But the seed of the righteous shall 
escape. 

 


22As a ring of gold in a swine’s 
snout, so is a fair woman that 
turneth aside from discretion. 

 

23The desire of the righteous is only 
good; 

But the expectation of the wicked is 
wrath. 

 

24There is that scattereth, and yet 
increaseth; 

And there is that withholdeth more 
than is meet, but it tendeth only to 
want. 

 

25The beneficent soul shall be made 
rich, and he that satisfieth 
abundantly shall be satisfied also 
himself. 

 

26He that withholdeth corn, the 
people shall curse him; 

But blessing shall be upon the head 
of him that selleth it. 

 

27He that diligently seeketh good 
seeketh favour; 

But he that searcheth for evil, it 
shall come unto him. 

 

28He that trusteth in his riches shall 
fall; 

But the righteous shall flourish as 
foliage. 

 

29He that troubleth his own house 
shall inherit the wind; 

And the foolish shall be servant to 
the wise of heart. 

 

30The fruit of the righteous is a tree 
of life; 

And he that is wise winneth souls. 

 

31Behold, the righteous shall be 
requited in the earth; 

How much more the wicked and the 
sinner! 

 

Whoso loveth knowledge 
loveth correction; 

But he that is brutish hateth reproof. 

 

2A good man shall obtain favour of 
the LORD; 

But a man of wicked devices will 
He condemn. 

 

3A man shall not be established by 
wickedness; 

But the root of the righteous shall 
never be moved. 

 

4A virtuous woman is a crown to her 
husband; 

But she that doeth shamefully is as 
rottenness in his bones. 

 

5The thoughts of the righteous are 
right; 

But the counsels of the wicked are 
deceit. 

 

6The words of the wicked are to lie 
in wait for blood; 

But the mouth of the upright shall 
deliver them. 

 
12 




7The wicked are overthrown, and 
are not; 

But the house of the righteous shall 
stand. 

 

8A man shall be commended 
according to his intelligence; 

But he that is of a distorted 
understanding shall be despised. 

 

9Better is he that is lightly esteemed, 
and hath a servant, 

Than he that playeth the man of 
rank, and lacketh bread. 

 

10A righteous man regardeth the life 
of his beast; 

But the tender mercies of the wicked 
are cruel. 

 

11He that tilleth his ground shall 
have plenty of bread; 

But he that followeth after vain 
things is void of understanding. 

 

12The wicked desireth the prey of 
evil men; 

But the root of the righteous 
yieldeth fruit. 

 

13In the transgression of the lips is a 
snare to the evil man; 

But the righteous cometh out of 
trouble. 

 

14A man shall be satisfied with good 
by the fruit of his mouth, 

And the doings of a man’s hands 
shall be rendered unto him. 

 

15The way of a fool is straight in his 
own eyes; 

But he that is wise hearkeneth unto 
counsel. 

 

16A fool’s vexation is presently 
known; 

But a prudent man concealeth 
shame. 

 

17He that breatheth forth truth 
uttereth righteousness; 

But a false witness deceit. 

 

18There is that speaketh like the 
piercings of a sword; 

But the tongue of the wise is health. 

 

19The lip of truth shall be 
established for ever; 

But a lying tongue is but for a 
moment. 

 

20Deceit is in the heart of them that 
devise evil; 

But to the counsellors of peace is 
joy. 

 

21There shall no mischief befall the 
righteous; 

But the wicked are filled with evil. 

 

22Lying lips are an abomination to 
the LORD; 

But they that deal truly are His 
delight. 

 


23A prudent man concealeth 
knowledge; 

But the heart of fools proclaimeth 
foolishness. 

 

24The hand of the diligent shall bear 
rule; 

But the slothful shall be under 
tribute. 

 

25Care in the heart of a man boweth 
it down; 

But a good word maketh it glad. 

 

26The righteous is guided by his 
friend; 

But the way of the wicked leadeth 
them astray. 

 

27The slothful man shall not hunt his 
prey; 

But the precious substance of men is 
to be diligent. 

 

28In the way of righteousness is life, 

And in the pathway thereof there is 
no death. 

 

A wise son is instructed of his 
father; 

But a scorner heareth not rebuke. 

 

2A man shall eat good from the fruit 
of his mouth; 

But the desire of the faithless is 
violence. 

 

3He that guardeth his mouth keepeth 
his life; 

But for him that openeth wide his 
lips there shall be ruin. 

 

4The soul of the sluggard desireth, 
and hath nothing; 

But the soul of the diligent shall be 
abundantly gratified. 

 

5A righteous man hateth lying; 

But a wicked man behaveth vilely 
and shamefully. 

 

6Righteousness guardeth him that is 
upright in the way; 

But wickedness overthroweth the 
sinner. 

 

7There is that pretendeth himself 
rich, yet hath nothing; 

There is that pretendeth himself 
poor, yet hath great wealth. 

 

8The ransom of a man’s life are his 
riches; 

But the poor heareth no threatening. 

 

9The light of the righteous rejoiceth; 

But the lamp of the wicked shall be 
put out. 

 

10By pride cometh only contention; 

But with the well-advised is 
wisdom. 

 

11Wealth gotten by vanity shall be 
diminished; 

But he that gathereth little by little 
shall increase. 

 
13 




12Hope deferred maketh the heart 
sick; 

But desire fulfilled is a tree of life. 

 

13Whoso despiseth the word shall 
suffer thereby; 

But he that feareth the 
commandment shall be rewarded. 

 

14The teaching of the wise is a 
fountain of life, 

To depart from the snares of death. 

 

15Good understanding giveth grace; 

But the way of the faithless is harsh. 

 

16Every prudent man dealeth with 
forethought; 

But a fool unfoldeth folly. 

 

17A wicked messenger falleth into 
evil; 

But a faithful ambassador is health. 

 

18Poverty and shame shall be to him 
that refuseth instruction; 

But he that regardeth reproof shall 
be honoured. 

 

19The desire accomplished is sweet 
to the soul; 

And it is an abomination to fools to 
depart from evil. 

 

20He that walketh with wise men 
shall be wise; 

But the companion of fools shall 
smart for it. 

 

21Evil pursueth sinners; 

But to the righteous good shall be 
repaid. 

 

22A good man leaveth an inheritance 
to his children’s children; 

And the wealth of the sinner is laid 
up for the righteous. 

 

23Much food is in the tillage of the 
poor; 

But there is that is swept away by 
want of righteousness. 

 

24He that spareth his rod hateth his 
son; 

But he that loveth him chasteneth 
him betimes. 

 

25The righteous eateth to the 
satisfying of his desire; 

But the belly of the wicked shall 
want. 

 

Every wise woman buildeth 
her house; 

But the foolish plucketh it down 
with her hands. 

 

2He that walketh in his uprightness 
feareth the LORD; 

But he that is perverse in his ways 
despiseth Him. 

 

3In the mouth of the foolish is a rod 
of pride; 

But the lips of the wise shall 
preserve them. 

 
14 




4Where no oxen are, the crib is 
clean; 

But much increase is by the strength 
of the ox. 

 

5A faithful witness will not lie; 

But a false witness breatheth forth 
lies. 

 

6A scorner seeketh wisdom, and 
findeth it not; 

But knowledge is easy unto him that 
hath discernment. 

 

7Go from the presence of a foolish 
man, for thou wilt not perceive 
the lips of knowledge. 

 

8The wisdom of the prudent is to 
look well to his way; 

But the folly of fools is deceit. 

 

9Amends pleadeth for fools; 

But among the upright there is good 
will. 

 

10The heart knoweth its own 
bitterness; 

And with its joy no stranger can 
intermeddle. 

 

11The house of the wicked shall be 
overthrown; 

But the tent of the upright shall 
flourish. 

 

12There is a way which seemeth 
right unto a man, 

But the end thereof are the ways of 
death. 

 

13Even in laughter the heart acheth; 

And the end of mirth is heaviness. 

 

14The dissembler in heart shall have 
his fill from his own ways; 

And a good man shall be satisfied 
from himself. 

 

15The thoughtless believeth every 
word; 

But the prudent man looketh well to 
his going. 

 

16A wise man feareth, and departeth 
from evil; 

But the fool behaveth overbearingly, 
and is confident. 

 

17He that is soon angry dealeth 
foolishly; 

And a man of wicked devices is 
hated. 

 

18The thoughtless come into 
possession of folly; 

But the prudent are crowned with 
knowledge. 

 

19The evil bow before the good, 

And the wicked at the gates of the 
righteous. 

 

20The poor is hated even of his own 
neighbour; 

But the rich hath many friends. 

 


21He that despiseth his neighbour 
sinneth; 

But he that is gracious unto the 
humble, happy is he. 

 

22Shall they not go astray that devise 
evil? But mercy and truth shall be 
for them that devise good. 

 

23In all labour there is profit; 

But the talk of the lips tendeth only 
to penury. 

 

24The crown of the wise is their 
riches; 

But the folly of fools remaineth 
folly. 

 

25A true witness delivereth souls; 

But he that breatheth forth lies is all 
deceit. 

 

26In the fear of the LORD a man hath 
strong confidence; 

And his children shall have a place 
of refuge. 

 

27The fear of the LORD is a fountain 
of life, to depart from the snares 
of death. 

 

28In the multitude of people is the 
king’s glory; 

But in the want of people is the ruin 
of the prince. 

 

29He that is slow to anger is of great 
understanding; 

But he that is hasty of spirit exalteth 
folly. 

 

30A tranquil heart is the life of the 
flesh; 

But envy is the rottenness of the 
bones. 

 

31He that oppresseth the poor 
blasphemeth his Maker; 

But he that is gracious unto the 
needy honoureth Him. 

 

32The wicked is thrust down in his 
misfortune; 

But the righteous, even when he is 
brought to death, hath hope. 

 

33In the heart of him that hath 
discernment wisdom resteth; 

But in the inward part of fools it 
maketh itself known. 

 

34Righteousness exalteth a nation; 

But sin is a reproach to any people. 

 

35The king’s favour is toward a 
servant that dealeth wisely; 

But his wrath striketh him that 
dealeth shamefully. 

 

A soft answer turneth away 
wrath; 

But a grievous word stirreth up 
anger. 

 

2The tongue of the wise useth 
knowledge aright; 
15 




But the mouth of fools poureth out 
foolishness. 

 

3The eyes of the LORD are in every 
place, 

Keeping watch upon the evil and the 
good. 

 

4A soothing tongue is a tree of life; 

But perverseness therein is a wound 
to the spirit. 

 

5A fool despiseth his father’s 
correction; 

But he that regardeth reproof is 
prudent. 

 

6In the house of the righteous is 
much treasure; 

But in the revenues of the wicked is 
trouble. 

 

7The lips of the wise disperse 
knowledge; 

But the heart of the foolish is not 
stedfast. 

 

8The sacrifice of the wicked is an 
abomination to the LORD; 

But the prayer of the upright is His 
delight. 

 

9The way of the wicked is an 
abomination to the LORD; 

But He loveth him that followeth 
after righteousness. 

 

10There is grievous correction for 
him that forsaketh the way; 

And he that hateth reproof shall die. 

 

11The nether-world and Destruction 
are before the LORD; 

How much more then the hearts of 
the children of men! 

 

12A scorner loveth not to be 
reproved; 

He will not go unto the wise. 

 

13A merry heart maketh a cheerful 
countenance; 

But by sorrow of heart the spirit is 
broken. 

 

14The heart of him that hath 
discernment seeketh knowledge; 

But the mouth of fools feedeth on 
folly. 

 

15All the days of the poor are evil; 

But he that is of a merry heart hath a 
continual feast. 

 

16Better is little with the fear of the 
LORD, 

Than great treasure and turmoil 
therewith. 

 

17Better is a dinner of herbs where 
love is, 

Than a stalled ox and hatred 
therewith. 

 

18A wrathful man stirreth up 
discord; 

But he that is slow to anger 
appeaseth strife. 


 

19The way of the sluggard is as 
though hedged by thorns; 

But the path of the upright is even. 

 

20A wise son maketh a glad father; 

But a foolish man despiseth his 
mother. 

 

21Folly is joy to him that lacketh 
understanding; 

But a man of discernment walketh 
straightforwards. 

 

22For want of counsel purposes are 
frustrated; 

But in the multitude of counsellors 
they are established. 

 

23A man hath joy in the answer of 
his mouth; 

And a word in due season, how 
good is it! 

 

24The path of life goeth upward for 
the wise, that he may depart from 
the nether-world beneath. 

 

25The LORD will pluck up the house 
of the proud; 

But He will establish the border of 
the widow. 

 

26The thoughts of wickedness are an 
abomination to the LORD; 

But words of pleasantness are pure. 

 

27He that is greedy of gain troubleth 
his own house; 

But he that hateth gifts shall live. 

 

28The heart of the righteous studieth 
to answer; 

But the mouth of the wicked poureth 
out evil things. 

 

29The LORD is far from the wicked; 

But He heareth the prayer of the 
righteous. 

 

30The light of the eyes rejoiceth the 
heart; 

And a good report maketh the bones 
fat. 

 

31The ear that hearkeneth to the 
reproof of life abideth among the 
wise. 

 

32He that refuseth correction 
despiseth his own soul; 

But he that hearkeneth to reproof 
getteth understanding. 

 

33The fear of the LORD is the 
instruction of wisdom; 

And before honour goeth humility. 

 

The preparations of the heart 
are man’s, 

But the answer of the tongue is from 
the LORD. 

 

2All the ways of a man are clean in 
his own eyes; 

But the LORD weigheth the spirits. 

 

3Commit thy works unto the LORD, 
16 




And thy thoughts shall be 
established. 

 

4The LORD hath made every things 
for His own purpose, 

Yea, even the wicked for the day of 
evil. 

 

5Every one that is proud in heart is 
an abomination to the LORD; 

My hand upon it! he shall not be 
unpunished. 

 

6By mercy and truth iniquity is 
expiated; 

And by the fear of the LORD men 
depart from evil. 

 

7When a man’s ways please the 
LORD, 

He maketh even his enemies to be at 
peace with him. 

 

8Better is a little with righteousness 

Than great revenues with injustice. 

 

9A man’s heart deviseth his way; 

But the LORD directeth his steps. 

 

10A divine sentence is in the lips of 
the king; 

His mouth trespasseth not in 
judgment. 

 

11A just balance and scales are the 
LORD’S; 

All the weights of the bag are His 
work. 

 

12It is an abomination to kings to 
commit wickedness; 

For the throne is established by 
righteousness. 

 

13Righteous lips are the delight of 
kings; 

And they love him that speaketh 
right. 

 

14The wrath of a king is as 
messengers of death; 

But a wise man will pacify it. 

 

15In the light of the king’s 
countenance is life; 

And his favour is as a cloud of the 
latter rain. 

 

16How much better is it to get 
wisdom than gold! 

Yea, to get understanding is rather 
to be chosen than silver. 

 

17The highway of the upright is to 
depart from evil; 

He that keepeth his way preserveth 
his soul. 

 

18Pride goeth before destruction, 

And a haughty spirit before a fall. 

 

19Better it is to be of a lowly spirit 
with the humble, 

Than to divide the spoil with the 
proud. 

 

20He that giveth heed unto the word 
shall find good; 


And whoso trusteth in the LORD, 
happy is he. 

 

21The wise in heart is called a man 
of discernment; 

And the sweetness of the lips 
increaseth learning. 

 

22Understanding is a fountain of life 
unto him that hath it; 

But folly is the chastisement of 
fools. 

 

23The heart of the wise teacheth his 
mouth, 

And addeth learning to his lips. 

 

24Pleasant words are as a 
honeycomb, 

Sweet to the soul, and health to the 
bones. 

 

25There is a way which seemeth 
right unto a man, 

But the end thereof are the ways of 
death. 

 

26The hunger of the labouring man 
laboureth for him; 

For his mouth compelleth him. 

 

27An ungodly man diggeth up evil, 

And in his lips there is as a burning 
fire. 

 

28A froward man soweth strife; 

And a whisperer separateth familiar 
friends. 

 

29A man of violence enticeth his 
neighbour, 

And leadeth him into a way that is 
not good. 

 

30He shutteth his eyes, it is to devise 
froward things; 

He that biteth his lips bringeth evil 
to pass. 

 

31The hoary head is a crown of 
glory, 

It is found in the way of 
righteousness. 

 

32He that is slow to anger is better 
than the mighty; 

And he that ruleth his spirit than he 
that taketh a city. 

 

33The lot is cast into the lap; 

But the whole disposing thereof is 
of the LORD. 

 

Better is a dry morsel and 
quietness therewith, 

Than a house full of feasting with 
strife. 

 

2A servant that dealeth wisely shall 
have rule over a son that dealeth 
shamefully, 

And shall have part of the 
inheritance among the brethren. 

 

3The refining pot is for silver, and 
the furnace for gold; 

But the LORD trieth the hearts. 

 
17 




4A evil-doer giveth heed to wicked 
lips; 

And a liar giveth ear to a 
mischievous tongue. 

 

5Whoso mocketh the poor 
blasphemeth his Maker; 

And he that is glad at calamity shall 
not be unpunished. 

 

6Children’s children are the crown 
of old men; 

And the glory of children are their 
fathers. 

 

7Overbearing speech becometh not a 
churl; 

Much less do lying lips a prince. 

 

8A gift is as a precious stone in the 
eyes of him that hath it; 

Whithersoever he turneth, he 
prospereth. 

 

9He that covereth a transgression 
seeketh love; 

But he that harpeth on a matter 
estrangeth a familiar friend. 

 

10A rebuke entereth deeper into a 
man of understanding 

Than a hundred stripes into a fool. 

 

11A rebellious man seeketh only 
evil; 

Therefore a cruel messenger shall be 
sent against him. 

 

12Let a bear robbed of her whelps 
meet a man, 

Rather than a fool in his folly. 

 

13Whoso rewardeth evil for good, 

Evil shall not depart from his house. 

 

14The beginning of strife is as when 
one letteth out water; 

Therefore leave off contention, 
before the quarrel break out. 

 

15He that justifieth the wicked, and 
he that condemneth the righteous, 

Even they both are an abomination 
to the LORD. 

 

16Wherefore is there a price in the 
hand of a fool 

To buy wisdom, seeing he hath no 
understanding? 

 

17A friend loveth at all times, 

And a brother is born for adversity. 

 

18A man void of understanding is he 
that striketh hands, 

And becometh surety in the 
presence of his neighbour. 

 

19He loveth transgression that loveth 
strife; 

He that exalteth his gate seeketh 
destruction. 

 

20He that hath a froward heart 
findeth no good; 

And he that hath a perverse tongue 
falleth into evil. 


 

21He that begetteth a fool doeth it to 
his sorrow; 

And the father of a churl hath no 
joy. 

 

22A merry heart is a good medicine; 

But a broken spirit drieth the bones. 

 

23A wicked man taketh a gift out of 
the bosom, 

To pervert the ways of justice. 

 

24Wisdom is before him that hath 
understanding; 

But the eyes of a fool are in the ends 
of the earth. 

 

25A foolish son is vexation to his 
father, 

And bitterness to her that bore him. 

 

26To punish also the righteous is not 
good, 

Nor to strike the noble for their 
uprightness. 

 

27He that spareth his words hath 
knowledge; 

And he that husbandeth his spirit is 
a man of discernment. 

 

28Even a fool, when he holdeth his 
peace, is counted wise; 

And he that shutteth his lips is 
esteemed as a man of 
understanding. 

 

He that separateth himself 
seeketh his own desire, 

And snarlest against all sound 
wisdom. 

 

2A fool hath no delight in 
understanding, 

But only that his heart may lay itself 
bare. 

 

3When the wicked cometh, there 
cometh also contempt, 

And with ignominy reproach. 

 

4The words of a man’s mouth are as 
deep waters; 

A flowing brook, a fountain of 
wisdom. 

 

5It is not good to respect the person 
of the wicked, 

So as to turn aside the righteous in 
judgment. 

 

6A fool’s lips enter into contention, 

And his mouth calleth for strokes. 

 

7A fool’s mouth is his ruin, 

And his lips are the snare of his 
soul. 

 

8The words of a whisperer are as 
dainty morsels, 

And they go down into the 
innermost parts of the belly. 

 

9Even one that is slack in his work 

Is brother to him that is a destroyer. 

 
18 




10The name of the LORD is a strong 
tower: 

The righteous runneth into it, and is 
set up on high. 

 

11The rich man’s wealth is his strong 
city, 

And as a high wall in his own 
conceit. 

 

12Before destruction the heart of a 
man is haughty, 

And before honour goeth humility. 

 

13He that giveth answer before he 
heareth, 

It is folly and confusion unto him. 

 

14The spirit of a man will sustain his 
infirmity; 

But a broken spirit who can bear? 

 

15The heart of the prudent getteth 
knowledge; 

And the ear of the wise seeketh 
knowledge. 

 

16A man’s gift maketh room for him, 

And bringeth him before great men. 

 

17He that pleadeth his cause first 
seemeth just; 

But his neighbour cometh and 
searcheth him out. 

 

18The lot causeth strife to cease, 

And parteth asunder the contentious. 

 

19A brother offended is harder to be 
won than a strong city; 

And their contentions are like the 
bars of a castle. 

 

20A man’s belly shall be filled with 
the fruit of his mouth; 

With the increase of his lips shall he 
be satisfied. 

 

21Death and life are in the power of 
the tongue; 

And they that indulge it shall eat the 
fruit thereof. 

 

22Whoso findeth a wife findeth a 
great good, 

And obtaineth favour of the LORD. 

 

23The poor useth entreaties; 

But the rich answereth impudently. 

 

24There are friends that one hath to 
his own hurt; 

But there is a friend that sticketh 
closer than a brother. 

 

Better is the poor that walketh 
in his integrity 

Than he that is perverse in his lips 
and a fool at the same time. 

 

2Also, that the soul be without 
knowledge is not good; 

And he that hasteth with his feet 
sinneth. 

 

3The foolishness of man perverteth 
his way; 
19 




And his heart fretteth against the 
LORD. 

 

4Wealth addeth many friends; 

But as for the poor, his friend 
separateth himself from him. 

 

5A false witness shall not be 
unpunished; 

And he that breatheth forth lies shall 
not escape. 

 

6Many will entreat the favour of the 
liberal man; 

And every man is a friend to him 
that giveth gifts. 

 

7All the brethren of the poor do hate 
him; 

How much more do his friends go 
far from him! 

He that pursueth words, they turn 
against him. 

 

8He that getteth wisdom loveth his 
own soul; 

He that keepeth understanding shall 
find good. 

 

9A false witness shall not be 
unpunished; 

And he that breatheth forth lies shall 
perish. 

 

10Luxury is not seemly for a fool; 

Much less for a servant to have rule 
over princes. 

 

11It is the discretion of a man to be 
slow to anger, 

And it is his glory to pass over a 
transgression. 

 

12The king’s wrath is as the roaring 
of a lion; 

But his favour is as dew upon the 
grass. 

 

13A foolish son is the calamity of his 
father; 

And the contentions of a wife are a 
continual dropping. 

 

14House and riches are the 
inheritance of fathers; 

But a prudent wife is from the LORD. 

 

15Slothfulness casteth into a deep 
sleep; 

And the idle soul shall suffer 
hunger. 

 

16He that keepeth the commandment 
keepeth his soul; 

But he that despiseth His ways shall 
die. 

 

17He that is gracious unto the poor 
lendeth unto the LORD; 

And his good deed will He repay 
unto him. 

 

18Chasten thy son, for there is hope; 

But set not thy heart on his 
destruction. 

 


19A man of great wrath shall suffer 
punishment; 

For if thou interpose, thou wilt add 
thereto. 

 

20Hear counsel, and receive 
instruction, 

That thou mayest be wise in thy 
latter end. 

 

21There are many devices in a man’s 
heart; 

But the counsel of the LORD, that 
shall stand. 

 

22The lust of a man is his shame; 

And a poor man is better than a liar. 

 

23The fear of the LORD tendeth to 
life; 

And he that hath it shall abide 
satisfied, 

He shall not be visited with evil. 

 

24The sluggard burieth his hand in 
the dish, 

And will not so much as bring it 
back to his mouth. 

 

25When thou smitest a scorner, the 
simple will become prudent; 

And when one that hath 
understanding is reproved, he will 
understand knowledge. 

 

26A son that dealeth shamefully and 
reproachfully 

Will despoil his father, and chase 
away his mother. 

 

27Cease, my son, to hear the 
instruction 

That causeth to err from the words 
of knowledge. 

 

28An ungodly witness mocketh at 
right; 

And the mouth of the wicked 
devoureth iniquity. 

 

29Judgments are prepared for 
scorners, 

And stripes for the back of fools. 

 

Wine is a mocker, strong drink 
is riotous; 

And whosoever reeleth thereby is 
not wise. 

 

2The terror of a king is as the 
roaring of a lion: 

He that provoketh him to anger 
forfeiteth his life. 

 

3It is an honour for a man to keep 
aloof from strife; 

But every fool will be snarling. 

 

4The sluggard will not plow when 
winter setteth in; 

Therefore he shall beg in harvest, 
and have nothing. 

 

5Counsel in the heart of man is like 
deep water; 

But a man of understanding will 
draw it out. 

 
20 




6Most men will proclaim every one 
his own goodness; 

But a faithful man who can find? 

 

7He that walketh in his integrity as a 
just man, 

Happy are his children after him. 

 

8A king that sitteth on the throne of 
judgment 

Scattereth away all evil with his 
eyes. 

 

9Who can say: ‘I have made my 
heart clean, 

I am pure from my sin’? 

 

10Divers weights, and divers 
measures, 

Both of them alike are abomination 
to the LORD. 

 

11Even a child is known by his 
doings, 

Whether his work be pure, and 
whether it be right. 

 

12The hearing ear, and the seeing 
eye, 

The LORD hath made even both of 
them. 

 

13Love not sleep, lest thou come to 
poverty; 

Open thine eyes, and thou shalt have 
bread in plenty. 

 

14’It is bad, it is bad’, saith the 
buyer; 

But when he is gone his way, then 
he boasteth. 

 

15There is gold, and a multitude of 
rubies; 

But the lips of knowledge are a 
precious jewel. 

 

16Take his garment that is surety for 
a stranger; 

And hold him in pledge that is 
surety for an alien woman. 

 

17Bread of falsehood is sweet to a 
man; 

But afterwards his mouth shall be 
filled with gravel. 

 

18Every purpose is established by 
counsel; 

And with good advice carry on war. 

 

19He that goeth about as a talebearer 
revealeth secrets; 

Therefore meddle not with him that 
openeth wide his lips. 

 

20Whoso curseth his father or his 
mother, 

His lamp shall be put out in the 
blackest darkness. 

 

21An estate may be gotten hastily at 
the beginning; 

But the end thereof shall not be 
blessed. 

 

22Say not thou: ‘I will requite evil’; 


Wait for the LORD, and He will save 
thee. 

 

23Divers weights are an abomination 
to the LORD; 

And a false balance is not good. 

 

24A man’s goings are of the LORD; 

How then can man look to his way? 

 

25It is a snare to a man rashly to say: 
‘Holy’, 

And after vows to make inquiry. 

 

26A wise king sifteth the wicked, 

And turneth the wheel over them. 

 

27The spirit of man is the lamp of 
the LORD, 

Searching all the inward parts. 

 

28Mercy and truth preserve the king; 

And his throne is upheld by mercy. 

 

29The glory of young men is their 
strength; 

And the beauty of old men is the 
hoary head. 

 

30Sharp wounds cleanse away evil; 

So do stripes that reach the inward 
parts. 

 

The king’s heart is in the hand 
of the LORD, as the 
watercourses: 

He turneth it whithersoever He will. 

 

2Every way of a man is right in his 
own eyes; 

But the LORD weigheth the hearts. 

 

3To do righteousness and justice 

Is more acceptable to the LORD than 
sacrifice. 

 

4A haughty look, and a proud 
heart— 

The tillage of the wicked is sin. 

 

5The thoughts of the diligent tend 
only to plenteousness; 

But every one that is hasty hasteth 
only to want. 

 

6The getting of treasures by a lying 
tongue 

Is a vapour driven to and fro; they 
[that seek them] seek death. 

 

7The violence of the wicked shall 
drag them away; 

Because they refuse to do justly. 

 

8The way of man is froward and 
strange; 

But as for the pure, his work is right. 

 

9It is better to dwell in a corner of 
the housetop, 

Than in a house in common with a 
contentious woman. 

 

10The soul of the wicked desireth 
evil; 

His neighbour findeth no favour in 
his eyes. 
21 




 

11When the scorner is punished, the 
thoughtless is made wise; 

And when the wise is instructed, he 
receiveth knowledge. 

 

12The Righteous One considereth 
the house of the wicked; 

Overthrowing the wicked to their 
ruin. 

 

13Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry 
of the poor, 

He also shall cry himself, but shall 
not be answered. 

 

14A gift in secret pacifieth anger, 

And a present in the bosom strong 
wrath. 

 

15To do justly is joy to the righteous, 

But ruin to the workers of iniquity. 

 

16The man that strayeth out of the 
way of understanding 

Shall rest in the congregation of the 
shades. 

 

17He that loveth pleasure shall be a 
poor man; 

He that loveth wine and oil shall not 
be rich. 

 

18The wicked is a ransom for the 
righteous; 

And the faithless cometh in the 
stead of the upright. 

 

19It is better to dwell in a desert 
land, 

Than with a contentious and fretful 
woman. 

 

20There is desirable treasure and oil 
in the dwelling of the wise; 

But a foolish man swalloweth it up. 

 

21He that followeth after 
righteousness and mercy 

Findeth life, prosperity, and honour. 

 

22A wise man scaleth the city of the 
mighty, 

And bringeth down the stronghold 
wherein it trusteth. 

 

23Whoso keepeth his mouth and his 
tongue 

Keepeth his soul from troubles. 

 

24A proud and haughty man, scorner 
is his name, 

Even he that dealeth in overbearing 
pride. 

 

25The desire of the slothful killeth 
him; 

For his hands refuse to labour. 

 

26There is that coveteth greedily all 
the day long; 

But the righteous giveth and spareth 
not. 

 

27The sacrifice of the wicked is an 
abomination; 


How much more, when he bringeth 
it with the proceeds of 
wickedness? 

 

28A false witness shall perish; 

But the man that obeyeth shall speak 
unchallenged. 

 

29A wicked man hardeneth his face; 

But as for the upright, he looketh 
well to his way. 

 

30There is no wisdom nor 
understanding 

Nor counsel against the LORD. 

 

31The horse is prepared against the 
day of battle; 

But victory is of the LORD. 

 

A good name is rather to be 
chosen than great riches, 

And loving favour rather than silver 
and gold. 

 

2The rich and the poor meet 
together— 

The LORD is the maker of them all. 

 

3A prudent man seeth the evil, and 
hideth himself; 

But the thoughtless pass on, and are 
punished. 

 

4The reward of humility is the fear 
of the LORD, 

Even riches, and honour, and life. 

 

5Thorns and snares are in the way of 
the froward; 

He that keepeth his soul holdeth 
himself far from them. 

 

6Train up a child in the way he 
should go, 

And even when he is old, he will not 
depart from it. 

 

7The rich ruleth over the poor, 

And the borrower is servant to the 
lender. 

 

8He that soweth iniquity shall reap 
vanity; 

And the rod of his wrath shall fail. 

 

9He that hath a bountiful eye shall 
be blessed; 

For he giveth of his bread to the 
poor. 

 

10Cast out the scorner, and 
contention will go out; 

Yea, strife and shame will cease. 

 

11He that loveth pureness of heart, 

That hath grace in his lips, the king 
shall be his friend. 

 

12The eyes of the LORD preserve him 
that hath knowledge, 

But He overthroweth the words of 
the faithless man. 

 

13The sluggard saith: ‘There is a lion 
without; 

I shall be slain in the streets.’ 
22 




 

14The mouth of strange women is a 
deep pit: 

He that is abhorred of the LORD shall 
fall therein. 

 

15Foolishness is bound up in the 
heart of a child; 

But the rod of correction shall drive 
it far from him. 

 

16One may oppress the poor, yet will 
their gain increase; 

One may give to the rich, yet will 
want come. 

 

17Incline thine ear, and hear the 
words of the wise, 

And apply thy heart unto my 
knowledge. 

18For it is a pleasant thing if thou 
keep them within thee; 

Let them be established altogether 
upon thy lips. 

19That thy trust may be in the LORD, 

I have made them known to thee 
this day, even to thee. 

20Have not I written unto thee 
excellent things 

Of counsels and knowledge; 

21That I might make thee know the 
certainty of the words of truth, 

That thou mightest bring back 
words of truth to them that send 
thee? 

 

22Rob not the weak, because he is 
weak, 

Neither crush the poor in the gate; 

23For the LORD will plead their 
cause, 

And despoil of life those that 
despoil them. 

 

24Make no friendship with a man 
that is given to anger; 

And with a wrathful man thou shalt 
not go; 

25Lest thou learn his ways, 

And get a snare to thy soul. 

 

26Be thou not of them that strike 
hands, 

Or of them that are sureties for 
debts; 

27If thou hast not wherewith to pay, 

Why should he take away thy bed 
from under thee? 

 

28Remove not the ancient landmark, 

Which thy fathers have set. 

 

29Seest thou a man diligent in his 
business? he shall stand before 
kings; 

He shall not stand before mean men. 

 

When thou sittest to eat with a 
ruler, 

Consider well him that is before 
thee; 

2And put a knife to thy throat, 

If thou be a man given to appetite. 

3Be not desirous of his dainties; 

Seeing they are deceitful food. 

4Weary not thyself to be rich; 

Cease from thine own wisdom. 
23 




5Wilt thou set thine eyes upon it? it 
is gone; 

For riches certainly make 
themselves wings, 

Like an eagle that flieth toward 
heaven. 

 

6Eat thou not the bread of him that 
hath an evil eye, 

Neither desire thou his dainties; 

7For as one that hath reckoned 
within himself, so is he: 

‘Eat and drink’, saith he to thee; 

But his heart is not with thee. 

8The morsel which thou hast eaten 
shalt thou vomit up, 

And lose thy sweet words. 

 

9Speak not in the ears of a fool; 

For he will despise the wisdom of 
thy words. 

 

10Remove not the ancient landmark; 

And enter not into the fields of the 
fatherless; 

11For their Redeemer is strong; 

He will plead their cause with thee. 

 

12Apply thy heart unto instruction, 

And thine ears to the words of 
knowledge. 

 

13Withhold not correction from the 
child; 

For though thou beat him with the 
rod, he will not die. 

14Thou beatest him with the rod, 

And wilt deliver his soul from the 
nether-world. 

 

15My son, if thy heart be wise, 

My heart will be glad, even mine; 

16Yea, my reins will rejoice, 

When thy lips speak right things. 

 

17Let not thy heart envy sinners, 

But be in the fear of the LORD all the 
day; 

18For surely there is a future; 

And thy hope shall not be cut off. 

 

19Hear thou, my son, and be wise, 

And guide thy heart in the way. 

20Be not among winebibbers; 

Among gluttonous eaters of flesh; 

21For the drunkard and the glutton 
shall come to poverty; 

And drowsiness shall clothe a man 
with rags. 

 

22Hearken unto thy father that begot 
thee, 

And despise not thy mother when 
she is old. 

 

23Buy the truth, and sell it not; 

Also wisdom, and instruction, and 
understanding. 

24The father of the righteous will 
greatly rejoice; 

And he that begetteth a wise child 
will have joy of him. 

25Let thy father and thy mother be 
glad, 

And let her that bore thee rejoice. 

 

26My son, give me thy heart, 

And let thine eyes observe my ways. 


27For a harlot is a deep ditch; 

And an alien woman is a narrow pit. 

28She also lieth in wait as a robber, 

And increaseth the faithless among 
men. 

 

29Who crieth: ‘Woe’? who: ‘Alas’? 

Who hath contentions? who hath 
raving? 

Who hath wounds without cause? 

Who hath redness of eyes? 

30They that tarry long at the wine; 

They that go to try mixed wine. 

31Look not thou upon the wine when 
it is red, 

When it giveth its colour in the cup, 

When it glideth down smoothly; 

32At the last it biteth like a serpent, 

And stingeth like a basilisk. 

33Thine eyes shall behold strange 
things, 

And thy heart shall utter confused 
things. 

34Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth 
down in the midst of the sea, 

Or as he that lieth upon the top of a 
mast. 

35’They have struck me, and I felt it 
not, 

They have beaten me, and I knew it 
not; 

When shall I awake? I will seek it 
yet again.’ 

 

Be not thou envious of evil 
men, 

Neither desire to be with them. 

2For their heart studieth destruction, 

And their lips talk of mischief. 

 

3Through wisdom is a house 
builded; 

And by understanding it is 
established; 

4And by knowledge are the 
chambers filled 

With all precious and pleasant 
riches. 

 

5A wise man is strong; 

Yea, a man of knowledge increaseth 
strength. 

6For with wise advice thou shalt 
make thy war; 

And in the multitude of counsellors 
there is safety. 

 

7Wisdom is as unattainable to a fool 
as corals; 

He openeth not his mouth in the 
gate. 

 

8He that deviseth to do evil, 

Men shall call him a mischievous 
person. 

9The thought of foolishness is sin; 

And the scorner is an abomination 
to men. 

10If thou faint in the day of 
adversity, 

Thy strength is small indeed. 

11Deliver them that are drawn unto 
death; 

And those that are ready to be slain 
wilt thou forbear to rescue? 

12If thou sayest: ‘Behold, we knew 
not this’, 
24 




Doth not He that weigheth the hearts 
consider it? 

And He that keepeth thy soul, doth 
not He know it? 

And shall not He render to every 
man according to his works? 

 

13My son, eat thou honey, for it is 
good, 

And the honeycomb is sweet to thy 
taste; 

14So know thou wisdom to be unto 
thy soul; 

If thou hast found it, then shall there 
be a future, 

And thy hope shall not be cut off. 

 

15Lie not in wait, O wicked man, 
against the dwelling of the 
righteous, 

Spoil not his resting-place; 

16For a righteous man falleth seven 
times, and riseth up again, 

But the wicked stumble under 
adversity. 

 

17Rejoice not when thine enemy 
falleth, 

And let not thy heart be glad when 
he stumbleth; 

18Lest the LORD see it, and it 
displease Him, 

And He turn away His wrath from 
him. 

19Fret not thyself because of 
evildoers, 

Neither be thou envious at the 
wicked; 

20For there will be no future to the 
evil man, 

The lamp of the wicked shall be put 
out. 

 

21My son, fear thou the LORD and the 
king, 

And meddle not with them that are 
given to change; 

22For their calamity shall rise 
suddenly; 

And who knoweth the ruin from 
them both? 

 

23These also are sayings of the wise. 

 

To have respect of persons in 
judgment is not good. 

24He that saith unto the wicked: 
‘Thou art righteous’, 

Peoples shall curse him, nations 
shall execrate him; 

25But to them that decide justly shall 
be delight, 

And a good blessing shall come 
upon them. 

26He kisseth the lips 

That giveth a right answer. 

 

27Prepare thy work without, 

And make it fit for thyself in the 
field; 

And afterwards build thy house. 

 

28Be not a witness against thy 
neighbour without cause; 

And deceive not with thy lips. 

29Say not: ‘I will do so to him as he 
hath done to me; 


I will render to the man according to 
his work.’ 

 

 

30I went by the field of the slothful, 

And by the vineyard of the man 
void of understanding; 

31And, lo, it was all grown over with 
thistles, 

The face thereof was covered with 
nettles, 

And the stone wall thereof was 
broken down. 

32Then I beheld, and considered 
well; 

I saw, and received instruction. 

33’Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, 

A little folding of the hands to 
sleep’— 

34So shall thy poverty come as a 
runner, 

And thy want as an armed man. 

 

These also are proverbs of 
Solomon, which the men of 
Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. 

 

2It is the glory of God to conceal a 
thing; but the glory of kings is to 
search out a matter. 

3The heaven for height, and the 
earth for depth, and the heart of 
kings is unsearchable. 

 

4Take away the dross from the 
silver, and there cometh forth a 
vessel for the refiner; 

5Take away the wicked from before 
the king, and his throne shall be 
established in righteousness. 

 

6Glorify not thyself in the presence 
of the king, and stand not in the 
place of great men; 

7For better is it that it be said unto 
thee: ‘Come up hither’, than that 
thou shouldest be put lower in the 
presence of the prince, whom 
thine eyes have seen. 

 

8Go not forth hastily to strive, lest 
thou know not what to do in the 
end thereof, when thy neighbour 
hath put thee to shame. 

9Debate thy cause with thy 
neighbour, but reveal not the 
secret of another; 

10Lest he that heareth it revile thee, 
and thine infamy turn not away. 

 

11A word fitly spoken 

Is like apples of gold in settings of 
silver. 

 

12As an ear-ring of gold, and an 
ornament of fine gold, 

So is a wise reprover upon an 
obedient ear. 

 

13As the cold of snow in the time of 
harvest, 

So is a faithful messenger to him 
that sendeth him; 

For he refresheth the soul of his 
master. 

 
25 




14As vapours and wind without rain, 

So is he that boasteth himself of a 
false gift. 

 

15By long forbearing is a ruler 
persuaded, 

And a soft tongue breaketh the 
bone. 

 

16Hast thou found honey? eat so 
much as is sufficient for thee, 

Lest thou be filled therewith, and 
vomit it. 

 

17Let thy foot be seldom in thy 
neighbour’s house; 

Lest he be sated with thee, and hate 
thee. 

 

18As a maul, and a sword, and a 
sharp arrow, 

So is a man that beareth false 
witness against his neighbour. 

 

19Confidence in an unfaithful man in 
time of trouble 

Is like a broken tooth, and a foot out 
of joint. 

 

20As one that taketh off a garment in 
cold weather, and as vinegar upon 
nitre, 

So is he that singeth songs to a 
heavy heart. 

 

21If thine enemy be hungry, give 
him bread to eat, 

And if he be thirsty, give him water 
to drink; 

22For thou wilt heap coals of fire 
upon his head, 

And the LORD will reward thee. 

 

23The north wind bringeth forth rain, 

And a backbiting tongue an angry 
countenance. 

 

24It is better to dwell in a corner of 
the housetop, 

Than in a house in common with a 
contentious woman. 

 

25As cold waters to a faint soul, 

So is good news from a far country. 

 

26As a troubled fountain, and a 
corrupted spring, 

So is a righteous man that giveth 
way before the wicked. 

 

27It is not good to eat much honey; 

So for men to search out their own 
glory is not glory. 

 

28Like a city broken down and 
without a wall, 

So is he whose spirit is without 
restraint. 

 

As snow in summer, and as 
rain in harvest, 

So honour is not seemly for a fool. 

 

2As the wandering sparrow, as the 
flying swallow, 

So the curse that is causeless shall 
come home. 

 
26 




3A whip for the horse, a bridle for 
the ass, 

And a rod for the back of fools. 

 

4Answer not a fool according to his 
folly, 

Lest thou also be like unto him. 

 

5Answer a fool according to his 
folly, 

Lest he be wise in his own eyes. 

 

6He that sendeth a message by the 
hand of a fool 

Cutteth off his own feet, and 
drinketh damage. 

 

7The legs hang limp from the lame; 

So is a parable in the mouth of 
fools. 

 

8As a small stone in a heap of 
stones, 

So is he that giveth honour to a fool. 

 

9As a thorn that cometh into the 
hand of a drunkard, 

So is a parable in the mouth of 
fools. 

 

10A master performeth all things; 

But he that stoppeth a fool is as one 
that stoppeth a flood. 

 

11As a dog that returneth to his 
vomit, 

So is a fool that repeateth his folly. 

 

12Seest thou a man wise in his own 
eyes? 

There is more hope of a fool than of 
him. 

 

13The sluggard saith: ‘There is a lion 
in the way; 

Yea, a lion is in the streets.’ 

 

14The door is turning upon its 
hinges, 

And the sluggard is still upon his 
bed. 

 

15The sluggard burieth his hand in 
the dish; 

It wearieth him to bring it back to 
his mouth. 

 

16The sluggard is wiser in his own 
eyes 

Than seven men that give wise 
answer. 

 

17He that passeth by, and meddleth 
with strife not his own, 

Is like one that taketh a dog by the 
ears. 

 

18As a madman who casteth 
firebrands, 

Arrows, and death; 

19So is the man that deceiveth his 
neighbour, 

And saith: ‘Am not I in sport?’ 

 

20Where no wood is, the fire goeth 
out; 


And where there is no whisperer, 
contention ceaseth. 

 

21As coals are to burning coals, and 
wood to fire; 

So is a contentious man to kindle 
strife. 

 

22The words of a whisperer are as 
dainty morsels, 

And they go down into the 
innermost parts of the body. 

 

23Burning lips and a wicked heart 

Are like an earthen vessel overlaid 
with silver dross. 

 

24He that hateth dissembleth with his 
lips, 

But he layeth up deceit within him. 

25When he speaketh fair, 

Believe him not; 

For there are seven abominations in 
his heart. 

26Though his hatred be concealed 
with deceit, 

His wickedness shall be revealed 
before the congregation. 

 

27Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall 
therein; 

And he that rolleth a stone, it shall 
return upon him. 

 

28A lying tongue hateth those that 
are crushed by it; 

And a flattering mouth worketh 
ruin. 

 

Boast not thyself of to- 
morrow; 

For thou knowest not what a day 
may bring forth. 

 

2Let another man praise thee, and 
not thine own mouth; 

A stranger, and not thine own lips. 

 

3A stone is heavy, and the sand 
weighty; 

But a fool’s vexation is heavier than 
they both. 

 

4Wrath is cruel, and anger is 
overwhelming; 

But who is able to stand before 
jealousy? 

 

5Better is open rebuke 

Than love that is hidden. 

 

6Faithful are the wounds of a friend; 

But the kisses of an enemy are 
importunate. 

 

7The full soul loatheth a 
honeycomb; 

But to the hungry soul every bitter 
thing is sweet. 

 

8As a bird that wandereth from her 
nest, 

So is a man that wandereth from his 
place. 

 

9Ointment and perfume rejoice the 
heart; 
27 




So doth the sweetness of a man’s 
friend by hearty counsel. 

 

10Thine own friend, and thy father’s 
friend, forsake not; 

Neither go into thy brother’s house 
in the day of thy calamity; 

Better is a neighbour that is near 
than a brother far off. 

 

11My son, be wise, and make my 
heart glad, 

That I may answer him that taunteth 
me. 

 

12A prudent man seeth the evil, and 
hideth himself; 

But the thoughtless pass on, and are 
punished. 

 

13Take his garment that is surety for 
a stranger; 

And hold him in pledge that is 
surety for an alien woman. 

 

14He that blesseth his friend with a 
loud voice, rising early in the 
morning, 

It shall be counted a curse to him. 

 

15A continual dropping in a very 
rainy day 

And a contentious woman are alike; 

16He that would hide her hideth the 
wind, 

And the ointment of his right hand 
betrayeth itself. 

 

17Iron sharpeneth iron; 

So a man sharpeneth the 
countenance of his friend. 

 

18Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall 
eat the fruit thereof; 

And he that waiteth on his master 
shall be honoured. 

 

19As in water face answereth to face, 

So the heart of man to man. 

 

20The nether-world and Destruction 
are never satiated; 

So the eyes of man are never 
satiated. 

 

21The refining pot is for silver, and 
the furnace for gold, 

And a man is tried by his praise. 

 

22Though thou shouldest bray a fool 
in a mortar with a pestle among 
groats, 

Yet will not his foolishness depart 
from him. 

 

23Be thou diligent to know the state 
of thy flocks, 

And look well to thy herds; 

24For riches are not for ever; 

And doth the crown endure unto all 
generations? 

25When the hay is mown, and the 
tender grass showeth itself, 

And the herbs of the mountains are 
gathered in; 

26The lambs will be for thy clothing, 

And the goats the price for a field. 


27And there will be goats’milk 
enough for thy food, for the food 
of thy household; 

And maintenance for thy maidens. 

 

The wicked flee when no man 
pursueth; 

But the righteous are secure as a 
young lion. 

 

2For the transgression of a land 
many are the princes thereof; 

But by a man of understanding and 
knowledge established order shall 
long continue. 

 

3A poor man that oppresseth the 
weak 

Is like a sweeping rain which 
leaveth no food. 

 

4They that forsake the law praise the 
wicked; 

But such as keep the law contend 
with them. 

 

5Evil men understand not justice; 

But they that seek the LORD 
understand all things. 

 

6Better is the poor that walketh in 
his integrity, 

Than he that is perverse in his ways, 
though he be rich. 

 

7A wise son observeth the teaching; 
ut he that is a companion of 
gluttonous men shameth his 
father. 

 

8He that augmenteth his substance 
by interest and increase, 

Gathereth it for him that is gracious 
to the poor. 

 

9He that turneth away his ear from 
hearing the law, 

Even his prayer is an abomination. 

 

10Whoso causeth the upright to go 
astray in an evil way, 

He shall fall himself into his own 
pit; 

But the whole-hearted shall inherit 
good. 

 

11The rich man is wise in his own 
eyes; 

But the poor that hath understanding 
searcheth him through. 

 

12When the righteous exult, there is 
great glory; 

But when the wicked rise, men must 
be sought for. 

 

13He that covereth his transgressions 
shall not prosper; 

But whoso confesseth and forsaketh 
them shall obtain mercy. 

 

14Happy is the man that feareth 
alway; 

But he that hardeneth his heart shall 
fall into evil. 

 

15As a roaring lion, and a ravenous 
bear; 
28 




So is a wicked ruler over a poor 
people. 

 

16The prince that lacketh 
understanding is also a great 
oppressor; 

But he that hateth covetousness 
shall prolong his days. 

 

17A man that is laden with the blood 
of any person 

Shall hasten his steps unto the pit; 
none will support him. 

 

18Whoso walketh uprightly shall be 
saved; 

But he that is perverse in his ways 
shall fall at once. 

 

19He that tilleth his ground shall 
have plenty of bread; 

But he that followeth after vain 
things shall have poverty enough. 

 

20A faithful man shall abound with 
blessings; 

But he that maketh haste to be rich 
shall not be unpunished. 

 

21To have respect of persons is not 
good; 

For a man will transgress for a piece 
of bread. 

 

22He that hath an evil eye hasteneth 
after riches, 

And knoweth not that want shall 
come upon him. 

 

23He that rebuketh a man shall in the 
end find more favour 

Than he that flattereth with the 
tongue. 

 

24Whoso robbeth his father or his 
mother, and saith: ‘It is no 
transgression’, 

The same is the companion of a 
destroyer. 

 

25He that is of a greedy spirit stirreth 
up strife; 

But he that putteth his trust in the 
LORD shall be abundantly 
gratified. 

 

26He that trusteth in his own heart is 
a fool; 

But whoso walketh wisely, he shall 
escape. 

 

27He that giveth unto the poor shall 
not lack; 

But he that hideth his eyes shall 
have many a curse. 

 

28When the wicked rise, men hide 
themselves; 

But when they perish, the righteous 
increase. 

 

He that being often reproved 
hardeneth his neck 

Shall suddenly be broken, and that 
without remedy. 

 

2When the righteous are increased, 
the people rejoice; 
29 




But when the wicked beareth rule, 
the people sigh. 

 

3Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his 
father; 

But he that keepeth company with 
harlots wasteth his substance. 

 

4The king by justice establisheth the 
land; 

But he that exacteth gifts 
overthroweth it. 

 

5A man that flattereth his neighbour 

Spreadeth a net for his steps. 

 

6In the transgression of an evil man 
there is a snare; 

But the righteous doth sing and 
rejoice. 

 

7The righteous taketh knowledge of 
the cause of the poor; 

The wicked understandeth not 
knowledge. 

 

8Scornful men set a city in a blaze; 

But wise men turn away wrath. 

 

9If a wise man contendeth with a 
foolish man, 

Whether he be angry or laugh, there 
will be no rest. 

 

10The men of blood hate him that is 
sincere; 

And as for the upright, they seek his 
life. 

 

11A fool spendeth all his spirit; 

But a wise man stilleth it within 
him. 

 

12If a ruler hearkeneth to falsehood, 

All his servants are wicked. 

 

13The poor man and the oppressor 
meet together; 

The LORD giveth light to the eyes of 
them both. 

 

14The king that faithfully judgeth the 
poor, 

His throne shall be established for 
ever. 

 

15The rod and reproof give wisdom; 

But a child left to himself causeth 
shame to his mother. 

 

16When the wicked are increased, 
transgression increaseth; 

But the righteous shall gaze upon 
their fall. 

 

17Correct thy son, and he will give 
thee rest; 

Yea, he will give delight unto thy 
soul. 

 

18Where there is no vision, the 
people cast off restraint; 

But he that keepeth the law, happy 
is he. 

 

19A servant will not be corrected by 
words; 


For though he understand, there will 
be no response. 

 

20Seest thou a man that is hasty in 
his words? 

There is more hope for a fool than 
for him. 

 

21He that delicately bringeth up his 
servant from a child 

Shall have him become master at the 
last. 

 

22An angry man stirreth up strife, 

And a wrathful man aboundeth in 
transgression. 

 

23A man’s pride shall bring him low; 

But he that is of a lowly spirit shall 
attain to honour. 

 

24Whoso is partner with a thief 
hateth his own soul: 

He heareth the adjuration and 
uttereth nothing. 

 

25The fear of man bringeth a snare; 

But whoso putteth his trust in the 
LORD shall be set up on high. 

 

26Many seek the ruler’s favour; 

But a man’s judgment cometh from 
the LORD. 

 

27An unjust man is an abomination 
to the righteous; 

And he that is upright in the way is 
an abomination to the wicked. 

 

The words of Agur the son of 
Jakeh; the burden. 

 

The man saith unto Ithiel, unto Ithiel 
and Ucal: 

2Surely I am brutish, unlike a man, 

And have not the understanding of a 
man; 

3And I have not learned wisdom, 

That I should have the knowledge of 
the Holy One. 

4Who hath ascended up into heaven, 
and descended? 

Who hath gathered the wind in his 
fists? 

Who hath bound the waters in his 
garment? 

Who hath established all the ends of 
the earth? 

What is his name, and what is his 
son’s name, if thou knowest? 

 

5Every word of God is tried; 

He is a shield unto them that take 
refuge in Him. 

6Add thou not unto His words, 

Lest He reprove thee, and thou be 
found a liar. 

 

7Two things have I asked of Thee; 

Deny me them not before I die: 

8Remove far from me falsehood and 
lies; 

Give me neither poverty nor riches; 
feed me with mine allotted bread; 

9Lest I be full, and deny, and say: 
‘Who is the LORD?’ 

Or lest I be poor, and steal, 

And profane the name of my God. 
30 




 

10Slander not a servant unto his 
master, 

Lest he curse thee, and thou be 
found guilty. 

 

11There is a generation that curse 
their father, 

And do not bless their mother. 

12There is a generation that are pure 
in their own eyes, 

And yet are not washed from their 
filthiness. 

13There is a generation, Oh how 
lofty are their eyes! 

And their eyelids are lifted up. 

14There is a generation whose teeth 
are as swords, and their great 
teeth as knives, 

To devour the poor from off the 
earth, and the needy from among 
men. 

 

15The horseleech hath two 
daughters: ‘Give, give.’ 

There are three things that are never 
satisfied, 

Yea, four that say not: ‘Enough’: 

16The grave; and the barren womb; 

The earth that is not satisfied with 
water; 

And the fire that saith not: 
‘Enough.’ 

 

17The eye that mocketh at his father, 

And despiseth to obey his mother, 

The ravens of the valley shall pick it 
out, 

And the young vultures shall eat it. 

 

18There are three things which are 
too wonderful for me, 

Yea, four which I know not: 

19The way of an eagle in the air; 

The way of a serpent upon a rock; 

The way of a ship in the midst of the 
sea; 

And the way of a man with a young 
woman. 

20So is the way of an adulterous 
woman; 

She eateth, and wipeth her mouth, 

And saith: ‘I have done no 
wickedness.’ 

 

21For three things the earth doth 
quake, 

And for four it cannot endure: 

22For a servant when he reigneth; 

And a churl when he is filled with 
food; 

23For an odious woman when she is 
married; 

And a handmaid that is heir to her 
mistress. 

 

24There are four things which are 
little upon the earth, 

But they are exceeding wise: 

25The ants are a people not strong, 

Yet they provide their food in the 
summer; 

26The rock-badgers are but a feeble 
folk, 

Yet make they their houses in the 
crags; 

27The locusts have no king, 


Yet go they forth all of them by 
bands; 

28The spider thou canst take with the 
hands, 

Yet is she in kings’palaces. 

 

29There are three things which are 
stately in their march, 

Yea, four which are stately in going: 

30The lion, which is mightiest 
among beasts, 

And turneth not away for any; 

31The greyhound; the he-goat also; 

And the king, against whom there is 
no rising up. 

 

32If thou hast done foolishly in 
lifting up thyself, 

Or if thou hast planned devices, lay 
thy hand upon thy mouth. 

33For the churning of milk bringeth 
forth curd, 

And the wringing of the nose 
bringeth forth blood; 

So the forcing of wrath bringeth 
forth strife. 

 

31 



The words of king Lemuel; the 
burden wherewith his mother 
corrected him. 

 

2What, my son? and what, O son of 
my womb? 

And what, O son of my vows? 

3Give not thy strength unto women, 

Nor thy ways to that which 
destroyeth kings. 

4It is not for kings, O aLemuel, it is 
not for kings to drink wine: 

a Heb. Lemoel. 

Nor for princes to say: ‘Where is 
strong drink?’ 

5Lest they drink, and forget that 
which is decreed, 

And pervert the justice due to any 
that is afflicted. 

6Give strong drink unto him that is 
ready to perish, 

And wine unto the bitter in soul; 

7Let him drink, and forget his 
poverty, 

And remember his misery no more. 

8Open thy mouth for the dumb, 

In the cause of all such as are 
appointed to destruction. 

9Open thy mouth, judge righteously, 

And plead the cause of the poor and 
needy. 

 

. 10A woman of valour who can find? 

 For her price is far above rubies. 

. 11The heart of her husband doth 
aafely trust in her, 

 And he hath no lack of gain. 

. 12She doeth him good and not evil 

 All the days of her life. 

. 13She seeketh wool and flax, 

 And worketh willingly with her 
hands. 

. 14She is like the merchant-ships; She 
bringeth her food from afar. 

. 15She riseth also while it is yet 
night, 


 And giveth food to her household, 
And a portion to her maidens. 

. 16She considereth a field, and 
buyeth it; 

 With the fruit of her hands she 
planteth a vineyard. 

. 17She girdeth her loins with 
strength, 

 And maketh strong her arms. 

. 18She perceiveth that her 
merchandise is good; 

 Her lamp goeth not out by night. 

. 19She layeth her hands to the distaff, 

 And her hands hold the spindle. 

. 20She stretcheth out her hand to the 
poor; 

 Yea, she reacheth forth her hands to 
the needy. 

. 21She is not afraid of the snow for 
her household; 

 For all her household are clothed 
with scarlet. 

. 22She maketh for herself coverlets; 

 Her clothing is fine linen and 
purple. 

. 23Her husband is known in the 
gates, 

 When he sitteth among the elders of 
the land. 

. 24She maketh linen garments and 
selleth them; 

 And delivereth girdles unto the 
merchant. 

. 25Strength and dignity are her 
clothing; 

 And she laugheth at the time to 
come. 

. 26She openeth her mouth with 
wisdom; 

 And the law of kindness is on her 
tongue. 

. 27She looketh well to the ways of 
her household, 

 And eateth not the bread of 
idleness. 

. 28Her children rise up, and call her 
blessed; 

 Her husband also, and he praiseth 
her: 

. 29’Many daughters have done 
valiantly, 

 But thou excellest them all.’ 

. 30Grace is deceitful, and beauty is 
vain; 

 But a woman that feareth the LORD, 
she shall be praised. 

. 31Give her of the fruit of her hands; 

 And let her works praise her in the 
gates. 

 




.... 

JOB 

 

THERE was a man in the land of 
Uz, whose name was Job; and 
that man was whole-hearted and 
upright, and one that feared God, and 
shunned evil. 2And there were born 
unto him seven sons and three 
daughters. 3His possessions also were 
seven thousand sheep, and three 
thousand camels, and five hundred 
yoke of oxen, and five hundred she-
asses, and a very great household; so 
that this man was the greatest of all the 
children of the east. 4And his sons used 
to go and hold a feast in the house of 
each one upon his day; and they would 
send and invite their three sisters to eat 
and to drink with them. 5And it was so, 
when the days of their feasting were 
gone about, that Job sent and 
sanctified them, and rose up early in 
the morning, and offered burnt-
offerings according to the number of 
them all; for Job said: ‘It may be that 
my sons have sinned, and blasphemed 
God in their hearts.’ Thus did Job 
continually. 

6Now it fell upon a day, that the 
sons of God came to present 
themselves before the LORD, and aSatan 
came also among them. 7And the LORD 
said unto Satan: ‘Whence comest 
thou?’ Then Satan answered the LORD, 

a That is, the Adversary. 

and said: ‘From going to and fro in the 
earth, and from walking up and down 
in it.’ 8And the LORD said unto Satan: 
‘Hast thou considered My servant Job, 
that there is none like him in the earth, 
a whole-hearted and an upright man, 
one that feareth God, and shunneth 
evil?’ 9Then Satan answered the LORD, 
and said: ‘Doth Job fear God for 
nought? 10Hast not Thou made a hedge 
about him, and about his house, and 
about all that he hath, on every side? 
Thou hast blessed the work of his 
hands, and his possessions are 
increased in the land. 11But put forth 
Thy hand now, and touch all that he 
hath, surely he will blaspheme Thee to 
Thy face.’ 12And the LORD said unto 
Satan: ‘Behold, all that he hath is in 
thy power; only upon himself put not 
forth thy hand.’ So Satan went forth 
from the presence of the LORD. 

13And it fell on a day when his sons 
and his daughters were eating and 
drinking wine in their eldest brother’s 
house, 14that there came a messenger 
unto Job, and said: ‘The oxen were 
plowing, and the asses feeding beside 
them; 15and the Sabeans made a raid, 
and took them away; yea, they have 
slain the servants with the edge of the 
sword; and I only am escaped alone to 
tell thee.’ 16While he was yet speaking, 
there came also another, and said: ‘A 
1 




fire of God is fallen from heaven, and 
hath burned up the sheep, and the 
servants, and consumed them; and I 
only am escaped alone to tell thee.’ 
17While he was yet speaking, there 
came also another, and said: ‘The 
Chaldeans set themselves in three 
bands, and fell upon the camels, and 
have taken them away, yea, and slain 
the servants with the edge of the 
sword; and I only am escaped alone to 
tell thee.’ 18While he was yet speaking, 
there came also another, and said: 
‘Thy sons and thy daughters were 
eating and drinking wine in their eldest 
brother’s house; 19And, behold, there 
came a great wind from across the 
wilderness, and smote the four corners 
of the house, and it fell upon the young 
people, and they are dead; and I only 
am escaped alone to tell thee.’ 

20Then Job arose, and rent his 
mantle, and shaved his head, and fell 
down upon the ground, and 
worshipped; 21And he said; 

Naked came I out of my mother’s 
womb, 

And naked shall I return thither; 

The LORD gave, and the LORD hath 
taken away; 

Blessed be the name of the LORD. 

22For all this Job sinned not, nor 
ascribed aught unseemly to God. 

Again it fell upon a day, that the 
sons of God came to present 
themselves before the LORD, and Satan 
came also among them to present 
himself before the LORD. 2And the 
LORD said unto Satan: ‘From whence 
comest thou?’ And Satan answered the 
LORD, and said: ‘From going to and fro 
in the earth, and from walking up and 
down in it.’ 3And the LORD said unto 
Satan: ‘Hast thou considered my 
servant Job, that there is none like him 
in the earth, a whole-hearted and an 
upright man, one that feareth God, and 
shunneth evil? and he still holdeth fast 
his integrity, although thou didst move 
Me against him, to destroy him 
without cause.’ 4And Satan answered 
the LORD, and said: ‘Skin for skin, yea, 
all that a man hath will he give for his 
life. 5But put forth Thy hand now, and 
touch his bone and his flesh, surely he 
will blaspheme Thee to Thy face.’ 
6And the LORD said unto Satan: 
‘Behold, he is in thy hand; only spare 
his life.’ 

7So Satan went forth from the 
presence of the LORD, and smote Job 
with sore boils from the sole of his 
foot even unto his crown. 8And he took 
him a potsherd to scrape himself 
therewith; and he sat among the ashes. 
9Then said his wife unto him: ‘Dost 
thou still hold fast thine integrity? 
blaspheme God, and die.’ 10But he said 
unto her: ‘Thou speakest as one of the 
impious women speaketh. What? shall 
we receive good at the hand of God, 
and shall we not receive evil?’ For all 
this did not Job sin with his lips. 

11Now when Job’s three friends 
heard of all this evil that was come 
upon him, they came every one from 
his own place, Eliphaz the Temanite, 
and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the 
2 




Naamathite; and they made an 
appointment together to come to 
bemoan him and to comfort him. 
12And when they lifted up their eyes 
afar off, and knew him not, they lifted 
up their voice, and wept; and they rent 
every one his mantle, and threw dust 
upon their heads toward heaven. 13So 
they sat down with him upon the 
ground seven days and seven nights, 
and none spoke a word unto him; for 
they saw that his grief was very great. 

 

After this opened Job his mouth, 
and cursed his day. 2And Job 
spoke, and said: 

3Let the day perish wherein I was 
born, 

And the night wherein it was said: 
‘A man-child is brought forth.’ 

4Let that day be darkness; 

Let not God inquire after it from 
above, 

Neither let the light shine upon it. 

5Let darkness and the shadow of 
death claim it for their own; 

Let a cloud dwell upon it; 

Let all that maketh black the day 
terrify it. 

6As for that night, let thick darkness 
seize upon it; 

Let it not rejoice among the days of 
the year; 

Let it not come into the number of 
the months. 

7Lo, let that night be desolate; 

Let no joyful voice come therein. 

8Let them curse it that curse the day, 

Who are ready to rouse up 
leviathan. 

9Let the stars of the twilight thereof 
be dark; 

Let it look for light, but have none; 

Neither let it behold the eyelids of 
the morning; 

10Because it shut not up the doors of 
my [mother’s] womb, 

Nor hid trouble from mine eyes. 

 

11Why died I not from the womb? 

Why did I not perish at birth? 

12Why did the knees receive me? 

And wherefore the breasts, that I 
should suck? 

13For now should I have lain still 
and been quiet; 

I should have slept; then had I been 
at rest— 

14With kings and counsellors of the 
earth, 

Who built up waste places for 
themselves; 

15Or with princes that had gold, 

Who filled their houses with silver; 

16Or as a hidden untimely birth I had 
not been; 

As infants that never saw light. 

17There the wicked cease from 
troubling; 

And there the weary are at rest. 

18There the prisoners are at ease 
together; 

They hear not the voice of the 
taskmaster. 

19The small and great are there 
alike; 
3 




And the servant is free from his 
master. 

 

20Wherewith is light given to him 
that is in misery, 

And life unto the bitter in soul— 

21Who long for death, but it cometh 
not; 

And dig for it more than for hid 
treasures; 

22Who rejoice unto exultation, 

And are glad, when they can find 
the grave?— 

23To a man whose way is hid, 

And whom God hath hedged in? 

24For my sighing cometh instead of 
my food, 

And my roarings are poured out like 
water. 

25For the thing which I did fear is 
come upon me, 

And that which I was afraid of hath 
overtaken me. 

26I was not at ease, neither was I 
quiet, 

Neither had I rest; but trouble came. 

 

Then answered Eliphaz the 
Temanite, and said: 

2If one venture a word unto thee, 
wilt thou be weary? 

But who can withhold himself from 
speaking? 

3Behold, thou hast instructed many, 

And thou hast strengthened the 
weak hands. 

4Thy words have upholden him that 
was falling, 

And thou hast strengthened the 
feeble knees. 

5But now it is come upon thee, and 
thou art weary; 

It toucheth thee, and thou art 
affrighted. 

6Is not thy fear of God thy 
confidence, 

And thy hope the integrity of thy 
ways? 

7Remember, I pray thee, who ever 
perished, being innocent? 

Or where were the upright cut off? 

8According as I have seen, they that 
plow iniquity, 

And sow mischief, reap the same. 

9By the breath of God they perish, 

And by the blast of His anger are 
they consumed. 

10The lion roareth, and the fierce 
lion howleth— 

Yet the teeth of the young lions are 
broken. 

11The old lion perisheth for lack of 
prey, 

And the whelps of the lioness are 
scattered abroad. 

 

12Now a word was secretly brought 
to me, 

And mine ear received a whisper 
thereof. 

13In thoughts from the visions of the 
night, 

When deep sleep falleth on men, 

14Fear came upon me, and 
trembling, 

And all my bones were made to 
shake. 
4 




15Then a spirit passed before my 
face, 

That made the hair of my flesh to 
stand up. 

16It stood still, but I could not 
discern the appearance thereof; 

A form was before mine eyes; I 
heard a still voice: 

17’Shall mortal man be just before 
God? 

Shall a man be pure before his 
Maker? 

18Behold, He putteth no trust in His 
servants, 

And His angels He chargeth with 
folly; 

19How much more them that dwell 
in houses of clay, 

Whose foundation is in the dust, 
who are crushed before the moth! 

20Betwixt morning and evening they 
are shattered; 

They perish for ever without any 
regarding it. 

21Is not their tent-cord plucked up 
within them? 

They die, and that without wisdom.’ 

 

Call now; is there any that will 
answer thee? 

And to which of the holy ones wilt 
thou turn? 

2For anger killeth the foolish man, 

And envy slayeth the silly one. 

3I have seen the foolish taking root; 

But suddenly I beheld his habitation 
cursed. 

4His children are far from safety, 

And are crushed in the gate, with 
none to deliver them. 

5Whose harvest the hungry eateth 
up, 

And taketh it even out of the thorns, 
and the snare gapeth for their 
substance. 

6For affliction cometh not forth 
from the dust, 

Neither doth trouble spring out of 
the ground; 

7But man is born unto trouble, 

As the sparks fly upward. 

 

8But as for me, I would seek unto 
God, 

And unto God would I commit my 
cause; 

9Who doeth great things and 
unsearchable, 

Marvellous things without number; 

10Who giveth rain upon the earth, 

And sendeth waters upon the fields; 

11So that He setteth up on high those 
that are low, 

And those that mourn are exalted to 
safety. 

12He frustrateth the devices of the 
crafty, 

So that their hands can perform 
nothing substantial. 

13He taketh the wise in their own 
craftiness; 

And the counsel of the wily is 
carried headlong. 

14They meet with darkness in the 
day-time, 

And grope at noonday as in the 
night. 
5 




15But He saveth from the sword of 
their mouth, 

Even the needy from the hand of the 
mighty. 

16So the poor hath hope, 

And iniquity stoppeth her mouth. 

 

17Behold, happy is the man whom 
God correcteth; 

Therefore despise not thou the 
chastening of the Almighty. 

18For He maketh sore, and bindeth 
up; 

He woundeth, and His hands make 
whole. 

19He will deliver thee in six 
troubles; 

Yea, in seven there shall no evil 
touch thee. 

20In famine He will redeem thee 
from death; 

And in war from the power of the 
sword. 

21Thou shalt be hid from the scourge 
of the tongue; 

Neither shalt thou be afraid of 
destruction when it cometh. 

22At destruction and famine thou 
shalt laugh; 

Neither shalt thou be afraid of the 
beasts of the earth. 

23For thou shalt be in league with 
the stones of the field; 

And the beasts of the field shall be 
at peace with thee. 

24And thou shalt know that thy tent 
is in peace; 

And thou shalt visit thy habitation, 
and shalt miss nothing. 

25Thou shalt know also that thy seed 
shall be great, 

And thine offspring as the grass of 
the earth. 

26Thou shalt come to thy grave in a 
ripe age, 

Like as a shock of corn cometh in in 
its season. 

27Lo this, we have searched it, 

So it is; hear it, and know thou it for 
thy good. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2Oh that my vexation were but 
weighed, 

And my calamity laid in the 
balances altogether! 

3For now it would be heavier than 
the sand of the seas; t 

Herefore are my words broken. 

4For the arrows of the Almighty are 
within me, 

The poison whereof my spirit 
drinketh up; 

The terrors of God do set 
themselves in array against me. 

5Doth the wild ass bray when he 
hath grass? 

Or loweth the ox over his fodder? 

6Can that which hath no savour be 
eaten without salt? 

Or is there any taste in the juice of 
mallows? 

7My soul refuseth to touch them; 

They are as the sickness of my flesh. 

 

8Oh that I might have my request, 

And that God would grant me the 
thing that I long for! 
6 




9Even that it would please God to 
crush me; 

That He would let loose His hand, 
and cut me off! 

10Then should I yet have comfort; 

Yea, I would exult in pain, though 
He spare not; 

For I have not denied the words of 
the Holy One. 

 

11What is my strength, that I should 
wait? 

And what is mine end, that I should 
be patient? 

12Is my strength the strength of 
stones? 

Or is my flesh of brass? 

13Is it that I have no help in me, 

And that sound wisdom is driven 
quite from me? 

 

14To him that is ready to faint 
kindness is due from his friend, 

Even to him that forsaketh the fear 
of the Almighty. 

15My brethren have dealt deceitfully 
as a brook, 

As the channel of brooks that 
overflow, 

16Which are black by reason of the 
ice, 

And wherein the snow hideth itself; 

17What time they wax warm, they 
vanish, 

When it is hot, they are consumed 
out of their place. 

18The paths of their way do wind, 

They go up into the waste, and are 
lost. 

19The caravans of Tema looked, 

The companies of Sheba waited for 
them— 

20They were ashamed because they 
had hoped; 

They came thither, and were 
confounded. 

21For now ye are become His; 

Ye see a terror, and are afraid. 

22Did I say: ‘Give unto me’? 

Or: ‘Offer a present for me of your 
substance’? 

23or: ‘Deliver me from the 
adversary’s hand’? 

Or: ‘Redeem me from the hand of 
the oppressors’? 

 

24Teach me, and I will hold my 
peace; 

And cause me to understand 
wherein I have erred. 

25How forcible are words of 
uprightness! 

But what doth your arguing argue? 

26Do ye hold words to be an 
argument, 

But the speeches of one that is 
desperate to be wind? 

27Yea, ye would cast lots upon the 
fatherless, 

And dig a pit for your friend. 

28Now therefore be pleased to look 
upon me; 

For surely I shall not lie to your 
face. 

29Return, I pray you, let there be no 
injustice; 

Yea, return again, my cause is 
righteous. 


30Is there injustice on my tongue? 

Cannot my taste discern crafty 
devices? 

 

Is there not a time of service to 
man upon earth? 

And are not his days like the days of 
a hireling? 

2As a servant that eagerly longeth 
for the shadow, 

And as a hireling that looketh for his 
wages; 

3So am I made to possess—months 
of vanity, 

And wearisome nights are appointed 
to me. 

4When I lie down, I say: ‘When 
shall I arise?’ 

But the night is long, and I am full 
of tossings to and fro unto the 
dawning of the day. 

5My flesh is clothed with worms and 
clods of dust; 

My skin closeth up and breaketh out 
afresh. 

6My days are swifter than a 
weaver’s shuttle, 

And are spent without hope. 

7O remember that my life is a 
breath; 

Mine eye shall no more see good. 

8The eye of him that seeth me shall 
behold me no more; 

While Thine eyes are upon me, I am 
gone. 

9As the cloud is consumed and 
vanisheth away, 

So he that goeth down to the grave 
shall come up no more. 

10He shall return no more to his 
house, 

Neither shall his place know him 
any more. 

 

11Therefore I will not refrain my 
mouth; 

I will speak in the anguish of my 
spirit; 

I will complain in the bitterness of 
my soul. 

12Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, 

That Thou settest a watch over me? 

13When I say: ‘My bed shall comfort 
me, 

My couch shall ease my complaint’; 

14Then Thou scarest me with 
dreams, 

And terrifiest me through visions; 

15So that my soul chooseth 
strangling, 

And death rather than these my 
bones. 

16I loathe it; I shall not live alway; 

Let me alone; for my days are 
vanity. 

17What is man, that Thou shouldest 
magnify him, 

And that Thou shouldest set Thy 
heart upon him, 

18And that Thou shouldest 
remember him every morning, 

And try him every moment? 

19How long wilt Thou not look away 
from me, 

Nor let me alone till I swallow down 
my spittle? 

20If I have sinned, what do I unto 
Thee, O Thou watcher of men? 
7 




Why hast Thou set me as a mark for 
Thee, 

So that I am a burden to myself? 

21And why dost Thou not pardon my 
transgression, 

And take away mine iniquity? 

For now shall I lie down in the dust; 

And Thou wilt seek me, but I shall 
not be. 

 

Then answered Bildad the 
Shuhite, and said: 

2How long wilt thou speak these 
things, 

Seeing that the words of thy mouth 
are as a mighty wind? 

3Doth God pervert judgment? 

Or doth the Almighty pervert 
justice? 

4If thy children sinned against Him, 

He delivered them into the hand of 
their transgression. 

5If thou wouldest seek earnestly 
unto God, 

And make thy supplication to the 
Almighty; 

6If thou wert pure and upright; 

Surely now He would awake for 
thee, 

And make the habitation of thy 
righteousness prosperous. 

7And though thy beginning was 
small, 

Yet thy end should greatly increase. 

 

8For inquire, I pray thee, of the 
former generation, 

And apply thyself to that which their 
fathers have searched out— 

9For we are but of yesterday, and 
know nothing, 

Because our days upon earth are a 
shadow— 

10Shall not they teach thee, and tell 
thee, 

And utter words out of their heart? 

11Can the rush shoot up without 
mire? 

Can the reed-grass grow without 
water? 

12Whilst it is yet in its greenness, 
and not cut down, 

It withereth before any other herb. 

13So are the paths of all that forget 
God; 

And the hope of the godless man 
shall perish; 

14Whose confidence is gossamer, 

And whose trust is a spider’s web. 

15He shall lean upon his house, but it 
shall not stand; 

He shall hold fast thereby, but it 
shall not endure. 

16He is green before the sun, 

And his shoots go forth over his 
garden. 

17His roots are wrapped about the 
heap, 

He beholdeth the place of stones. 

18If he be destroyed from his place, 

Then it shall deny him: ‘I have not 
seen thee.’ 

19Behold, this is the joy of his way, 

And out of the earth shall others 
spring. 

20Behold, God will not cast away an 
innocent man, 
8 




Neither will He uphold the evil-
doers; 

21Till He fill thy mouth with 
laughter, 

And thy lips with shouting. 

22They that hate thee shall be 
clothed with shame; 

And the tent of the wicked shall be 
no more. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2Of a truth I know that it is so; 

And how can man be just with God? 

3If one should desire to contend with 
Him, 

He could not answer Him one of a 
thousand. 

4He is wise in heart, and mighty in 
strength; 

Who hath hardened himself against 
Him, and prospered? 

5Who removeth the mountains, and 
they know it not, 

When He overturneth them in His 
anger. 

6Who shaketh the earth out of her 
place, 

And the pillars thereof tremble. 

7Who commandeth the sun, and it 
riseth not; 

And sealeth up the stars. 

8Who alone stretcheth out the 
heavens, 

And treadeth upon the waves of the 
sea. 

9Who maketh the Bear, Orion, and 
the Pleiades, 

And the chambers of the south. 

10Who doeth great things past 
finding out; 

Yea, marvellous things without 
number. 

11Lo, He goeth by me, and I see Him 
not. 

He passeth on also, but I perceive 
Him not. 

12Behold, He snatcheth away, who 
can hinder Him? 

Who will say unto Him: ‘What 
doest Thou?’ 

13God will not withdraw His anger; 

The helpers of Rahab did stoop 
under Him. 

 

14How much less shall I answer 
Him, 

And choose out my arguments with 
Him? 

15Whom, though I were righteous, 
yet would I not answer; 

I would make supplication to Him 
that contendeth with me. 

16If I had called, and He had 
answered me; 

Yet would I not believe that He 
would hearken unto my voice— 

17He that would break me with a 
tempest, 

And multiply my wounds without 
cause; 

18That would not suffer me to take 
my breath, 

But fill me with bitterness. 

19If it be a matter of strength, lo, He 
is mighty! 

And if of justice, who will appoint 
me a time? 
9 




20Though I be righteous, mine own 
mouth shall condemn me; 

Though I be innocent, He shall 
prove me perverse. 

21I am innocent—I regard not 
myself, 

I despise my life. 

22It is all one—therefore I say: 

He destroyeth the innocent and the 
wicked. 

23If the scourge slay suddenly, 

He will mock at the calamity of the 
guiltless. 

24The earth is given into the hand of 
the wicked; 

He covereth the faces of the judges 
thereof; 

If it be not He, who then is it? 

25Now my days are swifter than a 
runner; 

They flee away, they see no good. 

26They are passed away as the swift 
ships; 

As the vulture that swoopeth on the 
prey. 

27If I say: ‘I will forget my 
complaint, 

I will put off my sad countenance, 
and be of good cheer’, 

28I am afraid of all my pains, 

I know that Thou wilt not hold me 
guiltless. 

29I shall be condemned; 

Why then do I labour in vain? 

30If I wash myself with snow water, 

And make my hands never so clean; 

31Yet wilt Thou plunge me in the 
ditch, 

And mine own clothes shall abhor 
me. 

32For He is not a man, as I am, that I 
should answer Him, 

That we should come together in 
judgment. 

33There is no arbiter betwixt us, 

That might lay his hand upon us 
both. 

34Let Him take His rod away from 
me, 

And let not His terror make me 
afraid; 

5Then would I speak, and not fear 
Him; 

For I am not so with myself. 

 

My soul is weary of my life; 

I will give free course to my 
complaint; 

I will speak in the bitterness of my 
soul. 

2I will say unto God: Do not 
condemn me; 

Make me know wherefore Thou 
contendest with me. 

3Is it good unto Thee that Thou 
shouldest oppress, 

That Thou shouldest despise the 
work of Thy hands, 

And shine upon the counsel of the 
wicked? 

4Hast Thou eyes of flesh? 

Or seest Thou as man seeth? 

5Are Thy days as the days of man, 

Or Thy years as a man’s days, 

6That Thou inquirest after mine 
iniquity, 

And searchest after my sin, 
10 




7Although Thou knowest that I shall 
not be condemned; 

And there is none that can deliver 
out of Thy hand? 

8Thy hands have framed me and 
fashioned me 

Together round about; yet Thou dost 
destroy me! 

9Remember, I beseech Thee, that 
Thou hast fashioned me as clay; 

And wilt Thou bring me into dust 
again? 

10Hast Thou not poured me out as 
milk, 

And curdled me like cheese? 

11Thou hast clothed me with skin 
and flesh, 

And knit me together with bones 
and sinews. 

12Thou hast granted me life and 
favour, 

And Thy providence hath preserved 
my spirit. 

13Yet these things Thou didst hide in 
Thy heart; 

I know that this is with Thee; 

14If I sin, then Thou markest me, 

And Thou wilt not acquit me from 
mine iniquity. 

15If I be wicked, woe unto me; 

And if I be righteous, yet shall I not 
lift up my head— 

Being filled with ignominy 

And looking upon mine affliction. 

16And if it exalt itself, Thou huntest 
me as a lion; 

And again Thou showest Thyself 
marvellous upon me. 

17Thou renewest Thy witnesses 
against me, 

And increasest Thine indignation 
upon me; 

Host succeeding host against me. 

 

18Wherefore then hast Thou brought 
me forth out of the womb? 

Would that I had perished, and no 
eye had seen me! 

19I should have been as though I had 
not been; 

I should have been carried from the 
womb to the grave. 

20Are not my days few? Cease then, 

And let me alone, that I may take 
comfort a little, 

21Before I go whence I shall not 
return, 

Even to the land of darkness and of 
the shadow of death; 

22A land of thick darkness, as 
darkness itself; 

A land of the shadow of death, 
without any order, 

And where the light is as darkness. 

 

Then answered Zophar the 
Naamathite, and said: 

2Should not the multitude of words 
be answered? 

And should a man full of talk be 
accounted right? 

3Thy boastings have made men hold 
their peace, 

And thou hast mocked, with none to 
make thee ashamed; 

4And thou hast said: ‘My doctrine is 
pure, 
11 




And I am clean in Thine eyes.’ 

5But oh that God would speak, 

And open His lips against thee; 

6And that He would tell thee the 
secrets of wisdom, 

That sound wisdom is manifold! 

Know therefore that God exacteth of 
thee less than thine iniquity 
deserveth. 

 

7Canst thou find out the deep things 
of God? 

Canst thou attain unto the purpose 
of the Almighty? 

8It is high as heaven; what canst 
thou do? 

Deeper than the nether-world; what 
canst thou know? 

9The measure thereof is longer than 
the earth, 

And broader than the sea. 

10If He pass by, and shut up, 

Or gather in, then who can hinder 
Him? 

11For He knoweth base men; 

And when He seeth iniquity, will He 
not then consider it? 

12But an empty man will get 
understanding, 

When a wild ass’s colt is born a 
man. 

 

13If thou set thy heart aright, 

And stretch out thy hands toward 
Him— 

14If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far 
away, 

And let not unrighteousness dwell in 
thy tents— 

15Surely then shalt thou lift up thy 
face without spot; 

Yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt 
not fear; 

16For thou shalt forget thy misery; 

Thou shalt remember it as waters 
that are passed away; 

17And thy life shall be clearer than 
the noonday; 

Though there be darkness, it shall be 
as the morning. 

18And thou shalt be secure, because 
there is hope; 

Yea, thou shalt look about thee, and 
shalt take thy rest in safety. 

19Also thou shalt lie down, and none 
shall make thee afraid; 

Yea, many shall make suit unto 
thee. 

20But the eyes of the wicked shall 
fail, 

And they shall have no way to flee, 

And their hope shall be the drooping 
of the soul. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2No doubt but ye are the 
people, 

And wisdom shall die with you. 

3But I have understanding as well as 
you; 

I am not inferior to you; 

Yea, who knoweth not such things 
as these? 

4I am as one that is a laughing-stock 
to his neighbour, 

A man that called upon God, 

And He answered him; 
12 




The just, the innocent man is a 
laughing-stock, 

5A contemptible brand in the 
thought of him that is at ease, 

A thing ready for them whose foot 
slippeth. 

6The tents of robbers prosper, 

And they that provoke God are 
secure, 

In whatsoever God bringeth into 
their hand. 

 

7But ask now the beasts, and they 
shall teach thee; 

And the fowls of the air, and they 
shall tell thee; 

8Or speak to the earth, and it shall 
teach thee; 

And the fishes of the sea shall 
declare unto thee; 

9Who knoweth not among all these, 

That the hand of the LORD hath 
wrought this? 

10In whose hand is the soul of every 
living thing, 

And the breath of all mankind.— 

11Doth not the ear try words, 

Even as the palate tasteth its food? 

12Is wisdom with aged men, 

And understanding in length of 
days?— 

13With Him is wisdom and might; 

He hath counsel and understanding. 

14Behold, He breaketh down, and it 
cannot be built again; 

He shutteth up a man, and there can 
be no opening. 

15Behold, He withholdeth the 
waters, and they dry up; 

Also He sendeth them out, and they 
overturn the earth. 

16With Him is strength and sound 
wisdom; 

The deceived and the deceiver are 
His. 

17He leadeth counsellors away 
stripped, 

And judges maketh He fools. 

18He looseth the bond of kings, 

And bindeth their loins with a 
girdle. 

19He leadeth priests away stripped, 

And overthroweth the mighty. 

20He removeth the speech of men of 
trust, 

And taketh away the sense of the 
elders. 

21He poureth contempt upon princes, 

And looseth the belt of the strong. 

22He uncovereth deep things out of 
darkness, 

And bringeth out to light the shadow 
of death. 

23He increaseth the nations, and 
destroyeth them; 

He enlargeth the nations, and 
leadeth them away. 

24He taketh away the heart of the 
chiefs of the people of the land, 

And causeth them to wander in a 
wilderness where there is no way. 

25They grope in the dark without 
light, 

And He maketh them to stagger like 
a drunken man. 

 

Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, 

Mine ear hath heard and 13 




 understood it. 

2What ye know, do I know also; 

I am not inferior unto you. 

3Notwithstanding I would speak to 
the Almighty, 

And I desire to reason with God. 

4But ye are plasterers of lies, 

Ye are all physicians of no value. 

5Oh that ye would altogether hold 
your peace! 

And it would be your wisdom. 

6Hear now my reasoning, 

And hearken to the pleadings of my 
lips. 

7Will ye speak unrighteously for 
God, 

And talk deceitfully for Him? 

8Will ye show Him favour? 

Will ye contend for God? 

9Would it be good that He should 
search you out? 

Or as one mocketh a man, will ye 
mock Him? 

10He will surely reprove you, 

If ye do secretly show favour. 

11Shall not His majesty terrify you, 

And His dread fall upon you? 

12Your memorials shall be like unto 
ashes, 

Your eminences to eminences of 
clay. 

 

13Hold your peace, let me alone, that 
I may speak, 

And let come on me what will. 

14Wherefore? I will take my flesh in 
my teeth, 

And put my life in my hand. 

15Though He slay me, yet will I trust 
in Him; 

But I will argue my ways before 
Him. 

16This also shall be my salvation, 

That a hypocrite cannot come before 
Him. 

17Hear diligently my speech, 

And let my declaration be in your 
ears. 

18Behold now, I have ordered my 
cause; 

I know that I shall be justified. 

19Who is he that will contend with 
me? 

For then would I hold my peace and 
die. 

 

20Only do not two things unto me, 

Then will I not hide myself from 
Thee: 

21Withdraw Thy hand far from me; 

And let not Thy terror make me 
afraid. 

22Then call Thou, and I will answer; 

Or let me speak, and answer Thou 
me. 

23How many are mine iniquities and 
sins? 

Make me to know my transgression 
and my sin. 

24Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face, 

And holdest me for Thine enemy? 

25Wilt Thou harass a driven leaf? 

And wilt Thou pursue the dry 
stubble? 

26That Thou shouldest write bitter 
things against me, 


And make me to inherit the 
iniquities of my youth. 

27Thou puttest my feet also in the 
stocks, 

And lookest narrowly unto all my 
paths; 

Thou drawest Thee a line about the 
soles of my feet; 

28Though I am like a wine-skin that 
consumeth, 

Like a garment that is moth-eaten. 

 

Man that is born of a woman 

Is of few days, and full of 
trouble. 

2He cometh forth like a flower, and 
withereth; 

He fleeth also as a shadow, and 
continueth not. 

3And dost Thou open Thine eyes 
upon such a one, 

And bringest me into judgment with 
Thee? 

4Who can bring a clean thing out of 
an unclean? not one. 

5Seeing his days are determined, 

The number of his months is with 
Thee, 

And Thou hast appointed his bounds 
that he cannot pass; 

6Look away from him, that he may 
rest, 

Till he shall accomplish, as a 
hireling, his day. 

 

7For there is hope of a tree, 

If it be cut down, that it will sprout 
again, 

And that the tender branch thereof 
will not cease. 

8Though the root thereof wax old in 
the earth, 

And the stock thereof die in the 
ground; 

9Yet through the scent of water it 
will bud, 

And put forth boughs like a plant. 

10But man dieth, and lieth low; 

Yea, man perisheth, and where is 
he? 

11As the waters fail from the sea, 

And the river is drained dry; 

12So man lieth down and riseth not; 

Till the heavens be no more, they 
shall not awake, 

Nor be roused out of their sleep. 

13Oh that Thou wouldest hide me in 
the nether-world, 

That Thou wouldest keep me secret, 
until Thy wrath be past, 

That Thou wouldest appoint me a 
set time, and remember me!— 

14If a man die, may he live again? 

All the days of my service would I 
wait, till my relief should come— 

15Thou wouldest call, and I would 
answer Thee; 

Thou wouldest have a desire to the 
work of Thy hands. 

16But now Thou numberest my 
steps, 

Thou dost not even wait for my sin; 

17My transgression is sealed up in a 
bag, 

And Thou heapest up mine iniquity. 

18And surely the mountain falling 
crumbleth away, 
14 




And the rock is removed out of its 
place; 

19The waters wear the stones; 

The overflowings thereof wash 
away the dust of the earth; 

So Thou destroyest the hope of man. 

20Thou prevailest for ever against 
him, and he passeth; 

Thou changest his countenance, and 
sendest him away. 

21His sons come to honour, and he 
knoweth it not; 

And they are brought low, but he 
regardeth them not. 

22But his flesh grieveth for him, 

And his soul mourneth over him. 

 

Then answered Eliphaz the 
Temanite, and said: 

2Should a wise man make answer 
with windy knowledge, 

And fill his belly with the east 
wind? 

3Should he reason with unprofitable 
talk, 

Or with speeches wherewith he can 
do no good? 

4Yea, thou doest away with fear, 

And impairest devotion before God. 

5For thine iniquity teacheth thy 
mouth, 

And thou choosest the tongue of the 
crafty. 

6Thine own mouth condemneth 
thee, and not I; 

Yea, thine own lips testify against 
thee. 

 

7Art thou the first man that was 
born? 

Or wast thou brought forth before 
the hills? 

8Dost thou hearken in the council of 
God? 

And dost thou restrain wisdom to 
thyself? 

9What knowest thou, that we know 
not? 

What understandest thou, which is 
not in us? 

10With us are both the gray-headed 
and the very aged men, 

Much older than thy father. 

11Are the consolations of God too 
small for thee, 

And the word that dealeth gently 
with thee? 

12Why doth thy heart carry thee 
away? 

And why do thine eyes wink? 

13That thou turnest thy spirit against 
God, 

And lettest such words go out of thy 
mouth. 

14What is man, that he should be 
clean? 

And he that is born of a woman, that 
he should be righteous? 

15Behold, He putteth no trust in His 
holy ones; 

Yea, the heavens are not clean in 
His sight. 

16How much less one that is 
abominable and impure, 

Man who drinketh iniquity like 
water! 

 
15 




17I will tell thee, hear thou me; 

And that which I have seen I will 
declare— 

18Which wise men have told 

From their fathers, and have not hid 
it; 

19Unto whom alone the land was 
given, 

And no stranger passed among 
them. 

20The wicked man travaileth with 
pain all his days, 

Even the number of years that are 
laid up for the oppressor. 

21A sound of terrors is in his ears: 

In prosperity the destroyer shall 
come upon him. 

22He believeth not that he shall 
return out of darkness, 

And he is waited for of the sword. 

23He wandereth abroad for bread: 
‘Where is it?’ 

He knoweth that the day of darkness 
is ready at his hand. 

24Distress and anguish overwhelm 
him; 

They prevail against him, as a king 
ready to the battle. 

25Because he hath stretched out his 
hand against God, 

And behaveth himself proudly 
against the Almighty; 

26He runneth upon him with a stiff 
neck, 

With the thick bosses of his 
bucklers. 

27Because he hath covered his face 
with his fatness, 

And made collops of fat on his 
loins; 

28And he hath dwelt in desolate 
cities, 

In houses which no man would 
inhabit, 

Which were ready to become heaps. 

29He shall not be rich, neither shall 
his substance continue, 

Neither shall their produce bend to 
the earth. 

30He shall not depart out of 
darkness; 

The flame shall dry up his branches, 

And by the breath of His mouth 
shall he go away. 

31Let him not trust in vanity, 
deceiving himself; 

For vanity shall be his recompense. 

32It shall be accomplished before his 
time, 

And his branch shall not be leafy. 

33He shall shake off his unripe grape 
as the vine, 

And shall cast off his flower as the 
olive. 

34For the company of the godless 
shall be desolate, 

And fire shall consume the tents of 
bribery. 

35They conceive mischief, and bring 
forth iniquity, 

And their belly prepareth deceit. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2I have heard many such 
things; 

Sorry comforters are ye all. 

3Shall windy words have an end? 
16 




Or what provoketh thee that thou 
answerest? 

4I also could speak as ye do; 

If your soul were in my soul’s stead, 

I could join words together against 
you, 

And shake my head at you. 

5I would strengthen you with my 
mouth, 

And the moving of my lips would 
assuage your grief. 

 

6Though I speak, my pain is not 
assuaged; 

And though I forbear, what am I 
eased? 

7But now He hath made me weary; 

Thou hast made desolate all my 
company. 

8And Thou hast shrivelled me up, 
which is a witness against me; 

And my leanness riseth up against 
me, it testifieth to my face. 

9He hath torn me in His wrath, and 
hated me; 

He hath gnashed upon me with His 
teeth; 

Mine adversary sharpeneth his eyes 
upon me. 

10They have gaped upon me with 
their mouth; 

They have smitten me upon the 
cheek scornfully; 

They gather themselves together 
against me. 

11God delivereth me to the ungodly, 

And casteth me into the hands of the 
wicked. 

12I was at ease, and He broke me 
asunder; 

Yea, He hath taken me by the neck, 
and dashed me to pieces; 

He hath also set me up for His mark. 

13His archers compass me round 
about, 

He cleaveth my reins asunder, and 
doth not spare; 

He poureth out my gall upon the 
ground. 

14He breaketh me with breach upon 
breach; 

He runneth upon me like a giant. 

15I have sewed sackcloth upon my 
skin, 

And have laid my horn in the dust. 

16My face is reddened with weeping, 

And on my eyelids is the shadow of 
death; 

17Although there is no violence in 
my hands, 

And my prayer is pure. 

18O earth, cover not thou my blood, 

And let my cry have no resting-
place. 

19Even now, behold, my Witness is 
in heaven, 

And He that testifieth of me is on 
high. 

20Mine inward thoughts are my 
intercessors, 

Mine eye poureth out tears unto 
God; 

21That He would set aright a man 
contending with God, 

As a son of man setteth aright his 
neighbour! 


22For the years that are few are 
coming on, 

And I shall go the way whence I 
shall not return. 

My spirit is consumed, my 
days are extinct, 

The grave is ready for me. 

2Surely there are mockers with me, 

And mine eye abideth in their 
provocation. 

3Give now a pledge, be surety for 
me with Thyself; 

Who else is there that will strike 
hands with me? 

4For Thou hast hid their heart from 
understanding; 

Therefore shalt Thou not exalt them. 

5He that denounceth his friends for 
the sake of flattery, 

Even the eyes of his children shall 
fail. 

 

6He hath made me also a byword of 
the people; 

And I am become one in whose face 
they spit. 

7Mine eye also is dimmed by reason 
of vexation, 

And all my members are as a 
shadow. 

8Upright men are astonished at this, 

And the innocent stirreth up himself 
against the godless. 

9Yet the righteous holdeth on his 
way, 

And he that hath clean hands waxeth 
stronger and stronger. 

10But as for you all, do ye return, 
and come now; 

And I shall not find a wise man 
among you. 

11My days are past, my purposes are 
broken off, 

Even the thoughts of my heart. 

12They change the night into day; 

The light is short because of 
darkness. 

13If I look for the nether-world as 
my house; 

If I have spread my couch in the 
darkness; 

14If I have said to corruption: ‘Thou 
art my father’, 

To the worm: ‘Thou art my mother, 
and my sister’; 

15Where then is my hope? 

And as for my hope, who shall see 
it? 

16They shall go down to the bars of 
the nether-world, 

When we are at rest together in the 
dust. 

 

Then answered Bildad the 
Shuhite, and said: 

2How long will ye lay snares for 
words? 

Consider, and afterwards we will 
speak. 

3Wherefore are we counted as 
beasts, 

And reputed dull in your sight? 

4Thou that tearest thyself in thine 
anger, 

Shall the earth be forsaken for thee? 

Or shall the rock be removed out of 
its place? 

 
17 

18 




5Yea, the light of the wicked shall 
be put out, 

And the spark of his fire shall not 
shine. 

6The light shall be dark in his tent, 

And his lamp over him shall be put 
out. 

7The steps of his strength shall be 
straitened, 

And his own counsel shall cast him 
down. 

8For he is cast into a net by his own 
feet, 

And he walketh upon the toils. 

9A gin shall take him by the heel, 

And a snare shall lay hold on him. 

10A noose is hid for him in the 
ground, 

And a trap for him in the way. 

11Terrors shall overwhelm him on 
every side, 

And shall entrap him at his feet. 

12His trouble shall be ravenous, 

And calamity shall be ready for his 
fall. 

13It shall devour the members of his 
body, 

Yea, the first-born of death shall 
devour his members. 

14That wherein he trusteth shall be 
plucked out of his tent; 

And he shall be brought to the king 
of terrors. 

15There shall dwell in his tent that 
which is none of his; 

Brimstone shall be scattered upon 
his habitation. 

16His roots shall dry up beneath, 

And above shall his branch wither. 

17His remembrance shall perish 
from the earth, 

And he shall have no name abroad. 

18He shall be driven from light into 
darkness, 

And chased out of the world. 

19He shall have neither son nor son’s 
son among his people, 

Nor any remaining in his dwellings. 

20They that come after shall be 
astonished at his day, 

As they that went before are 
affrighted. 

21Surely such are the dwellings of 
the wicked, 

And this is the place of him that 
knoweth not God. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2How long will ye vex my 
soul, 

And crush me with words? 

3These ten times have ye reproached 
me; 

Ye are not ashamed that ye deal 
harshly with me. 

4And be it indeed that I have erred, 

Mine error remaineth with myself. 

5If indeed ye will magnify 
yourselves against me, 

And plead against me my reproach; 

6Know now that God hath subverted 
my cause, 

And hath compassed me with His 
net. 

7Behold, I cry out: ‘Violence! ’ but I 
am not heard; 

I cry aloud, but there is no justice. 
19 




8He hath fenced up my way that I 
cannot pass, 

And hath set darkness in my paths. 

9He hath stripped me of my glory, 

And taken the crown from my head. 

10He hath broken me down on every 
side, and I am gone; 

And my hope hath He plucked up 
like a tree. 

11He hath also kindled His wrath 
against me, 

And He counteth me unto Him as 
one of His adversaries. 

12His troops come on together, 

And cast up their way against me, 

And encamp round about my tent. 

13He hath put my brethren far from 
me, 

And mine acquaintance are wholly 
estranged from me. 

14My kinsfolk have failed, 

And my familiar friends have 
forgotten me. 

15They that dwell in my house, and 
my maids, count me for a 
stranger; 

I am become an alien in their sight. 

16I call unto my servant, and he 
giveth me no answer, 

Though I entreat him with my 
mouth. 

17My breath is abhorred of my wife, 

And I am loathsome to the children 
of my tribe. 

18Even urchins despised me; 

If I arise, they speak against me. 

19All my intimate friends abhor me; 

And they whom I loved are turned 
against me. 

20My bone cleaveth to my skin and 
to my flesh, 

And I am escaped with the skin of 
my teeth. 

 

21Have pity upon me, have pity upon 
me, O ye my friends; 

For the hand of God hath touched 
me. 

22Why do ye persecute me as God, 

And are not satisfied with my flesh? 

23Oh that my words were now 
written! 

Oh that they were inscribed in a 
book! 

24That with an iron pen and lead 

They were graven in the rock for 
ever! 

25But as for me, I know that my 
Redeemer liveth, 

And that He will witness at the last 
upon the dust; 

26And when after my skin this is 
destroyed, 

Then without my flesh shall I see 
God; 

27Whom I, even I, shall see for 
myself, 

And mine eyes shall behold, and not 
another’s. 

My reins are consumed within me. 

28If ye say: ‘How we will persecute 
him! ’ 

Seeing that the root of the matter is 
found in me; 

29Be ye afraid of the sword; 

For wrath bringeth the punishments 
of the sword, 


That ye may know there is a 
judgment. 

 

Then answered Zophar the 
Naamathite, and said: 

2Therefore do my thoughts give 
answer to me, 

Even by reason of mine agitation 
that is in me. 

3I have heard the reproof which 
putteth me to shame, 

But out of my understanding my 
spirit answereth me. 

 

4Knowest thou not this of old time, 

Since man was placed upon earth, 

5That the triumphing of the wicked 
is short, 

And the joy of the godless but for a 
moment? 

6Though his excellency mount up to 
the heavens, 

And his head reach unto the clouds; 

7Yet he shall perish for ever like his 
own dung; 

They that have seen him shall say: 
‘Where is he?’ 

8He shall fly away as a dream, and 
shall not be found; 

Yea, he shall be chased away as a 
vision of the night. 

9The eye which saw him shall see 
him no more; 

Neither shall his place any more 
behold him. 

10His children shall appease the 
poor, 

And his hands shall restore his 
wealth. 

11His bones are full of his youth, 

But it shall lie down with him in the 
dust. 

12Though wickedness be sweet in 
his mouth, 

Though he hide it under his tongue; 

13Though he spare it, and will not let 
it go, 

But keep it still within his mouth; 

14Yet his food in his bowels is 
turned, 

It is the gall of asps within him. 

15He hath swallowed down riches, 
and he shall vomit them up again; 

God shall cast them out of his belly. 

16He shall suck the poison of asps; 

The viper’s tongue shall slay him. 

17He shall not look upon the rivers, 

The flowing streams of honey and 
curd. 

18That which he laboured for shall 
he give back, and shall not 
swallow it down; 

According to the substance that he 
hath gotten, he shall not rejoice. 

19For he hath oppressed and 
forsaken the poor; 

He hath violently taken away a 
house, and he shall not build it 
up. 

20Because he knew no quietness 
within him, 

In his greed he suffered nought to 
escape, 

21There was nothing left that he 
devoured not— 

Therefore his prosperity shall not 
endure. 
20 




22In the fulness of his sufficiency he 
shall be in straits; 

The hand of every one that is in 
misery shall come upon him. 

23It shall be for the filling of his 
belly; 

He shall cast the fierceness of His 
wrath upon him, 

And shall cause it to rain upon him 
into his flesh. 

24If he flee from the iron weapon, 

The bow of brass shall strike him 
through. 

25He draweth it forth, and it cometh 
out of his body; 

Yea, the glittering point cometh out 
of his gall; 

Terrors are upon him. 

26All darkness is laid up for his 
treasures; 

A fire not blown by man shall 
consume him; 

It shall go ill with him that is left in 
his tent. 

27The heavens shall reveal his 
iniquity, 

And the earth shall rise up against 
him. 

28The increase of his house shall 
depart, 

His goods shall flow away in the 
day of his wrath. 

29This is the portion of a wicked 
man from God, 

And the heritage appointed unto him 
by God. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2Hear diligently my speech; 

And let this be your consolations. 

3Suffer me, that I may speak; 

And after that I have spoken, mock 
on. 

4As for me, is my complaint to man? 

Or why should I not be impatient? 

5Turn unto me, and be astonished, 

And lay your hand upon your 
mouth. 

6Even when I remember I am 
affrighted, 

And horror hath taketh hold on my 
flesh. 

7Wherefore do the wicked live, 

Become old, yea, wax mighty in 
power? 

8Their seed is established in their 
sight with them, 

And their offspring before their 
eyes. 

9Their houses are safe, without fear, 

Neither is the rod of God upon 
them. 

10Their bull gendereth, and faileth 
not; 

Their cow calveth, and casteth not 
her calf. 

11They send forth their little ones 
like a flock, 

And their children dance. 

12They sing to the timbrel and harp, 

And rejoice at the sound of the pipe. 

13They spend their days in 
prosperity, 

And peacefully they go down to the 
grave. 

14Yet they said unto God: ‘Depart 
from us; 21 




For we desire not the knowledge of 
Thy ways. 

15What is the Almighty, that we 
should serve Him? 

And what profit should we have, if 
we pray unto Him?’— 

16Lo, their prosperity is not in their 
hand; 

The counsel of the wicked is far 
from me. 

 

17How oft is it that the lamp of the 
wicked is put out? 

That their calamity cometh upon 
them? 

That He distributeth pains in His 
anger? 

18That they are as stubble before the 
wind, 

And as chaff that the storm stealeth 
away? 

19’God layeth up his iniquity for his 
children! ’— 

Let Him recompense it unto himself, 
that he may know it. 

20Let his own eyes see his 
destruction, 

And let him drink of the wrath of 
the Almighty. 

21For what pleasure hath he in his 
house after him? 

Seeing the number of his months is 
determined. 

 

22Shall any teach God knowledge? 

Seeing it is He that judgeth those 
that are high. 

23One dieth in his full strength, 

Being wholly at ease and quiet; 

24His pails are full of milk, 

And the marrow of his bones is 
moistened. 

25And another dieth in bitterness of 
soul, 

And hath never tasted of good. 

26They lie down alike in the dust, 

And the worm covereth them. 

 

27Behold, I know your thoughts, 

And the devices which ye 
wrongfully imagine against me. 

28For ye say: ‘Where is the house of 
the prince? 

And where is the tent wherein the 
wicked dwelt?’ 

29Have ye not asked them that go by 
the way; 

And will ye misdeem their tokens, 

30That the evil man is reserved to the 
day of calamity, 

That they are led forth to the day of 
wrath? 

31But who shall declare his way to 
his face? 

And who shall repay him what he 
hath done? 

32For he is borne to the grave, 

And watch is kept over his tomb. 

33The clods of the valley are sweet 
unto him, 

And all men draw after him, 

As there were innumerable before 
him. 

34How then comfort ye me in vain? 

And as for your answers, there 
remaineth only faithlessness? 

 


Then answered Eliphaz the 
Temanite, and said: 

2Can a man be profitable unto God? 

Or can he that is wise be profitable 
unto Him? 

3Is it any advantage to the Almighty, 
that thou art righteous? 

Or is it gain to Him, that thou 
makest thy ways blameless? 

4Is it for thy fear of Him that He 
reproveth thee, 

That He entereth with thee into 
judgment? 

5Is not thy wickedness great? 

And are not thine iniquities without 
end? 

6For thou hast taken pledges of thy 
brother for nought, 

And stripped the naked of their 
clothing. 

7Thou hast not given water to the 
weary to drink, 

And thou hast withholden bread 
from the hungry. 

8And as a mighty man, who hath the 
earth, 

And as a man of rank, who dwelleth 
in it, 

9Thou hast sent widows away 
empty, 

And the arms of the fatherless have 
been broken. 

10Therefore snares are round about 
thee, 

And sudden dread affrighted thee, 

11Or darkness, that thou canst not 
see, 

And abundance of waters cover 
thee. 

12Is not God in the height of heaven? 

And behold the topmost of the stars, 
how high they are! 

13And thou sayest: ‘What doth God 
know? 

Can He judge through the dark 
cloud? 

14Thick clouds are a covering to 
Him, that He seeth not; 

And He walketh in the circuit of 
heaven.’ 

15Wilt thou keep the old way 

Which wicked men have trodden? 

16Who were snatched away before 
their time, 

Whose foundation was poured out 
as a stream; 

17Who said unto God: ‘Depart from 
us’; 

And what could the Almighty do 
unto them? 

18Yet He filled their houses with 
good things— 

But the counsel of the wicked is far 
from me. 

19The righteous saw it, and were 
glad, 

And the innocent laugh them to 
scorn: 

20’Surely their substance is cut off, 

And their abundance the fire hath 
consumed.’ 

 

21Acquaint now thyself with Him, 
and be at peace; 

Thereby shall thine increase be 
good. 

22Receive, I pray thee, instruction 
from His mouth, 
22 




And lay up His words in thy heart. 

23If thou return to the Almighty, 
thou shalt be built up— 

If thou put away unrighteousness far 
from thy tents, 

24And lay thy treasure in the dust, 

And the gold of Ophir among the 
stones of the brooks; 

25And the Almighty be thy treasure, 

And precious silver unto thee; 

26Then surely shalt thou have thy 
delight in the Almighty, 

And shalt lift up thy face unto God. 

27Thou shalt make thy prayer unto 
Him, and He will hear thee, 

And thou shalt pay thy vows; 

28Thou shalt also decree a thing, and 
it shall be established unto thee, 

And light shall shine upon thy ways. 

 

29When they cast thee down, thou 
shalt say: ‘There is lifting up’; 

For the humble person He saveth. 

30He delivereth him that is innocent, 

Yea, thou shalt be delivered through 
the cleanness of thy hands. 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2Even to-day is my complaint 
bitter; 

My hand is become heavy because 
of my groaning. 

3Oh that I knew where I might find 
Him, 

That I might come even to His seat! 

4I would order my cause before 
Him, 

And fill my mouth with arguments. 

5I would know the words which He 
would answer me, 

And understand what He would say 
unto me. 

6Would He contend with me in His 
great power? 

Nay; but He would give heed unto 
me. 

7There the upright might reason 
with Him; 

So should I be delivered for ever 
from my Judge. 

 

8Behold, I go forward, but He is not 
there, 

And backward, but I cannot 
perceive Him; 

9On the left hand, when He doth 
work, but I cannot behold Him, 

He turneth Himself to the right 
hand, but I cannot see Him. 

 

10For He knoweth the way that I 
take; 

When He hath tried me, I shall come 
forth as gold. 

11My foot hath held fast to His steps, 

His way have I kept, and turned not 
aside. 

12I have not gone back from the 
commandment of His lips; 

I have treasured up the words of His 
mouth more than my necessary 
food. 

 

13But He is at one with Himself, and 
who can turn Him? 

And what His soul desireth, even 
that He doeth. 
23 




14For He will perform that which is 
appointed for me; 

And many such things are with 
Him. 

15Therefore am I affrighted at His 
presence; 

When I consider, I am afraid of 
Him. 

16Yea, God hath made my heart 
faint, 

And the Almighty hath affrighted 
me; 

17Because I was not cut off before 
the darkness, 

Neither did He cover the thick 
darkness from my face. 

 

Why are times not laid up by 
the Almighty? 

And why do not they that know Him 
see His days? 

2There are that remove the 
landmarks; 

They violently take away flocks, 
and feed them. 

3They drive away the ass of the 
fatherless, 

They take the widow’s ox for a 
pledge. 

4They turn the needy out of the way; 

The poor of the earth hide 
themselves together. 

5Behold, as wild asses in the 
wilderness 

They go forth to their work, seeking 
diligently for food; 

The desert yieldeth them bread for 
their children. 

6They cut his provender in the field; 

And they despoil the vineyard of the 
wicked. 

7They lie all night naked without 
clothing, 

And have no covering in the cold. 

8They are wet with the showers of 
the mountains, 

And embrace the rock for want of a 
shelter. 

9There are that pluck the fatherless 
from the breast, 

And take a pledge of the poor; 

10So that they go about naked 
without clothing, 

And being hungry they carry the 
sheaves; 

11They make oil within the rows of 
these men; 

They tread their winepresses, and 
suffer thirst. 

12From out of the populous city men 
groan, 

And the soul of the wounded crieth 
out; 

Yet God imputeth it not for 
unseemliness. 

 

13These are of them that rebel 
against the light; 

They know not the ways thereof, 
nor abide in the paths thereof. 

14The murderer riseth with the light, 
to kill the poor and needy; 

And in the night he is as a thief. 

15The eye also of the adulterer 
waiteth for the twilight, 

Saying: ‘No eye shall see me’; 

And he putteth a covering on his 
face. 
24 




16In the dark they dig through 
houses; 

They shut themselves up in the day-
time; 

They know not the light. 

17For the shadow of death is to all of 
them as the morning; 

For they know the terrors of the 
shadow of death. 

 

18He is swift upon the face of the 
waters; 

Their portion is cursed in the earth; 

He turneth not by the way of the 
vineyards. 

19Drought and heat consume the 
snow waters; 

So doth the nether-world those that 
have sinned. 

20The womb forgetteth him; the 
worm feedeth sweetly on him; 

He shall be no more remembered; 

And unrighteousness is broken as a 
tree. 

21He devoureth the barren that 
beareth not; 

And doeth not good to the widow. 

22He draweth away the mighty also 
by his power; 

He riseth up, and he trusteth not his 
own life. 

23Though it be given him to be in 
safety, whereon he resteth, 

Yet His eyes are upon their ways. 

24They are exalted for a little while, 
and they are gone; 

Yea, they are brought low, they are 
gathered in as all others, 

And wither as the tops of the ears of 
corn. 

25And if it be not so now, who will 
prove me a liar, 

And make my speech nothing 
worth? 

 

Then answered Bildad the 
Shuhite, and said: 

2Dominion and fear are with Him; 

He maketh peace in His high places. 

3Is there any number of His armies? 

And upon whom doth not His light 
arise? 

4How then can man be just with 
God? 

Or how can he be clean that is born 
of a woman? 

5Behold, even the moon hath no 
brightness, 

And the stars are not pure in His 
sight; 

6How much less man, that is a 
worm! 

And the son of man, that is a 
maggot! 

 

Then Job answered and said: 

2How hast thou helped him 
that is without power! 

How hast thou saved the arm that 
hath no strength! 

3How hast thou counselled him that 
hath no wisdom, 

And plentifully declared sound 
knowledge! 

4With whose help hast thou uttered 
words? 
25 

26 




And whose spirit came forth from 
thee? 

 

5The shades tremble 

Beneath the waters and the 
inhabitants thereof. 

6The nether-world is naked before 
Him, 

And Destruction hath no covering. 

7He stretcheth out the north over the 
empty space, 

And hangeth the earth over nothing. 

8He bindeth up the waters in His 
thick clouds; 

And the cloud is not rent under 
them. 

9He closeth in the face of His 
throne, 

And spreadeth His cloud upon it. 

10He hath described a boundary 
upon the face of the waters, 

Unto the confines of light and 
darkness. 

11The pillars of heaven tremble 

And are astonished at His rebuke. 

12He stirreth up the sea with His 
power, 

And by His understanding He 
smiteth through Rahab. 

13By His breath the heavens are 
serene; 

His hand hath pierced the slant 
serpent. 

14Lo, these are but the outskirts of 
His ways; 

And how small a whisper is heard of 
Him! 

But the thunder of His mighty deeds 
who can understand? 

 

And Job again took up his 
parable, and said: 

2As God liveth, who hath taken 
away my right; 

And the Almighty, who hath dealt 
bitterly with me; 

3All the while my breath is in me 

And the spirit of God is in my 
nostrils, 

4Surely my lips shall not speak 
unrighteousness, 

Neither shall my tongue utter deceit; 

5Far be it from me that I should 
justify you; 

Till I die I will not put away mine 
integrity from me. 

6My righteousness I hold fast, and 
will not let it go; 

My heart shall not reproach me so 
long as I live. 

 

7Let mine enemy be as the wicked, 

And let him that riseth up against 
me be as the unrighteous. 

8For what is the hope of the godless, 
though he get him gain, 

When God taketh away his soul? 

9Will God hear his cry, 

When trouble cometh upon him? 

10Will he have his delight in the 
Almighty, 

And call upon God at all times? 

11I will teach you concerning the 
hand of God; 

That which is with the Almighty 
will I not conceal. 

12Behold, all ye yourselves have 
seen it; 
27 




Why then are ye become altogether 
vain? 

13This is the portion of a wicked 
man with God, 

And the heritage of oppressors, 
which they receive from the 
Almighty. 

14If his children be multiplied, it is 
for the sword; 

And his offspring shall not have 
bread enough. 

15Those that remain of him shall be 
buried by pestilence, 

And his widows shall make no 
lamentation. 

16Though he heap up silver as the 
dust, 

And prepare raiment as the clay; 

17He may prepare it, but the just 
shall put it on, 

And the innocent shall divide the 
silver. 

18He buildeth his house as a moth, 

And as a booth which the keeper 
maketh. 

19He lieth down rich, but there shall 
be nought to gather; 

He openeth his eyes, and his wealth 
is not. 

20Terrors overtake him like waters; 

A tempest stealeth him away in the 
night. 

21The east wind carrieth him away, 
and he departeth; 

And it sweepeth him out of his 
place. 

22Yea, it hurleth at him, and spareth 
not; 

He would fain flee from its power. 

23Men shall clap their hands at him, 

And shall hiss him out of his place. 

 

For there is a mine for silver, 
And a place for gold which 
they refine. 

2Iron is taken out of the dust, 

And brass is molten out of the stone. 

3Man setteth an end to darkness, 

And searcheth out to the furthest 
bound 

The stones of thick darkness and of 
the shadow of death. 

4He breaketh open a shaft away 
from where men sojourn; 

They are forgotten of the foot that 
passeth by; 

They hang afar from men, they 
swing to and fro. 

5As for the earth, out of it cometh 
bread, 

And underneath it is turned up as it 
were by fire. 

6The stones thereof are the place of 
sapphires, 

And it hath dust of gold. 

7That path no bird of prey knoweth, 

Neither hath the falcon’s eye seen it; 

8The proud beasts have not trodden 
it, 

Nor hath the lion passed thereby. 

9He putteth forth his hand upon the 
flinty rock; 

He overturneth the mountains by the 
roots. 

10He cutteth out channels among the 
rocks; 

And his eye seeth every precious 
thing. 
28 




11He bindeth the streams that they 
trickle not; 

And the thing that is hid bringeth he 
forth to light. 

 

12But wisdom, where shall it be 
found? 

And where is the place of 
understanding? 

13Man knoweth not the price 
thereof; 

Neither is it found in the land of the 
living. 

14The deep saith: ‘It is not in me’; 

And the sea saith: ‘It is not with 
me.’ 

15It cannot be gotten for gold, 

Neither shall silver be weighed for 
the price thereof. 

16It cannot be valued with the gold 
of Ophir, 

With the precious onyx, or the 
sapphire. 

17Gold and glass cannot equal it; 

Neither shall the exchange thereof 
be vessels of fine gold. 

18No mention shall be made of coral 
or of crystal; 

Yea, the price of wisdom is above 
rubies. 

19The topaz of Ethiopia shall not 
equal it, 

Neither shall it be valued with pure 
gold. 

 

20Whence then cometh wisdom? 

And where is the place of 
understanding? 

21Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all 
living, 

And kept close from the fowls of the 
air. 

22Destruction and Death say: 

‘We have heard a rumor thereof 
with our ears.’ 

23God understandeth the way 
thereof, 

And He knoweth the place thereof. 

24For He looketh to the ends of the 
earth, 

And seeth under the whole heaven; 

25When He maketh a weight for the 
wind, 

And meteth out the waters by 
measure. 

26When He made a decree for the 
rain, 

And a way for the storm of 
thunders; 

27Then did He see it, and declare it; 

He established it, yea, and searched 
it out. 

 

28And unto man He said: 

‘Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is 
wisdom; 

And to depart from evil is 
understanding.’ 

 

And Job again took up his 
parable, and said: 

2Oh that I were as in the months of 
old, 

As in the days when God watched 
over me; 

3When His lamp shined above my 
head, 
29 




And by His light I walked through 
darkness; 

4As I was in the days of my youth, 

When the converse of God was 
upon my tent; 

5When the Almighty was yet with 
me, 

And my children were about me; 

6When my steps were washed with 
butter, 

And the rock poured me out rivers 
of oil! 

7When I went forth to the gate unto 
the city, 

When I prepared my seat in the 
broad place, 

8The young men saw me and hid 
themselves, 

And the aged rose up and stood; 

9The princes refrained talking, 

And laid their hand on their mouth; 

10The voice of the nobles was 
hushed, 

And their tongue cleaved to the roof 
of their mouth. 

11For when the ear heard me, then it 
blessed me, 

And when the eye saw me, it gave 
witness unto me; 

12Because I delivered the poor that 
cried, 

The fatherless also, that had none to 
help him. 

13The blessing of him that was ready 
to perish came upon me; and I 
caused the widow’s heart to sing 
for joy. 

14I put on righteousness, and it 
clothed itself with me; 

My justice was as a robe and a 
diadem. 

15I was eyes to the blind, 

And feet was I to the lame. 

16I was a father to the needy; 

And the cause of him that I knew 
not I searched out. 

17And I broke the jaws of the 
unrighteous, 

And plucked the prey out of his 
teeth. 

18Then I said: ‘I shall die with my 
nest, 

And I shall multiply my days as the 
phoenix; 

19My root shall be spread out to the 
waters, 

And the dew shall lie all night upon 
my branch; 

20My glory shall be fresh in me, 

And my bow shall be renewed in 
my hand.’ 

 

21Unto me men gave ear, and 
waited, 

And kept silence for my counsel. 

22After my words they spoke not 
again; 

And my speech dropped upon them. 

23And they waited for me as for the 
rain; 

And they opened their mouth wide 
as for the latter rain. 

24If I laughed on them, they believed 
it not; 

And the light of my countenance 
they cast not down. 

25I chose out their way, and sat as 
chief, 


And dwelt as a king in the army, 

As one that comforteth the 
mourners. 

 

But now they that are younger 
than I have me in derision, 

Whose fathers I disdained to set 
with the dogs of my flock. 

2Yea, the strength of their hands, 
whereto should it profit me? 

Men in whom ripe age is perished. 

3They are gaunt with want and 
famine; 

They gnaw the dry ground, in the 
gloom of wasteness and 
desolation. 

4They pluck salt-wort with 
wormwood; 

And the roots of the broom are their 
food. 

5They are driven forth from the 
midst of men; 

They cry after them as after a thief. 

6In the clefts of the valleys must 
they dwell, 

In holes of the earth and of the 
rocks. 

7Among the bushes they bray; 

Under the nettles they are gathered 
together. 

8They are children of churls, yea, 
children of ignoble men; 

They were scourged out of the land. 

 

9And now I am become their song, 

Yea, I am a byword unto them. 

10They abhor me, they flee far from 
me, 

And spare not to spit in my face. 

11For He hath loosed my cord, and 
afflicted me, 

And they have cast off the bridle 
before me. 

12Upon my right hand rise the 
brood; 

They entangle my feet, 

And they cast up against me their 
ways of destruction. 

13They break up my path, 

They further my calamity, 

Even men that have no helper. 

14As through a wide breach they 
come; 

In the midst of the ruin they roll 
themselves upon me. 

15Terrors are turned upon me, 

They chase mine honour as the 
wind; 

And my welfare is passed away as a 
cloud. 

 

16And now my soul is poured out 
within me; 

Days of affliction have taken hold 
upon me. 

17In the night my bones are pierced, 
and fall from me, 

And my sinews take no rest. 

18By the great force [of my disease] 
is my garment disfigured; 

It bindeth me about as the collar of 
my coat. 

19He hath cast me into the mire, 

And I am become like dust and 
ashes. 

20I cry unto Thee, and Thou dost not 
answer me; 

I stand up, and Thou lookest at me. 
30 




21Thou art turned to be cruel to me; 

With the might of Thy hand Thou 
hatest me. 

22Thou liftest me up to the wind, 
Thou causest me to ride upon it; 

And Thou dissolvest my substance. 

23For I know that Thou wilt bring 
me to death, 

And to the house appointed for all 
living. 

 

24Surely none shall put forth his 
hand to a ruinous heap, 

Neither because of these things shall 
help come in one’s calamity, 

25If I have not wept for him that was 
in trouble, 

And if my soul grieved not for the 
needy. 

26Yet, when I looked for good, there 
came evil; 

And when I waited for light, there 
came darkness. 

27Mine inwards boil, and rest not; 

Days of affliction are come upon 
me. 

28I go mourning without the sun; 

I stand up in the assembly, and cry 
for help. 

29I am become a brother to jackals, 

And a companion to ostriches. 

30My skin is black, and falleth from 
me, 

And my bones are burned with heat. 

31Therefore is my harp turned to 
mourning, 

And my pipe into the voice of them 
that weep. 

 

I made a covenant with mine 
eyes; 

How then should I look upon a 
maid? 

2For what would be the portion of 
God from above, 

And the heritage of the Almighty 
from on high? 

3Is it not calamity to the 
unrighteous, 

And disaster to the workers of 
iniquity? 

4Doth not He see my ways, 

And count all my steps? 

 

5If I have walked with vanity, 

And my foot hath hasted to deceit— 

6Let me be weighed in a just 
balance, 

That God may know mine 
integrity— 

7If my step hath turned out of the 
way, 

And my heart walked after mine 
eyes, 

And if any spot hath cleaved to my 
hands; 

8Then let me sow, and let another 
eat; 

Yea, let the produce of my field be 
rooted out. 

 

9If my heart have been enticed unto 
a woman, 

And I have lain in wait at my 
neighbour’s door; 

10Then let my wife grind unto 
another, 

And let others bow down upon her. 
31 




11For that were a heinous crime; 

Yea, it were an iniquity to be 
punished by the judges. 

12For it is a fire that consumeth unto 
destruction, 

And would root out all mine 
increase. 

 

13If I did despise the cause of my 
man-servant, 

Or of my maid-servant, when they 
contended with me— 

14What then shall I do when God 
riseth up? 

And when He remembereth, what 
shall I answer Him? 

15Did not He that made me in the 
womb make him? 

And did not One fashion us in the 
womb? 

 

16If I have withheld aught that the 
poor desired, 

Or have caused the eyes of the 
widow to fail; 

17Or have eaten my morsel myself 
alone, 

And the fatherless hath not eaten 
thereof— 

18Nay, from my youth he grew up 
with me as with a father, 

And I have been her guide from my 
mother’s womb. 

19If I have seen any wanderer in 
want of clothing, 

Or that the needy had no covering; 

20If his loins have not blessed me, 

And if he were not warmed with the 
fleece of my sheep; 

21If I have lifted up my hand against 
the fatherless, 

Because I saw my help in the gate; 

22Then let my shoulder fall from the 
shoulder-blade, 

And mine arm be broken from the 
bone. 

23For calamity from God was a 
terror to me, 

And by reason of His majesty I 
could do nothing. 

24If I have made gold my hope, 

And have said to the fine gold: 
‘Thou art my confidence’; 

25If I rejoiced because my wealth 
was great, 

And because my hand had gotten 
much; 

26If I beheld the sun when it shined, 

Or the moon walking in brightness; 

27And my heart hath been secretly 
enticed, 

And my mouth hath kissed my 
hand; 

28This also were an iniquity to be 
punished by the judges; 

For I should have lied to God that is 
above. 

 

29If I rejoiced at the destruction of 
him that hated me, 

Or exulted when evil found him— 

30Yea, I suffered not my mouth to 
sin 

By asking his life with a curse. 

31If the men of my tent said not: 

‘Who can find one that hath not 
been satisfied with his meat?’ 


32The stranger did not lodge in the 
street; 

My doors I opened to the roadside. 

 

33If after the manner of men I 
covered my transgressions, 

By hiding mine iniquity in my 
bosom— 

34Because I feared the great 
multitude, 

And the most contemptible among 
families terrified me, 

So that I kept silence, and went not 
out of the door. 

 

35Oh that I had one to hear me!— 

Lo, here is my signature, let the 
Almighty answer me— 

And that I had the indictment which 
mine adversary hath written! 

36Surely I would carry it upon my 
shoulder; 

I would bind it unto me as a crown. 

37I would declare unto him the 
number of my steps; 

As a prince would I go near unto 
him. 

 

38If my land cry out against me, 

And the furrows thereof weep 
together; 

39If I have eaten the fruits thereof 
without money, 

Or have caused the tillers thereof to 
be disappointed— 

40Let thistles grow instead of wheat, 

And noisome weeds instead of 
barley. 

 

The words of Job are ended. 

 

So these three men ceased to 
answer Job, because he was 
righteous in his own eyes. 2Then was 
kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of 
Barachel the Buzite, of the family of 
Ram; against Job was his wrath 
kindled, because he justified himself 
rather than God. 3Also against his 
three friends was his wrath kindled, 
because they had found no answer, and 
yet had condemned Job. 4Now Elihu 
had waited to speak unto Job, because 
they were older than he. 5And when 
Elihu saw that there was no answer in 
the mouth of these three men, his 
wrath was kindled. 

6And Elihu the son of Barachel the 
Buzite answered and said: 

I am young, and ye are very old; 

Wherefore I held back, and durst not 
declare you mine opinion. 

7I said: ‘Days should speak, 

And multitude of years should teach 
wisdom.’ 

8But it is a spirit in man, 

And the breath of the Almighty, that 
giveth them understanding. 

9It is not the great that are wise, 

Nor the aged that discern judgment. 

10Therefore I say: ‘Hearken to me; 

I also will declare mine opinion.’ 

 

11Behold, I waited for your words, 

I listened for your reasons, 

Whilst ye searched out what to say. 

12Yea, I attended unto you, 
32 




And, behold, there was none that 
convinced Job, 

Or that answered his words, among 
you. 

13Beware lest ye say: ‘We have 
found wisdom; 

God may vanquish him, not man! ’ 

14For he hath not directed his words 
against me; 

Neither will I answer him with your 
speeches. 

 

15They are amazed, they answer no 
more; 

Words are departed from them. 

16And shall I wait, because they 
speak not, 

Because they stand still, and answer 
no more? 

17I also will answer my part, 

I also will declare mine opinion. 

18For I am full of words; 

The spirit within me constraineth 
me. 

19Behold, mine inwards are as wine 
which hath no vent; 

Like new wine-skins which are 
ready to burst. 

20I will speak, that I may find relief; 

I will open my lips and answer. 

21Let me not, I pray you, respect any 
man’s person; 

Neither will I give flattering titles 
unto any man. 

22For I know not to give flattering 
titles; 

Else would my Maker soon take me 
away 

 

Howbeit, Job, I pray thee, hear 
my speech, 

And hearken to all my words. 

2Behold now, I have opened my 
mouth, 

My tongue hath spoken in my 
mouth. 

3My words shall utter the 
uprightness of my heart; 

And that which my lips know they 
shall speak sincerely. 

4The spirit of God hath made me, 

And the breath of the Almighty 
given me life. 

5If thou canst, answer thou me, 

Set thy words in order before me, 
stand forth. 

6Behold, I am toward God even as 
thou art; 

I also am formed out of the clay. 

7Behold, my terror shall not make 
thee afraid, 

Neither shall my pressure be heavy 
upon thee. 

 

8Surely thou hast spoken in my 
hearing, 

And I have heard the voice of thy 
words; 

9’I am clean, without transgression, 

I am innocent, neither is there 
iniquity in me; 

10Behold, He findeth occasions 
against me, 

He counteth me for His enemy; 

11He putteth my feet in the stocks, 

He marketh all my paths.’ 

 
33 




12Behold, I answer thee: In this thou 
art not right, 

That God is too great for man; 

13Why hast thou striven against 
Him? 

Seeing that He will not answer any 
of his words. 

14For God speaketh in one way, 

Yea in two, though man perceiveth 
it not. 

15In a dream, in a vision of the night, 

When deep sleep falleth upon men, 

In slumberings upon the bed; 

16Then He openeth the ears of men, 

And by their chastisement sealeth 
the decree, 

17That men may put away their 
purpose, 

And that He may hide pride from 
man; 

18That He may keep back his soul 
from the pit, 

And his life from perishing by the 
sword. 

19He is chastened also with pain 
upon his bed, 

And all his bones grow stiff; 

20So that his life maketh him to 
abhor bread, 

And his soul dainty food. 

21His flesh is consumed away, that it 
cannot be seen; 

And his bones corrode to 
unsightliness. 

22Yea, his soul draweth near unto 
the pit, 

And his life to the destroyers. 

23If there be for him an angel, 

An intercessor, one among a 
thousand, 

To vouch for a man’s uprightness; 

24Then He is gracious unto him, and 
saith: 

‘Deliver him from going down to 
the pit, 

I have found a ransom.’ 

25His flesh is tenderer than a child’s; 

He returneth to the days of his 
youth; 

26He prayeth unto God, and He is 
favourable unto him; 

So that he seeth His face with joy; 

And He restoreth unto man his 
righteousness. 

27He cometh before men, and saith: 

‘I have sinned, and perverted that 
which was right, 

And it profited me not.’ 

28So He redeemeth his soul from 
going into the pit, 

And his life beholdeth the light. 

 

29Lo, all these things doth God 
work, 

Twice, yea thrice, with a man, 

30To bring back his soul from the 
pit, 

That he may be enlightened with the 
light of the living. 

 

31Mark well, O Job, hearken unto 
me; 

Hold thy peace, and I will speak. 

32If thou hast any thing to say, 
answer me; 

Speak, for I desire to justify thee. 

33If not, hearken thou unto me; 


Hold thy peace, and I will teach thee 
wisdom. 

 

Moreover Elihu answered and 
said: 

2Hear my words, ye wise men; 

And give ear unto me, ye that have 
knowledge. 

3For the ear trieth words, 

As the palate tasteth food. 

4Let us choose for us that which is 
right; 

Let us know among ourselves what 
is good. 

5For Job hath said: ‘I am righteous, 

And God hath taken away my right; 

6Notwithstanding my right I am 
accounted a liar; 

My wound is incurable, though I am 
without transgression.’ 

7What man is like Job, 

Who drinketh up scorning like 
water? 

8Who goeth in company with the 
workers of iniquity, 

And walketh with wicked men. 

9For he hath said: ‘It profiteth a man 
nothing 

That he should be in accord with 
God.’ 

 

10Therefore hearken unto me, ye 
men of understanding: 

Far be it from God, that He should 
do wickedness; 

And from the Almighty, that He 
should commit iniquity. 

11For the work of a man will He 
requite unto him, 

And cause every man to find 
according to his ways. 

12Yea, of a surety, God will not do 
wickedly, 

Neither will the Almighty pervert 
justice. 

13Who gave Him a charge over the 
earth? 

Or who hath disposed the whole 
world? 

14If He set His heart upon man, 

If He gather unto Himself his spirit 
and his breath; 

15All flesh shall perish together, 

And man shall return unto dust. 

 

16If now thou hast understanding, 
hear this; 

Hearken to the voice of my words. 

17Shall even one that hateth right 
govern? 

And wilt thou condemn Him that is 
just and mighty— 

18Is it fit to say to a king: ‘Thou art 
base’? 

Or to nobles: ‘Ye are wicked’?— 

19That respecteth not the persons of 
princes, 

Nor regardeth the rich more than the 
poor? 

For they all are the work of His 
hands. 

20In a moment they die, even at 
midnight; 

The people are shaken and pass 
away, 

And the mighty are taken away 
without hand. 

 
34 




21For His eyes are upon the ways of 
a man, 

And He seeth all his goings. 

22There is no darkness, nor shadow 
of death, 

Where the workers of iniquity may 
hide themselves. 

23For He doth not appoint a time 
unto any man, 

When he should go before God in 
judgment. 

24He breaketh in pieces mighty men 
without inquisition, 

And setteth others in their stead. 

25Therefore He taketh knowledge of 
their works; 

And He overturneth them in the 
night, so that they are crushed. 

26He striketh them as wicked men 

In the open sight of others; 

27Because they turned aside from 
following Him, 

And would not have regard to any 
of His ways; 

28So that they cause the cry of the 
poor to come unto Him, 

And He heareth the cry of the 
afflicted. 

29When He giveth quietness, who 
then can condemn? 

And when He hideth His face, who 
then can behold Him? 

Whether it be done unto a nation, or 
unto a man, alike; 

30That the godless man reign not, 

That there be none to ensnare the 
people. 

 

31For hath any said unto God: 

‘I have borne chastisement, though I 
offend not; 

32That which I see not teach Thou 
me; 

If I have done iniquity, I will do it 
no more’? 

33Shall His recompense be as thou 
wilt? For thou loathest it, 

So that thou must choose, and not I; 

Therefore speak what thou knowest. 

34Men of understanding will say 
unto me, 

Yea, every wise man that heareth 
me: 

35’Job speaketh without knowledge, 

And his words are without 
discernment.’ 

36Would that Job were tried unto the 
end, 

Because of his answering like 
wicked men. 

37For he addeth rebellion unto his 
sin, 

He clappeth his hands among us, 

And multiplieth his words against 
God. 

 

Moreover Elihu answered and 
said: 

2Thinkest thou this to be thy right, 

Or sayest thou: ‘I am righteousness 
before God’, 

3That thou inquirest: ‘What 
advantage will it be unto Thee?’ 

And: ‘What profit shall I have, more 
than if I had sinned?’ 

4I will give thee answer, 

And thy companions with thee. 

5Look unto the heavens, and see; 
35 




And behold the skies, which are 
higher than thou. 

6If thou hast sinned, what doest thou 
against Him? 

And if thy transgressions be 
multiplied, what doest thou unto 
Him? 

7If thou be righteous, what givest 
thou Him? 

Or what receiveth He of thy hand? 

8Thy wickedness concerneth a man 
as thou art; 

And thy righteousness a son of man. 

 

9By reason of the multitude of 
oppressions they cry out; 

They cry for help by reason of the 
arm of the mighty. 

10But none saith: ‘Where is God my 
Maker, 

Who giveth songs in the night; 

11Who teacheth us more than the 
beasts of the earth, 

And maketh us wiser than the fowls 
of heaven?’ 

12There they cry, but none giveth 
answer, 

Because of the pride of evil men. 

13Surely God will not hear vanity, 

Neither will the Almighty regard it. 

14Yea, when thou sayest thou canst 
not see Him— 

The cause is before Him; therefore 
wait thou for Him. 

15And now, is it for nought that He 
punished in His anger? 

And hath He not full knowledge of 
arrogance? 

16But Job doth open his mouth in 
vanity; 

He multiplieth words without 
knowledge. 

 

Elihu also proceeded, and 
said: 

2Suffer me a little, and I will tell 
thee; 

For there are yet words on God’s 
behalf. 

3I will fetch my knowledge from 
afar, 

And will ascribe righteousness to 
my Maker. 

4For truly my words are not false; 

One that is upright in mind is with 
thee. 

5Behold, God is mighty, yet He 
despiseth not any; 

He is mighty in strength of 
understanding. 

6He preserveth not the life of the 
wicked; 

But giveth to the poor their right. 

7He withdraweth not His eyes from 
the righteous; 

But with kings upon the throne 

He setteth them for ever, and they 
are exalted. 

8And if they be bound in fetters, 

And be holden in cords of affliction; 

9Then He declareth unto them their 
work, 

And their transgressions, that they 
have behaved themselves 
proudly. 

10He openeth also their ear to 
discipline, 
36 




And commandeth that they return 
from iniquity. 

11If they hearken and serve Him, 

They shall spend their days in 
prosperity, 

And their years in pleasures. 

12But if they hearken not, they shall 
perish by the sword, 

And they shall die without 
knowledge. 

13But they that are godless in heart 
lay up anger; 

They cry not for help when He 
bindeth them. 

14Their soul perisheth in youth, 

And their life as that of the 
depraved. 

15He delivereth the afflicted by His 
affliction, 

And openeth their ear by tribulation. 

16Yea, He hath allured thee out of 
distress 

Into a broad place, where there is no 
straitness; 

And that which is set on thy table is 
full of fatness; 

17And thou art full of the judgment 
of the wicked; 

Judgment and justice take hold on 
them. 

18For beware of wrath, lest thou be 
led away by thy sufficiency; 

Neither let the greatness of the 
ransom turn thee aside. 

19Will thy riches avail, that are 
without stint, 

Or all the forces of thy strength? 

20Desire not the night, 

When peoples are cut off in their 
place. 

21Take heed, regard not iniquity; 

For this hast thou chosen rather than 
affliction. 

 

22Behold, God doeth loftily in His 
power; 

Who is a teacher like Him? 

23Who hath enjoined Him His way? 

Or who hath said: ‘Thou hast 
wrought unrighteousness’? 

24Remember that thou magnify His 
work, 

Whereof men have sung. 

25All men have looked thereon; 

Man beholdeth it afar off. 

26Behold, God is great, beyond our 
knowledge; 

The number of His years is 
unsearchable. 

27For He draweth away the drops of 
water, 

Which distil rain from His vapour; 

28Which the skies pour down 

And drop upon the multitudes of 
men. 

29Yea, can any understand the 
spreadings of the clouds, 

The crashings of His pavilion? 

30Behold, He spreadeth His light 
upon it; 

And He covereth the depths of the 
sea. 

31For by these He judgeth the 
peoples; 

He giveth food in abundance. 

32He covereth His hands with the 
lightning, 


And giveth it a charge that it strike 
the mark. 

33The noise thereof telleth 
concerning it, 

The cattle also concerning the storm 
that cometh up. 

 

At this also my heart 
trembleth, 

And is moved out of its place. 

2Hear attentively the noise of His 
voice, 

And the sound that goeth out of His 
mouth. 

3He sendeth it forth under the whole 
heaven, 

And His lightning unto the ends of 
the earth. 

4After it a voice roareth; 

He thundereth with the voice of His 
majesty; 

And He stayeth them not when His 
voice is heard. 

5God thundereth marvellously with 
His voice; 

Great things doeth He, which we 
cannot comprehend. 

6For He saith to the snow: ‘Fall thou 
on the earth’; 

Likewise to the shower of rain, and 
to the showers of His mighty rain. 

7He sealeth up the hand of every 
man, 

That all men whom He hath made 
may know it. 

8Then the beasts go into coverts, 

And remain in their dens. 

9Out of the Chamber cometh the 
storm; 

And cold out of the north. 

10By the breath of God ice is given, 

And the breadth of the waters is 
straitened. 

11Yea, He ladeth the thick cloud 
with moister, 

He spreadeth abroad the cloud of 
His lightning; 

12And they are turned round about 
by His guidance, 

That they may do whatsoever He 
commandeth them 

Upon the face of the habitable 
world: 

13Whether it be for correction, or for 
His earth, 

Or for mercy, that He cause it to 
come. 

 

14Hearken unto this, O Job; 

Stand still, and consider the 
wondrous works of God. 

15Dost thou know how God 
enjoineth them, 

And causeth the lightning of His 
cloud to shine? 

16Dost thou know the balancings of 
the clouds, 

The wondrous works of Him who is 
perfect in knowledge? 

17Thou whose garments are warm, 

When the earth is still by reason of 
the south wind; 

18Canst thou with Him spread out 
the sky, 

Which is strong as a molten mirror? 

19Teach us what we shall say unto 
Him; 
37 




For we cannot order our speech by 
reason of darkness. 

20Shall it be told Him that I would 
speak? 

Or should a man wish that he were 
swallowed up? 

 

21And now men see not the light 
which is bright in the skies; 

But the wind passeth, and cleanseth 
them. 

22Out of the north cometh golden 
splendour, 

About God is terrible majesty. 

23The Almighty, whom we cannot 
find out, is excellent in power, 

Yet to judgment and plenteous 
justice He doeth no violence. 

24Men do therefore fear Him; 

He regardeth not any that are wise 
of heart. 

 

Then the LORD answered Job 
out of the whirlwind, and said: 

2Who is this that darkeneth counsel 

By words without knowledge? 

3Gird up now thy loins like a man; 

For I will demand of thee, and 
declare thou unto Me. 

 

4Where wast thou when I laid the 
foundations of the earth? 

Declare, if thou hast the 
understanding. 

5Who determined the measures 
thereof, if thou knowest? 

Or who stretched the line upon it? 

6Whereupon were the foundations 
thereof fastened? 

Or who laid the corner-stone 
thereof, 

7When the morning stars sang 
together, 

And all the sons of God shouted for 
joy? 

 

8Or who shut up the sea with doors, 

When it broke forth, and issued out 
of the womb; 

9When I made the cloud the garment 
thereof, 

And thick darkness a swaddlingband 
for it, 

10And prescribed for it My decree, 

And set bars and doors, 

11And said: ‘Thus far shalt thou 
come, but no further; 

And here shall thy proud waves be 
stayed’? 

 

12Hast thou commanded the 
morning since thy days began, 

And caused the dayspring to know 
its place; 

13That it might take hold of the ends 
of the earth, 

And the wicked be shaken out of it? 

14It is changed as clay under the 
seal; 

And they stand as a garment. 

15But from the wicked their light is 
withholden, 

And the high arm is broken. 

 

16Hast thou entered into the springs 
of the sea? 

Or hast thou walked in the recesses 
of the deep? 
38 




17Have the gates of death been 
revealed unto thee? 

Or hast thou seen the gates of the 
shadow of death? 

18Hast thou surveyed unto the 
breadths of the earth? 

Declare, if thou knowest it all. 

 

19Where is the way to the dwelling 
of light, 

And as for darkness, where is the 
place thereof; 

20That thou shouldest take it to the 
bound thereof, 

And that thou shouldest know the 
paths to the house thereof? 

21Thou knowest it, for thou wast 
then born, 

And the number of thy days is great! 

22Hast thou entered the treasuries of 
the snow, 

Or hast thou seen the treasuries of 
the hail, 

23Which I have reserved against the 
time of trouble, 

Against the day of battle and war? 

 

24By what way is the light parted, 

Or the east wind scattered upon the 
earth? 

25Who hath cleft a channel for the 
waterflood, 

Or a way for the lightning of the 
thunder; 

26To cause it to rain on a land where 
no man is, 

On the wilderness, wherein there is 
no man; 

27To satisfy the desolate and waste 
ground, 

And to cause the bud of the tender 
herb to spring forth? 

28Hath the rain a father? 

Or who hath begotten the drops of 
dew? 

29Out of whose womb came the ice? 

And the hoar-frost of heaven, who 
hath gendered it? 

30The waters are congealed like 
stone, 

And the face of the deep is frozen. 

 

31Canst thou bind the chains of the 
Pleiades, 

Or loose the bands of Orion? 

32Canst thou lead forth the 
Mazzaroth in their season? 

Or canst thou guide the Bear with 
her sons? 

33Knowest thou the ordinances of 
the heavens? 

Canst thou establish the dominion 
thereof in the earth? 

34Canst thou lift up thy voice to the 
clouds, 

That abundance of waters may 
cover thee? 

35Canst thou send forth lightnings, 
that they may go, 

And say unto thee: ‘Here we are’? 

 

36Who hath put wisdom in the 
inward parts? 

Or who hath given understanding to 
the mind? 

37Who can number the clouds by 
wisdom? 


Or who can pour out the bottles of 
heaven, 

38When the dust runneth into a mass, 

And the clods cleave fast together? 

 

39Wilt thou hunt the prey for the 
lioness? 

Or satisfy the appetite of the young 
lions, 

40When they couch in their dens, 

And abide in the covert to lie in 
wait? 

41Who provideth for the raven his 
prey, 

When his young ones cry unto God, 
and wander for lack of food? 

Knowest thou the time when 
the wild goats of the rock 
bring forth? 

Or canst thou mark when the hinds 
do calve? 

2Canst thou number the months that 
they fulfil? 

Or knowest thou the time when they 
bring forth? 

3They bow themselves, they bring 
forth their young, 

They cast out their fruit. 

4Their young ones wax strong, they 
grow up in the open field; 

They go forth, and return not again. 

 

5Who hath sent out the wild ass 
free? 

Or who hath loosed the bands of the 
wild ass? 

6Whose house I have made the 
wilderness, 

And the salt land his dwelling-place. 

7He scorneth the tumult of the city, 

Neither heareth he the shoutings of 
the driver. 

8The range of the mountains is his 
pasture, 

And he searcheth after every green 
thing. 

 

9Will the wild-ox be willing to serve 
thee? 

Or will he abide by thy crib? 

10Canst thou bind the wild-ox with 
his band in the furrow? 

Or will he harrow the valleys after 
thee? 

11Wilt thou trust him, because his 
strength is great? 

Or wilt thou leave thy labour to 
him? 

12Wilt thou rely on him, that he will 
bring home thy seed, 

And gather the corn of thy 
threshing-floor? 

 

13The wing of the ostrich beateth 
joyously; 

But are her pinions and feathers the 
kindly stork’s? 

14For she leaveth her eggs on the 
earth, 

And warmeth them in dust, 

15And forgetteth that the foot may 
crush them, 

Or that the wild beast may trample 
them. 

16She is hardened against her young 
ones, as if they were not hers; 

Though her labour be in vain, she is 
without fear; 
39 




17Because God hath deprived her of 
wisdom, 

Neither hath He imparted to her 
understanding. 

18When the time cometh, she raiseth 
her wings on high, 

And scorneth the horse and his 
rider. 

 

19Hast thou given the horse his 
strength? 

Hast thou clothed his neck with 
fierceness? 

20Hast thou made him to leap as a 
locust? 

The glory of his snorting is terrible. 

21He paweth in the valley, and 
rejoiceth in his strength; 

He goeth out to meet the clash of 
arms. 

22He mocketh at fear, and is not 
affrighted; 

Neither turneth he back from the 
sword. 

23The quiver rattleth upon him, 

The glittering spear and the javelin. 

24He swalloweth the ground with 
storm and rage; 

Neither believeth he that it is the 
voice of the horn. 

25As oft as he heareth the horn he 
saith: ‘Ha, ha! ’ 

And he smelleth the battle afar off, 

The thunder of the captains, and the 
shouting. 

 

26Doth the hawk soar by thy 
wisdom, 

And stretch her wings toward the 
south? 

27Doth the vulture mount up at thy 
command, 

And make her nest on high? 

28She dwelleth and abideth on the 
rock, 

Upon the crag of the rock, and the 
stronghold. 

29From thence she spieth out the 
prey; 

Her eyes behold it afar off. 

30Her young ones also suck up 
blood; 

And where the slain are, there is 
she. 

 

Moreover the LORD answered 
Job, and said: 

2Shall he that reproveth contend 
with the Almighty? 

He that argueth with God, let him 
answer it. 

 

3Then Job answered the LORD, and 
said: 

4Behold, I am of small account; 
what shall I answer Thee? 

I lay my hand upon my mouth. 

5Once have I spoken, but I will not 
answer again; 

Yea, twice, but I will proceed no 
further. 

 

6Then the LORD answered Job out of 
the whirlwind, and said: 

7Gird up thy loins now like a man; 

I will demand of thee, and declare 
thou unto Me. 
40 




8Wilt thou even make void My 
judgment? 

Wilt thou condemn Me, that thou 
mayest be justified? 

9Or hast thou an arm like God? 

And canst thou thunder with a voice 
like Him? 

10Deck thyself now with majesty 
and excellency, 

And array thyself with glory and 
beauty. 

11Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath; 

And look upon every one that is 
proud, and abase him. 

12Look on every one that is proud, 
and bring him low; 

And tread down the wicked in their 
place. 

13Hide them in the dust together; 

Bind their faces in the hidden place. 

14Then will I also confess unto thee 

That thine own right hand can save 
thee. 

 

15Behold now behemoth, which I 
made with thee; 

He eateth grass as an ox. 

16Lo now, his strength is in his loins, 

And his force is in the stays of his 
body. 

17He straineth his tail like a cedar; 

The sinews of his thighs are knit 
together. 

18His bones are as pipes of brass; 

His gristles are like bars of iron. 

19He is the beginning of the ways of 
God; 

He only that made him can make 
His sword to approach unto him. 

20Surely the mountains bring him 
forth food, 

And all the beasts of the field play 
there. 

21He lieth under the lotus-trees, 

In the covert of the reed, and fens. 

22The lotus-trees cover him with 
their shadow; 

The willows of the brook compass 
him about. 

23Behold, if a river overflow, he 
trembleth not; 

He is confident, though the Jordan 
rush forth to his mouth. 

24Shall any take him by his eyes, 

Or pierce through his nose with a 
snare? 

 

25Canst thou draw out leviathan with 
a fish-hook? 

Or press down his tongue with a 
cord? 

26Canst thou put a ring into his 
nose? 

Or bore his jaw through with a 
hook? 

27Will he make many supplications 
unto thee? 

Or will he speak soft words unto 
thee? 

28Will he make a covenant with 
thee, 

That thou shouldest take him for a 
servant for ever? 

29Wilt thou play with him as with a 
bird? 

Or wilt thou bind him for thy 
maidens? 


30Will the bands of fishermen make 
a banquet of him? 

Will they part him among the 
merchants? 

31Canst thou fill his skin with barbed 
irons? 

Or his head with fish-spears? 

32Lay thy hand upon him; 

Think upon the battle, thou wilt do 
so no more. 

 

Behold, the hope of him is in 
vain; 

Shall not one be cast down even at 
the sight of him? 

2None is so fierce that dare stir him 
up; 

Who then is able to stand before 
Me? 

3Who hath given Me anything 
beforehand, that I should repay 
him? 

Whatsoever is under the whole 
heaven is Mine. 

4Would I keep silence concerning 
his boastings, 

Or his proud talk, or his fair array of 
words? 

 

5Who can uncover the face of his 
garment? 

Who shall come within his double 
bridle? 

6Who can open the doors of his 
face? 

Round about his teeth is terror. 

7His scales are his pride, 

Shut up together as with a close 
seal. 

8One is so near to another, 

That no air can come between them. 

9They are joined one to another; 

They stick together, that they cannot 
be sundered. 

10His sneezings flash forth light, 

And his eyes are like the eyelids of 
the morning. 

11Out of his mouth go burning 
torches, 

And sparks of fire leap forth. 

12Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, 

As out of a seething pot and burning 
rushes. 

13His breath kindleth coals, 

And a flame goeth out of his mouth. 

14In his neck abideth strength, 

And dismay danceth before him. 

15The flakes of his flesh are joined 
together; 

They are firm upon him; they cannot 
be moved. 

16His heart is as firm as a stone; 

Yea, firm as the nether millstone. 

17When he raiseth himself up, the 
mighty are afraid; 

By reason of despair they are beside 
themselves. 

18If one lay at him with the sword, it 
will not hold; 

Nor the spear, the dart, nor the 
pointed shaft. 

19He esteemeth iron as straw, 

And brass as rotten wood. 

20The arrow cannot make him flee; 

Slingstones are turned with him into 
stubble. 

21Clubs are accounted as stubble; 
41 




He laugheth at the rattling of the 
javelin. 

22Sharpest potsherds are under him; 

He spreadeth a threshing-sledge 
upon the mire. 

23He maketh the deep to boil like a 
pot; 

He maketh the sea like a seething 
mixture. 

24He maketh a path to shine after 
him; 

One would think the deep to be 
hoary. 

25Upon earth there is not his like 

Who is made to be fearless. 

26He looketh at all high things; 

He is king over all the proud beasts. 

 

Then Job answered the LORD, 
and said: 

2I know that Thou canst do every 
thing, 

And that no purpose can be 
withholden from Thee. 

3Who is this that hideth counsel 
without knowledge? 

Therefore have I uttered that which I 
understood not, 

Things too wonderful for me, which 
I knew not. 

4Hear, I beseech Thee, and I will 
speak; 

I will demand of Thee, and declare 
Thou unto me. 

5I had heard of Thee by the hearing 
of the ear; 

But now mine eye seeth Thee; 

6Wherefore I abhor my words, and 
repent, 

Seeing I am dust and ashes. 

 

7And it was so, that after the LORD 
had spoken these words unto Job, the 
LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite: 
‘My wrath is kindled against thee, and 
against thy two friends; for ye have not 
spoken of Me the thing that is right, as 
My servant Job hath. 8Now therefore, 
take unto you seven bullocks and 
seven rams, and go to My servant Job, 
and offer up for yourselves a burnt-
offering; and My servant Job shall 
pray for you; for him will I accept, that 
I do not unto you aught unseemly; for 
ye have not spoken of Me the thing 
that is right, as my servant Job hath.’ 
9So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad 
the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite 
went, and did according as the LORD 
commanded them; and the LORD 
accepted Job. 10And the LORD changed 
the fortune of Job, when he prayed for 
his friends; and the LORD gave Job 
twice as much as he had before. 11Then 
came there unto him all his brethren, 
and all his sisters, and all they that had 
been of his acquaintance before, and 
did eat bread with him in his house; 
and they bemoaned him, and 
comforted him concerning all the evil 
that the LORD had brought upon him; 
every man also gave him a piece of 
money, and every one a ring of gold. 
12So the LORD blessed the latter end of 
Job more than his beginning; and he 
had fourteen thousand sheep, and six 
thousand camels, and a thousand yoke 
of oxen, and a thousand she-asses. 
42 




13He had also seven sons and three 
daughters. 14And he called the name of 
the first, aJemimah; and the name of 
the second, bKeziah; and the name of 
the third, cKeren-happuch. 15And in all 
the land were no women found so fair 
as the daughters of Job; and their 
father gave them inheritance among 
their brethren. 16And after this Job 
lived a hundred and forty years, and 
saw his sons, and his sons’sons, even 
four generations. 17So Job died, being 
old and full of days. 

a That is, Dove. 

b That is, Cassia. 

c That is, Horn of eye-paint. 

 

 

 


...... ... 

SONG OF SONGS 

 

THE song of songs, which is 
Solomon’s. 

 

2Let him kiss me with the kisses of 
his mouth— 

For thy love is better than wine. 

3Thine ointments have a goodly 
fragrance; 

Thy name is as ointment poured 
forth; 

Therefore do the maidens love thee. 

4Draw me, we will run after thee; 

The king hath brought me into his 
chambers; 

We will be glad and rejoice in thee, 

We will find thy love more fragrant 
than wine! 

Sincerely do they love thee. 

5’I am black, but comely, 

O ye daughters of Jerusalem, 

As the tents of Kedar, 

As the curtains of Solomon. 

6Look not upon me, that I am 
swarthy, 

That the sun hath tanned me; 

My mother’s sons were incensed 
against me, 

They made me keeper of the 
vineyards; 

But mine own vineyard have I not 
kept.’ 

7Tell me, O thou whom my soul 
loveth, 

Where thou feedest, where thou 
makest thy flock to rest at noon; 

For why should I be as one that 
veileth herself 

Beside the flocks of thy 
companions? 

8If thou know not, O thou fairest 
among women, 

Go thy way forth by the footsteps of 
the flock 

And feed thy kids, beside the 
shepherds’tents. 

9I have compared thee, O my love, 

To a steed in Pharaoh’s chariots. 

10Thy cheeks are comely with 
circlets, 

Thy neck with beads. 

11We will make thee circlets of gold 

With studs of silver. 

 

12While the king sat at his table, 

My spikenard sent forth its 
fragrance. 

13My beloved is unto me as a bag of 
myrrh, 

That lieth betwixt my breasts. 

14My beloved is unto me as a cluster 
of henna 

In the vineyards of En-gedi. 

 

15Behold, thou art fair, my love; 
behold, thou art fair; 

Thine eyes are as doves. 
1 




16Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, 
yea, pleasant; 

Also our couch is leafy. 

17The beams of our houses are 
cedars, 

And our panels are cypresses. 

 

2 

3 



I am a rose of Sharon, 

A lily of the valleys. 

 

2As a lily among thorns, 

So is my love among the daughters. 

3As an apple-tree among the trees of 
the wood, 

So is my beloved among the sons. 

Under its shadow I delighted to sit, 

And its fruit was sweet to my taste. 

4He hath brought me to the 
banqueting-house, 

And his banner over me is love. 

5’Stay ye me with dainties, refresh 
me with apples; 

For I am love-sick.’ 

6Let his left hand be under my head, 

And his right hand embrace me. 

7’I adjure you, O daughters of 
Jerusalem, 

By the gazelles, and by the hinds of 
the field, 

That ye awaken not, nor stir up love, 
until it please.’ 

8Hark! my beloved! behold, he 
cometh, 

Leaping upon the mountains, 
skipping upon the hills. 

9My beloved is like a gazelle or a 
young hart; 

Behold, he standeth behind our wall, 

He looketh in through the windows, 

He peereth through the lattice. 

10My beloved spoke, and said unto 
me: 

‘Rise up, my love, my fair one, and 
come away. 

11For, lo, the winter is past, 

The rain is over and gone; 

12The flowers appear on the earth; 

The time of singing is come, 

And the voice of the turtle is heard 
in our land; 

13The fig-tree putteth forth her green 
figs, 

And the vines in blossom give forth 
their fragrance. 

Arise, my love, my fair one, and 
come away. 

14O my dove, that art in the clefts of 
the rock, in the covert of the cliff, 

Let me see thy countenance, let me 
hear thy voice; 

For sweet is thy voice, and thy 
countenance is comely.’ 

15’Take us the foxes, the little foxes, 
that spoil the vineyards; 

For our vineyards are in blossom.’ 

16My beloved is mine, and I am his, 

That feedeth among the lilies. 

17Until the day breathe, and the 
shadows flee away, 

Turn, my beloved, and be thou like 
a gazelle or a young hart 

Upon the mountains of spices. 

 

By night on my bed I sought him 
whom my soul loveth; 

I sought him, but I found him not. 

2’I will rise now, and go about the 
city, 


In the streets and in the broad ways, 

I will seek him whom my soul 
loveth.’ 

I sought him, but I found him not. 

3The watchmen that go about the 
city found me: 

‘Saw ye him whom my soul 
loveth?’ 

4Scarce had I passed from them, 

When I found him whom my soul 
loveth: 

I held him, and would not let him 
go, 

Until I had brought him into my 
mother’s house, 

And into the chamber of her that 
conceived me. 

5’I adjure you, O daughters of 
Jerusalem, 

By the gazelles, and by the hinds of 
the field, 

That ye awaken not, nor stir up love, 

Until it please.’ 

 

6Who is this that cometh up out of 
the wilderness 

Like pillars of smoke, 

Perfumed with myrrh and 
frankincense, 

With all powders of the merchant? 

7Behold, it is the litter of Solomon; 

Threescore mighty men are about it, 

Of the mighty men of Israel. 

8They all handle the sword, 

And are expert in war; 

Every man hath his sword upon his 
thigh, 

Because of dread in the night. 

9King Solomon made himself a 
palanquin 

Of the wood of Lebanon. 

10He made the pillars thereof of 
silver, 

The top thereof of gold, 

The seat of it of purple, 

The inside thereof being inlaid with 
love, 

From the daughters of Jerusalem. 

11Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, 

And gaze upon king Solomon, 

Even upon the crown wherewith his 
mother hath crowned him in the 
day of his espousals, 

And in the day of the gladness of his 
heart. 

 

Behold, thou art fair, my love; 
behold, thou art fair; 

Thine eyes are as doves behind thy 
veil; 

Thy hair is as a flock of goats, that 
trail down from mount Gilead. 

2Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes 
all shaped alike, 

Which are come up from the 
washing; 

Whereof all are paired, and none 
faileth among them. 

3Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, 

And thy mouth is comely; 

Thy temples are like a pomegranate 
split open 

Behind thy veil. 

4Thy neck is like the tower of David 

Builded with turrets, 

Whereon there hang a thousand 
shields, 
4 




All the armour of the mighty men. 

5Thy two breasts are like two fawns 

That are twins of a gazelle, 

Which feed among the lilies. 

6Until the day breathe, 

And the shadows flee away, 

I will get me to the mountain of 
myrrh, 

And to the hill of frankincense. 

7Thou art all fair, my love; 

And there is no spot in thee. 

8Come with me from Lebanon, my 
bride, 

With me from Lebanon; 

Look from the top of Amana, 

From the top of Senir and Hermon, 

From the lions’dens, 

From the mountains of the leopards. 

9Thou hast ravished my heart, my 
sister, my bride; 

Thou hast ravished my heart with 
one of thine eyes, 

With one bead of thy necklace. 

10How fair is thy love, my sister, my 
bride! 

How much better is thy love than 
wine! 

And the smell of thine ointments 
than all manner of spices! 

11Thy lips, O my bride, drop 
honey— 

Honey and milk are under thy 
tongue; 

And the smell of thy garments is 
like the smell of Lebanon. 

12A garden shut up is my sister, my 
bride; 

A spring shut up, a fountain sealed. 

13Thy shoots are a park of 
pomegranates, 

With precious fruits; 

Henna with spikenard plants, 

14Spikenard and saffron, calamus 
and cinnamon, 

With all trees of frankincense; 

Myrrh and aloes, with all the chief 
spices. 

15Thou art a fountain of gardens, 

A well of living waters, 

And flowing streams from Lebanon. 

 

16Awake, O north wind; 

And come, thou south; 

Blow upon my garden, 

That the spices thereof may flow 
out. 

Let my beloved come into his 
garden, 

And eat his precious fruits. 

 

I am come into my garden, my 
sister, my bride; 

I have gathered my myrrh with my 
spice; 

I have eaten my honeycomb with 
my honey; 

I have drunk my wine with my milk. 

Eat, O friends; 

Drink, yea, drink abundantly, O 
beloved. 

 

2I sleep, but my heart waketh; 

Hark! my beloved knocketh: 

‘Open to me, my sister, my love, my 
dove, my undefiled; 

For my head is filled with dew, 
5 




My locks with the drops of the 
night.’ 

3I have put off my coat; 

How shall I put it on? 

I have washed my feet; 

How shall I defile them? 

4My beloved put in his hand by the 
hole of the door, 

And my heart was moved for him. 

5I rose up to open to my beloved; 

And my hands dropped with myrrh, 

And my fingers with flowing myrrh, 

Upon the handles of the bar. 

6I opened to my beloved; 

But my beloved had turned away, 
and was gone. 

My soul failed me when he spoke. 

I sought him, but I could not find 
him; 

I called him, but he gave me no 
answer. 

7The watchmen that go about the 
city found me, 

They smote me, they wounded me; 

The keepers of the walls took away 
my mantle from me. 

8’I adjure you, O daughters of 
Jerusalem, 

If ye find my beloved, what will ye 
tell him? 

That I am love-sick.’ 

9’What is thy beloved more than 
another beloved, 

O thou fairest among women? 

What is thy beloved more than 
another beloved, 

That thou dost so adjure us?’ 

10’My beloved is white and ruddy, 

Pre-eminent above ten thousand. 

11His head is as the most fine gold, 

His locks are curled, 

And black as a raven. 

12His eyes are like doves 

Beside the water-brooks; 

Washed with milk, 

And fitly set. 

13His cheeks are as a bed of spices, 

As banks of sweet herbs; 

His lips are as lilies, 

Dropping with flowing myrrh. 

14His hands are as rods of gold 

Set with beryl; 

His body is as polished ivory 

Overlaid with sapphires. 

15His legs are as pillars of marble, 

Set upon sockets of fine gold; 

His aspect is like Lebanon, 

Excellent as the cedars. 

16His mouth is most sweet; 

Yea, he is altogether lovely. 

This is my beloved, and this is my 
friend, 

O daughters of Jerusalem.’ 

 

’Whither is thy beloved gone, 

O thou fairest among women? 

Whither hath thy beloved turned 
him, 

That we may seek him with thee?’ 

2’My beloved is gone down into his 
garden, 

To the beds of spices, 

To feed in the gardens, 

And to gather lilies. 

3I am my beloved’s, and my beloved 
is mine, 

That feedeth among the lilies.’ 

 
6 




4Thou art beautiful, O my love, as 
Tirzah, 

Comely as Jerusalem, 

Terrible as an army with banners. 

5Turn away thine eyes from me, 

For they have overcome me. 

Thy hair is as a flock of goats, 

That trail down from Gilead. 

6Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes, 

Which are come up from the 
washing; 

Whereof all are paired, 

And none faileth among them. 

7Thy temples are like a pomegranate 
split open 

Behind thy veil. 

8There are threescore queens, 

And fourscore concubines, 

And maidens without number. 

9My dove, my undefiled, is but one; 

She is the only one of her mother; 

She is the choice one of her that 
bore her. 

The daughters saw her, and called 
her happy; 

Yea, the queens and the concubines, 
and they praised her. 

10Who is she that looketh forth as 
the dawn, 

Fair as the moon, 

Clear as the sun, 

Terrible as an army with banners? 

11I went down into the garden of 
nuts, 

To look at the green plants of the 
valley, 

To see whether the vine budded, 

And the pomegranates were in 
flower. 

12Before I was aware, my soul set 
me 

Upon the chariots of my princely 
people. 

 

Return, return, O Shulammite; 

Return, return, that we may look 
upon thee. 

 

What will ye see in the Shulammite? 

As it were a dance of two 
companies. 

 

2How beautiful are thy steps in 
sandals, 

O prince’s daughter! 

The roundings of thy thighs are like 
the links of a chain, 

The work of the hands of a skilled 
workman. 

3Thy navel is like a round goblet, 

Wherein no mingled wine is 
wanting; 

Thy belly is like a heap of wheat 

Set about with lilies. 

4Thy two breasts are like two fawns 

That are twins of a gazelle. 

5Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; 

Thine eyes as the pools in Heshbon, 

By the gate of Bath-rabbim; 

Thy nose is like the tower of 
Lebanon 

Which looketh toward Damascus. 

6Thy head upon thee is like Carmel, 

And the hair of thy head like purple; 

The king is held captive in the 
tresses thereof. 

7How fair and how pleasant art thou, 

O love, for delights! 
7 




8This thy stature is like to a palm-
tree, 

And thy breasts to clusters of 
grapes. 

9I said: ‘I will climb up into the 
palm-tree, 

I will take hold of the branches 
thereof; 

And let thy breasts be as clusters of 
the vine, 

And the smell of thy countenance 
like apples; 

10And the roof of thy mouth like the 
best wine, 

That glideth down smoothly for my 
beloved, 

Moving gently the lips of those that 
are asleep.’ 

 

11I am my beloved’s, 

And his desire is toward me. : 

12Come, my beloved, let us go forth 
into the field; 

Let us lodge in the villages. 

13Let us get up early to the 
vineyards; 

Let us see whether the vine hath 
budded, 

Whether the vine-blossom be 
opened, 

And the pomegranates be in flower; 

There will I give thee my love. 

14The mandrakes give forth 
fragrance, 

And at our doors are all manner of 
precious fruits, 

New and old, 

Which I have laid up for thee, O my 
beloved. 

 

Oh that thou wert as my brother, 

That sucked the breasts of my 
mother! 

When I should find thee without, I 
would kiss thee; 

Yea, and none would despise me. 

2I would lead thee, and bring thee 
into my mother’s house, 

That thou mightest instruct me; 

I would cause thee to drink of 
spiced wine, 

Of the juice of my pomegranate. 

3His left hand should be under my 
head, 

And his right hand should embrace 
me. 

4’I adjure you, O daughters of 
Jerusalem: 

Why should ye awaken, or stir up 
love, 

Until it please?’ 

 

5Who is this that cometh up from 
the wilderness, 

Leaning upon her beloved? 

Under the apple-tree I awakened 
thee; 

There thy mother was in travail with 
thee; 

There was she in travail and brought 
thee forth. 

 

6Set me as a seal upon thy heart, 

As a seal upon thine arm; 

For love is strong as death, 

Jealousy is cruel as the grave; 

The flashes thereof are flashes of 
fire, 
8 




A very flame of the LORD. 

7Many waters cannot quench love, 

Neither can the floods drown it; 

If a man would give all the 
substance of his house for love, 

He would utterly be contemned. 

8We have a little sister, 

And she hath no breasts; 

What shall we do for our sister 

In the day when she shall be spoken 
for? 

9If she be a wall, 

We will build upon her a turret of 
silver; 

And if she be a door, 

We will enclose her with boards of 
cedar. 

 

10I am a wall, 

And my breasts like the towers 
thereof; 

Then was I in his eyes 

As one that found peace. 

 

11Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-
hamon; 

He gave over the vineyard unto 
keepers; 

Every one for the fruit thereof 

Brought in a thousand pieces of 
silver. 

12My vineyard, which is mine, is 
before me; 

Thou, O Solomon, shalt have the 
thousand, 

And those that keep the fruit thereof 
two hundred. 

 

13Thou that dwellest in the gardens, 

The companions hearken for thy 
voice: 

‘Cause me to hear it.’ 

 

14Make haste, my beloved, 

And be thou like to a gazelle or to a 
young hart 

Upon the mountains of spices. 

 

 

 
RUTH
 




and more also, if aught but death part 
thee and me.’ 18And when she saw that 
she was stedfastly minded to go with 
her, she left off speaking unto her. 19So 
they two went until they came to Beth-
lehem. And it came to pass, when they 
were come to Beth-lehem, that all the 
city was astir concerning them, and the 
women said: ‘Is this Naomi?’ 20And 
she said unto them: ‘Call me not 
aNaomi, call me bMarah; for the 
Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with 
me. 21I went out full, and the LORD 
hath brought me back home empty; 
why call ye me Naomi, seeing the 
LORD hath testified against me, and the 
Almighty hath afflicted me?’ 22So 
Naomi returned, and Ruth the 
Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with 
her, who returned out of the field of 
Moab—and they came to Beth-lehem 
in the beginning of barley harvest. 

a That is, Pleasant. 

b That is, Bitter. 

And Naomi had a kinsman of her 
husband’s, a mighty man of 
valour, of the family of Elimelech, and 
his name was Boaz. 2And Ruth the 
Moabitess said unto Naomi: ‘Let me 
now go to the field, and glean among 
the ears of corn after him in whose 
sight I shall find favour.’ And she said 
unto her: ‘Go, my daughter.’ 3And she 
went, and came and gleaned in the 
field after the reapers; and her hap was 
to light on the portion of the field 
belonging unto Boaz, who was of the 
family of Elimelech. 4And, behold, 

Boaz came from Beth-lehem, and said 
unto the reapers: ‘The LORD be with 
you.’ And they answered him: ‘The 
LORD bless thee.’ 5Then said Boaz unto 
his servant that was set over the 
reapers: ‘Whose damsel is this?’ 6And 
the servant that was set over the 
reapers answered and said: ‘It is a 
Moabitish damsel that came back with 
Naomi out of the field of Moab; 7and 
she said: Let me glean, I pray you, and 
gather after the reapers among the 
sheaves; so she came, and hath 
continued even from the morning until 
now, save that she tarried a little in the 
house.’ 8Then said Boaz unto Ruth: 
‘Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go 
not to glean in another field, neither 
pass from hence, but abide here fast by 
my maidens. 9Let thine eyes be on the 
field that they do reap, and go thou 
after them; have I not charged the 
young men that they shall not touch 
thee? and when thou art athirst, go 
unto the vessels, and drink of that 
which the young men have drawn.’ 
10Then she fell on her face, and bowed 
down to the ground, and said unto 
him: ‘Why have I found favour in thy 
sight, that thou shouldest take 
cognizance of me, seeing I am a 
foreigner?’ 11And Boaz answered and 
said unto her: ‘It hath fully been told 
me, all that thou hast done unto thy 
mother-in-law since the death of thy 
husband; and how thou hast left thy 
father and thy mother, and the land of 
thy nativity, and art come unto a 
people that thou knewest not 
2 




heretofore. 12The LORD recompense thy 
work, and be thy reward complete 
from the LORD, the God of Israel, 
under whose wings thou art come to 
take refuge.’ 13Then she said: ‘Let me 
find favour in thy sight, my LORD; for 
that thou hast comforted me, and for 
that thou hast spoken to the heart of 
thy handmaid, though I be not as one 
of thy handmaidens.’ 14And Boaz said 
unto her at meal-time: ‘Come hither, 
and eat of the bread, and dip thy 
morsel in the vinegar.’ And she sat 
beside the reapers; and they reached 
her parched corn, and she did eat and 
was satisfied, and left thereof. 15And 
when she was risen up to glean, Boaz 
commanded his young men, saying: 
‘Let her glean even among the 
sheaves, and put her not to shame. 
16And also pull out some for her of 
purpose from the bundles, and leave it, 
and let her glean, and rebuke her not.’ 
17So she gleaned in the field until 
even; and she beat out that which she 
had gleaned, and it was about an ephah 
of barley. 18And she took it up, and 
went into the city; and her mother-in-
law saw what she had gleaned; and she 
brought forth and gave to her that 
which she had left after she was 
satisfied. 19And her mother-in-law said 
unto her: ‘Where hast thou gleaned to-
day? and where wroughtest thou? 
blessed be he that did take knowledge 
of thee.’ And she told her mother-in-
law with whom she had wrought, and 
said: ‘The man’s name with whom I 
wrought to-day is Boaz.’ 20And Naomi 
said unto her daughter-in-law: 
‘Blessed be he of the LORD, who hath 
not left off His kindness to the living 
and to the dead.’ And Naomi said unto 
her: ‘The man is nigh of kin unto us, 
one of our near kinsmen.’ 21And Ruth 
the Moabitess said: ‘Yea, he said unto 
me: Thou shalt keep fast by my young 
men, until they have ended all my 
harvest.’ 22And Naomi said unto Ruth 
her daughter-in-law: ‘It is good, my 
daughter, that thou go out with his 
maidens, and that thou be not met in 
any other field.’ 23So she kept fast by 
the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the 
end of barley harvest and of wheat 
harvest; and she dwelt with her 
mother-in-law. 

And Naomi her mother-in-law 
said unto her: ‘My daughter, shall 
I not seek rest for thee, that it may be 
well with thee? 2And now is there not 
Boaz our kinsman, with whose 
maidens thou wast? Behold, he 
winnoweth barley to-night in the 
threshing-floor. 3Wash thyself 
therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy 
raiment upon thee, and get thee down 
to the threshing-floor; but make not 
thyself known unto the man, until he 
shall have done eating and drinking. 
4And it shall be, when he lieth down, 
that thou shalt mark the place where he 
shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and 
uncover his feet, and lay thee down; 
and he will tell thee what thou shalt 
do.’ 5And she said unto her: ‘All that 
thou sayest unto me I will do.’ 6And 
she went down unto the threshing-
3 




floor, and did according to all that her 
mother-in-law bade her. 7And when 
Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his 
heart was merry, he went to lie down 
at the end of the heap of corn; and she 
came softly, and uncovered his feet, 
and laid her down. 8And it came to 
pass at midnight, that the man was 
startled, and turned himself; and, 
behold, a woman lay at his feet. 9And 
he said: ‘Who art thou?’ And she 
answered: ‘I am Ruth thine handmaid; 
spread therefore thy skirt over thy 
handmaid; for thou art a near 
kinsman.’ 10And he said: ‘Blessed be 
thou of the LORD, my daughter; thou 
hast shown more kindness in the end 
than at the beginning, inasmuch as 
thou didst not follow the young men, 
whether poor or rich. 11And now, my 
daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all 
that thou sayest; for all the men in the 
gate of my people do know that thou 
art a virtuous woman. 12And now it is 
true that I am a near kinsman; howbeit 
there is a kinsman nearer than I. 
13Tarry this night, and it shall be in the 
morning, that if he will perform unto 
thee the part of a kinsman, well; let 
him do the kinsman’s part; but if he be 
not willing to do the part of a kinsman 
to thee, then will I do the part of a 
kinsman to thee, as the LORD liveth; lie 
down until the morning.’ 14And she lay 
at his feet until the morning; and she 
rose up before one could discern 
another. For he said: ‘Let it not be 
known that the woman came to the 
threshing-floor.’ 15And he said: ‘Bring 
the mantle that is upon thee, and hold 
it’; and she held it; and he measured 
six measures of barley, and laid it on 
her; and he went into the city. 16And 
when she came to her mother-in-law, 
she said: ‘Who art thou, my daughter?’ 
And she told her all that the man had 
done to her. 17And she said: ‘These six 
measures of barley gave he me; for he 
said to me: Go not empty unto thy 
mother-in-law.’ 18Then said she: ‘Sit 
still, my daughter, until thou know 
how the matter will fall; for the man 
will not rest, until he have finished the 
thing this day.’ 

Now Boaz went up to the gate, 
and sat him down there; and, 
behold, the near kinsman of whom 
Boaz spoke came by; unto whom he 
said: ‘Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit 
down here.’ And he turned aside, and 
sat down. 2And he took ten men of the 
elders of the city, and said: ‘Sit ye 
down here.’ And they sat down. 3And 
he said unto the near kinsman: 
‘Naomi, that is come back out of the 
field of Moab, selleth the parcel of 
land, which was our brother 
Elimelech’s; 4and I thought to disclose 
it unto thee, saying: Buy it before them 
that sit here, and before the elders of 
my people. If thou wilt redeem it, 
redeem it; but if it will not be 
redeemed, then tell me, that I may 
know; for there is none to redeem it 
beside thee; and I am after thee.’ And 
he said: ‘I will redeem it.’ 5Then said 
Boaz: ‘What day thou buyest the field 
of the hand of Naomi—hast thou also 
4 




bought of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife 
of the dead, to raise up the name of the 
dead upon his inheritance?’ 6And the 
near kinsman said: ‘I cannot redeem it 
for myself, lest I mar mine own 
inheritance; take thou my right of 
redemption on thee; for I cannot 
redeem it.’— 7Now this was the 
custom in former time in Israel 
concerning redeeming and concerning 
exchanging, to confirm all things: a 
man drew off his shoe, and gave it to 
his neighbour; and this was the 
attestation in Israel.— 8So the near 
kinsman said unto Boaz: ‘Buy it for 
thyself.’ And he drew off his shoe. 
9And Boaz said unto the elders, and 
unto all the people: ‘Ye are witnesses 
this day, that I have bought all that was 
Elimelech’s, and all that was Chilion’s 
and Mahlon’s, of the hand of Naomi. 
10Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the 
wife of Mahlon, have I acquired to be 
my wife, to raise up the name of the 
dead upon his inheritance, that the 
name of the dead be not cut off from 
among his brethren, and from the gate 
of his place; ye are witnesses this day.’ 
11And all the people that were in the 
gate, and the elders, said: ‘We are 
witnesses. The LORD make the woman 
that is come into thy house like Rachel 
and like Leah, which two did build the 
house of Israel; and do thou worthily 
in Ephrath, and be famous in Beth-
lehem; 12and let thy house be like the 
house of Perez, whom Tamar bore 
unto Judah, of the seed which the LORD 
shall give thee of this young woman.’ 
13So Boaz took Ruth, and she became 
his wife; and he went in unto her, and 
the LORD gave her conception, and she 
bore a son. 14And the women said unto 
Naomi: ‘Blessed be the LORD, who 
hath not left thee this day without a 
near kinsman, and let his name be 
famous in Israel. 15And he shall be 
unto thee a restorer of life, and a 
nourisher of thine old age; for thy 
daughter-in-law, who loveth thee, who 
is better to thee than seven sons, hath 
borne him.’ 16And Naomi took the 
child, and laid it in her bosom, and 
became nurse unto it. 17And the 
women her neighbours gave it a name, 
saying: ‘There is a son born to 
Naomi’; and they called his name 
Obed; he is the father of Jesse, the 
father of David. 18Now these are the 
generations of Perez: Perez begot 
Hezron; 19and Hezron begot Ram, and 
Ram begot Amminadab; 20and 
Amminadab begot Nahshon, and 
Nahshon begot aSalmon; 21and Salmon 
begot Boaz, and Boaz begot Obed; 
22and Obed begot Jesse, and Jesse 
begot David. 

a Heb. Salmah. 


.... 

LAMENTATIONS 

 

. HOW DOTH the city sit solitary, 

 That was full of people! 

 How is she become as a widow! 

 She that was great among the 
nations, 

 And princess among the provinces, 

 How is she become tributary! 

. 2She weepeth sore in the night, 

 And her tears are on her cheeks; 

 She hath none to comfort her 

 Among all her lovers; 

 All her friends have dealt 
treacherously with her, 

 They are become her enemies. 

. 3Judah is gone into exile because of 
affliction, 

 And because of great servitude; 

 She dwelleth among the nations, 

 She findeth no rest; 

 All her pursuers overtook her 

 Within the straits. 

. 4The ways of Zion do mourn, 

 Because none come to the solemn 
assembly; 

 All her gates are desolate, 

 Her priests sigh; 

 Her virgins are afflicted, 

 And she herself is in bitterness. 

. 5Her adversaries are become the 
head, 

 Her enemies are at ease; 

 For the LORD hath afflicted her 

 For the multitude of her 
transgressions; 

 Her young children are gone into 
captivity 

 Before the adversary. 

. 6And gone is from the daughter of 
Zion 

 All her splendour; 

 Her princes are become like harts 

 That find no pasture, 

 And they are gone without strength 

 Before the pursuer. 

 

. 7Jerusalem remembereth 

 In the days of her affliction and of 
her anguish 

 All her treasures that she had 

 From the days of old; 

 Now that her people fall by the hand 
of the adversary, 

 And none doth help her, 

 The adversaries have seen her, 

 They have mocked at her 
desolations. 

. 8Jerusalem hath grievously sinned, 

 Therefore she is become as one 
unclean; 

 All that honoured her despise her, 

 Because they have seen her 
nakedness; 

 She herself also sigheth, 

 And turneth backward. 

. 9Her filthiness was in her skirts, 

 She was not mindful of her end; 

 Therefore is she come down 
wonderfully, 

 She hath no comforter. 
1 




 ’Behold, O LORD, my affliction, 

 For the enemy hath magnified 
himself.’ 

. 10The adversary hath spread out his 
hand 

 Upon all her treasures; 

 For she hath seen that the heathen 

 Are entered into her sanctuary, 

 Concerning whom Thou didst 
command 

 That they should not enter into Thy 
congregation. 

. 11All her people sigh, 

 They seek bread; 

 They have given their pleasant 
things for food 

 To refresh the soul. 

 ‘See, O LORD, and behold, 

 How abject I am become.’ 

 

. 12’Let it not come unto you, all ye 
that pass by! 

 Behold, and see 

 If there be any pain like unto my 
pain, 

 Which is done unto me, 

 Wherewith the LORD hath afflicted 
me 

 In the day of His fierce anger. 

. 13From on high hath He sent fire 

 Into my bones, and it prevaileth 
against them; 

 He hath spread a net for my feet, 

 He hath turned me back; 

 He hath made me desolate 

 And faint all the day. 

. 14The yoke of my transgressions is 
impressed by His hand; 

They are knit together, 

They are come up upon my neck; 

He hath made my strength to fail; 

The Lord hath delivered me into 
their hands, 

Against whom I am not able to 
stand. 

. 15The Lord hath set at nought 

All my mighty men in the midst of 
me; 

He hath called a solemn assembly 
against me 

To crush my young men; 

The Lord hath trodden as in a 
winepress 

The virgin the daughter of Judah.’ 

. 16’For these things I weep; 

Mine eye, mine eye runneth down 
with water; 

Because the comforter is far from 
me, 

Even he that should refresh my soul; 

My children are desolate, 

Because the enemy hath prevailed.’ 

. 17Zion spreadeth forth her hands; 

 There is none to comfort her; 

 The LORD hath commanded 
concerning Jacob, 

 That they that are round about him 
should be his adversaries; 

 Jerusalem is among them 

 As one unclean. 

 

. 18’The LORD is righteous; 

For I have rebelled against His 
word; 

Hear, I pray you, all ye peoples, 

 And behold my pain: 

 My virgins and my young men 

 Are gone into captivity. 


. 19I called for my lovers, 

But they deceived me; 

My priests and mine elders 

Perished in the city, 

While they sought them food 

To refresh their souls. 

. 20Behold, O LORD, for I am in 
distress, 

Mine inwards burn; 

My heart is turned within me, 

For I have grievously rebelled. 

Abroad the sword bereaveth, 

At home there is the like of death. 

. 21They have heard that I sigh, 

There is none to comfort me; 

All mine enemies have heard of my 
trouble, and are glad, 

For Thou hast done it; 

Thou wilt bring the day that Thou 
hast proclaimed, 

And they shall be like unto me. 

. 22Let all their wickedness come 
before Thee; 

And do unto them, 

As Thou hast done unto me 

For all my transgressions; 

For my sighs are many 

And my heart is faint.’ 

 

. How hath the Lord covered 
with a cloud 

The daughter of Zion in His anger! 

He hath cast down from heaven unto 
the earth 

The beauty of Israel, 

And hath not remembered His 
footstool 

In the day of His anger. 

. 2The Lord hath swallowed up 
unsparingly 

All the habitations of Jacob; 

He hath thrown down in His wrath 

The strongholds of the daughter of 
Judah; 

He hath brought them down to the 
ground; 

He hath profaned the kingdom and 
the princes thereof. 

. 3He hath cut off in fierce anger 

All the horn of Israel; 

He hath drawn back His right hand 

From before the enemy; 

And He hath burned in Jacob like a 
flaming fire, 

Which devoureth round about. 

. 4He hath bent His bow like an 
enemy, 

Standing with His right hand as an 
adversary, 

And hath slain all that were pleasant 
to the eye; 

In the tent of the daughter of Zion 

He hath poured out His fury like 
fire. 

. 5The Lord is become as an enemy, 

He hath swallowed up Israel; 

He hath swallowed up all her 
palaces, 

He hath destroyed his strongholds; 

And He hath multiplied in the 
daughter of Judah 

Mourning and moaning. 

. 6And He hath stripped His 
tabernacle, as if it were a garden, 

He hath destroyed His place of 
assembly; 
2 




The LORD hath caused to be 
forgotten in Zion 

Appointed season and sabbath, 

And hath rejected in the indignation 
of His anger 

The king and the priest. 

. 7The Lord hath cast off His altar, 

He hath abhorred His sanctuary, 

He hath given up into the hand of 
the enemy 

The walls of her palaces; 

They have made a noise in the 
house of the LORD, 

As in the day of a solemn assembly. 

. 8The LORD hath purposed to destroy 

The wall of the daughter of Zion; 

He hath stretched out the line, 

He hath not withdrawn 

His hand from destroying; 

But He hath made the rampart and 
wall to mourn, 

They languish together. 

. 9Her gates are sunk into the ground; 

He hath destroyed and broken her 
bars; 

Her king and her princes are among 
the nations, 

Instruction is no more; 

Yea, her prophets find 

No vision from the LORD. 

. 10They sit upon the ground, and 
keep silence, 

The elders of the daughter of Zion; 

They have cast up dust upon their 
heads, 

They have girded themselves with 
sackcloth; 

The virgins of Jerusalem hang down 

Their heads to the ground. 

. 11Mine eyes do fail with tears, 

Mine inwards burn, 

My liver is poured upon the earth, 

For the breach of the daughter of my 
people; 

Because the young children and the 
sucklings swoon 

In the broad places of the city. 

. 12They say to their mothers: 

‘Where is corn and wine?’ 

When they swoon as the wounded 

In the broad places of the city, 

When their soul is poured out 

Into their mothers’bosom. 

. 13What shall I take to witness for 
thee? 

What shall I liken to thee, 

O daughter of Jerusalem? 

What shall I equal to thee, that I 
may comfort thee, 

O virgin daughter of Zion? 

For thy breach is great like the sea; 

Who can heal thee? 

. 14Thy prophets have seen visions for 
thee 

Of vanity and delusion; 

And they have not uncovered thine 
iniquity, 

To bring back thy captivity; 

But have prophesied for thee 
burdens 

Of vanity and seduction. 

. 15All that pass by clap 

Their hands at thee; 

They hiss and wag their head 

At the daughter of Jerusalem: 

‘Is this the city that men called 

The perfection of beauty, 

The joy of the whole earth?’ 


. 16All thine enemies have opened 

Their mouth wide against thee; 

They hiss and gnash the teeth; 

They say: ‘We have swallowed her 
up; 

Certainly this is the day that we 
looked for; 

We have found, we have seen it.’ 

. 17The LORD hath done that which He 
devised; 

He hath performed His word 

That He commanded in the days of 
old; 

He hath thrown down unsparingly; 

And He hath caused the enemy to 
rejoice over thee, 

He hath exalted the horn of thine 
adversaries. 

 

. 18Their heart cried unto the Lord: 

‘O wall of the daughter of Zion, 

Let tears run down like a river 

Day and night; 

Give thyself no respite; 

Let not the apple of thine eye cease. 

. 19Arise, cry out in the night, 

At the beginning of the watches; 

Pour out thy heart like water 

Before the face of the Lord; 

Lift up thy hands toward Him 

For the life of thy young children, 

That faint for hunger 

At the head of every street.’ 

. 20’See, O LORD, and consider, 

To whom Thou hast done thus! 

Shall the women eat their fruit, 

The children that are dandled in the 
hands? 

Shall the priest and the prophet be 
slain 

In the sanctuary of the Lord? 

. 21The youth and the old man lie 

On the ground in the streets; 

My virgins and my young men 

Are fallen by the sword; 

Thou hast slain them in the day of 
Thine anger; 

Thou hast slaughtered unsparingly. 

. 22Thou hast called, as in the day of a 
solemn assembly, 

My terrors on every side, 

And there was none in the day of the 
LORD’S anger 

That escaped or remained; 

Those that I have dandled and 
brought up 

Hath mine enemy consumed.’ 

 

. 

I am the man that hath seen 
affliction 

By the rod of His wrath. 

2He hath led me and caused me to 
walk in darkness and not in light. 

3Surely against me He turneth His 
hand again and again all the day. 

. 

4My flesh and my skin hath He 
worn out; 

He hath broken my bones. 

5He hath builded against me, and 
compassed me 

With gall and travail. 

6He hath made me to dwell in dark 
places, 

As those that have been long dead. 

. 
3 




7He hath hedged me about, that I 
cannot go forth; 

He hath made my chain heavy. 

8Yea, when I cry and call for help, 
He shutteth out my prayer. 

9He hath enclosed my ways with 
hewn stone, 

He hath made my paths crooked. 

. 

10He is unto me as a bear lying in 
wait, 

As a lion in secret places. 

11He hath turned aside my ways, and 
pulled me in pieces; 

He hath made me desolate. 

12He hath bent His bow, and set me 

As a mark for the arrow. 

. 

13He hath caused the arrows of His 
quiver 

To enter into my reins. 

14I am become a derision to all my 
people, 

And their song all the day. 

15He hath filled me with bitterness, 

He hath sated me with wormwood. 

. 

16He hath also broken my teeth with 
gravel stones, 

He hath made me to wallow in 
ashes. 

17And my soul is removed far off 
from peace, 

I forgot prosperity. 

18And I said: ‘My strength is 
perished, 

And mine expectation from the 
LORD.’ 

. 

19Remember mine affliction and 
mine anguish, 

The wormwood and the gall. 

20My soul hath them still in 
remembrance, 

And is bowed down within me. 

21This I recall to my mind, 
Therefore have I hope. 

. 

22Surely the LORD’S mercies are not 
consumed, 

Surely His compassions fail not. 

23They are new every morning; 

Great is Thy faithfulness. 

24’The LORD is my portion’, saith my 
soul; 

‘Therefore will I hope in Him.’ 

. 

25The LORD is good unto them that 
wait for Him, 

To the soul that seeketh Him. 

26It is good that a man should 
quietly wait 

For the salvation of the LORD. 

27It is good for a man that he bear 

The yoke in his youth. 

. 

28Let him sit alone and keep silence, 

Because He hath laid it upon him. 

29Let him put his mouth in the dust, 

If so be there may be hope. 

30Let him give his cheek to him that 
smiteth him 

Let him be filled full with reproach. 

. 

31For the Lord will not cast off 

For ever. 

32For though He cause grief, yet will 
He have compassion 


According to the multitude of His 
mercies. 

33For He doth not afflict willingly, 

Nor grieve the children of men. 

. 

34To crush under foot 

All the prisoners of the earth, 

35To turn aside the right of a man 

Before the face of the Most High, 

36To subvert a man in his cause, 

The Lord approveth not. 

. 

37Who is he that saith, and it cometh 
to pass, 

When the Lord commandeth it not? 

38Out of the mouth of the Most High 
proceedeth not 

Evil and good? 

39Wherefore doth a living man 
complain, 

A strong man because of his sins? 

. 

40Let us search and try our ways, 

And return to the LORD. 

41Let us lift up our heart with our 
hands 

Unto God in the heavens. 

42We have transgressed and have 
rebelled; 

Thou hast not pardoned. 

. 

43Thou hast covered with anger and 
pursued us; 

Thou hast slain unsparingly. 

44Thou hast covered Thyself with a 
cloud, 

So that no prayer can pass through. 

45Thou hast made us as the 
offscouring and refuse 

In the midst of the peoples. 

. 

46All our enemies have opened their 
mouth 

Wide against us. 

47Terror and the pit are come upon 
us, 

Desolation and destruction. 

48Mine eye runneth down with rivers 
of water, 

For the breach of the daughter of my 
people. 

. 

49Mine eye is poured out, and 
ceaseth not, 

Without any intermission, 

50Till the LORD look forth, 

And behold from heaven. 

51Mine eye affected my soul, 

Because of all the daughters of my 
city. 

. 

52They have chased me sore like a 
bird, 

That are mine enemies without 
cause. 

53They have cut off my life in the 
dungeon, 

And have cast stones upon me. 

54Waters flowed over my head; 

I said: ‘I am cut off.’ 

. 

55I called upon Thy name, O LORD, 

Out of the lowest dungeon. 

56Thou heardest my voice; hide not 

Thine ear at my sighing, at my cry. 

57Thou drewest near in the day that I 
called upon Thee; 

Thou saidst: ‘Fear not.’ 


. 

58O Lord, Thou hast pleaded the 
causes of my soul; 

Thou hast redeemed my life. 

59O LORD, Thou hast seen my 
wrong; 

Judge Thou my cause. 

60Thou hast seen all their vengeance 

And all their devices against me. 

. 

61Thou hast heard their taunt, O 
LORD, 

And all their devices against me; 

62The lips of those that rose up 
against me, 

And their muttering against me all 
the day. 

63Behold Thou their sitting down, 
and their rising up; 

I am their song. 

. 

64Thou wilt render unto them a 
recompense, O LORD, 

According to the work of their 
hands. 

65Thou wilt give them hardness of 
heart, 

Thy curse unto them. 

66Thou wilt pursue them in anger, 
and destroy them 

From under the heavens of the LORD. 

 

. How is the gold become dim! 

How is the most fine gold 
changed! 

The hallowed stones are poured out 

At the head of every street. 

. 2The precious sons of Zion, 

Comparable to fine gold, 

How are they esteemed as earthen 
pitchers, 

The work of the hands of the potter! 

. 3Even the jackals draw out the 
breast, 

They give suck to their young ones; 

The daughter of my people is 
become cruel, 

Like the ostriches in the wilderness. 

. 4The tongue of the sucking child 
cleaveth 

To the roof of his mouth for thirst; 

The young children ask bread, 

And none breaketh it unto them. 

. 5They that did feed on dainties 

Are desolate in the streets; 

They that were brought up in scarlet 

Embrace dunghills. 

. 6For the iniquity of the daughter of 
my people is greater 

Than the sin of Sodom, 

That was overthrown as in a 
moment, 

And no hands fell upon her. 

. 7Her princes were purer than snow, 

They were whiter than milk, 

They were more ruddy in body than 
rubies, 

Their polishing was as of sapphire; 

. 8Their visage is blacker than a coal; 

They are not known in the streets; 

Their skin is shrivelled upon their 
bones; 

It is withered, it is become like a 
stick. 

. 9They that are slain with the sword 
are better 

Than they that are slain with hunger; 
4 




For these pine away, stricken 
through, 

For want of the fruits of the field. 

. 10The hands of women full of 
compassion 

Have sodden their own children; 

They were their food 

In the destruction of the daughter of 
my people. 

 

. 11The LORD hath accomplished His 
fury, 

He hath poured out His fierce anger; 

And He hath kindled a fire in Zion, 

Which hath devoured the 
foundations thereof. 

. 12The kings of the earth believed 
not, 

Neither all the inhabitants of the 
world, 

That the adversary and the enemy 
would enter 

Into the gates of Jerusalem. 

. 13It is because of the sins of her 
prophets, 

And the iniquities of her priests, 

That have shed the blood of the just 

In the midst of her. 

. 14They wander as blind men in the 
streets, 

They are polluted with blood, 

So that men cannot 

Touch their garments. 

. 15’Depart ye! unclean! ’ men cried 
unto them, 

‘Depart, depart, touch not’; 

Yea, they fled away and wandered; 

Men said among the nations: 

‘They shall no more sojourn here.’ 

. 16The anger of the LORD hath divided 
them; 

He will no more regard them; 

They respected not the persons of 
the priests, 

They were not gracious unto the 
elders. 

 

. 17As for us, our eyes do yet fail 

For our vain help; 

In our watching we have watched 

For a nation that could not save. 

. 18They hunt our steps, 

That we cannot go in our broad 
places; 

Our end is near, our days are 
fulfilled; 

For our end is come. 

. 19Our pursuers were swifter 

Than the eagles of the heaven; 

They chased us upon the mountains, 

They lay in wait for us in the 
wilderness. 

. 20The breath of our nostrils, the 
anointed of the LORD, 

Was taken in their pits; 

Of whom we said: ‘Under his 
shadow 

We shall live among the nations.’ 

. 21Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of 
Edom, 

That dwellest in the land of Uz: 

The cup shall pass over unto thee 
also; 

Thou shalt be drunken, and shalt 
make thyself naked. 

. 22The punishment of thine iniquity is 
accomplished, O daughter of 
Zion, 


He will no more carry thee away 
into captivity; 

He will punish thine iniquity, O 
daughter of Edom, 

He will uncover thy sins. 

 

Remember, O LORD, what is come 
upon us; 

Behold, and see our reproach. 

2Our inheritance is turned unto 
strangers, 

Our houses unto aliens. 

3We are become orphans and 
fatherless, 

Our mothers are as widows. 

4We have drunk our water for 
money; 

Our wood cometh to us for price. 

5To our very necks we are pursued; 

We labour, and have no rest. 

6We have given the hand to Egypt, 

And to Assyria, to have bread 
enough; 

7Our fathers have sinned, and are 
not; 

And we have borne their iniquities. 

8Servants rule over us; 

There is none to deliver us out of 
their hand. 

9We get our bread with the peril of 
our lives 

Because of the sword of the 
wilderness. 

10Our skin is hot like an oven 

Because of the burning heat of 
famine. 

11They have ravished the women in 
Zion, 

The maidens in the cities of Judah. 

12Princes are hanged up by their 
hand; 

The faces of elders are not 
honoured. 

13The young men have borne the 
mill, 

And the children have stumbled 
under the wood. 

14The elders have ceased from the 
gate, 

The young men from their music. 

15The joy of our heart is ceased; 

Our dance is turned into mourning. 

16The crown is fallen from our head; 

Woe unto us! for we have sinned. 

 

17For this our heart is faint, 

For these things our eyes are dim; 

18For the mountain of Zion, which is 
desolate, 

The foxes walk upon it. 

19Thou, O LORD, art enthroned for 
ever, 

Thy throne is from generation to 
generation. 

20Wherefore dost Thou forget us for 
ever, 

And forsake us so long time? 

21Turn Thou us unto Thee, O LORD, 
and we shall be turned; 

Renew our days as of old. 

22Thou canst not have utterly 
rejected us, 

And be exceeding wroth against us! 

 

Turn us unto Thee, O Lord, and we shall be 
turned; 

Renew our days as of old. 
5 




 

.... 

ECCLESIASTES 

 

THE WORDs OF the Koheleth, the 
son of David, king in Jerusalem. 

 

2Vanity of vanities, saith Koheleth; 

Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. 

 

3What profit hath man of all his 
labour 

Wherein he laboureth under the 
sun? 

4One generation passeth away, and 
another generation cometh; 

And the earth abideth for ever. 

5The sun also ariseth, 

And the sun goeth down, 

And hasteth to his place where he 
ariseth. 

6The wind goeth toward the south, 

And turneth about unto the north; 

It turneth about continually in its 
circuit, 

And the wind returneth again to its 
circuits. 

7All the rivers run into the sea, 

Yet the sea is not full; 

Unto the place whither the rivers go, 

Thither they go again. 

8All things toil to weariness; 

Man cannot utter it, 

The eye is not satisfied with seeing, 

Nor the ear filled with hearing. 

9That which hath been is that which 
shall be, 

And that which hath been done is 
that which shall be done; 

And there is nothing new under the 
sun. 

10Is there a thing whereof it is said: 
‘See, this is new’?—it hath been 
already, in the ages which were before 
us. 11There is no remembrance of them 
of former times; neither shall there be 
any remembrance of them of latter 
times that are to come, among those 
that shall come after. 

 

12I Koheleth have been king over 
Israel in Jerusalem. 13And I applied my 
heart to seek and to search out by 
wisdom concerning all things that are 
done under heaven; it is a sore task 
that God hath given to the sons of men 
to be exercised therewith. 14I have seen 
all the works that are done under the 
sun; and, behold, all is vanity and a 
striving after wind. 

15That which is crooked cannot be 
made straight; 

And that which is wanting cannot be 
numbered. 

16I spoke with my own heart, saying: 
‘Lo, I have gotten great wisdom, more 
also than all that were before me over 
Jerusalem’; yea, my heart hath had 
great experience of wisdom and 
knowledge. 17And I applied my heart 
to know wisdom, and to know 
1 




madness and folly—I perceived that 
this also was a striving after wind. 

18For in much wisdom is much 
vexation; 

And he that increaseth knowledge 
increaseth sorrow. 

 

I said in my heart: ‘Come now, I 
will try thee with mirth, and enjoy 
pleasure’; and, behold, this also was 
vanity. 2I said of laughter: ‘It is mad’; 
and of mirth: ‘What doth it 
accomplish?’ 3I searched in my heart 
how to pamper my flesh with wine, 
and, my heart conducting itself with 
wisdom, how yet to lay hold on folly, 
till I might see which it was best for 
the sons of men that they should do 
under the heaven the few days of their 
life. 4I made me great works; I builded 
me houses; I planted me vineyards; 5I 
made me gardens and parks, and I 
planted trees in them of all kinds of 
fruit; 6I made me pools of water, to 
water therefrom the wood springing up 
with trees; 7I acquired men-servants 
and maid-servants, and had servants 
born in my house; also I had great 
possessions of herds and flocks, above 
all that were before me in Jerusalem; 8I 
gathered me also silver and gold, and 
treasure such as kings and the 
provinces have as their own; I got me 
men-singers and women-singers, and 
the delights of the sons of men, 
women very many. 9So I was great, 
and increased more than all that were 
before me in Jerusalem; also my 
wisdom stood me in stead. 10And 
whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept 
not from them; I withheld not my heart 
from any joy, for my heart had joy of 
all my labour; and this was my portion 
from all my labour. 11Then I looked on 
all the works that my hands had 
wrought, and on the labour that I had 
laboured to do; and, behold, all was 
vanity and a striving after wind, and 
there was no profit under the sun. 

12And I turned myself to behold 
wisdom, and madness and folly; for 
what can the man do that cometh after 
the king? even that which hath been 
already done. 13Then I saw that 
wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light 
excelleth darkness. 

14The wise man, his eyes are in his 
head; 

But the fool walketh in darkness. 

And I also perceived that one event 
happeneth to them all. 15Then said I in 
my heart: ‘As it happeneth to the fool, 
so will it happen even to me; and why 
was I then more wise?’ Then I said in 
my heart, that this also is vanity. 16For 
of the wise man, even as of the fool, 
there is no remembrance for ever; 
seeing that in the days to come all will 
long ago have been forgotten. And 
how must the wise man die even as the 
fool! 17So I hated life; because the 
work that is wrought under the sun 
was grievous unto me; for all is vanity 
and a striving after wind. 

18And I hated all my labour wherein 
I laboured under the sun, seeing that I 
must leave it unto the man that shall be 
after me. 19And who knoweth whether 
2 




he will be a wise man or a fool? yet 
will he have rule over all my labour 
wherein I have laboured, and wherein I 
have shown myself wise under the sun. 
This also is vanity. 20Therefore I 
turned about to cause my heart to 
despair concerning all the labour 
wherein I had laboured under the sun. 
21For there is a man whose labour is 
with wisdom, and with knowledge, 
and with skill; yet to a man that hath 
not laboured therein shall he leave it 
for his portion. This also is vanity and 
a great evil. 22For what hath a man of 
all his labour, and of the striving of his 
heart, wherein he laboureth under the 
sun? 23For all his days are pains, and 
his occupation vexation; yea, even in 
the night his heart taketh not rest. This 
also is vanity. 

24There is nothing better for a man 
than that he should eat and drink, and 
make his soul enjoy pleasure for his 
labour. This also I saw, that it is from 
the hand of God. 25For who will eat, or 
who will enjoy, if not I? 26For to the 
man that is good in His sight He giveth 
wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; but 
to the sinner He giveth the task, to 
gather and to heap up, that he may 
leave to him that is good in the sight of 
God. This also is vanity and a striving 
after wind. 

To every thing there is a season, 
and a time to every purpose under 
the heaven: 

2A time to be born, and a time to 
die; 

A time to plant, and a time to pluck 
up that which is planted; 

3A time to kill, and a time to heal; 

A time to break down, and a time to 
build up; 

4A time to weep, and a time to 
laugh; 

A time to mourn, and a time to 
dance; 

5A time to cast away stones, and a 
time to gather stones together; 

A time to embrace, and a time to 
refrain from embracing; 

6A time to seek, and a time to lose; 

A time to keep, and a time to cast 
away; 

7A time to rend, and a time to sew; 

A time to keep silence, and a time to 
speak; 

8A time to love, and a time to hate; 

A time for war, and a time for 
peace. 

9What profit hath he that worketh in 
that he laboureth? 10I have seen the 
task which God hath given to the sons 
of men to be exercised therewith. 11He 
hath made every thing beautiful in its 
time; also He hath set the world in 
their heart, yet so that man cannot find 
out the work that God hath done from 
the beginning even to the end. 12I 
know that there is nothing better for 
them, than to rejoice, and to get 
pleasure so long as they live. 13But 
also that every man should eat and 
drink, and enjoy pleasure for all his 
labour, is the gift of God. 14I know 
that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be 
for ever; nothing can be added to it, 
3 




nor any thing taken from it; and God 
hath so made it, that men should fear 
before Him. 15That which is hath been 
long ago, and that which is to be hath 
already been; and God seeketh that 
which is pursued. 

16And moreover I saw under the sun, 
in the place of justice, that wickedness 
was there; and in the place of 
righteousness, that wickedness was 
there. 17I said in my heart: ‘The 
righteous and the wicked God will 
judge; for there is a time there for 
every purpose and for every work.’ 18I 
said in my heart: ‘It is because of the 
sons of men, that God may sift them, 
and that they may see that they 
themselves are but as beasts.’ 19For 
that which befalleth the sons of men 
befalleth beasts; even one thing 
befalleth them; as the one dieth, so 
dieth the other; yea, they have all one 
breath; so that man hath no pre-
eminence above a beast; for all is 
vanity. 20All go unto one place; all are 
of the dust, and all return to dust. 
21Who knoweth the spirit of man 
whether it goeth upward, and the spirit 
of the beast whether it goeth 
downward to the earth? 22Wherefore I 
perceived that there is nothing better, 
than that a man should rejoice in his 
works; for that is his portion; for who 
shall bring him to see what shall be 
after him? 

But I returned and considered all 
the oppressions that are done 
under the sun; and behold the tears of 
such as were oppressed, and they had 
no comforter; and on the side of their 
oppressors there was power, but they 
had no comforter. 2Wherefore I praised 
the dead that are already dead more 
than the living that are yet alive; 3but 
better than they both is he that hath not 
yet been, who hath not seen the evil 
work that is done under the sun. 

4Again, I considered all labour and 
all excelling in work, that it is a man’s 
rivalry with his neighbour. This also is 
vanity and a striving after wind. 

5The fool foldeth his hands together, 

And eateth his own flesh. 

6Better is a handful of quietness, 

Than both the hands full of labour 
and striving after wind. 

7Then I returned and saw vanity 
under the sun. 8There is one that is 
alone, and he hath not a second; yea, 
he hath neither son nor brother; yet is 
there no end of all his labour, neither is 
his eye satisfied with riches: ‘for 
whom then do I labour, and bereave 
my soul of pleasure?’ This also is 
vanity, yea, it is a grievous business. 
9Two are better than one; because they 
have a good reward for their labour. 
10For if they fall, the one will lift up 
his fellow; but woe to him that is alone 
when he falleth, and hath not another 
to lift him up. 11Again, if two lie 
together, then they have warmth; but 
how can one be warm alone? 12And if 
a man prevail against him that is alone, 
two shall withstand him; and a 
threefold cord is not quickly broken. 

13Better is a poor and wise child 
than an old and foolish king, who 
4 




knoweth not how to receive 
admonition any more. 14For out of 
prison he came forth to be king; 
although in his kingdom he was born 
poor. 15I saw all the living that walk 
under the sun, that they were with the 
child, the second, that was to stand up 
in his stead. 16There was no end of all 
the people, even of all them whom he 
did lead; yet they that come after shall 
not rejoice in him. Surely this also is 
vanity and a striving after wind. 

17Guard thy foot when thou goest to 
the house of God, and be ready to 
hearken: it is better than when fools 
give sacrifices; for they know not that 
they do evil. 

Be not rash with thy mouth, and 
let not thy heart be hasty to utter a 
word before God; for God is in 
heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore 
let thy words be few. 

2For a dream cometh through a 
multitude of business; 

And a fool’s voice through a 
multitude of words. 

3When thou vowest a vow unto God, 
defer not to pay it; for He hath no 
pleasure in fools; pay that which thou 
vowest. 4Better is it that thou 
shouldest not vow, than that thou 
shouldest vow and not pay. 5Suffer 
not thy mouth to bring thy flesh into 
guilt, neither say thou before the 
messenger, that it was an error; 
wherefore should God be angry at thy 
voice, and destroy the work of thy 
hands? 6For through the multitude of 
dreams and vanities there are also 
many words; but fear thou God. 

7If thou seest the oppression of the 
poor, and the violent perverting of 
justice and righteousness in the state, 
marvel not at the matter; for one 
higher than the high watcheth, and 
there are higher than they. 8But the 
profit of a land every way is a king 
that maketh himself servant to the 
field. 

9He that loveth silver shall not be 
satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth 
abundance, with increase; this also is 
vanity. 10When goods increase, they 
are increased that eat them; and what 
advantage is there to the owner 
thereof, saving the beholding of them 
with his eyes? 

11Sweet is the sleep of a labouring 
man, whether he eat little or much; but 
the satiety of the rich will not suffer 
him to sleep. 

12There is a grievous evil which I 
have seen under the sun, namely, 
riches kept by the owner thereof to his 
hurt; 13and those riches perish by evil 
adventure; and if he hath begotten a 
son, there is nothing in his hand. 14As 
he came forth of his mother’s womb, 
naked shall he go back as he came, and 
shall take nothing for his labour, which 
he may carry away in his hand. 15And 
this also is a grievous evil, that in all 
points as he came, so shall he go; and 
what profit hath he that he laboureth 
for the wind? 16All his days also he 
eateth in darkness, and he hath much 
vexation and sickness and wrath. 
5 




17Behold that which I have seen: it is 
good, yea, it is comely for one to eat 
and to drink, and to enjoy pleasure for 
all his labour, wherein he laboureth 
under the sun, all the days of his life 
which God hath given him; for this is 
his portion. 18Every man also to whom 
God hath given riches and wealth, and 
hath given him power to eat thereof, 
and to take his portion, and to rejoice 
in his labour—this is the gift of God. 
19For let him remember the days of his 
life that they are not many; for God 
answereth him in the joy of his heart. 

There is an evil which I have seen 
under the sun, and it is heavy 
upon men: 2a man to whom God 
giveth riches, wealth, and honour, so 
that he wanteth nothing for his soul of 
all that he desireth, yet God giveth him 
not power to eat thereof, but a stranger 
eateth it; this is vanity, and it is an evil 
disease. 3If a man beget a hundred 
children, and live many years, so that 
the days of his years are many, but his 
soul have not enough of good, and 
moreover he have no burial; I say, that 
an untimely birth is better than he; 4for 
it cometh in vanity, and departeth in 
darkness, and the name thereof is 
covered with darkness; 5moreover it 
hath not seen the sun nor known it; 
this hath gratification rather than the 
other; 6yea, though he live a thousand 
years twice told, and enjoy no good; 
do not all go to one place? 

7All the labour of man is for his 
mouth, 

And yet the appetite is not filled. 

8For what advantage hath the wise 
more than the fool? or the poor man 
that hath understanding, in walking 
before the living? 9Better is the seeing 
of the eyes than the wandering of the 
desire; this also is vanity and a striving 
after wind. 

10Whatsoever cometh into being, the 
name thereof was given long ago, and 
it is foreknown what man is; neither 
can he contend with Him that is 
mightier than he. 11Seeing there are 
many words that increase vanity, what 
is man the better? 12For who knoweth 
what is good for man in his life, all the 
days of his vain life which he spendeth 
as a shadow? for who can tell a man 
what shall be after him under the sun? 

 

A good name is better than 
precious oil; 

And the day of death than the day of 
one’s birth. 

2It is better to go to the house of 
mourning, 

Than to go to the house of feasting; 

For that is the end of all men, 

And the living will lay it to his 
heart. 

3Vexation is better than laughter; 

For by the sadness of the 
countenance the heart may be 
gladdened. 

4The heart of the wise is in the 
house of mourning; 

But the heart of fools is in the house 
of mirth. 

5It is better to hear the rebuke of the 
wise, 
6 

7 




Than for a man to hear the song of 
fools. 

6For as the crackling of thorns under 
a pot, so is the laughter of the 
fool; this also is vanity. 

7Surely oppression turneth a wise 
man into a fool; 

And a gift destroyeth the 
understanding. 

8Better is the end of a thing than the 
beginning thereof; 

And the patient in spirit is better 
than the proud in spirit. 

9Be not hasty in thy spirit to be 
angry; 

For anger resteth in the bosom of 
fools. 

10Say not thou: ‘How was it that the 
former days were better than these?’ 
for it is not out of wisdom that thou 
inquirest concerning this. 

11Wisdom is good with an 
inheritance, 

Yea, a profit to them that see the 
sun. 

12For wisdom is a defence, even as 
money is a defence; but the excellency 
of knowledge is, that wisdom 
preserveth the life of him that hath it. 

13Consider the work of God; for 
who can make that straight, which He 
hath made crooked? 14In the day of 
prosperity be joyful, and in the day of 
adversity consider; God hath made 
even the one as well as the other, to 
the end that man should find nothing 
after him. 

15All things have I seen in the days 
of my vanity; there is a righteous man 
that perisheth in his righteousness, and 
there is a wicked man that prolongeth 
his life in his evil-doing. 16Be not 
righteous overmuch; neither make 
thyself overwise; why shouldest thou 
destroy thyself? 17Be not overmuch 
wicked, neither be thou foolish; why 
shouldest thou die before thy time? 18It 
is good that thou shouldest take hold 
of the one; yea, also from the other 
withdraw not thy hand; for he that 
feareth God shall discharge himself of 
them all. 

19Wisdom is a stronghold to the 
wise man more than ten rulers that are 
in a city. 20For there is not a righteous 
man upon earth, that doeth good, and 
sinneth not. 

21Also take not heed unto all words 
that are spoken, lest thou hear thy 
servant curse thee; 22for oftentimes 
also thine own heart knoweth that thou 
thyself likewise hast cursed others. 

23All this have I tried by wisdom; I 
said: ‘I will get wisdom’; but it was far 
from me. 24That which is is far off, and 
exceeding deep; who can find it out? 
25I turned about, and applied my heart 
to know and to search out, and to seek 
wisdom and the reason of things, and 
to know wickedness to be folly, and 
foolishness to be madness; 26and I find 
more bitter than death the woman, 
whose heart is snares and nets, and her 
hands as bands; whoso pleaseth God 
shall escape from her; but the sinner 
shall be taken by her. 27Behold, this 
have I found, saith Koheleth, adding 
one thing to another, to find out the 


account; 28which yet my soul sought, 
but I found not; one man among a 
thousand have I found; but a woman 
among all those have I not found. 
29Behold, this only have I found, that 
God made man upright; but they have 
sought out many inventions. 

 

Who is as the wise man? and who 
knoweth the interpretation of a 
thing? 

A man’s wisdom maketh his face to 
shine, 

And the boldness of his face is 
changed. 

2I [counsel thee]: keep the king’s 
command, and that in regard of the 
oath of God. 3Be not hasty to go out of 
his presence; stand not in an evil thing; 
for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him. 
4Forasmuch as the king’s word hath 
power; and who may say unto him: 
‘What doest thou?’ 

5Whoso keepeth the commandment 
shall know no evil thing; 

And a wise man’s heart discerneth 
time and judgment. 

6For to every matter there is a time and 
judgment; for the evil of man is great 
upon him. 7For he knoweth not that 
which shall be; for even when it 
cometh to pass, who shall declare it 
unto him? 8There is no man that hath 
power over the wind to retain the 
wind; neither hath he power over the 
day of death; and there is no discharge 
in war; neither shall wickedness 
deliver him that is given to it. 9All this 
have I seen, even applied my heart 
thereto, whatever the work that is done 
under the sun; what time one man had 
power over another to his hurt. 

10And so I saw the wicked buried, and 
they entered into their rest; but they 
that had done right went away from 
the holy place, and were forgotten in 
the city; this also is vanity. 11Because 
sentence against an evil work is not 
executed speedily, therefore the heart 
of the sons of men is fully set in them 
to do evil; 12because a sinner doeth 
evil a hundred times, and prolongeth 
his days—though yet I know that it 
shall be well with them that fear God, 
that fear before Him; 13but it shall not 
be well with the wicked, neither shall 
he prolong his days, which are as a 
shadow, because he feareth not before 
God. 14There is a vanity which is done 
upon the earth: that there are righteous 
men, unto whom it happeneth 
according to the work of the wicked; 
again, there are wicked men, to whom 
it happeneth according to the work of 
the righteous—I said that this also is 
vanity. 15So I commended mirth, that a 
man hath no better thing under the sun, 
than to eat, and to drink, and to be 
merry, and that this should accompany 
him in his labour all the days of his life 
which God hath given him under the 
sun. 

16When I applied my heart to know 
wisdom, and to see the business that is 
done upon the earth—for neither day 
nor night do men see sleep with their 
eyes—17then I beheld all the work of 
God, that man cannot find out the 
8 




work that is done under the sun; 
because though a man labour to seek it 
out, yet he shall not find it; yea further, 
though a wise man think to know it, 
yet shall he not be able to find it. 

For all this I laid to my heart, 
even to make clear all this: that 
the righteous, and the wise, and their 
works, are in the hand of God; whether 
it be love or hatred, man knoweth it 
not; all is before them. 2All things 
come alike to all; there is one event to 
the righteous and to the wicked; to the 
good and to the clean and to the 
unclean; to him that sacrificeth and to 
him that sacrificeth not; as is the good, 
so is the sinner, and he that sweareth, 
as he that feareth an oath. 3This is an 
evil in all that is done under the sun, 
that there is one event unto all; yea 
also, the heart of the sons of men is 
full of evil, and madness is in their 
heart while they live, and after that 
they go to the dead. 

4For to him that is joined to all the 
living there is hope; for a living dog is 
better than a dead lion. 5For the living 
know that they shall die; but the dead 
know not any thing, neither have they 
any more a reward; for the memory of 
them is forgotten. 6As well their love, 
as their hatred and their envy, is long 
ago perished; neither have they any 
more a portion for ever in any thing 
that is done under the sun. 

 

7Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, 

And drink thy wine with a merry 
heart; 

For God hath already accepted thy 
works. 

8Let thy garments be always white; 

And let thy head lack no oil. 

9Enjoy life with the wife whom thou 
lovest all the days of the life of thy 
vanity, which He hath given thee 
under the sun, all the days of thy 
vanity; for that is thy portion in life, 
and in thy labour wherein thou 
labourest under the sun. 10Whatsoever 
thy hand attaineth to do by thy 
strength, that do; for there is no work, 
nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou 
goest. 

11I returned, and saw under the sun, 
that the race is not to the swift, nor the 
battle to the strong, neither yet bread 
to the wise, nor yet riches to men of 
understanding, nor yet favour to men 
of skill; but time and chance 
happeneth to them all. 12For man also 
knoweth not his time; as the fishes that 
are taken in an evil net, and as the 
birds that are caught in the snare, even 
so are the sons of men snared in an 
evil time, when it falleth suddenly 
upon them. 

13This also have I seen as wisdom 
under the sun, and it seemed great unto 
me: 14there was a little city, and few 
men within it; and there came a great 
king against it, and besieged it, and 
built great bulwarks against it; 15now 
there was found in it a man poor and 
wise, and he by his wisdom delivered 
the city; yet no man remembered that 
same poor man. 16Then said I: 
9 




‘Wisdom is better than strength; 
nevertheless the poor man’s wisdom is 
despised, and his words are not heard.’ 

17The words of the wise spoken in 
quiet 

Are more acceptable than the cry of 
a ruler among fools. 

18Wisdom is better than weapons of 
war; 

But one sinner destroyeth much 
good. 

Dead flies make the ointment 
of the perfumer fetid and 
putrid; 

So doth a little folly outweigh 
wisdom and honour. 

2A wise man’s understanding is at 
his right hand; 

But a fool’s understanding at his 
left. 3Yea also, when a fool walketh by 
the way, his understanding faileth him, 
and he saith to every one that he is a 
fool. 

 

4If the spirit of the ruler rise up 
against thee, 

Leave not thy place; 

For gentleness allayeth great 
offences. 

5There is an evil which I have seen 
under the sun, 

Like an error which proceedeth 
from a ruler: 

6Folly is set on great heights, 

And the rich sit in low place. 

7I have seen servants upon horses, 

And princes walking as servants 
upon the earth. 

 

8He that diggeth a pit shall fall into 
it; 

And whoso breaketh through a 
fence, a serpent shall bite him. 

9Whoso quarrieth stones shall be 
hurt therewith; 

And he that cleaveth wood is 
endangered thereby. 

10If the iron be blunt, 

And one do not whet the edge, 

Then must he put to more strength; 

But wisdom is profitable to direct. 

11If the serpent bite before it is 
charmed, 

Then the charmer hath no 
advantage. 

 

12The words of a wise man’s mouth 
are gracious; 

But the lips of a fool will swallow 
up himself. 

13The beginning of the words of his 
mouth is foolishness; 

And the end of his talk is grievous 
madness. 

14A fool also multiplieth words; 

Yet man knoweth not what shall be; 

And that which shall be after him, 

Who can tell him? 

15The labour of fools wearieth every 
one of them, 

For he knoweth not how to go to the 
city. 

 

16Woe to thee, O land, when thy 
king is a boy, 

And thy princes feast in the 
morning! 
10 




17Happy art thou, O land, when thy 
king is a free man, 

And thy princes eat in due season, 

In strength, and not in drunkenness! 

 

18By slothfulness the rafters sink in; 

And through idleness of the hands 
the house leaketh. 

 

19A feast is made for laughter, 

And wine maketh glad the life; 

And money answereth all things. 

 

20Curse not the king, no, not in thy 
thought, 

And curse not the rich in thy 
bedchamber; 

For a bird of the air shall carry the 
voice, 

And that which hath wings shall tell 
the matter. 

 

Cast thy bread upon the 
waters, 

For thou shalt find it after many 
days. 

2Divide a portion into seven, yea, 
even into eight; 

For thou knowest not what evil shall 
be upon the earth. 

3If the clouds be full of rain, 

They empty themselves upon the 
earth; 

And if a tree fall in the south, or in 
the north, 

In the place where the tree falleth, 
there shall it be. 

4He that observeth the wind shall 
not sow; 

And he that regardeth the clouds 
shall not reap. 

5As thou knowest not what is the 
way of the wind, 

Nor how the bones do grow in the 
womb of her that is with child; 

Even so thou knowest not the work 
of God 

Who doeth all things. 

6In the morning sow thy seed, 

And in the evening withhold not thy 
hand; 

For thou knowest not which shall 
prosper, whether this or that, 

Or whether they both shall be alike 
good. 

7And the light is sweet, 

And a pleasant thing it is for the 
eyes to behold the sun. 

8For if a man live many years, 

Let him rejoice in them all, 

And remember the days of darkness, 

For they shall be many. 

All that cometh is vanity. 

 

9Rejoice, O young man, in thy 
youth; 

And let thy heart cheer thee in the 
days of thy youth, 

And walk in the ways of thy heart, 

And in the sight of thine eyes; 

But know thou, that for all these 
things 

God will bring thee into judgment. 

10Therefore remove vexation from 
thy heart, 

And put away evil from thy flesh; 

For childhood and youth are vanity. 

 
11 




Remember then thy Creator in 
the days of thy youth, 

Before the evil days come, 

And the years draw nigh, when thou 
shalt say: 

‘I have no pleasure in them’; 

2Before the sun, and the light, and 
the moon, 

And the stars, are darkened, 

And the clouds return after the rain; 

3In the day when the keepers of the 
house shall tremble, 

And the strong men shall bow 
themselves, 

And the grinders cease because they 
are few, 

And those that look out shall be 
darkened in the windows, 

4And the doors shall be shut in the 
street, 

When the sound of the grinding is 
low; 

And one shall start up at the voice of 
a bird, 

And all the daughters of music shall 
be brought low; 

5Also when they shall be afraid of 
that which is high, 

And terrors shall be in the way; 

And the almond-tree shall blossom, 

And the grasshopper shall drag itself 
along, 

And the caperberry shall fail; 

Because man goeth to his long 
home, 

And the mourners go about the 
streets; 

6Before the silver cord is snapped 
asunder, 

And the golden bowl is shattered, 

And the pitcher is broken at the 
fountain, 

And the wheel falleth shattered, into 
the pit; 

7And the dust returneth to the earth 
as it was, 

And the spirit returneth unto God 
who gave it. 

8Vanity of vanities, saith Koheleth; 
all is vanity. 

 

9And besides that Koheleth was 
wise, he also taught the people 
knowledge; yea, he pondered, and 
sought out, and set in order many 
proverbs. 10Koheleth sought to find out 
words of delight, and that which was 
written uprightly, even words of truth. 

11The words of the wise are as 
goads, and as nails well fastened are 
those that are composed in collections; 
they are given from one shepherd. 
12And furthermore, my son, be 
admonished: of making many books 
there is no end; and much study is a 
weariness of the flesh. 

13The end of the matter, all having 
been heard: fear God, and keep His 
commandments; for this is the whole 
man. 14For God shall bring every work 
into the judgment concerning every 
hidden thing, whether it be good or 
whether it be evil. 

 

The end of the matter, all having been heard: 
fear God, and keep His Commandments; for 
this is the whole man. 
12 




.... 

ESTHER 

 

NOW IT came to pass in the days of 
Ahasuerus—this is Ahasuerus 
who reigned, from India even unto 
Ethiopia, over a hundred and seven 
and twenty provinces— 2that in those 
days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on 
the throne of his kingdom, which was 
in Shushan the castle, 3in the third year 
of his reign, he made a feast unto all 
his princes and his servants; the army 
of Persia and Media, the nobles and 
princes of the provinces, being before 
him; 4when he showed the riches of his 
glorious kingdom and the honour of 
his excellent majesty, many days, even 
a hundred and fourscore days. 5And 
when these days were fulfilled, the 
king made a feast unto all the people 
that were present in Shushan the 
castle, both great and small, seven 
days, in the court of the garden of the 
king’s palace; 6there were hangings of 
white, fine cotton, and blue, bordered 
with cords of fine linen and purple, 
upon silver rods and pillars of marble; 
the couches were of gold and silver, 
upon a pavement of green, and white, 
and shell, and onyx marble. 7And they 
gave them drink in vessels of gold—
the vessels being diverse one from 
another—and royal wine in 
abundance, according to the bounty of 
the king. 8And the drinking was 
according to the law; none did compel; 
for so the king had appointed to all the 
officers of his house, that they should 
do according to every man’s pleasure. 
9Also Vashti the queen made a feast 
for the women in the royal house 
which belonged to king Ahasuerus. 
10On the seventh day, when the heart 
of the king was merry with wine, he 
commanded Mehuman, Bizzetha, 
Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, 
and Carcas, the seven chamberlains 
that ministered in the presence of 
Ahasuerus the king, 11to bring Vashti 
the queen before the king with the 
crown royal, to show the peoples and 
the princes her beauty; for she was fair 
to look on. 12But the queen Vashti 
refused to come at the king’s 
commandment by the chamberlains; 
therefore was the king very wroth, and 
his anger burned in him. 

13Then the king said to the wise men, 
who knew the times—for so was the 
king’s manner toward all that knew 
law and judgment; 14and the next unto 
him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, 
Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and 
Memucan, the seven princes of Persia 
and Media, who saw the king’s face, 
and sat the first in the kingdom: 
15’What shall we do unto the queen 
Vashti according to law, forasmuch as 
she hath not done the bidding of the 
king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?’ 
16And Memucan answered before 
the king and the princes: ‘Vashti the 
1 




queen hath not done wrong to the king 
only, but also to all the princes, and to 
all the peoples, that are in all the 
provinces of the king Ahasuerus. 17For 
this deed of the queen will come 
abroad unto all women, to make their 
husbands contemptible in their eyes, 
when it will be said: The king 
Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the 
queen to be brought in before him, but 
she came not. 18And this day will the 
princesses of Persia and Media who 
have heard of the deed of the queen 
say the like unto all the king’s princes. 
So will there arise enough contempt 
and wrath. 19If it please the king, let 
there go forth a royal commandment 
from him, and let it be written among 
the laws of the Persians and the 
Medes, that it be not altered, that 
Vashti come no more before king 
Ahasuerus, and that the king give her 
royal estate unto another that is better 
than she. 20And when the king’s decree 
which he shall make shall be published 
throughout all his kingdom, great 
though it be, all the wives will give to 
their husbands honour, both to great 
and small.’ 21And the word pleased the 
king and the princes; and the king did 
according to the word of Memucan; 
22for he sent letters into all the king’s 
provinces, into every province 
according to the writing thereof, and to 
every people after their language, that 
every man should bear rule in his own 
house, and speak according to the 
language of his people. 

 

2 



After these things, when the 
wrath of king Ahasuerus was 
assuaged, he remembered Vashti, and 
what she had done, and what was 
decreed against her. 2Then said the 
king’s servants that ministered unto 
him: ‘Let there be sought for the king 
young virgins fair to look on; 3and let 
the king appoint officers in all the 
provinces of his kingdom, that they 
may gather together all the fair young 
virgins unto Shushan the castle, to the 
house of the women, unto the custody 
of aHegai the king’s chamberlain, 
keeper of the women; and let their 
ointments be given them; 4and let the 
maiden that pleaseth the king be queen 
instead of Vashti.’ And the thing 
pleased the king; and he did so. 

a Heb. Hege. 

5There was a certain Jew in Shushan 
the castle, whose name was Mordecai 
the son of Jair the son of Shimei the 
son of Kish, a Benjamite, 6who had 
been carried away from Jerusalem 
with the captives that had been carried 
away with Jeconiah king of Judah, 
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of 
Babylon had carried away. 7And he 
brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, 
his uncle’s daughter; for she had 
neither father nor mother, and the 
maiden was of beautiful form and fair 
to look on; and when her father and 
mother were dead, Mordecai took her 
for his own daughter. 

8So it came to pass, when the king’s 
commandment and his decree was 


published, and when many maidens 
were gathered together unto Shushan 
the castle, to the custody of Hegai, that 
Esther was taken into the king’s house, 
to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the 
women. 9And the maiden pleased him, 
and she obtained kindness of him; and 
he speedily gave her her ointments, 
with her portions, and the seven 
maidens, who were meet to be given 
her out of the king’s house; and he 
advanced her and her maidens to the 
best place in the house of the women. 
10Esther had not made known her 
people nor her kindred; for Mordecai 
had charged her that she should not tell 
it. 11And Mordecai walked every day 
before the court of the women’s house, 
to know how Esther did, and what 
would become of her. 

12Now when the turn of every 
maiden was come to go in to king 
Ahasuerus, after that it had been done 
to her according to the law for the 
women, twelve months—for so were 
the days of their anointing 
accomplished, to wit, six months with 
oil of myrrh, and six month with sweet 
odours, and with other ointments of 
the women —13when then the maiden 
came unto the king, whatsoever she 
desired was given her to go with her 
out of the house of the women unto the 
king’s house. 14In the evening she 
went, and on the morrow she returned 
into the second house of the women, to 
the custody of Shaashgaz, the king’s 
chamberlain, who kept the concubines; 
she came in unto the king no more, 
except the king delighted in her, and 
she were called by name. 

15Now when the turn of Esther, the 
daughter of Abihail the uncle of 
Mordecai, who had taken her for his 
daughter, was come to go in unto the 
king, she required nothing but what 
Hegai the king’s chamberlain, the 
keeper of the women, appointed. And 
Esther obtained favour in the sight of 
all them that looked upon her. 16So 
Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus 
into his house royal in the tenth month, 
which is the month Tebeth, in the 
seventh year of his reign. 17And the 
king loved Esther above all the 
women, and she obtained grace and 
favour in his sight more than all the 
virgins; so that he set the royal crown 
upon her head, and made her queen 
instead of Vashti. 18Then the king 
made a great feast unto all his princes 
and his servants, even Esther’s feast; 
and he made a release to the provinces, 
and gave gifts, according to the bounty 
of the king. 

19And when the virgins were 
gathered together the second time, and 
Mordecai sat in the king’s gate—
20Esther had not yet made known her 
kindred nor her people; as Mordecai 
had charged her; for Esther did the 
commandment of Mordecai, like as 
when she was brought up with him— 
21in those days, while Mordecai sat in 
the king’s gate, two of the king’s 
chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of 
those that kept the door, were wroth, 
and sought to lay hands on the king 


Ahasuerus. 22And the thing became 
known to Mordecai, who told it unto 
Esther the queen; and Esther told the 
king thereof in Mordecai’s name. 
23And when inquisition was made of 
the matter, and it was found to be so, 
they were both hanged on a tree; and it 
was written in the book of the 
chronicles before the king. 

 

After these things did king 
Ahasuerus promote Haman the 
son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and 
advanced him, and set his seat above 
all the princes that were with him. 
2And all the king’s servants, that were 
in the king’s gate, bowed down, and 
prostrated themselves before Haman; 
for the king had so commanded 
concerning him. But Mordecai bowed 
not down, nor prostrated himself 
before him. 3Then the king’s servants, 
that were in the king’s gate, said unto 
Mordecai: ‘Why transgressest thou the 
king’s commandment?’ 4Now it came 
to pass, when they spoke daily unto 
him, and he hearkened not unto them, 
that they told Haman, to see whether 
Mordecai’s words would stand; for he 
had told them that he was a Jew. 5And 
when Haman saw that Mordecai 
bowed not down, nor prostrated 
himself before him, then was Haman 
full of wrath. 6But it seemed 
contemptible in his eyes to lay hands 
on Mordecai alone; for they had made 
known to him the people of Mordecai; 
wherefore Haman sought to destroy all 
the Jews that were throughout the 
whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even the 
people of Mordecai. 7In the first 
month, which is the month Nisan, in 
the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, 
they cast pur, that is, the lot, before 
Haman from day to day, and from 
month to month, to the twelfth month, 
which is the month Adar. 

8And Haman said unto king 
Ahasuerus: ‘There is a certain people 
scattered abroad and dispersed among 
the peoples in all the provinces of thy 
kingdom; and their laws are diverse 
from those of every people; neither 
keep they the king’s laws; therefore it 
profiteth not the king to suffer them. 
9If it please the king, let it be written 
that they be destroyed; and I will pay 
ten thousand talents of silver into the 
hands of those that have the charge of 
the king’s business, to bring it into the 
king’s treasuries.’ 10And the king took 
his ring from his hand, and gave it 
unto Haman the son of Hammedatha 
the Agagite, the Jews’enemy. 11And 
the king said unto Haman: ‘The silver 
is given to thee, the people also, to do 
with them as it seemeth good to thee.’ 
12Then were the king’s scribes 
called in the first month, on the 
thirteenth day thereof, and there was 
written, according to all that Haman 
commanded, unto the king’s satraps, 
and to the governors that were over 
every province, and to the princes of 
every people; to every province 
according to the writing thereof, and to 
every people after their language; in 
the name of king Ahasuerus was it 
3 




written, and it was sealed with the 
king’s ring. 13And letters were sent by 
posts into all the king’s provinces, to 
destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, 
all Jews, both young and old, little 
children and women, in one day, even 
upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth 
month, which is the month Adar, and 
to take the spoil of them for a prey. 
14The copy of the writing, to be given 
out for a decree in every province, was 
to be published unto all peoples, that 
they should be ready against that day. 
15The posts went forth in haste by the 
king’s commandment, and the decree 
was given out in Shushan the castle; 
and the king and Haman sat down to 
drink; but the city of Shushan was 
perplexed. 

Now when Mordecai knew all 
that was done, Mordecai rent his 
clothes, and put on sackcloth with 
ashes, and went out into the midst of 
the city, and cried with a loud and a 
bitter cry; 2and he came even before 
the king’s gate; for none might enter 
within the king’s gate clothed with 
sackcloth. 3And in every province, 
whithersoever the king’s 
commandment and his decree came, 
there was great mourning among the 
Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and 
wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and 
ashes. 

4And Esther’s maidens and her 
chamberlains came and told it her; and 
the queen was exceedingly pained; and 
she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai; 
and to take his sackcloth from off him; 
but he accepted it not. 5Then called 
Esther for Hathach, one of the king’s 
chamberlains, whom he had appointed 
to attend upon her, and charged him to 
go to Mordecai, to know what this 
was, and why it was. 6So Hathach 
went forth to Mordecai unto the broad 
place of the city, which was before the 
king’s gate. 7And Mordecai told him 
of all that had happened unto him, and 
the exact sum of the money that 
Haman had promised to pay to the 
king’s treasuries for the Jews, to 
destroy them. 8Also he gave him the 
copy of the writing of the decree that 
was given out in Shushan to destroy 
them, to show it unto Esther, and to 
declare it unto her; and to charge her 
that she should go in unto the king, to 
make supplication unto him, and to 
make request before him, for her 
people. 

9And Hathach came and told Esther 
the words of Mordecai. 10Then Esther 
spoke unto Hathach, and gave him a 
message unto Mordecai: 11’All the 
king’s servants, and the people of the 
king’s provinces, do know, that 
whosoever, whether man or woman, 
shall come unto the king into the inner 
court, who is not called, there is one 
law for him, that he be put to death, 
except such to whom the king shall 
hold out the golden sceptre, that he 
may live; but I have not been called to 
come in unto the king these thirty 
days.’ 12And they told to Mordecai 
Esther’s words. 
4 




13Then Mordecai bade them to 
return answer unto Esther: ‘Think not 
with thyself that thou shalt escape in 
the king’s house, more than all the 
Jews. 14For if thou altogether holdest 
thy peace at this time, then will relief 
and deliverance arise to the Jews from 
another place, but thou and thy father’s 
house will perish; and who knoweth 
whether thou art not come to royal 
estate for such a time as this?’ 15Then 
Esther bade them return answer unto 
Mordecai: 16’Go, gather together all 
the Jews that are present in Shushan, 
and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor 
drink three days, night or day; I also 
and my maidens will fast in like 
manner; and so will I go in unto the 
king, which is not according to the 
law; and if I perish, I perish.’ 17So 
Mordecai went his way, and did 
according to all that Esther had 
commanded him. 

Now it came to pass on the third 
day, that Esther put on her royal 
apparel, and stood in the inner court of 
the king’s house, over against the 
king’s house; and the king sat upon his 
royal throne in the royal house, over 
against the entrance of the house. 2And 
it was so, when the king saw Esther 
the queen standing in the court, that 
she obtained favour in his sight; and 
the king held out to Esther the golden 
sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther 
drew near, and touched the top of the 
sceptre. 3Then said the king unto her: 
‘What wilt thou, queen Esther? for 
whatever thy request, even to the half 
of the kingdom, it shall be given thee.’ 
4And Esther said: ‘If it seem good unto 
the king, let the king and Haman come 
this day unto the banquet that I have 
prepared for him.’ 5Then the king said: 
‘Cause Haman to make haste, that it 
may be done as Esther hath said.’ So 
the king and Haman came to the 
banquet that Esther had prepared. 6And 
the king said unto Esther at the 
banquet of wine: ‘Whatever thy 
petition, it shall be granted thee; and 
whatever thy request, even to the half 
of the kingdom, it shall be performed.’ 
7Then answered Esther, and said: ‘My 
petition and my request is— 8if I have 
found favour in the sight of the king, 
and if it please the king to grant my 
petition, and to perform my request—
let the king and Haman come to the 
banquet that I shall prepare for them, 
and I will do to-morrow as the king 
hath said.’ 

9Then went Haman forth that day 
joyful and glad of heart; but when 
Haman saw Mordecai in the king’s 
gate, that he stood not up, nor moved 
for him, Haman was filled with wrath 
against Mordecai. 10Nevertheless 
Haman refrained himself, and went 
home; and he sent and fetched his 
friends and Zeresh his wife. 11And 
Haman recounted unto them the glory 
of his riches, and the multitude of his 
children, and everything as to how the 
king had promoted him, and how he 
had advanced him above the princes 
and servants of the king. 12Haman said 
moreover: ‘Yea, Esther the queen did 
5 




let no man come in with the king unto 
the banquet that she had prepared but 
myself; and to-morrow also am I 
invited by her together with the king. 
13Yet all this availeth me nothing, so 
long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting 
at the king’s gate.’ 14Then said Zeresh 
his wife and all his friends unto him: 
‘Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits 
high, and in the morning speak thou 
unto the king that Mordecai may be 
hanged thereon; then go thou in 
merrily with the king unto the 
banquet.’ And the thing pleased 
Haman; and he caused the gallows to 
be made. 

On that night could not the king 
sleep; and he commanded to bring 
the book of records of the chronicles, 
and they were read before the king. 
2And it was found written, that 
Mordecai had told of Bigthana and 
Teresh, two of the king’s 
chamberlains, of those that kept the 
door, who had sought to lay hands on 
the king Ahasuerus. 3And the king 
said: ‘What honour and dignity hath 
been done to Mordecai for this?’ Then 
said the king’s servants that ministered 
unto him: ‘There is nothing done for 
him.’ 4And the king said: ‘Who is in 
the court?’—Now Haman was come 
into the outer court of the king’s 
house, to speak unto the king to hang 
Mordecai on the gallows that he had 
prepared for him.— 5And the king’s 
servants said unto him: ‘Behold, 
Haman standeth in the court.’ And the 
king said: ‘Let him come in.’ 6So 
Haman came in. And the king said 
unto him: ‘What shall be done unto the 
man whom the king delighteth to 
honour?’—Now Haman said in his 
heart: ‘Whom would the king delight 
to honour besides myself?’—7And 
Haman said unto the king: ‘For the 
man whom the king delighteth to 
honour, 8let royal apparel be brought 
which the king useth to wear, and the 
horse that the king rideth upon, and on 
whose head a crown royal is set; 9and 
let the apparel and the horse be 
delivered to the hand of one of the 
king’s most noble princes, that they 
may array the man therewith whom 
the king delighteth to honour, and 
cause him to ride on horseback 
through the street of the city, and 
proclaim before him: Thus shall it be 
done to the man whom the king 
delighteth to honour.’ 10Then the king 
said to Haman: ‘Make haste, and take 
the apparel and the horse, as thou hast 
said, and do even so to Mordecai the 
Jew, that sitteth at the king’s gate; let 
nothing fail of all that thou hast 
spoken.’ 11Then took Haman the 
apparel and the horse, and arrayed 
Mordecai, and caused him to ride 
through the street of the city, and 
proclaimed before him: ‘Thus shall it 
be done unto the man whom the king 
delighteth to honour.’ 

12And Mordecai returned to the 
king’s gate. But Haman hasted to his 
house, mourning and having his head 
covered. 13And Haman recounted unto 
Zeresh his wife and all his friends 
6 




every thing that had befallen him. 
Then said his wise men and Zeresh his 
wife unto him: ‘If Mordecai, before 
whom thou hast begun to fall, be of the 
seed of the Jews, thou shalt not prevail 
against him, but shalt surely fall before 
him.’ 14While they were yet talking 
with him, came the king’s 
chamberlains, and hastened to bring 
Haman unto the banquet that Esther 
had prepared. 

So the king and Haman came to 
banquet with Esther the queen. 
2And the king said again unto Esther 
on the second day at the banquet of 
wine: ‘Whatever thy petition, queen 
Esther, it shall be granted thee; and 
whatever thy request, even to the half 
of the kingdom, it shall be performed.’ 
3Then Esther the queen answered and 
said: ‘If I have found favour in thy 
sight, O king, and if it please the king, 
let my life be given me at my petition, 
and my people at my request; 4for we 
are sold, I and my people, to be 
destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. 
But if we had been sold for bondmen 
and bondwomen, I had held my peace, 
for the adversary is not worthy that the 
king be endamaged.’ 

5Then spoke the king Ahasuerus and 
said unto Esther the queen: ‘Who is 
he, and where is he, that durst presume 
in his heart to do so?’ 6And Esther 
said: ‘An adversary and an enemy, 
even this wicked Haman.’ Then 
Haman was terrified before the king 
and the queen. 7And the king arose in 
his wrath from the banquet of wine 
and went into the palace garden; but 
Haman remained to make request for 
his life to Esther the queen; for he saw 
that there was evil determined against 
him by the king. 8Then the king 
returned out of the palace garden into 
the place of the banquet of wine; and 
Haman was fallen upon the couch 
whereon Esther was. Then said the 
king: ‘Will he even force the queen 
before me in the house?’ As the word 
went out of the king’s mouth, they 
covered Haman’s face. 9Then said 
Harbonah, one of the chamberlains 
that were before the king: ‘Behold 
also, the gallows fifty cubits high, 
which Haman hath made for 
Mordecai, who spoke good for the 
king, standeth in the house of Haman.’ 
And the king said: ‘Hang him 
thereon.’ 10So they hanged Haman on 
the gallows that he had prepared for 
Mordecai. Then was the king’s wrath 
assuaged. 

On that day did the king 
Ahasuerus give the house of 
Haman the Jews’enemy unto Esther 
the queen. And Mordecai came before 
the king; for Esther had told what he 
was unto her. 2And the king took off 
his ring, which he had taken from 
Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. 
And Esther set Mordecai over the 
house of Haman. 

3And Esther spoke yet again before 
the king, and fell down at his feet, and 
besought him with tears to put away 
the mischief of Haman the Agagite, 
and his device that he had devised 
7 

8 




against the Jews. 4Then the king held 
out to Esther the golden sceptre. So 
Esther arose, and stood before the 
king. 5And she said: ‘If it please the 
king, and if I have found favour in his 
sight, and the thing seem right before 
the king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, 
let it be written to reverse the letters 
devised by Haman the son of 
Hammedatha the Agagite, which he 
wrote to destroy the Jews that are in all 
the king’s provinces; 6for how can I 
endure to see the evil that shall come 
unto my people? or how can I endure 
to see the destruction of my kindred?’ 

7Then the king Ahasuerus said unto 
Esther the queen and to Mordecai the 
Jew: ‘Behold, I have given Esther the 
house of Haman, and him they have 
hanged upon the gallows, because he 
laid his hand upon the Jews. 8Write ye 
also concerning the Jews, as it liketh 
you, in the king’s name, and seal it 
with the king’s ring; for the writing 
which is written in the king’s name, 
and sealed with the king’s ring, may 
no man reverse.’ 9Then were the 
king’s scribes called at that time, in the 
third month, which is the month Sivan, 
on the three and twentieth day thereof; 
and it was written according to all that 
Mordecai commanded concerning the 
Jews, even to the satraps, and the 
governors and princes of the provinces 
which are from India unto Ethiopia, a 
hundred twenty and seven provinces, 
unto every province according to the 
writing thereof, and unto every people 
after their language, and to the Jews 
according to their writing, and 
according to their language. 10And 
they wrote in the name of king 
Ahasuerus, and sealed it with the 
king’s ring, and sent letters by posts on 
horseback, riding on swift steeds that 
were used in the king’s service, bred 
of the stud; 11that the king had granted 
the Jews that were in every city to 
gather themselves together, and to 
stand for their life, to destroy, and to 
slay, and to cause to perish, all the 
forces of the people and province that 
would assault them, their little ones 
and women, and to take the spoil of 
them for a prey, 12upon one day in all 
the provinces of king Ahasuerus, 
namely, upon the thirteenth day of the 
twelfth month, which is the month 
Adar. 13The copy of the writing, to be 
given out for a decree in every 
province, was to be published unto all 
the peoples, and that the Jews should 
be ready against that day to avenge 
themselves on their enemies. 14So the 
posts that rode upon swift steeds that 
were used in the king’s service went 
out, being hastened and pressed on by 
the king’s commandment; and the 
decree was given out in Shushan the 
castle. 

15And Mordecai went forth from the 
presence of the king in royal apparel of 
blue and white, and with a great crown 
of gold, and with a rob of fine linen 
and purple; and the city of Shushan 
shouted and was glad. 16The Jews had 
light and gladness, and joy and 
honour. 17And in every province, and 


in every city, whithersoever the king’s 
commandment and his decree came, 
the Jews had gladness and joy, a feast 
and a good day. And many from 
among the peoples of the land became 
Jews; for the fear of the Jews was 
fallen upon them. 

Now in the twelfth month, which 
is the month Adar, on the 
thirteenth day of the same, when the 
king’s commandment and his decree 
drew near to be put in execution, in the 
day that the enemies of the Jews hoped 
to have rule over them; whereas it was 
turned to the contrary, that the Jews 
had rule over them that hated them; 
2the Jews gathered themselves together 
in their cities throughout all the 
provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay 
hand on such as sought their hurt; and 
no man could withstand them; for the 
fear of them was fallen upon all the 
peoples. 3And all the princes of the 
provinces, and the satraps, and the 
governors, and they that did the king’s 
business, helped the Jews; because the 
fear of Mordecai was fallen upon 
them. 4For Mordecai was great in the 
king’s house, and his fame went forth 
throughout all the provinces; for the 
man Mordecai waxed greater and 
greater. 5And the Jews smote all their 
enemies with the stroke of the sword, 
and with slaughter and destruction, 
and did what they would unto them 
that hated them. 6And in Shushan the 
castle the Jews slew and destroyed five 
hundred men. 7And Parshandatha, and 
Dalphon, and Aspatha, 8and Poratha, 
and Adalia, and Aridatha, 9and 
Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and 
Vaizatha, 10the ten sons of Haman the 
son of Hammedatha, the Jews’enemy, 
slew they; but on the spoil they laid 
not their hand. 

11On that day the number of those 
that were slain in Shushan the castle 
was brought before the king. 12And the 
king said unto Esther the queen: ‘The 
Jews have slain and destroyed five 
hundred men in Shushan the castle, 
and the ten sons of Haman; what then 
have they done in the rest of the king’s 
provinces! Now whatever thy petition, 
it shall be granted thee; and whatever 
thy request further, it shall be done.’ 
13Then said Esther: ‘If it please the 
king, let it be granted to the Jews that 
are in Shushan to do to-morrow also 
according unto this day’s decree, and 
let Haman’s ten sons be hanged upon 
the gallows.’ 14And the king 
commanded it so to be done; and a 
decree was given out in Shushan; and 
they hanged Haman’s ten sons. 15And 
the Jews that were in Shushan 
gathered themselves together on the 
fourteenth day also of the month Adar, 
and slew three hundred men in 
Shushan; but on the spoil they laid not 
their hand. 

16And the other Jews that were in 
the king’s provinces gathered 
themselves together, and stood for 
their lives, and had rest from their 
enemies, and slew of them that hated 
them seventy and five thousand—but 
on the spoil they laid not their hand—
9 




17on the thirteenth day of the month 
Adar, and on the fourteenth day of the 
same they rested, and made it a day of 
feasting and gladness. 18But the Jews 
that were in Shushan assembled 
together on the thirteenth day thereof, 
and on the fourteenth thereof; and on 
the fifteenth day of the same they 
rested, and made it a day of feasting 
and gladness. 19Therefore do the Jews 
of the villages, that dwell in the 
unwalled towns, make the fourteenth 
day of the month Adar a day of 
gladness and feasting, and a good day, 
and of sending portions one to another. 

20And Mordecai wrote these things, 
and sent letters unto all the Jews that 
were in all the provinces of the king 
Ahasuerus, both nigh and far, 21to 
enjoin them that they should keep the 
fourteenth day of the month Adar, and 
the fifteenth day of the same, yearly, 
22the days wherein the Jews had rest 
from their enemies, and the month 
which was turned unto them from 
sorrow to gladness, and from 
mourning into a good day; that they 
should make them days of feasting and 
gladness, and of sending portions one 
to another, and gifts to the poor. 23And 
the Jews took upon them to do as they 
had begun, and as Mordecai had 
written unto them; 24because Haman 
the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, 
the enemy of all the Jews, had devised 
against the Jews to destroy them, and 
had cast pur, that is, the lot, to 
discomfit them, and to destroy them; 
25but when ashe came before the king, 
he commanded by letters that his 
wicked device, which he had devised 
against the Jews, should return upon 
his own head; and that he and his sons 
should be hanged on the gallows. 
26Wherefore they called these days 
Purim, after the name of pur. 
Therefore because of all the words of 
this letter, and of that which they had 
seen concerning this matter, and that 
which had come unto them, 27the Jews 
ordained, and took upon them, and 
upon their seed, and upon all such as 
joined themselves unto them, so as it 
should not fail, that they would keep 
these two days according to the 
writing thereof, and according to the 
appointed time thereof, every year; 
28and that these days should be 
remembered and kept throughout 
every generation, every family, every 
province, and every city; and that these 
days of Purim should not fail from 
among the Jews, nor the memorial of 
them perish from their seed. 

a That is, Esther. 

29Then Esther the queen, the 
daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the 
Jew, wrote down all the acts of power, 
to confirm this second letter of Purim. 
30And he sent letters unto all the Jews, 
to the hundred twenty and seven 
provinces of the kingdom of 
Ahasuerus, with words of peace and 
truth, 31to confirm these days of Purim 
in their appointed times, according as 
Mordecai the Jew and Esther the 


queen had enjoined them, and as they 
had ordained for themselves and for 
their seed, the matters of the fastings 
and their cry. 32And the commandment 
of Esther confirmed these matters of 
Purim; and it was written in the book. 

 

10 



And the king Ahasuerus laid a 
tribute upon the land, and 
upon the isles of the sea. 2And all the 
acts of his power and of his might, and 
the full account of the greatness of 
Mordecai, how the king advanced him, 
are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Media and 
Persia? 3For Mordecai the Jew was 
next unto king Ahasuerus, and great 
among the Jews, and accepted of the 
multitude of his brethren; seeking the 
good of his people and speaking peace 
to all his seed. 

 

 

 

 




..... 

DANIEL 

 

IN THE third year of the reign of 
Jehoiakim king of Judah came 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto 
Jerusalem, and besieged it. 2And the 
Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah 
into his hand, with part of the vessels 
of the house of God; and he carried 
them into the land of Shinar to the 
house of his god, and the vessels he 
brought into the treasure-house of his 
god. 3And the king spoke unto 
Ashpenaz his chief officer, that he 
should bring in certain of the children 
of Israel, and of the seed royal, and of 
the nobles, 4youths in whom was no 
blemish, but fair to look on, and skilful 
in all wisdom, and skilful in 
knowledge, and discerning in thought, 
and such as had ability to stand in the 
king’s palace; and that he should teach 
them the learning and the tongue of the 
Chaldeans. 5And the king appointed 
for them a daily portion of the king’s 
food, and of the wine which he drank, 
and that they should be nourished 
three years; that at the end thereof they 
might stand before the king. 6Now 
among these were, of the children of 
Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and 
Azariah. 7And the chief of the officers 
gave names unto them: unto Daniel he 
gave the name of Belteshazzar; and to 
Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to 
Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, 
of Abed-nego. 

8But Daniel purposed in his heart 
that he would not defile himself with 
the king’s food, nor with the wine 
which he drank; therefore he requested 
of the chief of the officers that he 
might not defile himself. 9And God 
granted Daniel mercy and compassion 
in the sight of the chief of the officers. 
10And the chief of the officers said 
unto Daniel: ‘I fear my lord the king, 
who hath appointed your food and 
your drink; for why should he see your 
faces sad in comparison with the 
youths that are of your own age? so 
would ye endanger my head with the 
king.’ 11Then said Daniel to the 
steward, whom the chief of the officers 
had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, 
Mishael, and Azariah: 12’Try thy 
servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and 
let them give us pulse to eat, and water 
to drink. 13Then let our countenances 
be looked upon before thee, and the 
countenance of the youths that eat of 
the king’s food; and as thou seest, deal 
with thy servants.’ 14So he hearkened 
unto them in this matter, and tried 
them ten days. 15And at the end of ten 
days their countenances appeared 
fairer, and they were fatter in flesh, 
than all the youths that did eat of the 
king’s food. 16So the steward took 
away their food, and the wine that they 
should drink, and gave them pulse. 
17Now as for these four youths, God 
1 




gave them knowledge and skill in all 
learning and wisdom; and Daniel had 
understanding in all visions and 
dreams. 18And at the end of the days 
which the king had appointed for 
bringing them in, the chief of the 
officers brought them in before 
Nebuchadnezzar. 19And the king spoke 
with them; and among them all was 
found none like Daniel, Hananiah, 
Mishael, and Azariah; therefore stood 
they before the king. 20And in all 
matters of wisdom and understanding, 
that the king inquired of them, he 
found them ten times better than all the 
magicians and enchanters that were in 
all his realm. 21And Daniel continued 
even unto the first year of king Cyrus. 

And in the second year of the 
reign of Nebuchadnezzar 
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams; and 
his spirit was troubled, and his sleep 
broke from him. 2Then the king 
commanded to call the magicians, and 
the enchanters, and the sorcerers, and 
the Chaldeans, to tell the king his 
dreams. So they came and stood before 
the king. 3And the king said unto them: 
‘I have dreamed a dream, and my 
spirit is troubled to know the dream.’ 
4Then spoke the Chaldeans to the king 
in Aramaic: ‘O king, live for ever! tell 
thy servants the dream, and we will 
declare the interpretation.’ 5The king 
answered and said to the Chaldeans: 
‘The thing is certain with me; if ye 
make not known unto me the dream 
and the interpretation thereof, ye shall 
be cut in pieces, and your houses shall 
be made a dunghill. 6But if ye declare 
the dream and the interpretation 
thereof, ye shall receive of me gifts 
and rewards and great honour; only 
declare unto me the dream and the 
interpretation thereof.’ 7They answered 
the second time and said: ‘Let the king 
tell his servants the dream, and we will 
declare the interpretation.’ 8The king 
answered and said: ‘I know of a truth 
that ye would gain time, inasmuch as 
ye see the thing is certain with me, 
9that, if ye make not known unto me 
the dream, there is but one law for 
you; and ye have agreed together to 
speak before me lying and corrupt 
words, till the time be changed; only 
tell me the dream, and I shall know 
that ye can declare unto me the 
interpretation thereof.’ 10The 
Chaldeans answered before the king, 
and said: ‘There is not a man upon the 
earth that can declare the king’s 
matter; forasmuch as no great and 
powerful king hath asked such a thing 
of any magician, or enchanter, or 
Chaldean. 11And it is a hard thing that 
the king asketh, and there is none other 
that can declare it before the king, 
except the gods, whose dwelling is not 
with flesh.’ 12For this cause the king 
was angry and very furious, and 
commanded to destroy all the wise 
men of Babylon. 13So the decree went 
forth, and the wise men were to be 
slain; and they sought Daniel and his 
companions to be slain. 

14Then Daniel returned answer with 
counsel and discretion to Arioch the 
2 




captain of the king’s guard, who was 
gone forth to slay the wise men of 
Babylon; 15he answered and said to 
Arioch the king’s captain: ‘Wherefore 
is the decree so peremptory from the 
king?’ Then Arioch made the thing 
known to Daniel. 16Then Daniel went 
in, and desired of the king that he 
would give him time, that he might 
declare unto the king the 
interpretation. 

17Then Daniel went to his house, 
and made the thing known to 
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his 
companions; 18that they might ask 
mercy of the God of heaven 
concerning this secret; that Daniel and 
his companions should not perish with 
the rest of the wise men of Babylon. 
19Then was the secret revealed unto 
Daniel in a vision of the night. Then 
Daniel blessed the God of heaven. 
20Daniel spoke and said: 

Blessed be the name of God 

From everlasting even unto 
everlasting; 

For wisdom and might are His; 

21And He changeth the times and the 
seasons; 

He removeth kings, and setteth up 
kings; 

He giveth wisdom unto the wise, 

And knowledge to them that know 
understanding; 

22He revealeth the deep and secret 
things; 

He knoweth what is in the darkness, 

And the light dwelleth with Him. 

23I thank Thee, and praise Thee, 

O Thou God of my fathers, w 

Who hast given me wisdom and 
might, 

And hast now made known unto me 
what we desired of Thee; 

For Thou hast made known unto us 
the king’s matter. 

24Therefore Daniel went in unto 
Arioch, whom the king had appointed 
to destroy the wise men of Babylon; he 
went and said thus unto him: ‘Destroy 
not the wise men of Babylon; bring me 
in before the king, and I will declare 
unto the king the interpretation.’ 

25Then Arioch brought in Daniel 
before the king in haste, and said thus 
unto him: ‘I have found a man of the 
children of the captivity of Judah, that 
will make known unto the king the 
interpretation.’ 26The king spoke and 
said to Daniel, whose name was 
Belteshazzar: ‘Art thou able to make 
known unto me the dream which I 
have seen, and the interpretation 
thereof?’ 27Daniel answered before the 
king, and said: ‘The secret which the 
king hath asked can neither wise men, 
enchanters, magicians, nor astrologers, 
declare unto the king; 28but there is a 
God in heaven that revealeth secrets, 
and He hath made known to the king 
Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the 
end of days. Thy dream, and the 
visions of thy head upon thy bed, are 
these: 29as for thee, O king, thy 
thoughts came [into thy mind] upon 
thy bed, what should come to pass 
hereafter; and He that revealeth secrets 
hath made known to thee what shall 


come to pass. 30But as for me, this 
secret is not revealed to me for any 
wisdom that I have more than any 
living, but to the intent that the 
interpretation may be made known to 
the king, and that thou mayest know 
the thoughts of thy heart. 

31Thou, O king, sawest, and behold 
a great image. This image, which was 
mighty, and whose brightness was 
surpassing, stood before thee; and the 
appearance thereof was terrible. 32As 
for that image, its head was of fine 
gold, its breast and its arms of silver, 
its belly and its thighs of brass, 33its 
legs of iron, its feet part of iron and 
part of clay. 34Thou sawest till that a 
stone was cut out without hands, 
which smote the image upon its feet 
that were of iron and clay, and broke 
them to pieces. 35Then was the iron, 
the clay, the brass, the silver, and the 
gold, broken in pieces together, and 
became like the chaff of the summer 
threshing-floors; and the wind carried 
them away, so that no place was found 
for them; and the stone that smote the 
image became a great mountain, and 
filled the whole earth. 36This is the 
dream; and we will tell the 
interpretation thereof before the king. 

37Thou, O king, king of kings, unto 
whom the God of heaven hath given 
the kingdom, the power, and the 
strength, and the glory; 38and 
wheresoever the children of men, the 
beasts of the field, and the fowls of the 
heaven dwell, hath He given them into 
thy hand, and hath made thee to rule 
over them all; thou art the head of 
gold. 39And after thee shall arise 
another kingdom inferior to thee; and 
another third kingdom of brass, which 
shall bear rule over all the earth. 40And 
the fourth kingdom shall be strong as 
iron; forasmuch as iron breaketh in 
pieces and beateth down all things; 
and as iron that crusheth all these, 
shall it break in pieces and crush. 
41And whereas thou sawest the feet 
and toes, part of potters’clay, and part 
of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom; 
but there shall be in it of the firmness 
of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest 
the iron mixed with miry clay. 42And 
as the toes of the feet were part of iron, 
and part of clay, so part of the 
kingdom shall be strong, and part 
thereof broken. 43And whereas thou 
sawest the iron mixed with miry clay, 
they shall mingle themselves by the 
seed of men; but they shall not cleave 
one to another, even as iron doth not 
mingle with clay. 44And in the days of 
those kings shall the God of heaven set 
up a kingdom, which shall never be 
destroyed; nor shall the kingdom be 
left to another people; it shall break in 
pieces and consume all these 
kingdoms, but it shall stand for ever. 
45Forasmuch as thou sawest that a 
stone was cut out of the mountain 
without hands, and that it broke in 
pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the 
silver, and the gold; the great God hath 
made known to the king what shall 
come to pass hereafter; and the dream 
is certain, and the interpretation 


thereof sure.’ 46Then the king 
Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, 
and worshipped Daniel, and 
commanded that they should offer an 
offering and sweet odours unto him. 
47The king spoke unto Daniel, and 
said: ‘Of a truth it is, that your God is 
the God of gods, and the Lord of 
kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing 
thou hast been able to reveal this 
secret.’ 48Then the king made Daniel 
great, and gave him many great gifts, 
and made him to rule over the whole 
province of Babylon, and to be chief 
prefect over all the wise men of 
Babylon. 49And Daniel requested of 
the king, and he appointed Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, over the 
affairs of the province of Babylon; but 
Daniel was in the gate of the king. 

 

Nebuchadnezzar the king made 
an image of gold, whose height 
was threescore cubits, and the breadth 
thereof six cubits; he set it up in the 
plain of Dura, in the province of 
Babylon. 2Then Nebuchadnezzar the 
king sent to gather together the satraps, 
the prefects, and the governors, the 
judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, 
the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the 
provinces, to come to the dedication of 
the image which Nebuchadnezzar the 
king had set up. 3Then the satraps, the 
prefects, and the governors, the judges, 
the treasurers, the counsellors, the 
sheriffs, and all the rulers of the 
provinces, were gathered together unto 
the dedication of the image that 
Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; 
and they stood before the image that 
Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 4And the 
herald cried aloud: ‘To you it is 
commanded, O peoples, nations, and 
languages, 5that at what time ye hear 
the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, 
trigon, psaltery, bagpipe, and all kinds 
of music, ye fall down and worship the 
golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the 
king hath set up; 6and whoso falleth 
not down and worshippeth shall the 
same hour be cast into the midst of a 
burning fiery furnace.’ 7Therefore at 
that time, when all the peoples heard 
the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, 
trigon, psaltery, and all kinds of music, 
all the peoples, the nations, and the 
languages, fell down and worshipped 
the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar 
the king had set up. 

8Wherefore at that time certain 
Chaldeans came near, and brought 
accusation against the Jews. 9They 
spoke and said to Nebuchadnezzar the 
king: ‘O king, live for ever! 10Thou, O 
king, hast made a decree, that every 
man that shall hear the sound of the 
horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, and 
bagpipe, and all kinds of music, shall 
fall down and worship the golden 
image; 11and whoso falleth not down 
and worshippeth shall be cast into the 
midst of a burning fiery furnace. 
12There are certain Jews whom thou 
hast appointed over the affairs of the 
province of Babylon, Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men, 
O king, have not regarded thee: they 
3 




serve not thy gods, nor worship the 
golden image which thou hast set up.’ 

13Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage 
and fury commanded to bring 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. 
Then were these men brought before 
the king. 14Nebuchadnezzar spoke and 
said unto them: ‘Is it true, O Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, that ye 
serve not my gods, nor worship the 
golden image which I have set up? 
15Now if ye be ready that at what time 
ye hear the sound of the horn, pipe, 
harp, trigon, psaltery, and bagpipe, and 
all kinds of music, ye fall down and 
worship the image which I have made 
, well; but if ye worship not, ye shall 
be cast the same hour into the midst of 
a burning fiery furnace; and who is the 
god that shall deliver you out of my 
hands?’ 16Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, answered and said to the 
king: ‘O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no 
need to answer thee in this matter. 17If 
our God whom we serve is able to 
deliver us, He will deliver us from the 
burning fiery furnace, and out of thy 
hand, O king. 18But if not, be it known 
unto thee, O king, that we will not 
serve thy gods, nor worship the golden 
image which thou hast set up.’ 

19Then was Nebuchadnezzar filled 
with fury, and the form of his visage 
was changed, against Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego; he spoke, 
and commanded that they should heat 
the furnace seven times more than it 
was wont to be heated. 20And he 
commanded certain mighty men that 
were in his army to bind Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, and to cast 
them into the burning fiery furnace. 
21Then these men were bound in their 
cloaks, their tunics, and their robes, 
and their other garments, and were cast 
into the midst of the burning fiery 
furnace. 22Therefore because the 
king’s commandment was peremptory, 
and the furnace exceeding hot, the 
flame of the fire slew those men that 
took up Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego. 23And these three men, 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
fell down bound into the midst of the 
burning fiery furnace. 

24Then Nebuchadnezzar the king 
was alarmed, and rose up in haste; he 
spoke and said unto his ministers: ‘Did 
not we cast three men bound into the 
midst of the fire?’ They answered and 
said unto the king: ‘True, O king.’ 
25He answered and said: ‘Lo, I see four 
men loose, walking in the midst of the 
fire, and they have no hurt; and the 
appearance of the fourth is like a son 
of the gods.’ 

26Then Nebuchadnezzar came near 
to the mouth of the burning fiery 
furnace; he spoke and said: ‘Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants 
of God Most High, come forth, and 
come hither.’ Then Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, came forth 
out of the midst of the fire. 27And the 
satraps, the prefects, and the 
governors, and the king’s ministers, 
being gathered together, saw these 
men, that the fire had no power upon 


their bodies, nor was the hair of their 
head singed, neither were their cloaks 
changed, nor had the smell of fire 
passed on them. 28Nebuchadnezzar 
spoke and said: ‘Blessed be the God of 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
who hath sent His angel, and delivered 
His servants that trusted in Him, and 
have changed the king’s word, and 
have yielded their bodies, that they 
might not serve nor worship any god, 
except their own God. 29Therefore I 
make a decree, that every people, 
nation, and language, which speak any 
thing amiss against the God of 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
shall be cut in pieces, and their houses 
shall be made a dunghill; because 
there is no other god that is able to 
deliver after this sort.’ 30Then the king 
promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, in the province of 
Babylon. 

 

31‘Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all 
peoples, nations, and languages, that 
dwell in all the earth; peace be 
multiplied unto you. 32It hath seemed 
good unto me to declare the signs and 
wonders that God Most High hath 
wrought toward me. 

33How great are His signs! 

And how mighty are His wonders! 

His kingdom is an everlasting 
kingdom, 

And His dominion is from 
generation to generation. 

I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in 
my house, and flourishing in my 
palace. 2I saw a dream which made 
me afraid; and imaginings upon my 
bed and the visions of my head 
affrighted me. 3Therefore made I a 
decree to bring in all the wise men of 
Babylon before me, that they might 
make known unto me the 
interpretation of the dream. 4Then 
came in the magicians, the enchanters, 
the Chaldeans, and the astrologers; and 
I told the dream before them; but they 
did not make known unto me the 
interpretation thereof. 5But at the last 
Daniel came in before me, whose 
name was Belteshazzar, according to 
the name of my god, and in whom is 
the spirit of the holy gods; and I told 
the dream before him: 6O 
Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, 
because I know that the spirit of the 
holy gods is in thee, and no secret 
causeth thee trouble, tell me the 
visions of my dream that I have seen, 
and the interpretation thereof. 7Thus 
were the visions of my head upon my 
bed: I saw, 

And behold a tree in the midst of the 
earth, 

And the height thereof was great. 
8The tree grew, and was strong, 

And the height thereof reached unto 
heaven, 

And the sight thereof to the end of 
all the earth. 

9The leaves thereof were fair, and 
the fruit thereof much, 

And in it was food for all; 

The beasts of the field had shadow 
under it, 4 




And the fowls of the heaven dwelt 
in the branches thereof, 

And all flesh was fed of it. 

10I saw in the visions of my head upon 
my bed, and, behold, a watcher and a 
holy one came down from heaven. 
11He cried aloud, and said thus: 

Hew down the tree, and cut off its 
branches, 

Shake off its leaves, and scatter its 
fruit; 

Let the beasts get away from under 
it, 

And the fowls from its branches. 

12Nevertheless leave the stump of its 
roots in the earth, 

Even in a band of iron and brass, in 
the tender grass of the field; 

And let it be wet with the dew of 
heaven, 

And let his portion be with the 
beasts in the grass of the earth; 

13Let his heart be changed from 
man’s, 

And let a beast’s heart be given unto 
him; 

And let seven times pass over him. 

14The matter is by the decree of the 
watchers, 

And the sentence by the word of the 
holy ones; 

To the intent that the living may 
know 

That the Most High ruleth in the 
kingdom of men, 

And giveth it to whomsoever He 
will, 

And setteth up over it the lowest of 
men. 

15This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar 
have seen; and thou, O Belteshazzar, 
declare the interpretation, forasmuch 
as all the wise men of my kingdom are 
not able to make known unto me the 
interpretation; but thou art able, for the 
spirit of the holy gods is in thee.’ 

 

16Then Daniel, whose name was 
Belteshazzar, was appalled for a while, 
and his thoughts affrighted him. The 
king spoke and said: ‘Belteshazzar, let 
not the dream, or the interpretation, 
affright thee.’ Belteshazzar answered 
and said: ‘My lord, the dream be to 
them that hate thee, and the 
interpretation thereof to thine 
adversaries. 17The tree that thou 
sawest, which grew, and was strong, 
whose height reached unto the heaven, 
and the sight thereof to all the earth; 
18whose leaves were fair, and the fruit 
thereof much, and in it was food for 
all; under which the beasts of the field 
dwelt, and upon whose branches the 
fowls of the heaven had their 
habitation; 19it is thou, O king, that art 
grown and become strong; for thy 
greatness is grown, and reacheth unto 
heaven, and thy dominion to the end of 
the earth. 20And whereas the king saw 
a watcher and a holy one coming down 
from heaven, and saying: Hew down 
the tree, and destroy it; nevertheless 
leave the stump of the roots thereof in 
the earth, even in a band of iron and 
brass, in the tender grass of the field; 
and let it be wet with the dew of 
heaven, and let his portion be with the 


beasts of the field, till seven times pass 
over him—21this is the interpretation, 
O king, and it is the decree of the Most 
High, which is come upon my lord the 
king, 22that thou shalt be driven from 
men, and thy dwelling shall be with 
the beasts of the field, and thou shalt 
be made to eat grass as oxen, and shalt 
be wet with the dew of heaven, and 
seven times shall pass over thee; till 
thou know that the Most High ruleth in 
the kingdom of men, and giveth it to 
whomsoever He will. 23And whereas it 
was commanded to leave the stump of 
the roots of the tree, thy kingdom shall 
be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt 
have known that the heavens do rule. 
24Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be 
acceptable unto thee, and break off thy 
sins by almsgiving, and thine iniquities 
by showing mercy to the poor; if there 
may be a lengthening of thy 
prosperity.’ 

25All this came upon the king 
Nebuchadnezzar. 26At the end of 
twelve months he was walking upon 
the royal palace of Babylon. 27The 
king spoke, and said: ‘Is not this great 
Babylon, which I have built for a royal 
dwelling-place, by the might of my 
power and for the glory of my 
majesty?’ 28While the word was in the 
king’s mouth, there fell a voice from 
heaven: ‘O king Nebuchadnezzar, to 
thee it is spoken: the kingdom is 
departed from thee. 29And thou shalt 
be driven from men, and thy dwelling 
shall be with the beasts of the field; 
thou shalt be made to eat grass as 
oxen, and seven times shall pass over 
thee; until thou know that the Most 
High ruleth in the kingdom of men, 
and giveth it to whomsoever He will.’ 
30The same hour was the thing fulfilled 
upon Nebuchadnezzar; and he was 
driven from men, and did eat grass as 
oxen, and his body was wet with the 
dew of heaven, till his hair was grown 
like eagles’feathers, and his nails like 
birds’claws. 

 

31‘And at the end of the days I 
Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes 
unto heaven, and mine understanding 
returned unto me, and I blessed the 
Most High, and I praised and honoured 
Him that liveth for ever; 

For His dominion is an everlasting 
dominion, 

And His kingdom from generation 
to generation; 

32And all the inhabitants of the earth 
are reputed as nothing; 

And He doeth according to His will 
in the host of heaven, 

And among the inhabitants of the 
earth; 

And none can stay His hand, 

Or say unto Him: What doest Thou? 

33At the same time mine understanding 
returned unto me; and for the glory of 
my kingdom, my majesty and my 
splendour returned unto me; and my 
ministers and my lords sought unto 
me; and I was established in my 
kingdom, and surpassing greatness 
was added unto me. 34Now I 
Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and 


honour the King of heaven; for all His 
works are truth, and His ways justice; 
and those that walk in pride He is able 
to abase.’ 

 

Belshazzar the king made a 
great feast to a thousand of his 
lords, and drank wine before the 
thousand. 2Belshazzar, while he tasted 
the wine, commanded to bring the 
golden and silver vessels which 
Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken 
out of the temple which was in 
Jerusalem; that the king and his lords, 
his consorts and his concubines, might 
drink therein. 3Then they brought the 
golden vessels that were taken out of 
the temple of the house of God which 
was at Jerusalem; and the king, and his 
lords, his consorts and his concubines, 
drank in them. 4They drank wine, and 
praised the gods of gold, and of silver, 
of brass, of iron, of wood, and of 
stone. 5In the same hour came forth 
fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote 
over against the candlestick upon the 
plaster of the wall of the king’s palace; 
and the king saw the palm of the hand 
that wrote. 6Then the king’s 
countenance was changed in him, and 
his thoughts affrighted him; and the 
joints of his loins were loosed, and his 
knees smote one against another. 7The 
king cried aloud to bring in the 
enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the 
astrologers. The king spoke and said to 
the wise men of Babylon: ‘Whosoever 
shall read this writing, and declare 
unto me the interpretation thereof, 
shall be clothed with purple, and have 
a chain of gold about his neck, and 
shall rule as one of three in the 
kingdom.’ 

8Then came in all the king’s wise 
men: but they could not read the 
writing, nor make known to the king 
the interpretation. 9Then was king 
Belshazzar greatly affrighted, and his 
countenance was changed in him, and 
his lords were perplexed. 10Now the 
queen by reason of the words of the 
king and his lords came into the 
banquet house; the queen spoke and 
said: ‘O king, live for ever! let not thy 
thoughts affright thee, nor let thy 
countenance be changed; 11there is a 
man in thy kingdom, in whom is the 
spirit of the holy gods; and in the days 
of thy father light and understanding 
and wisdom, like the wisdom of the 
gods, was found in him; and the king 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I 
say, thy father, made him master of the 
magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans, and 
astrologers; 12forasmuch as a 
surpassing spirit, and knowledge, and 
understanding, interpreting of dreams, 
and declaring of riddles, and loosing of 
knots, were found in the same Daniel, 
whom the king named Belteshazzar. 
Now let Daniel be called, and he will 
declare the interpretation.’ 

13Then was Daniel brought in before 
the king. The king spoke and said unto 
Daniel: ‘Art thou Daniel, who is of the 
children of the captivity of Judah, 
whom the king my father brought out 
of Judah? 14I have heard of thee, that 
5 




the spirit of the gods is in thee, and 
that light and understanding and 
surpassing wisdom is found in thee. 
15And now the wise men, the 
enchanters, have been brought in 
before me, that they should read this 
writing, and make known unto me the 
interpretation thereof; but they could 
not declare the interpretation of the 
thing. 16But I have heard of thee, that 
thou canst give interpretations, and 
loose knots; now if thou canst read the 
writing, and make known to me the 
interpretation thereof, thou shalt be 
clothed with purple, and have a chain 
of gold about thy neck, and shalt rule 
as one of three in the kingdom.’ 

17Then Daniel answered and said 
before the king: ‘Let thy gifts be to 
thyself, and give thy rewards to 
another; nevertheless I will read the 
writing unto the king, and make 
known to him the interpretation. 18O 
thou king, God Most High gave 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father the 
kingdom, and greatness, and glory, 
and majesty; 19and because of the 
greatness that He gave him, all the 
peoples, nations, and languages 
trembled and feared before him: whom 
he would he slew, and whom he would 
he kept alive; and whom he would he 
raised up, and whom he would he put 
down. 20But when his heart was lifted 
up, and his spirit was hardened that he 
dealt proudly, he was deposed from his 
kingly throne, and his glory was taken 
from him; 21and he was driven from 
the sons of men, and his heart was 
made like the beasts, and his dwelling 
was with the wild asses; he was fed 
with grass like oxen, and his body was 
wet with the dew of heaven; until he 
knew that God Most High ruleth in the 
kingdom of men, and that He setteth 
up over it whomsoever He will. 22And 
thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not 
humbled thy heart, though thou 
knewest all this; 23but hast lifted up 
thyself against the Lord of heaven; and 
they have brought the vessels of His 
house before thee, and thou and thy 
lords, thy consorts and thy concubines, 
have drunk wine in them; and thou 
hast praised the gods of silver, and 
gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, 
which see not, nor hear, nor know; and 
the God in whose hand thy breath is, 
and whose are all thy ways, hast thou 
not glorified; 24then was the palm of 
the hand sent from before Him, and 
this writing was inscribed. 25And this 
is the writing that was inscribed: 
MENE MENE, TEKEL UPHARSIN. 
26This is the interpretation of the thing: 
MENE, God hath numbered thy 
kingdom, and brought it to an end. 
27TEKEL, Thou art weighed in the 
balances, and art found wanting. 
28PERES, thy kingdom is divided, and 
given to the Medes and Persians.’ 
29Then commanded Belshazzar, and 
they clothed Daniel with purple, and 
put a chain of gold about his neck, and 
made proclamation concerning him, 
that he should rule as one of three in 
the kingdom. 30In that night Belshazzar 
the Chaldean king was slain. 


And Darius the Mede received the 
kingdom, being about threescore 
and two years old. 2It pleased Darius to 
set over the kingdom a hundred and 
twenty satraps, who should be 
throughout the whole kingdom; 3and 
over them three presidents, of whom 
Daniel was one; that these satraps 
might give account unto them, and that 
the king should have no damage. 
4Then this Daniel distinguished 
himself above the presidents and the 
satraps, because a surpassing spirit 
was in him; and the king thought to set 
him over the whole realm. 

5Then the presidents and the satraps 
sought to find occasion against Daniel 
as touching the kingdom; but they 
could find no occasion nor fault; 
forasmuch as he was faithful, neither 
was there any error or fault found in 
him. 6Then said these men: ‘We shall 
not find any occasion against this 
Daniel, except we find it against him 
in the matter of the law of his God.’ 
7Then these presidents and satraps 
came tumultuously to the king, and 
said thus unto him: ‘King Darius, live 
for ever! 8All the presidents of the 
kingdom, the prefects and the satraps, 
the ministers and the governors, have 
consulted together that the king should 
establish a statute, and make a strong 
interdict, that whosoever shall ask a 
petition of any god or man for thirty 
days, save of thee, O king, he shall be 
cast into the den of lions. 9Now, O 
king, establish the interdict, and sign 
the writing, that it be not changed, 
according to the law of the Medes and 
Persians, which altereth not.’ 
10Wherefore king Darius signed the 
writing and the interdict. 

11And when Daniel knew that the 
writing was signed, he went into his 
house—now his windows were open 
in his upper chamber toward 
Jerusalem—and he kneeled upon his 
knees three times a day, and prayed, 
and gave thanks before his God, as he 
did aforetime. 12Then these men came 
tumultuously, and found Daniel 
making petition and supplication 
before his God. 13Then they came near, 
and spoke before the king concerning 
the king’s interdict: ‘Hast thou not 
signed an interdict, that every man that 
shall make petition unto any god or 
man within thirty days, save of thee, O 
king, shall be cast into the den of 
lions?’ The king answered and said: 
‘The thing is true, according to the law 
of the Medes and Persians, which 
altereth not.’ 14Then answered they 
and said before the king: ‘That Daniel, 
who is of the children of the captivity 
of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, 
nor the interdict that thou hast signed, 
but maketh his petition three times a 
day.’ 15Then the king, when he heard 
these words, was sore displeased, and 
set his heart on Daniel to deliver him; 
and he laboured till the going down of 
the sun to deliver him. 16Then these 
men came tumultuously unto the king, 
and said unto the king: ‘Know, O king, 
that it is a law of the Medes and 
Persians, that no interdict nor statute 
6 




which the king establisheth may be 
changed.’ 17Then the king 
commanded, and they brought Daniel, 
and cast him into the den of lions. 
Now the king spoke and said unto 
Daniel: ‘Thy God whom thou servest 
continually, He will deliver thee.’ 
18And a stone was brought, and laid 
upon the mouth of the den; and the 
king sealed it with his own signet, and 
with the signet of his lords; that 
nothing might be changed concerning 
Daniel. 

19Then the king went to his palace, 
and passed the night fasting; neither 
were diversions brought before him; 
and his sleep fled from him. 20Then 
the king arose very early in the 
morning, and went in haste unto the 
den of lions. 21And when he came near 
unto the den to Daniel, he cried with a 
pained voice; the king spoke and said 
to Daniel: ‘O Daniel, servant of the 
living God, is thy God, whom thou 
servest continually, able to deliver thee 
from the lions?’ 22Then said Daniel 
unto the king: ‘O king, live for ever! 
23My God hath sent His angel, and 
hath shut the lions’mouths, and they 
have not hurt me; forasmuch as before 
Him innocency was found in me; and 
also before thee, O king, have I done 
no hurt.’ 24Then was the king 
exceeding glad, and commanded that 
they should take Daniel up out of the 
den. So Daniel was taken up out of the 
den, and no manner of hurt was found 
upon him, because he had trusted in 
his God. 25And the king commanded, 
and they brought those men that had 
accused Daniel, and they cast them 
into the den of lions, them, their 
children, and their wives; and they had 
not come to the bottom of the den, 
when the lions had the mastery of 
them, and broke all their bones in 
pieces. 

26Then king Darius wrote unto all 
the peoples, nations, and languages, 
that dwell in all the earth: ‘Peace be 
multiplied unto you. 27I make a decree, 
that in all the dominion of my 
kingdom men tremble and fear before 
the God of Daniel; 

For He is the living God, 

And stedfast for ever, 

And His kingdom that which shall 
not be destroyed, 

And His dominion shall be even 
unto the end; 

28He delivereth and rescueth, 

And He worketh signs and wonders 

In heaven and in earth; 

Who hath delivered Daniel from the 
power of the lions.’ 

29So this Daniel prospered in the reign 
of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the 
Persian. 

 

In the first year of Belshazzar 
king of Babylon Daniel had a 
dream and visions of his head upon his 
bed; then he wrote the dream and told 
the sum of the matters. 2Daniel spoke 
and said: I saw in my vision by night, 
and, behold, the four winds of the 
heaven broke forth upon the great sea. 
3And four great beasts came up from 
7 




the sea, diverse one from another. 4The 
first was like a lion, and had eagle’s 
wings; I beheld till the wings thereof 
were plucked off, and it was lifted up 
from the earth, and made stand upon 
two feet as a man, and a man’s heart 
was given to it. 5And behold another 
beast, a second, like to a bear, and it 
raised up itself on one side, and it had 
three ribs in its mouth between its 
teeth; and it was said thus unto it: 
‘Arise, devour much flesh.’ 6After this 
I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, 
which had upon the sides of it four 
wings of a fowl; the beast had also 
four heads; and dominion was given to 
it. 7After this I saw in the night visions, 
and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and 
terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it 
had great iron teeth; it devoured and 
broke in pieces, and stamped the 
residue with its feet; and it was diverse 
from all the beasts that were before it; 
and it had ten horns. 8I considered the 
horns, and, behold, there came up 
among them another horn, a little one, 
before which three of the first horns 
were plucked up by the roots; and, 
behold, in this horn were eyes like the 
eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking 
great things. 9I beheld 

Till thrones were placed, 

And one that was ancient of days 
did sit: 

His raiment was as white snow, 

And the hair of his head like pure 
wool; 

His throne was fiery flames, and the 
wheels thereof burning fire. 

10A fiery stream issued 

And came forth from before him; 
thousand thousands ministered 
unto him, 

And ten thousand times ten 
thousand stood before him; 

The judgment was set, 

And the books were opened. 

11I beheld at that time because of the 
voice of the great words which the 
horn spoke, I beheld even till the beast 
was slain, and its body destroyed, and 
it was given to be burned with fire. 
12And as for the rest of the beasts, their 
dominion was taken away; yet their 
lives were prolonged for a season and 
a time. 

13I saw in the night visions, 

And, behold, there came with the 
clouds of heaven 

One like unto a son of man, 

And he came even to the Ancient of 
days, 

And he was brought near before 
Him. 

14And there was given him 
dominion, 

And glory, and a kingdom, 

That all the peoples, nations, and 
languages 

Should serve him; 

His dominion is an everlasting 
dominion, which shall not pass 
away, 

And his kingdom that which shall 
not be destroyed. 

15As for me Daniel, my spirit was 
pained in the midst of my body, and 
the visions of my head affrighted me. 


16I came near unto one of them that 
stood by, and asked him the truth 
concerning all this. So he told me, and 
made me know the interpretation of 
the things: 17’These great beasts, which 
are four, are four kings, that shall arise 
out of the earth. 18But the saints of the 
Most High shall receive the kingdom, 
and possess the kingdom for ever, 
even for ever and ever.’ 19Then I 
desired to know the truth concerning 
the fourth beast, which was diverse 
from all of them, exceeding terrible, 
whose teeth were of iron, and its nails 
of brass; which devoured, brake in 
pieces, and stamped the residue with 
its feet; 20and concerning the ten horns 
that were on its head, and the other 
horn which came up, and before which 
three fell; even that horn that had eyes, 
and a mouth that spoke great things, 
whose appearance was greater than 
that of its fellows. 21I beheld, and the 
same horn made war with the saints, 
and prevailed against them; 22until the 
Ancient of days came, and judgment 
was given for the saints of the Most 
High; and the time came, and the 
saints possessed the kingdom. 23Thus 
he said: ‘The fourth beast shall be a 
fourth kingdom upon earth, which 
shall be diverse from all the kingdoms, 
and shall devour the whole earth, and 
shall tread it down, and break it in 
pieces. 24And as for the ten horns, out 
of this kingdom shall ten kings arise; 
and another shall arise after them; and 
he shall be diverse from the former, 
and he shall put down three kings. 
25And he shall speak words against the 
Most High, and shall wear out the 
saints of the Most High; and he shall 
think to change the seasons and the 
law; and they shall be given into his 
hand until a time and times and half a 
time. 26But the judgment shall sit, and 
his dominions shall be taken away, to 
be consumed and to be destroy unto 
the end. 27And the kingdom and the 
dominion, and the greatness of the 
kingdoms under the whole heaven, 
shall be given to the people of the 
saints of the Most High; their kingdom 
is an everlasting kingdom, and all 
dominions shall serve and obey them.’ 
28Here is the end of the matter. As for 
me Daniel, my thoughts much 
affrighted me, and my countenance 
was changed in me; but I kept the 
matter in my heart. 

In the third year of the reign of 
king Belshazzar a vision appeared 
unto me, even unto me Daniel, after 
that which appeared unto me at the 
first. 2And I saw in the vision; now it 
was so, that when I saw, I was in 
Shushan the castle, which is in the 
province of Elam; and I saw in the 
vision, and I was by the stream Ulai. 
3And I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, 
and, behold, there stood before the 
stream a ram which had two horns; 
and the two horns were high; but one 
was higher than the other, and the 
higher came up last. 4I saw the ram 
pushing westward, and northward, and 
southward; and no beasts could stand 
before him, neither was there any that 
8 




could deliver out of his hand; but he 
did according to his will, and 
magnified himself. 

5And as I was considering, behold, a 
he-goat came from the west over the 
face of the whole earth, and touched 
not the ground; and the goat had a 
conspicuous horn between his eyes. 
6And he came to the ram that had the 
two horns, which I saw standing 
before the stream, and ran at him in the 
fury of his power. 7And I saw him 
come close unto the ram, and he was 
moved with choler against him, and 
smote the ram, and broke his two 
horns; and there was no power in the 
ram to stand before him; but he cast 
him down to the ground, and trampled 
upon him; and there was none that 
could deliver the ram out of his hand. 
8And the he-goat magnified himself 
exceedingly; and when he was strong, 
the great horn was broken; and instead 
of it there came up the appearance of 
four horns toward the four winds of 
heaven. 

9And out of one of them came forth 
a little horn, which waxed exceeding 
great, toward the south, and toward the 
east, and toward the beauteous land. 
10And it waxed great, even to the host 
of heaven; and some of the host and of 
the stars it cast down to the ground, 
and trampled upon them. 11Yea, it 
magnified itself, even to the prince of 
the host; and from him the continual 
burnt-offering was taken away, and the 
place of his sanctuary was cast down. 
12And the host was given over to it 
together with the continual burnt-
offering through transgression; and it 
cast down truth to the ground, and it 
wrought, and prospered. 13Then I 
heard a holy one speaking; and another 
holy one said unto that certain one 
who spoke: ‘How long shall be the 
vision concerning the continual burnt-
offering, and the transgression that 
causes appalment, to give both the 
sanctuary and the host to be trampled 
under foot?’ 14And he said unto me: 
‘Unto two thousand and three hundred 
evenings and mornings; then shall the 
sanctuary be victorious.’ 

15And it came to pass, when I, even 
I Daniel, had seen the vision, that I 
sought to understand it; and, behold, 
there stood before me as the 
appearance of a man. 16And I heard the 
voice of a man between the banks of 
Ulai, who called, and said: ‘Gabriel, 
make this man to understand the 
vision.’ 17So he came near where I 
stood; and when he came, I was 
terrified, and fell upon my face; but he 
said unto me: ‘Understand, O son of 
man; for the vision belongeth to the 
time of the end.’ 18Now as he was 
speaking with me, I fell into a deep 
sleep with my face toward the ground; 
but he touched me, and set me upright. 
19And he said: ‘Behold, I will make 
thee know what shall be in the latter 
time of the indignation; for it 
belongeth to the appointed time of the 
end. 20The ram which thou sawest 
having the two horns, they are the 
kings of Media and Persia. 21And the 


rough he-goat is the king of Greece; 
and the great horn that is between his 
eyes is the first king. 22And as for that 
which was broken, in the place 
whereof four stood up, four kingdoms 
shall stand up out of the nation, but not 
with his power. 23And in the latter time 
of their kingdom, when the 
transgressors have completed their 
transgression, there shall stand up a 
king of fierce countenance, and 
understanding stratagems. 24And his 
power shall be mighty, but not by his 
own power; and he shall destroy 
wonderfully, and shall prosper and do; 
and he shall destroy them that are 
mighty and the people of the saints. 
25And through his cunning he shall 
cause craft to prosper in his hand; and 
he shall magnify himself in his heart, 
and in time of security shall he destroy 
many; he shall also stand up against 
the prince of princes; but he shall be 
broken without hand. 26And the vision 
of the evenings and mornings which 
hath been told is true; but thou, shut 
thou up the vision; for it belongeth to 
many days to come.’ 27And I Daniel 
fainted, and was sick certain days; then 
I rose up, and did the king’s business; 
and I was appalled at the vision, but 
understood it not. 

 

In the first year of Darius the son 
of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the 
Medes, who was made king over the 
realm of the Chaldeans; 2in the first 
year of his reign I Daniel meditated in 
the books, over the number of the 
years, whereof the word of the LORD 
came to Jeremiah the prophet, that He 
would accomplish for the desolations 
of Jerusalem seventy years. 3And I set 
my face unto the Lord God, to seek by 
prayer and supplications, with fasting, 
and sackcloth, and ashes. 4And I 
prayed unto the LORD my God, and 
made confession, and said: ‘O Lord, 
the great and awful God, who keepest 
covenant and mercy with them that 
love Thee and keep Thy 
commandments, 5we have sinned, and 
have dealt iniquitously, and have done 
wickedly, and have rebelled, and have 
turned aside from Thy commandments 
and from Thine ordinances; 6neither 
have we hearkened unto Thy servants 
the prophets, that spoke in Thy name 
to our kings, our princes, and our 
fathers, and to all the people of the 
land. 7Unto Thee, O Lord, belongeth 
righteousness, but unto us confusion of 
face, as at this day; to the men of 
Judah, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are 
near, and that are far off, through all 
the countries whither Thou hast driven 
them, because they dealt treacherously 
with Thee. 8O LORD, to us belongeth 
confusion of face, to our kings, to our 
princes, and to our fathers, because we 
have sinned against Thee. 9To the Lord 
our God belong compassions and 
forgivenesses; for we have rebelled 
against Him; 10neither have we 
hearkened to the voice of the LORD our 
God, to walk in His laws, which He set 
before us by His servants the prophets. 
9 




11Yea, all Israel have transgressed Thy 
law, and have turned aside, so as not to 
hearken to Thy voice; and so there 
hath been poured out upon us the curse 
and the oath that is written in the Law 
of Moses the servant of God; for we 
have sinned against Him. 12And He 
hath confirmed His word, which He 
spoke against us, and against our 
judges that judged us, by bringing 
upon us a great evil; so that under the 
whole heaven hath not been done as 
hath been done upon Jerusalem. 13As it 
is written in the Law of Moses, all this 
evil is come upon us; yet have we not 
entreated the favour of the LORD our 
God, that we might turn from our 
iniquities, and have discernment in 
Thy truth. 14And so the LORD hath 
watched over the evil, and brought it 
upon us; for the LORD our God is 
righteous in all His works which He 
hath done, and we have not hearkened 
to His voice. 15And now, O Lord our 
God, that hast brought Thy people 
forth out of the land of Egypt with a 
mighty hand, and hast gotten Thee 
renown, as at this day; we have sinned, 
we have done wickedly. 16O Lord, 
according to all Thy righteousness, let 
Thine anger and Thy fury, I pray Thee, 
be turned away from Thy city 
Jerusalem, Thy holy mountain; 
because for our sins, and for the 
iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and 
Thy people are become a reproach to 
all that are about us. 17Now therefore, 
O our God, hearken unto the prayer of 
Thy servant, and to his supplications, 
and cause Thy face to shine upon Thy 
sanctuary that is desolate, for the 
Lord’s sake. 18O my God, incline 
Thine ear, and hear; open Thine eyes, 
and behold our desolations, and the 
city upon which Thy name is called; 
for we do not present our supplications 
before Thee because of our 
righteousness, but because of Thy 
great compassions. 19O Lord, hear, O 
Lord, forgive, O Lord, attend and do, 
defer not; for Thine own sake, O my 
God, because Thy name is called upon 
Thy city and Thy people.’ 

20And while I was speaking, and 
praying, and confessing my sin and the 
sin of my people Israel, and presenting 
my supplication before the LORD my 
God for the holy mountain of my God; 
21yea, while I was speaking in prayer, 
the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in 
the vision at the beginning, being 
caused to fly swiftly, approached close 
to me about the time of the evening 
offering. 22And he made me to 
understand, and talked with me, and 
said: ‘O Daniel, I am now come forth 
to make thee skilful of understanding. 
23At the beginning of thy supplications 
a word went forth, and I am come to 
declare it; for thou art greatly beloved; 
therefore look into the word, and 
understand the vision. 24Seventy weeks 
are decreed upon thy people and upon 
thy holy city, to finish the 
transgression, and to make an end of 
sin, and to forgive iniquity, and to 
bring in everlasting righteousness, and 
to seal vision and prophet, and to 


anoint the most holy place. 25Know 
therefore and discern, that from the 
going forth of the word to restore and 
to build Jerusalem unto one anointed, a 
prince, shall be seven weeks; and for 
threescore and two weeks, it shall be 
built again, with broad place and moat, 
but in troublous times. 26And after the 
threescore and two weeks shall an 
anointed one be cut off, and be no 
more; and the people of a prince that 
shall come shall destroy the city and 
the sanctuary; but his end shall be with 
a flood; and unto the end of the war 
desolations are determined. 27And he 
shall make a firm covenant with many 
for one week; and for half of the week 
he shall cause the sacrifice and the 
offering to cease; and upon the wing of 
detestable things shall be that which 
causeth appalment; and that until the 
extermination wholly determined be 
poured out upon that which causeth 
appalment.’ 

In the third year of Cyrus king 
of Persia a word was revealed 
unto Daniel, whose name was called 
Belteshazzar; and the word was true, 
even a great warfare; and he gave heed 
to the word, and had understanding of 
the vision. 2In those days I Daniel was 
mourning three whole weeks. 3I ate no 
pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor 
wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint 
myself at all, till three whole weeks 
were fulfilled. 4And in the four and 
twentieth day of the first month, as I 
was by the side of the great river, 
which is Tigris, 5I lifted up mine eyes, 
and looked, and behold a man clothed 
in linen, whose loins were girded with 
fine gold of Uphaz; 6his body also was 
like the beryl, and his face as the 
appearance of lightning, and his eyes 
as torches of fire, and his arms and his 
feet like in colour to burnished brass, 
and the voice of his words like the 
voice of a multitude. 7And I Daniel 
alone saw the vision; for the men that 
were with me saw not the vision; 
howbeit a great trembling fell upon 
them, and they fled to hide themselves. 
8So that I was left alone, and saw this 
great vision, and there remained no 
strength in me; for my comeliness was 
turned in me into corruption, and I 
retained no strength. 9Yet heard I the 
voice of his words; and when I heard 
the voice of his words, then was I 
fallen into a deep sleep on my face, 
with my face toward the ground. 
10And, behold, a hand touched me, 
which set me tottering upon my knees 
and upon the palms of my hands. 
11And he said unto me: ‘O Daniel, thou 
man greatly beloved, give heed unto 
the words that I speak unto thee, and 
stand upright; for now am I sent unto 
thee’; and when he had spoken this 
word unto me, I stood trembling. 
12Then said he unto me: ‘Fear not, 
Daniel; for from the first day that thou 
didst set thy heart to understand, and 
to humble thyself before thy God, thy 
words were heard; and I am come 
because of thy words. 13But the prince 
of the kingdom of Persia withstood me 
one and twenty days; but, lo, Michael, 
10 




one of the chief princes, came to help 
me; and I was left over there beside 
the kings of Persia. 14Now I am come 
to make thee understand what shall 
befall thy people in the end of days; 
for there is yet a vision for the days.’ 

15And when he had spoken unto me 
according to these words, I set my face 
toward the ground, and was dumb. 
16And, behold, one like the similitude 
of the sons of men touched my lips; 
then I opened my mouth, and spoke 
and said unto him that stood before 
me: ‘O my lord, by reason of the 
vision my pains are come upon me, 
and I retain no strength. 17For how can 
this servant of my lord talk with this 
my lord? for as for me, straightway 
there remained no strength in me, 
neither was there breath left in me.’ 
18Then there touched me again one like 
the appearance of a man, and he 
strengthened me. 19And he said: ‘O 
man greatly beloved, fear not! peace 
be unto thee, be strong, yea, be 
strong.’ And when he had spoken unto 
me, I was strengthened, and said: ‘Let 
my lord speak; for thou hast 
strengthened me.’ 20Then said he: 
Knowest thou wherefore I come unto 
thee? and now will I return to fight 
with the prince of Persia; and when I 
go forth, lo, the prince of Greece shall 
come. 21Howbeit I will declare unto 
thee that which is inscribed in the 
writing of truth; and there is none that 
holdeth with me against these, except 
Michael your prince. 

And as for me, in the first year 
of Darius the Mede, I stood up 
to be a supporter and a stronghold unto 
him. 

2And now will I declare unto thee 
the truth. Behold, there shall stand up 
yet three kings in Persia; and the 
fourth shall be far richer than they all; 
and when he is waxed strong through 
his riches, he shall stir up all against 
the realm of Greece. 3And a mighty 
king shall stand up, that shall rule with 
great dominion, and do according to 
his will. 4And when he shall stand up, 
his kingdom shall be broken, and shall 
be divided toward the four winds of 
heaven; but not to his posterity, nor 
according to his dominion wherewith 
he ruled; for his kingdom shall be 
plucked up, even for others beside 
those. 

5And the king of the south shall be 
strong, and one of his princes; and he 
shall be strong above him, and have 
dominion; his dominion shall be a 
great dominion. 

6And at the end of years they shall 
join themselves together; and the 
daughter of the king of the south shall 
come to the king of the north to make 
an agreement; but she shall not retain 
the strength of her arm; neither shall 
he stand, nor his arm; but she shall be 
given up, and they that brought her, 
and he that begot her, and he that 
obtained her in those times. 

7But one of the shoots of her roots 
shall stand up in his place, and shall 
come unto the army, and shall enter 
11 




into the stronghold of the king of the 
north, and shall deal with them, and 
shall prevail; 8and also their gods, with 
their molten images, and with their 
precious vessels of silver and of gold, 
shall he bring into captivity into 
Egypt; and he shall desist some years 
from the king of the north. 9And he 
shall come into the kingdom of the 
king of the south, but he shall return 
into his own land. 

10And his sons shall stir themselves 
up, and shall assemble a multitude of 
great forces, and he shall come on, and 
overflow, as he passes through; and he 
shall return and stir himself up, even to 
his stronghold. 11And the king of the 
south shall be moved with choler, and 
shall come forth and fight with him, 
even with the king of the north; and he 
shall set forth a great multitude, but 
the multitude shall be given into his 
hand. 12and the multitude shall be 
carried away, and his heart shall be 
lifted up; and he shall cast down tens 
of thousands; but he shall not prevail. 
13And the king of the north shall again 
set forth a multitude, greater than the 
former; and he shall come on at the 
end of the times, even of years, with a 
great army and with much substance. 
14And in those times there shall many 
stand up against the king of the south; 
also the children of the violent among 
thy people shall lift themselves up to 
establish the vision; but they shall 
stumble. 15And the king of the north 
shall come, and cast up a mound, and 
take a well-fortified city; and the arms 
of the south shall not withstand; and as 
for his chosen people, there shall be no 
strength in them to withstand. 16But he 
that cometh against him shall do 
according to his own will, and none 
shall stand before him; and he shall 
stand in the beauteous land, and in his 
hand shall be extermination. 17And he 
shall set his face to come with the 
strength of his whole kingdom, but 
shall make an agreement with him; 
and he shall give him the daughter of 
women, to destroy it; but it shall not 
stand, neither be for him. 18After this 
shall he set his face unto the isles, and 
shall take many; but a captain shall 
cause the reproach offered by him to 
cease; yea, he shall cause his own 
reproach to return upon him. 19Then he 
shall turn his face toward the 
strongholds of his own land; but he 
shall stumble and fall, and shall not be 
found. 

20Then shall stand up in his place 
one that shall cause an exactor to pass 
through the glory of the kingdom; but 
within few days he shall be destroyed, 
neither in anger, nor in battle. 

21And in his place shall stand up a 
contemptible person, upon whom had 
not been conferred the majesty of the 
kingdom; but he shall come in time of 
security, and shall obtain the kingdom 
by blandishments. 22And the arms of 
the flood shall be swept away from 
before him, and shall be broken; yea, 
also the prince of the covenant. 23And 
after the league made with him he 
shall work deceitfully; and he shall 


come up and become strong, with a 
little nation. 24In time of security shall 
he come even upon the fattest places 
of the province; and he shall do that 
which his fathers have not done, nor 
his fathers’fathers: he shall scatter 
among them prey, and spoil, and 
substance; yea, he shall devise his 
devices against fortresses, but only 
until the time. 

25And he shall stir up his power and 
his courage against the king of the 
south with a great army; and the king 
of the south shall stir himself up to 
battle with a very great and mighty 
army; but he shall not stand, for they 
shall devise devices against him. 
26Yea, they that eat of his food shall 
destroy him, and his army shall be 
swept away; and many shall fall down 
slain. 27And as for both these kings, 
their hearts shall be to do mischief, 
and they shall speak lies at one table; 
but it shall not prosper, for the end 
remaineth yet for the time appointed. 
28And he shall return to his own land 
with great substance; and his heart 
shall be against the holy covenant; and 
he shall do his pleasure, and return to 
his own land. 

29At the time appointed he shall 
return, and come into the south; but it 
shall not be in the latter time as it was 
in the former. 30For ships of Kittim 
shall come against him, and he shall be 
cowed, and he shall return, and have 
indignation against the holy covenant, 
and shall do his pleasure; and he shall 
return, and have regard unto them that 
forsake the holy covenant. 31And arms 
shall stand on his part, and they shall 
profane the sanctuary, even the 
stronghold, and shall take away the 
continual burnt-offering, and they shall 
set up the detestable thing that causeth 
appalment. 32And such as do wickedly 
against the covenant shall be corrupt 
by blandishments; but the people that 
know their God shall show strength, 
and prevail. 33And they that are wise 
among the people shall cause the many 
to understand; yet they shall stumble 
by the sword and by flame, by 
captivity and by spoil, many days. 
34Now when they shall stumble, they 
shall be helped with a little help; but 
many shall join themselves unto them 
with blandishments. 35And some of 
them that are wise shall stumble, to 
refine among them, and to purify, and 
to make white, even to the time of the 
end; for it is yet for the time appointed. 

36And the king shall do according to 
his will; and he shall exalt himself, and 
magnify himself above every god, and 
shall speak strange things against the 
God of gods; and he shall prosper till 
the indignation be accomplished; for 
that which is determined shall be done. 
37Neither shall he regard the gods of 
his fathers; and neither the desire of 
women, nor any god, shall he regard; 
for he shall magnify himself above all. 
38But in his place shall he honour the 
god of strongholds; and a god whom 
his fathers knew not shall he honour 
with gold, and silver, and with 
precious stones, and costly things. 


39And he shall deal with the strongest 
fortresses with the help of a foreign 
god; whom he shall acknowledge, 
shall increase glory; and he shall cause 
them to rule over many, and shall 
divide the land for a price. 

40And at the time of the end shall the 
king of the south push at him; and the 
king of the north shall come against 
him like a whirlwind, with chariots, 
and with horsemen, and with many 
ships; and he shall enter into the 
countries, and shall overflow, as he 
passes through. 41He shall enter also 
into the beauteous land, and many 
countries shall be overthrown; but 
these shall be delivered out of his 
hand, Edom, and Moab, and the chief 
of the children of Ammon. 42He shall 
stretch forth his hand also upon the 
countries; and the land of Egypt shall 
not escape. 43But he shall have power 
over the treasures of gold and silver, 
and over all the precious things of 
Egypt; and the Libyans and the 
Ethiopians shall be at his steps. 44But 
tidings out of the east and out of the 
north shall affright him; and he shall 
go forth with great fury to destroy and 
utterly to take away many. 45And he 
shall plant the tents of his palace 
between the seas and the beauteous 
holy mountain; and he shall come to 
his end, and none shall help him. 

And at that time shall Michael 
stand up, the great prince who 
standeth for the children of thy people; 
and there shall be a time of trouble, 
such as never was since there was a 
nation even to that same time; and at 
that time thy people shall be delivered, 
every one that shall be found written in 
the book. 2And many of them that 
sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and 
some to reproaches and everlasting 
abhorrence. 3And they that are wise 
shall shine as the brightness of the 
firmament; and they that turn the many 
to righteousness as the stars for ever 
and ever. 4But thou, O Daniel, shut up 
the words, and seal the book, even to 
the time of the end; many shall run to 
and fro, and knowledge shall be 
increased.’ 

5Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, 
there stood other two, the one on the 
bank of the river on this side, and the 
other on the bank of the river on that 
side. 6And one said to the man clothed 
in linen, who was above the waters of 
the river: ‘How long shall it be to the 
end of the wonders?’ 7And I heard the 
man clothed in linen, who was above 
the waters of the river, when he lifted 
up his right hand and his left hand unto 
heaven, and swore by Him that liveth 
for ever that it shall be for a time, 
times, and a half; and when they have 
made an end of breaking in pieces the 
power of the holy people, all these 
things shall be finished. 

8And I heard, but I understood not; 
then said I: ‘O my Lord, what shall be 
the latter end of these things?’ 9And he 
said: ‘Go thy way, Daniel; for the 
words are shut up and sealed till the 
time of the end. 10Many shall purify 
12 




themselves, and make themselves 
white, and be refined; but the wicked 
shall do wickedly; and none of the 
wicked shall understand; but they that 
are wise shall understand. 11And from 
the time that the continual burnt-
offering shall be taken away, and the 
detestable thing that causes appalment 
set up, there shall be a thousand two 
hundred and ninety days. 12Happy is 
he that waiteth, and cometh to the 
thousand three hundred and five and 
thirty days. 13But go thou thy way till 
the end be; and thou shalt rest, and 
shalt stand up to thy lot, at the end of 
the days.’ 

 

 

 




.... 

EZRA 

 

NOW IN the first year of Cyrus 
king of Persia, that the word of 
the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah 
might be accomplished, the LORD 
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of 
Persia, that he made a proclamation 
throughout all his kingdom, and put it 
also in writing, saying: 2’Thus saith 
Cyrus king of Persia: All the kingdoms 
of the earth hath the LORD, the God of 
heaven, given me; and He hath 
charged me to build Him a house in 
Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 
3Whosoever there is among you of all 
His people—his God be with him—let 
him go up to Jerusalem, which is in 
Judah, and build the house of the 
LORD, the God of Israel, He is the God 
who is in Jerusalem. 4And whosoever 
is left, in any place where he 
sojourneth, let the men of his place 
help him with silver, and with gold, 
and with goods, and with beasts, 
beside the freewill-offering for the 
house of God which is in Jerusalem.’ 

5Then rose up the heads of 
fathers’houses of Judah and Benjamin, 
and the priests, and the Levites, even 
all whose spirit God had stirred to go 
up to build the house of the LORD 
which is in Jerusalem. 6And all they 
that were round about them 
strengthened their hands with vessels 
of silver, with gold, with goods, and 
with beasts, and with precious things, 
beside all that was willingly offered. 
7Also Cyrus the king brought forth the 
vessels of the house of the LORD, 
which Nebuchadnezzar had brought 
forth out of Jerusalem, and had put 
them in the house of his gods; 8even 
those did Cyrus king of Persia bring 
forth by the hand of Mithredath the 
treasurer, and numbered them unto 
Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah. 9And 
this is the number of them: thirty 
basins of gold, a thousand basins of 
silver, nine and twenty knives; 10thirty 
bowls of gold, silver bowls of a second 
sort four hundred and ten, and other 
vessels a thousand. 11All the vessels of 
gold and of silver were five thousand 
and four hundred. All these did 
Sheshbazzar bring up, when they of 
the captivity were brought up from 
Babylon unto Jerusalem. 

Now these are the children of the 
province, that went up out of the 
captivity of those that had been carried 
away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king 
of Babylon had carried away unto 
Babylon, and that returned unto 
Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto 
his city; 2who came with Zerubbabel, 
Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, 
Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, 
Rehum, Baanah. 

The number of the men of the 
people of Israel: 
1 

2 




3The children of Parosh, two 
thousand a hundred seventy and two. 

4The children of Shephatiah, three 
hundred seventy and two. 

5The children of Arah, seven 
hundred seventy and five. 

6The children of Pahath-moab, of 
the children of Jeshua and Joab, two 
thousand eight hundred and twelve. 

7The children of Elam, a thousand 
two hundred fifty and four. 

8The children of Zattu, nine hundred 
forty and five. 

9The children of Zaccai, seven 
hundred and threescore. 

10The children of Bani, six hundred 
forty and two. 

11The children of Bebai, six hundred 
twenty and three. 

12The children of Azgad, a thousand 
two hundred twenty and two. 

13The children of Adonikam, six 
hundred sixty and six. 

14The children of Bigvai, two 
thousand fifty and six. 

15The children of Adin, four 
hundred fifty and four. 

16The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, 
ninety and eight. 

17The children of Bezai, three 
hundred twenty and three. 

18The children of Jorah, a hundred 
and twelve. 

19The children of Hashum, two 
hundred twenty and three. 

20The children of Gibbar, ninety and 
five. 

21The children of Beth-lehem, a 
hundred twenty and three. 

22The men of Netophah, fifty and 
six. 

23The men of Anathoth, a hundred 
twenty and eight. 

24The children of Azmaveth, forty 
and two. 

25The children of Kiriath-arim, 
Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven 
hundred and forty and three. 

26The children of Ramah and Geba, 
six hundred twenty and one. 

27The men of Michmas, a hundred 
twenty and two. 

28The men of Beth-el and Ai, two 
hundred twenty and three. 

29The children of Nebo, fifty and 
two. 

30The children of Magbish, a 
hundred fifty and six. 

31The children of the other Elam, a 
thousand two hundred fifty and four. 

32The children of Harim, three 
hundred and twenty. 

33The children of Lod, Hadid, and 
Ono, seven hundred twenty and five. 

34The children of Jericho, three 
hundred forty and five. 

35The children of Senaah, three 
thousand and six hundred and thirty. 

 

36The priests: 

The children of Jedaiah, of the 
house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy 
and three. 

37The children of Immer, a thousand 
fifty and two. 

38The children of Pashhur, a 
thousand two hundred forty and seven. 


39The children of Harim, a thousand 
and seventeen. 4 

 

0The Levites: the children of Jeshua 
and Kadmiel, of the children of 
Hodaviah, seventy and four. 

 

41The singers: the children of Asaph, 
a hundred twenty and eight. 

 

42The children of the porters: the 
children of Shallum, the children of 
Ater, the children of Talmon, the 
children of Akkub, the children of 
Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all a 
hundred thirty and nine. 

 

43The Nethinim: the children of 
Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the 
children of Tabbaoth; 44the children of 
Keros, the children of Siaha, the 
children of Padon; 45the children of 
Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the 
children of Akkub; 46the children of 
Hagab, the children of Salmai, the 
children of Hanan; 47the children of 
Giddel, the children of Gahar, the 
children of Reaiah; 48the children of 
Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the 
children of Gazzam; 49the children of 
Uzza, the children of Paseah, the 
children of Besai; 50the children of 
Asnah, the children of Meunim, the 
children of Nephusim; 51the children 
of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, 
the children of Harhur; 52the children 
of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the 
children of Harsha; 53the children of 
Barkos, the children of Sisera, the 
children of Temah; 54the children of 
Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 

55The children of Solomon’s 
servants: the children of Sotai, the 
children of Hassophereth, the children 
of Peruda; 56the children of Jaalah, the 
children of Darkon, the children of 
Giddel; 57the children of Shephatiah, 
the children of Hattil, the children of 
Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of 
Ami. 

58All the Nethinim, and the children 
of Solomon’s servants, were three 
hundred ninety and two. 

 

59And these were they that went up 
from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub, 
Addan, and Immer; but they could not 
tell their fathers’houses, and their seed, 
whether they were of Israel: 60the 
children of Delaiah, the children of 
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six 
hundred fifty and two. 61And of the 
children of the priests: the children of 
Habaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the 
children of Barzillai, who took a wife 
of the daughters of Barzillai the 
Gileadite, and was called after their 
name. 62These sought their register, 
that is, the genealogy, but it was not 
found; therefore were they deemed 
polluted and put from the priesthood. 
63And the aTirshatha said unto them, 
that they should not eat of the most 
holy things, till there stood up a priest 
with Urim and with Thummim. 

a That is, governor. 

 


64The whole congregation together 
was forty and two thousand three 
hundred and threescore, 65beside their 
men-servants and their maid-servants, 
of whom there were seven thousand 
three hundred thirty and seven; and 
they had two hundred singing men and 
singing women. 66Their horses were 
seven hundred thirty and six; their 
mules, two hundred forty and five; 
67their camels, four hundred thirty and 
five; their asses, six thousand seven 
hundred and twenty. 

68And some of the heads of 
fathers’houses, when they came to the 
house of the LORD which is in 
Jerusalem, offered willingly for the 
house of God to set it up in its place; 
69they gave after their ability into the 
treasury of the work threescore and 
one thousand darics of gold, and five 
thousand pounds of silver, and one 
hundred priests’tunics. 

70So the priests, and the Levites, and 
some of the people, and the singers, 
and the porters, and the Nethinim, 
dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in 
their cities. 

And when the seventh month was 
come, and the children of Israel 
were in the cities, the people gathered 
themselves together as one man to 
Jerusalem. 2Then stood up Jeshua the 
son of Jozadak, and his brethren the 
priests, and Zerubbabel the son of 
Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded 
the altar of the God of Israel, to offer 
burnt-offerings thereon, as it is written 
in the Law of Moses the man of God. 
3And they set the altar upon its bases; 
for fear was upon them because of the 
people of the countries, and they 
offered burnt-offerings thereon unto 
the LORD, even burnt-offerings 
morning and evening. 4And they kept 
the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, 
and offered the daily burnt-offerings 
by number, according to the ordinance, 
as the duty of every day required; 5and 
afterward the continual burnt-offering, 
and the offerings of the new moons, 
and of all the appointed seasons of the 
LORD that were hallowed, and of every 
one that willingly offered a freewill-
offering unto the LORD. 6From the first 
day of the seventh month began they 
to offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD; 
but the foundation of the temple of the 
LORD was not yet laid. 7They gave 
money also unto the hewers, and to the 
carpenters; and food, and drink, and 
oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of 
Tyre, to bring cedar-trees from 
Lebanon to the sea, unto Joppa, 
according to the grant that they had of 
Cyrus king of Persia. 

8Now in the second year of their 
coming unto the house of God at 
Jerusalem, in the second month, began 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and 
Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the rest 
of their brethren the priests and the 
Levites, and all they that were come 
out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; 
and appointed the Levites, from 
twenty years old and upward, to have 
the oversight of the work of the house 
of the LORD. 9Then stood Jeshua with 
3 




his sons and his brethren, and Kadmiel 
and his sons, the sons of Judah, 
together, to have the oversight of the 
workmen in the house of God; the sons 
of Henadad also, with their sons and 
their brethren the Levites. 10And when 
the builders laid the foundation of the 
temple of the LORD, they set the priests 
in their apparel with trumpets, and the 
Levites the sons of Asaph with 
cymbals, to praise the LORD, according 
to the direction of David king of Israel. 
11And they sang one to another in 
praising and giving thanks unto the 
LORD: ‘for He is good, for His mercy 
endureth for ever toward Israel.’ And 
all the people shouted with a great 
shout, when they praised the LORD, 
because the foundation of the house of 
the LORD was laid. 12But many of the 
priests and Levites and heads of 
fathers’houses, the old men that had 
seen the first house standing on its 
foundation, wept with a loud voice, 
when this house was before their eyes; 
and many shouted aloud for joy; 13so 
that the people could not discern the 
noise of the shout of joy from the 
noise of the weeping of the people; for 
the people shouted with a loud shout, 
and the noise was heard afar off. 

Now when the adversaries of 
Judah and Benjamin heard that 
the children of the captivity were 
building a temple unto the LORD, the 
God of Israel; 2then they drew near to 
Zerubbabel, and to the heads of 
fathers’houses, and said unto them: 
‘Let us build with you; for we seek 
your God, as ye do; and we do 
sacrifice unto Him since the days of 
Esarhaddon king of Assyria, who 
brought us up hither.’ 3But 
Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of 
the heads of fathers’houses of Israel, 
said unto them: ‘Ye have nothing to do 
with us to build a house unto our God; 
but we ourselves together will build 
unto the LORD, the God of Israel, as 
king Cyrus the king of Persia hath 
commanded us.’ 4Then the people of 
the land weakened the hands of the 
people of Judah, and harried them 
while they were building, 5and hired 
counsellors against them, to frustrate 
their purpose, all the days of Cyrus 
king of Persia, even until the reign of 
Darius king of Persia. 6And in the 
reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of 
his reign, wrote they an accusation 
against the inhabitants of Judah and 
Jerusalem. 

7And in the days of Artaxerxes 
wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, 
and the rest of his companions, unto 
Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the 
writing of the letter was written in the 
Aramaic character, and set forth in the 
Aramaic tongue. 8Rehum the 
commander and Shimshai the scribe 
wrote a letter against Jerusalem to 
Artaxerxes the king in this sort— 9then 
wrote Rehum the commander, and 
Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of 
their companions; the Dinites, and the 
Apharesattechites, the Tarpelites, the 
Apharesites, the Archevites, the 
Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the 
4 




Dehites, the Elamites, 10and the rest of 
the nations whom the great and noble 
Asenappar brought over, and set in the 
city of Samaria, and the rest that are in 
the country beyond the River:— ‘And 
now—11this is the copy of the letter 
that they sent unto him, even unto 
Artaxerxes the king—thy servants the 
men beyond the River—and now12be it 
known unto the king, that the Jews that 
came up from thee are come to us unto 
Jerusalem; they are building the 
rebellious and the bad city, and have 
finished the walls, and are digging out 
the foundations. 13Be it known now 
unto the king, that, if this city be 
builded, and the walls finished, they 
will not pay tribute, impost, or toll, 
and so thou wilt endamage the revenue 
of the kings. 14Now because we eat the 
salt of the palace, and it is not meet for 
us to see the king’s dishonour, 
therefore have we sent and announced 
to the king, 15that search may be made 
in the book of the records of thy 
fathers; so shalt thou find in the book 
of the records, and know that this city 
is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto 
kings and provinces, and that they 
have moved sedition within the same 
of old time; for which cause was this 
city laid waste. 16We announce to the 
king that, if this city be builded, and 
the walls finished, by this means thou 
shalt have no portion beyond the 
River.’ 

17Then sent the king an answer unto 
Rehum the commander, and to 
Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of 
their companions that dwell in 
Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the 
River: ‘Peace, and now18the letter 
which ye sent unto us hath been 
plainly read before me. 19And I 
decreed, and search hath been made, 
and it is found that this city of old time 
hath made insurrection against kings, 
and that rebellion and sedition have 
been made therein. 20There have been 
mighty kings also over Jerusalem, who 
have ruled over all the country beyond 
the River; and tribute, impost, and toll, 
was paid unto them. 21Make ye now a 
decree to cause these men to cease, 
and that this city be not builded, until a 
decree shall be made by me. 22And 
take heed that ye be not slack herein; 
why should damage grow to the hurt 
of the kings?’ 

23Then when the copy of king 
Artaxerxes’letter was read before 
Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and 
their companions, they went in haste to 
Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made 
them to cease by force and power. 
24Then ceased the work of the house of 
God which is at Jerusalem; and it 
ceased unto the second year of the 
reign of Darius king of Persia. 

Now the prophets, Haggai the 
prophet, and Zechariah the son of 
Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews that 
were in Judah and Jerusalem; in the 
name of the God of Israel prophesied 
they unto them. 2Then rose up 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and 
Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began 
to build the house of God which is at 
5 




Jerusalem; and with them were the 
prophets of God, helping them. 3At the 
same time came to them Tattenai, the 
governor beyond the River, and 
Shethar-bozenai, and their 
companions, and said thus unto them: 
‘Who gave you a decree to build this 
house, and to finish this structure?’ 
4’Then spoke we unto them after this 
manner [, wrote they]: What are the 
names of the men that build this 
building?’ 5But the eye of their God 
was upon the elders of the Jews, and 
they did not make them cease, till the 
matter should come to Darius, and 
then answer should be returned by 
letter concerning it. 

6The copy of the letter that 
Tattenai, the governor beyond the 
River, and Shethar-bozenai, and his 
companions the Apharesachites, who 
were beyond the River, sent unto 
Darius the king; 7they sent a letter unto 
him, wherein was written thus: ‘Unto 
Darius the king, all peace. 8Be it 
known unto the king, that we went into 
the province of Judah, to the house of 
the great God, which is builded with 
great stones, and timber is laid in the 
walls, and this work goeth on with 
diligence and prospereth in their 
hands. 9Then asked we those elders, 
and said unto them thus: Who gave 
you a decree to build this house, and to 
finish this wall? 10We asked them their 
names also, to announce to thee, that 
we might write the names of the men 
that were at the head of them. 11And 
thus they returned us answer, saying: 
We are the servants of the God of 
heaven and earth, and build the house 
that was builded these many years ago, 
which a great king of Israel builded 
and finished. 12But because that our 
fathers had provoked the God of 
heaven, He gave them into the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the 
Chaldean, who destroyed this house, 
and carried the people away into 
Babylon. 13But in the first year of 
Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king 
made a decree to build this house of 
God. 14And the gold and silver vessels 
also of the house of God, which 
Nebuchadnezzar took out of the 
temple that was in Jerusalem, and 
brought them into the temple of 
Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take 
out of the temple of Babylon, and they 
were delivered unto one whose name 
was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made 
governor; 15and he said unto him: Take 
these vessels, go, put them in the 
temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the 
house of God be builded in its place. 
16Then came the same Sheshbazzar, 
and laid the foundations of the house 
of God which is in Jerusalem; and 
since that time even until now hath it 
been in building, and yet it is not 
completed. 17Now therefore, if it seem 
good to the king, let search be made in 
the king’s treasure-house there, which 
is at Babylon, whether it be so, that a 
decree was made of Cyrus the king to 
build this house of God at Jerusalem, 
and let the king send his pleasure to us 
concerning this matter.’ 


Then Darius the king made a 
decree, and search was made in 
the house of the archives, where the 
treasures were laid up, in Babylon. 
2And there was found at Ahmetha, in 
the palace that is in the province of 
Media, a roll, and therein was thus 
written: ‘A record. 3In the first year of 
Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made a 
decree: Concerning the house of God 
at Jerusalem, let the house be builded, 
the place where they offer sacrifices, 
and let the foundations thereof be 
strongly laid; the height thereof 
threescore cubits, and the breadth 
thereof threescore cubits; 4with three 
rows of great stones, and a row of new 
timber, and let the expenses be given 
out of the king’s house; 5and also let 
the gold and silver vessels of the house 
of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took 
forth out of the temple which is at 
Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, 
be restored, and brought back unto the 
temple which is at Jerusalem, every 
one to its place, and thou shalt put 
them in the house of God.’ 

6’Now therefore, Tattenai, governor 
beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, 
and your companions the 
Apharesachites, who are beyond the 
River, be ye far from thence; 7let the 
work of this house of God alone; let 
the governor of the Jews and the elders 
of the Jews build this house of God in 
its place. 8Moreover I make a decree 
concerning what ye shall do to these 
elders of the Jews for the building of 
this house of God; that of the king’s 
goods, even of the tribute beyond the 
River, expenses be given with all 
diligence unto these men, that they be 
not hindered. 9And that which they 
have need of, both young bullocks, 
and rams, and lambs, for burnt-
offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, 
salt, wine, and oil, according to the 
word of the priests that are at 
Jerusalem, let it be given them day by 
day without fail; 10that they may offer 
sacrifices of sweet savour unto the 
God of heaven, and pray for the life of 
the king, and of his sons. 11Also I have 
made a decree, that whosoever shall 
alter this word, let a beam be pulled 
out from his house, and let him be 
lifted up and fastened thereon; and let 
his house be made a dunghill for this; 
12and may the God that hath caused 
His name to dwell there overthrow all 
kings and peoples, that shall put forth 
their hand to alter the same, to destroy 
this house of God which is at 
Jerusalem. I Darius have made a 
decree; let it be done with all 
diligence.’ 

13Then Tattenai, the governor 
beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, 
and their companions, because that 
Darius the king had thus sent, acted 
with all diligence. 14And the elders of 
the Jews builded and prospered, 
through the prophesying of Haggai the 
prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. 
And they builded and finished it, 
according to the commandment of the 
God of Israel, and according to the 
decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and 
6 




Artaxerxes king of Persia. 15And this 
house was finished on the third day of 
the month Adar, which was in the 
sixth year of the reign of Darius the 
king. 

16And the children of Israel, the 
priests and the Levites, and the rest of 
the children of the captivity, kept the 
dedication of this house of God with 
joy. 17And they offered at the 
dedication of this house of God a 
hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, 
four hundred lambs; and for a sin-
offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, 
according to the number of the tribes 
of Israel. 18And they set the priests in 
their divisions, and the Levites in their 
courses, for the service of God, which 
is at Jerusalem; as it is written in the 
book of Moses. 

19And the children of the captivity 
kept the passover upon the fourteenth 
day of the first month. 20For the priests 
and the Levites had purified 
themselves together; all of them were 
pure; and they killed the passover 
lamb for all the children of the 
captivity, and for their brethren the 
priests, and for themselves. 21And the 
children of Israel, that were come back 
out of the captivity, and all such as had 
separated themselves unto them from 
the filthiness of the nations of the land, 
to seek the LORD, the God of Israel, did 
eat, 22and kept the feast of unleavened 
bread seven days with joy; for the 
LORD had made them joyful, and had 
turned the heart of the king of Assyria 
unto them, to strengthen their hands in 
the work of the house of God, the God 
of Israel. 

 

Now after these things, in the 
reign of Artaxerxes king of 
Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son 
of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, 2the son 
of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son 
of Ahitub, 3the son of Amariah, the 
son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 
4the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, 
the son of Bukki, 5the son of Abishua, 
the son of Phinehas, the son of 
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief 
priest— 6this Ezra went up from 
Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in 
the Law of Moses, which the LORD, the 
God of Israel, had given; and the king 
granted him all his request, according 
to the hand of the LORD his God upon 
him. 7And there went up some of the 
children of Israel, and of the priests, 
and the Levites, and the singers, and 
the porters, and the Nethinim, unto 
Jerusalem, in the seventh year of 
Artaxerxes the king. 8And he came to 
Jerusalem in the fifth month, which 
was in the seventh year of the king. 
9For upon the first day of the first 
month began he to go up from 
Babylon, and on the first day of the 
fifth month came he to Jerusalem, 
according to the good hand of his God 
upon him. 10For Ezra had set his heart 
to seek the law of the LORD, and to do 
it, and to teach in Israel statutes and 
ordinances. 

11Now this is the copy of the letter 
that the king Artaxerxes gave unto 
7 




Ezra the priest, the scribe, even the 
scribe of the words of the 
commandments of the LORD, and of 
His statutes to Israel: 12’Artaxerxes, 
king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, the 
scribe of the Law of the God of 
heaven, and so forth. And now13I make 
a decree, that all they of the people of 
Israel, and their priests and the 
Levites, in my realm, that are minded 
of their own free will to go with thee 
to Jerusalem, go. 14Forasmuch as thou 
art sent of the king and his seven 
counsellors, to inquire concerning 
Judah and Jerusalem, according to the 
law of thy God which is in thy hand; 
15and to carry the silver and gold, 
which the king and his counsellors 
have freely offered unto the God of 
Israel, whose habitation is in 
Jerusalem, 16and all the silver and gold 
that thou shalt find in all the province 
of Babylon, with the freewill-offering 
of the people, and of the priests, 
offering willingly for the house of 
their God which is in Jerusalem; 
17therefore thou shalt with all diligence 
buy with this money bullocks, rams, 
lambs, with their meal-offerings and 
their drink-offerings, and shalt offer 
them upon the altar of the house of 
your God which is in Jerusalem. 18And 
whatsoever shall seem good to thee 
and to thy brethren to do with the rest 
of the silver and the gold, that do ye 
after the will of your God. 19And the 
vessels that are given thee for the 
service of the house of thy God, 
deliver thou before the God of 
Jerusalem. 20And whatsoever more 
shall be needful for the house of thy 
God, which thou shalt have occasion 
to bestow, bestow it out of the king’s 
treasure-house. 21And I, even I 
Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree 
to all the treasurers that are beyond the 
River, that whatsoever Ezra the priest, 
the scribe of the Law of the God of 
heaven, shall require of you, it be done 
with all diligence, 22unto a hundred 
talents of silver, and to a hundred 
measures of wheat, and to a hundred 
baths of wine, and to a hundred baths 
of oil, and salt without prescribing 
how much. 23Whatsoever is 
commanded by the God of heaven, let 
it be done exactly for the house of the 
God of heaven; for why should there 
be wrath against the realm of the king 
and his sons? 24Also we announce to 
you, that touching any of the priests 
and Levites, the singers, porters, 
Nethinim, or servants of this house of 
God, it shall not be lawful to impose 
tribute, impost, or toll, upon them. 
25And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of 
thy God that is in thy hand, appoint 
magistrates and judges, who may 
judge all the people that are beyond 
the River, all such as know the laws of 
thy God; and teach ye him that 
knoweth them not. 26And whosoever 
will not do the law of thy God, and the 
law of the king, let judgment be 
executed upon him with all diligence, 
whether it be unto death, or to 
banishment, or to confiscation of 
goods, or to imprisonment.’ 


27Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
our fathers, who hath put such a thing 
as this in the king’s heart, to beautify 
the house of the LORD which is in 
Jerusalem; 28and hath extended mercy 
unto me before the king, and his 
counsellors, and before all the king’s 
mighty princes. And I was 
strengthened according to the hand of 
the LORD my God upon me, and I 
gathered together out of Israel chief 
men to go up with me. 

Now these are the heads of their 
fathers’houses, and this is the 
genealogy of them that went up with 
me from Babylon, in the reign of 
Artaxerxes the king. 2Of the sons of 
Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of 
Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, 
Hattush. 3Of the sons of Shecaniah: of 
the sons of Parosh, Zechariah; and 
with him were reckoned by genealogy 
of the males a hundred and fifty. 4Of 
the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai 
the son of Zerahiah; and with him two 
hundred males. 5Of the sons of 
Shechaniah, the son of Jahaziel; and 
with him three hundred males. 6And of 
the sons of Adin, Ebed the son of 
Jonathan; and with him fifty males. 
7And of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the 
son of Athaliah; and with him seventy 
males. 8And of the sons of Shephatiah, 
Zebadiah the son of Michael; and with 
him fourscore males. 9Of the sons of 
Joab, Obadiah the son of Jehiel; and 
with him two hundred and eighteen 
males. 10And of the sons of Shelomith, 
the son of Josiphiah; and with him a 
hundred and threescore males. 11And 
of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah the son 
of Bebai; and with him twenty and 
eight males. 12And of the sons of 
Azgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan; 
and with him a hundred and ten males. 
13And of the sons of Adonikam, that 
were the last; and these are their 
names, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah; 
and with them threescore males. 14And 
of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and 
Zaccur; and with him seventy males. 

15And I gathered them together to 
the river that runneth to Ahava; and 
there we encamped three days; and I 
viewed the people, and the priests, and 
found there none of the sons of Levi. 
16Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for 
Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for 
Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for 
Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for 
Meshullam, chief men; also for 
Joiarib, and for Elnathan, teachers. 
17And I gave them commandment unto 
Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia; 
and I told them what they should say 
unto Iddo [and] his brother, who were 
set over the place Casiphia, that they 
should bring unto us ministers for the 
house of our God. 18And according to 
the good hand of our God upon us they 
brought us a man of discretion, of the 
sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son 
of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons 
and his brethren, eighteen; 19and 
Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of 
the sons of Merari, his brethren and 
their sons, twenty; 20and of the 
Nethinim, whom David and the 
8 




princes had given for the service of the 
Levites, two hundred and twenty 
Nethinim; all of them were mentioned 
by name. 

21Then I proclaimed a fast there, at 
the river Ahava, that we might humble 
ourselves before our God, to seek of 
Him a straight way, for us, and for our 
little ones, and for all our substance. 
22For I was ashamed to ask of the king 
a band of soldiers and horsemen to 
help us against the enemy in the way; 
because we had spoken unto the king, 
saying: ‘The hand of our God is upon 
all them that seek Him, for good; but 
His power and His wrath is against all 
them that forsake Him.’ 23So we fasted 
and besought our God for this; and He 
was entreated of us. 24Then I separated 
twelve of the chiefs of the priests, 
besides Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten 
of their brethren with them, 25and 
weighed unto them the silver, and the 
gold, and the vessels, even the offering 
for the house of our God, which the 
king, and his counsellors, and his 
princes, and all Israel there present, 
had offered; 26I even weighed into 
their hand six hundred and fifty talents 
of silver, and silver vessels a hundred 
talents; of gold a hundred talents; 27and 
twenty bowels of gold, of a thousand 
darics; and two vessels of fine bright 
brass, precious as gold. 28And I said 
unto them: ‘Ye are holy unto the LORD, 
and the vessels are holy; and the silver 
and the gold are a freewill-offering 
unto the LORD, the God of your fathers. 
29Watch ye, and keep them, until ye 
weigh them before the chiefs of the 
priests and the Levites, and the princes 
of the fathers’houses of Israel, at 
Jerusalem, in the chambers of the 
house of the LORD.’ 30So the priests 
and the Levites received the weight of 
the silver and the gold, and the vessels, 
to bring them to Jerusalem unto the 
house of our God. 

31Then we departed from the river 
of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first 
month, to go unto Jerusalem; and the 
hand of our God was upon us, and He 
delivered us from the hand of the 
enemy and lier-in-wait by the way. 
32And we came to Jerusalem, and 
abode there three days. 33And on the 
fourth day was the silver and the gold 
and the vessels weighed in the house 
of our God into the hand of Meremoth 
the son of Uriah the priest; and with 
him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; 
and with them was Jozabad the son of 
Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui, 
the Levites; 34the whole by number 
and by weight; and all the weight was 
written at that time. 

35The children of the captivity, that 
were come out of exile, offered burnt-
offerings unto the God of Israel, 
twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety 
and six rams, seventy and seven 
lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin-
offering; all this was a burnt-offering 
unto the LORD. 36And they delivered 
the king’s commissions unto the king’s 
satraps, and to the governors beyond 
the River; and they furthered the 
people and the house of God. 


Now when these things were 
done, the princes drew near unto 
me, saying: ‘The people of Israel, and 
the priests and the Levites, have not 
separated themselves from the peoples 
of the lands, doing according to their 
abominations, even of the Canaanites, 
the Hittites, the Perizzites, the 
Jebusites, the Ammonites, the 
Moabites, the Egyptians, and the 
Amorites. 2For they have taken of their 
daughters for themselves and for their 
sons; so that the holy seed have 
mingled themselves with the peoples 
of the lands; yea, the hand of the 
princes and rulers hath been first in 
this faithlessness.’ 3And when I heard 
this thing, I rent my garment and my 
mantle, and plucked off the hair of my 
head and of my beard, and sat down 
appalled. 4Then were assembled unto 
me every one that trembled at the 
words of the God of Israel, because of 
the faithlessness of them of the 
captivity; and I sat appalled until the 
evening offering. 

5And at the evening offering I arose 
up from my fasting, even with my 
garment and my mantle rent; and I fell 
upon my knees, and spread out my 
hands unto the LORD my God; 6and I 
said: ‘O my God, I am ashamed and 
blush to lift up my face to Thee, my 
God; for our iniquities are increased 
over our head, and our guiltiness is 
grown up unto the heavens. 7Since the 
days of our fathers we have been 
exceeding guilty unto this day; and for 
our iniquities have we, our kings, and 
our priests, been delivered into the 
hand of the kings of the lands, to the 
sword, to captivity, and to spoiling, 
and to confusion of face, as it is this 
day. 8And now for a little moment 
grace hath been shown from the LORD 
our God, to leave us a remnant to 
escape, and to give us a nail in His 
holy place, that our God may lighten 
our eyes, and give us a little reviving 
in our bondage. 9For we are bondmen; 
yet our God hath not forsaken us in 
our bondage, but hath extended mercy 
unto us in the sight of the kings of 
Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up 
the house of our God, and to repair the 
ruins thereof, and to give us a fence in 
Judah and in Jerusalem. 10And now, O 
our God, what shall we say after this? 
for we have forsaken Thy 
commandments, 11which Thou hast 
commanded by Thy servants the 
prophets, saying: The land, unto which 
ye go to possess it, is an unclean land 
through the uncleanness of the peoples 
of the lands, through their 
abominations, wherewith they have 
filled it from one end to another with 
their filthiness. 12Now therefore give 
not your daughters unto their sons, 
neither take their daughters unto your 
sons, nor seek their peace or their 
prosperity for ever; that ye may be 
strong, and eat the good of the land, 
and leave it for an inheritance to your 
children for ever. 13And after all that is 
come upon us for our evil deeds, and 
for our great guilt, seeing that Thou 
our God hast punished us less than our 
9 




iniquities deserve, and hast given us 
such a remnant, 14shall we again break 
Thy commandments, and make 
marriages with the peoples that do 
these abominations? wouldest not 
Thou be angry with us till Thou hadst 
consumed us, so that there should be 
no remnant, nor any to escape? 15O 
LORD, the God of Israel, Thou art 
righteous; for we are left a remnant 
that is escaped, as it is this day; 
behold, we are before Thee in our 
guiltiness; for none can stand before 
Thee because of this.’ 

Now while Ezra prayed, and 
made confession, weeping and 
casting himself down before the house 
of God, there was gathered together 
unto him out of Israel a very great 
congregation of men and women and 
children; for the people wept very 
sore. 2And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, 
one of the sons of Elam, answered and 
said unto Ezra: ‘We have broken faith 
with our God, and have married 
foreign women of the peoples of the 
land; yet now there is hope for Israel 
concerning this thing. 3Now therefore 
let us make a covenant with our God 
to put away all the wives, and such as 
are born of them, according to the 
counsel of the LORD, and of those that 
tremble at the commandment of our 
God; and let it be done according to 
the law. 4Arise; for the matter 
belongeth unto thee, and we are with 
thee; be of good courage, and do it.’ 

5Then arose Ezra, and made the 
chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and 
all Israel, to swear that they would do 
according to this word. So they swore. 
6Then Ezra rose up from before the 
house of God, and went into the 
chamber of Jehohanan the son of 
Eliashib; and when he came thither, he 
did eat no bread, nor drink water; for 
he mourned because of the 
faithlessness of them of the captivity. 
7And they made proclamation 
throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto 
all the children of the captivity, that 
they should gather themselves together 
unto Jerusalem; 8and that whosoever 
came not within three days, according 
to the counsel of the princes and the 
elders, all his substance should be 
forfeited, and himself separated from 
the congregation of the captivity. 

9Then all the men of Judah and 
Benjamin gathered themselves 
together unto Jerusalem within the 
three days; it was the ninth month, on 
the twentieth day of the month; and all 
the people sat in the broad place before 
the house of God, trembling because 
of this matter, and for the great rain. 
10And Ezra the priest stood up, and 
said unto them: ‘Ye have broken faith, 
and have married foreign women, to 
increase the guilt of Israel. 11Now 
therefore make confession unto the 
LORD, the God of your fathers, and do 
His pleasure; and separate yourselves 
from the peoples of the land, and from 
the foreign women.’ 12Then all the 
congregation answered and said with a 
loud voice: ‘As thou hast said, so it is 
for us to do. 13But the people are 
10 




many, and it is a time of much rain, 
and we are not able to stand without, 
neither is this a work of one day or 
two; for we have greatly transgressed 
in this matter. 14Let now our princes of 
all the congregation stand, and let all 
them that are in our cities that have 
married foreign women come at 
appointed times, and with them the 
elders of every city, and the judges 
thereof, until the fierce wrath of our 
God be turned from us, as touching 
this matter.’ 15Only Jonathan the son 
of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of 
Tikvah stood up against this matter; 
and Meshullam and Shabbethai the 
Levite helped them. 16And the children 
of the captivity did so. And Ezra the 
priest, with certain heads of 
fathers’houses, after their 
fathers’houses, and all of them by their 
names, were separated; and they sat 
down in the first day of the tenth 
month to examine the matter. 17And 
they were finished with all the men 
that had married foreign women by the 
first day of the first month. 

18And among the sons of the priests 
there were found that had married 
foreign women, namely: of the sons of 
Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and his 
brethren, Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and 
Jarib, and Gedaliah. 19And they gave 
their hand that they would put away 
their wives; and being guilty, [they 
offered] a ram of the flock for their 
guilt. 20And of the sons of Immer: 
Hanani and Zebadiah. 21And of the 
sons of Harim: Maaseiah, and Elijah, 
and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah. 
22And of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, 
Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, 
and Elasah. 23And of the Levites: 
Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah—
the same is Kelita—Pethahiah, Judah, 
and Eliezer. 24And of the singers: 
Eliashib; and of the porters: Shallum, 
and Telem, and Uri. 25And of Israel: of 
the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, and 
Izziah, and Malchijah, and Mijamin, 
and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and 
Benaiah. 26And of the sons of Elam: 
Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and 
Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Elijah. 27And 
of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, 
Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, 
and Aziza. 28And of the sons of Bebai: 
Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai. 
29And of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, 
Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and 
Sheal, and Ramoth. 30And of the sons 
of Pahath-moab: Adna, and Chelal, 
Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, 
Bezalel, and Binnui, and Manasseh. 
31And of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, 
Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, 
Shimeon; 32Benjamin, Malluch, 
Shemariah. 33Of the sons of Hashum: 
Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, 
Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei. 34Of the 
sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, and 
Uel; 35Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhu; 
36Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib; 
37Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasai; 
38and Bani, and Binnui, Shimei; 
39Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah; 
40Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai; 
41Azarel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah; 


42Shallum, Amariah, Joseph. 43Of the 
sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, 
Zebina, Jaddai, and Joel, Benaiah. 
44All these had taken foreign wives; 
and some of them had wives by whom 
they had children. 

 

 

..... 

NEHEMIAH 

 

THE WORDS of Nehemiah the son of 
Hacaliah. 

Now it came to pass in the month 
Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was 
in Shushan the castle, 2that Hanani, 
one of my brethren, came out of Judah, 
he and certain men; and I asked them 
concerning the Jews that had escaped, 
that were left of the captivity, and 
concerning Jerusalem. 3And they said 
unto me: ‘The remnant that are left of 
the captivity there in the province are 
in great affliction and reproach; the 
wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, 
and the gates thereof are burned with 
fire.’ 4And it came to pass, when I 
heard these words, that I sat down and 
wept, and mourned certain days; and I 
fasted and prayed before the God of 
heaven, 5and said: ‘I beseech Thee, O 
LORD, the God of heaven, the great and 
awful God, that keepeth covenant and 
mercy with them that love Him and 
keep His commandments; 6let Thine 
ear now be attentive, and Thine eyes 
open, that Thou mayest hearken unto 
the prayer of Thy servant, which I pray 
before Thee at this time, day and night, 
for the children of Israel Thy servants, 
while I confess the sins of the children 
of Israel, which we have sinned 
against Thee; yea, I and my father’s 
house have sinned. 7We have dealt 
very corruptly against Thee, and have 
not kept the commandments, nor the 
statutes, nor the ordinances which 
Thou didst command Thy servant 
Moses. 8Remember, I beseech Thee, 
the word that Thou didst command 
Thy servant Moses, saying: If ye deal 
treacherously, I will scatter you abroad 
among the peoples; 9but if ye return 
unto Me, and keep My commandments 
and do them, though your dispersed 
were in the uttermost part of the 
heaven, yet will I gather them from 
thence, and will bring them unto the 
place that I have chosen to cause My 
name to dwell there. 10Now these are 
Thy servants and Thy people, whom 
Thou hast redeemed by Thy great 
power, and by Thy strong hand. 11O 
Lord, I beseech Thee, let now Thine 
ear be attentive to the prayer of Thy 
servant, and to the prayer of Thy 
servants, who delight to fear Thy 
name; and prosper, I pray Thee, Thy 
servant this day, and grant him mercy 
1 




in the sight of this man.’ Now I was 
cupbearer to the king. 

And it came to pass in the month 
Nisan, in the twentieth year of 
Artaxerxes the king, when wine was 
before him, that I took up the wine, 
and gave it unto the king. Now I had 
not been beforetime sad in his 
presence. 2And the king said unto me: 
‘Why is thy countenance sad, seeing 
thou art not sick? this is nothing else 
but sorrow of heart.’ Then I was very 
sore afraid. 3And I said unto the king: 
‘Let the king live for ever: why should 
not my countenance be sad, when the 
city, the place of my fathers’ 
sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates 
thereof are consumed with fire?’ 4Then 
the king said unto me: ‘For what dost 
thou make request?’ So I prayed to the 
God of heaven. 5And I said unto the 
king: ‘If it please the king, and if thy 
servant have found favour in thy sight, 
that thou wouldest send me unto 
Judah, unto the city of my 
fathers’sepulchres, that I may build it.’ 
6And the king said unto me, the queen 
also sitting by him: ‘For how long 
shall thy journey be? and when wilt 
thou return?’ So it pleased the king to 
send me; and I set him a time. 
7Moreover I said unto the king: ‘If it 
please the king, let letters be given me 
to the governors beyond the River, that 
they may let me pass through till I 
come unto Judah; 8and a letter unto 
Asaph the keeper of the king’s park, 
that he may give me timber to make 
beams for the gates of the castle which 
appertaineth to the house, and for the 
wall of the city, and for the house that 
I shall enter into.’ And the king 
granted me, according to the good 
hand of my God upon me. 

9Then I came to the governors 
beyond the River, and gave them the 
king’s letters. Now the king had sent 
with me captains of the army and 
horsemen. 10And when Sanballat the 
Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the 
Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them 
exceedingly, for that there was come a 
man to seek the welfare of the children 
of Israel. 11So I came to Jerusalem, and 
was there three days. 12And I arose in 
the night, I and some few men with 
me; neither told I any man what my 
God put into my heart to do for 
Jerusalem; neither was there any beast 
with me, save the beast that I rode 
upon. 13And I went out by night by the 
valley gate, even toward the dragon’s 
well, and to the dung gate, and viewed 
the walls of Jerusalem, which were 
broken down, and the gates thereof 
were consumed with fire. 14Then I 
went on to the fountain gate and to the 
king’s pool; but there was no place for 
the beast that was under me to pass. 
15Then went I up in the night in the 
valley, and viewed the wall; and I 
turned back, and entered by the valley 
gate, and so returned. 16And the rulers 
knew not whither I went, or what I did; 
neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, 
nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, 
nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did 
the work. 
2 




17Then said I unto them: ‘Ye see 
the evil case that we are in, how 
Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates 
thereof are burned with fire; come and 
let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, 
that we be no more a reproach.’ 18And 
I told them of the hand of my God 
which was good upon me; as also of 
the king’s words that he had spoken 
unto me. And they said: ‘Let us rise up 
and build.’ So they strengthened their 
hands for the good work. 19But when 
Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the 
servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem 
the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us 
to scorn, and despised us, and said: 
‘What is this thing that ye do? will ye 
rebel against the king?’ 20Then 
answered I them, and said unto them: 
‘The God of heaven, He will prosper 
us; therefore we His servants will arise 
and build; but ye have no portion, nor 
right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.’ 

Then Eliashib the high priest rose 
up with his brethren the priests, 
and they builded the sheep gate; they 
sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; 
even unto the tower of Hammeah they 
sanctified it, unto the tower of 
Hananel. 2And next unto him builded 
the men of Jericho. And next to them 
builded Zaccur the son of Imri. 3And 
the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah 
build; they laid the beams thereof, and 
set up the doors thereof, the bolts 
thereof, and the bars thereof. 4And 
next unto them repaired Meremoth the 
son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz. And 
next unto them repaired Meshullam 
the son of Berechiah, the son of 
Meshezabel. And next unto them 
repaired Zadok the son of Baana. 5And 
next unto them the Tekoites repaired; 
and their nobles put not their necks to 
the work of their lord. 6And the gate of 
the old city repaired Joiada the son of 
Paseah and Meshullam the son of 
Besodeiah; they laid the beams 
thereof, and set up the doors thereof, 
and the bolts thereof, and the bars 
thereof. 7And next unto them repaired 
Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the 
Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and 
of Mizpah, for them that appertained 
to the throne of the governor beyond 
the River. 8Next unto him repaired 
Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, 
goldsmiths. And next unto him 
repaired Hananiah one of the 
perfumers, and they restored Jerusalem 
even unto the broad wall. 9And next 
unto them repaired Rephaiah the son 
of Hur, the ruler of half the district of 
Jerusalem. 10And next unto them 
repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, 
even over against his house. And next 
unto him repaired Hattush the son of 
Hashabneiah. 11Malchijah the son of 
Harim, and Hasshub the son of Pahath-
moab, repaired another portion, and 
the tower of the furnaces. 12And next 
unto him repaired Shallum the son of 
Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district 
of Jerusalem, he and his daughters. 
13The valley gate repaired Hanun, and 
the inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, 
and set up the doors thereof, the bolts 
thereof, and the bars thereof, and a 
3 




thousand cubits of the wall unto the 
dung gate. 14And the dung gate 
repaired Malchijah the son of Rechab, 
the ruler of the district of Beth-
cherem; he built it, and set up the 
doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and 
the bars thereof. 15And the fountain 
gate repaired Shallun the son of 
Colhozeh, the ruler of the district of 
Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and 
set up the doors thereof, the bolts 
thereof, and the bars thereof, and the 
wall of the pool of Shelah by the 
king’s garden, even unto the stairs that 
go down from the city of David. 
16After him repaired Nehemiah the son 
of Azbuk, the ruler of half the district 
of Beth-zur, unto the place over 
against the sepulchres of David, and 
unto the pool that was made, and unto 
the house of the mighty men. 17After 
him repaired the Levites, Rehum the 
son of Bani. Next unto him repaired 
Hashabiah, the ruler of half the district 
of Keilah, for his district. 18After him 
repaired their brethren, Bavvai the son 
of Henadad, the ruler of half the 
district of Keilah. 19And next to him 
repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the 
ruler of Mizpah, another portion, over 
against the ascent to the armoury at the 
Turning. 20After him Baruch the son of 
Zaccai earnestly repaired another 
portion, from the Turning unto the 
door of the house of Eliashib the high 
priest. 21After him repaired Meremoth 
the son of Uriah the son of Hakkoz 
another portion, from the door of the 
house of Eliashib even to the end of 
the house of Eliashib. 22And after him 
repaired the priests, the men of the 
Plain. 23After them repaired Benjamin 
and Hasshub over against their house. 
After them repaired Azariah the son of 
Maaseiah the son of Ananiah beside 
his own house. 24After him repaired 
Binnui the son of Henadad another 
portion, from the house of Azariah 
unto the Turning and unto the corner. 
25Palal the son of Uzai repaired over 
against the Turning, and the tower that 
standeth out from the upper house of 
the king, which is by the court of the 
guard. After him Pedaiah the son of 
Parosh repaired.— 26Now the 
Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, unto the 
place over against the water gate 
toward the east, and the tower that 
standeth out.— 27After him the 
Tekoites repaired another portion, over 
against the great tower that standeth 
out, and unto the wall of Ophel. 
28Above the horse gate repaired the 
priests, every one over against his own 
house. 29After them repaired Zadok the 
son of Immer over against his own 
house. And after him repaired 
Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, the 
keeper of the east gate. 30After him 
repaired Hananiah the son of 
Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of 
Zalaph, another portion. After him 
repaired Meshullam the son of 
Berechiah over against his chamber. 
31After him repaired Malchijah one of 
the goldsmiths unto the house of the 
Nethinim, and of the merchants, over 
against the gate of Hammiphkad, and 


to the upper chamber of the corner. 
32And between the upper chamber of 
the corner and the sheep gate repaired 
the goldsmiths and the merchants. 

33But it came to pass that, when 
Sanballat heard that we builded the 
wall, he was wroth, and took great 
indignation, and mocked the Jews. 
34And he spoke before his brethren and 
the army of Samaria, and said: ‘What 
do these feeble Jews? will they restore 
at will? will they sacrifice? will they 
make an end this day? will they revive 
the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, 
seeing they are burned?’ 35Now 
Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and 
he said: ‘Even that which they build, if 
a fox go up, he shall break down their 
stone wall.’ 36Hear, O our God; for we 
are despised; and turn back their 
reproach upon their own head, and 
give them up to spoiling in a land of 
captivity; 37and cover not their 
iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted 
out from before Thee; for they have 
vexed Thee before the builders. 38So 
we built the wall; and all the wall was 
joined together unto half the height 
thereof; for the people had a mind to 
work. 

But it came to pass that, when 
Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the 
Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the 
Ashdodites, heard that the repairing of 
the walls of Jerusalem went forward, 
and that the breaches began to be 
stopped, then they were very wroth; 
2and they conspired all of them 
together to come and fight against 
Jerusalem, and to cause confusion 
therein. 3But we made our prayer unto 
our God, and set a watch against them 
day and night, because of them. 4And 
Judah said: ‘The strength of the 
bearers of burdens is decayed, and 
there is much rubbish; so that we are 
not able to build the wall.’ 5And our 
adversaries said: ‘They shall not know, 
neither see, till we come into the midst 
of them, and slay them, and cause the 
work to cease.’ 6And it came to pass 
that, when the Jews that dwelt by them 
came, they said unto us ten times: ‘Ye 
must return unto us from all places.’ 
7Therefore set I in the lowest parts of 
the space behind the wall, in the open 
places, I even set the people after their 
families with their swords, their 
spears, and their bows. 8And I looked, 
and rose up, and said unto the nobles, 
and to the rulers, and to the rest of the 
people: ‘Be not ye afraid of them; 
remember the Lord, who is great and 
awful, and fight for your brethren, 
your sons and your daughters, your 
wives and your houses.’ 

9And it came to pass, when our 
enemies heard that it was known unto 
us, and God had brought their counsel 
to nought, that we returned all of us to 
the wall, every one unto his work. 
10And it came to pass from that time 
forth, that half of my servants wrought 
in the work, and half of them held the 
spears, the shields, and the bows, and 
the coats of mail; and the rulers were 
behind all the house of Judah. 11They 
that builded the wall and they that bore 
4 




burdens laded themselves, every one 
with one of his hands wrought in the 
work, and with the other held his 
weapon; 12and the builders, every one 
had his sword girded by his side, and 
so builded. And he that sounded the 
horn was by me. 13And I said unto the 
nobles, and to the rulers and to the rest 
of the people: ‘The work is great and 
large, and we are separated upon the 
wall, one far from another; 14in what 
place soever ye hear the sound of the 
horn, resort ye thither unto us; our God 
will fight for us.’ 

15So we wrought in the work; and 
half of them held the spears from the 
rising of the morning till the stars 
appeared. 16Likewise at the same time 
said I unto the people: ‘Let every one 
with his servant lodge within 
Jerusalem, that in the night they may 
be a guard to us, and may labour in the 
day.’ 17So neither I, nor my brethren, 
nor my servants, nor the men of the 
guard that followed me, none of us put 
off our clothes, every one that went to 
the water had his weapon. 

 

Then there arose a great cry of the 
people and of their wives against 
their brethren the Jews. 2For there 
were that said: ‘We, our sons and our 
daughters, are many; let us get for 
them corn, that we may eat and live.’ 
3Some also there were that said: ‘We 
are mortgaging our fields, and our 
vineyards, and our houses; let us get 
corn, because of the dearth.’ 4There 
were also that said: ‘We have 
borrowed money for the king’s tribute 
upon our fields and our vineyards. 
5Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of 
our brethren, our children as their 
children; and, lo, we bring into 
bondage our sons and our daughters to 
be servants, and some of our daughters 
are brought into bondage already; 
neither is it in our power to help it; for 
other men have our fields and our 
vineyards.’ 

6And I was very angry when I 
heard their cry and these words. 7Then 
I consulted with myself, and 
contended with the nobles and the 
rulers, and said unto them: ‘Ye lend 
upon pledge, every one to his brother.’ 
And I held a great assembly against 
them. 8And I said unto them: ‘We after 
our ability have redeemed our brethren 
the Jews, that sold themselves unto the 
heathen; and would ye nevertheless 
sell your brethren, and should they sell 
themselves unto us?’ Then held they 
their peace, and found never a word. 
9Also I said: ‘The thing that ye do is 
not good; ought ye not to walk in the 
fear of our God, because of the 
reproach of the heathen our enemies? 
10And I likewise, my brethren and my 
servants, have lent them money and 
corn. I pray you, let us leave off this 
exaction. 11Restore, I pray you, to 
them, even this day, their fields, their 
vineyards, their oliveyards, and their 
houses, also the hundred pieces of 
silver, and the corn, the wine, and the 
oil, that ye exact of them.’ 12Then said 
they: ‘We will restore them, and will 
5 




require nothing of them; so will we do, 
even as thou sayest.’ Then I called the 
priests, and took an oath of them, that 
they should do according to this 
promise. 13Also I shook out my lap, 
and said: ‘So God shake out every man 
from his house, and from his labour, 
that performeth not this promise; even 
thus be he shaken out, and emptied.’ 
And all the congregation said: ‘Amen’, 
and praised the LORD. And the people 
did according to this promise. 

14Moreover from the time that I 
was appointed to be their governor in 
the land of Judah, from the twentieth 
year even unto the two and thirtieth 
year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, 
twelve years, I and my brethren have 
not eaten the bread of the governor. 
15But the former governors that were 
before me laid burdens upon the 
people, and took of them for bread and 
wine above forty shekels of silver; yea, 
even their servants lorded over the 
people; but so did not I, because of the 
fear of God. 16Yea, also I set hand to 
the work of this wall, neither bought 
we any land; and all my servants were 
gathered thither unto the work. 
17Moreover there were at my table of 
the Jews and the rulers a hundred and 
fifty men, beside those that came unto 
us from among the nations that were 
round about us. 18Now that which was 
prepared for one day was one ox and 
six choice sheep, also fowls were 
prepared for me; and once in ten days 
store of all sorts of wine; yet for all 
this I demanded not the bread of the 
governor, because the service was 
heavy upon this people. 19Remember 
unto me, O my God, for good, all that 
I have done for this people. 

6 



Now it came to pass, when it was 
reported to Sanballat and Tobiah, 
and to Geshem the Arabian, and unto 
the rest of our enemies, that I had 
builded the wall, and that there was no 
breach left therein—though even unto 
that time I had not set up the doors in 
the gates— 2that Sanballat and Geshem 
sent unto me, saying: ‘Come, let us 
meet together in one of the villages in 
the plain of Ono.’ But they thought to 
do me mischief. 3And I sent 
messengers unto them, saying: ‘I am 
doing a great work, so that I cannot 
come down; why should the work 
cease, whilst I leave it, and come down 
to you?’ 4And they sent unto me four 
times after this sort; and I answered 
them after the same manner. 5Then 
sent Sanballat his servant unto me in 
like manner the fifth time with an open 
letter in his hand; 6wherein was 
written: ‘It is reported among the 
nations, and aGeshem saith it, that thou 
and the Jews think to rebel; for which 
cause thou buildest the wall; and thou 
wouldest be their king, even according 
to these words. 7And thou hast also 
appointed prophets to proclaim of thee 
at Jerusalem, saying: There is a king in 
Judah; and now shall it be reported to 
the king according to these words. 
Come now therefore, and let us take 

a Heb. Gashmu. 


counsel together.’ 8Then I sent unto 
him, saying: ‘There are no such things 
done as thou sayest, but thou feignest 
them out of thine own heart.’ 9For they 
all would have us afraid, saying: 
‘Their hands shall be weakened from 
the work, that it be not done.’ But 
now, strengthen Thou my hands. 

10And as for me, I went unto the 
house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah 
the son of Mehetabel, who was shut 
up; and he said: ‘Let us meet together 
in the house of God, within the temple, 
and let us shut the doors of the temple; 
for they will come to slay thee; yea, in 
the night will they come to slay thee.’ 
11And I said: ‘Should such a man as I 
flee? and who is there, that, being such 
as I, could go into the temple and live? 
I will not go in.’ 12And I discerned, 
and, lo, God had not sent him; for he 
pronounced this prophecy against me, 
whereas Tobiah and Sanballat had 
hired him. 13For this cause was he 
hired, that I should be afraid, and do 
so, and sin, and that they might have 
matter for an evil report, that they 
might taunt me. 14Remember, O my 
God, Tobiah and Sanballat according 
to these their works, and also the 
prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the 
prophets, that would have me put in 
fear. 

15So the wall was finished in the 
twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, 
in fifty and two days. 16And it came to 
pass, when all our enemies heard 
thereof, that all the nations that were 
about us feared, and were much cast 
down in their own eyes; for they 
perceived that this work was wrought 
of our God. 17Moreover in those days 
the nobles of Judah sent many letters 
unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah 
came unto them. 18For there were 
many in Judah sworn unto him, 
because he was the son-in-law of 
Shecaniah the son of Arah; and his son 
Jehohanan had taken the daughter of 
Meshullam the son of Berechiah to 
wife. 19Also they spoke of his good 
deeds before me, and reported my 
words to him. And Tobiah sent letters 
to put me in fear. 

Now it came to pass, when the 
wall was built, and I had set up 
the doors, and the porters and the 
singers and the Levites were 
appointed, 2that I gave my brother 
Hanani, and Hananiah the governor of 
the castle, charge over Jerusalem; for 
he was a faithful man, and feared God 
above many. 3And I said unto them: 
‘Let not the gates of Jerusalem be 
opened until the sun be hot; and while 
they stand on guard, let them shut the 
doors, and bar ye them; and let 
watches be appointed of the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in 
his watch, and every one to be over 
against his house.’ 4Now the city was 
wide and large; but the people were 
few therein, and the houses were not 
builded. 5And my God put into my 
heart to gather together the nobles, and 
the rulers, and the people, that they 
might be reckoned by genealogy. And 
I found the book of the genealogy of 
7 




them that came up at the first, and I 
found written therein: 

 

6These are the children of the 
province, that went up out of the 
captivity of those that had been carried 
away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king 
of Babylon had carried away, and that 
returned unto Jerusalem and to Judah, 
every one unto his city; 7who came 
with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, 
Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, 
Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, 
Nehum, Baanah. 

The number of the men of the 
people of Israel: 

8The children of Parosh, two 
thousand a hundred and seventy and 
two. 

9The children of Shephatiah, three 
hundred seventy and two. 

10The children of Arah, six hundred 
fifty and two. 

11The children of Pahath-moab, of 
the children of Jeshua and Joab, two 
thousand and eight hundred and 
eighteen. 

12The children of Elam, a thousand 
two hundred fifty and four. 

13The children of Zattu, eight 
hundred forty and five. 

14The children of Zaccai, seven 
hundred and threescore. 

15The children of Binnui, six 
hundred forty and eight. 

16The children of Bebai, six 
hundred twenty and eight. 

17The children of Azgad, two 
thousand three hundred twenty and 
two. 

18The children of Adonikam, six 
hundred threescore and seven. 

19The children of Bigvai, two 
thousand threescore and seven. 

20The children of Adin, six hundred 
fifty and five. 

21The children of Ater, of 
Hezekiah, ninety and eight. 

22The children of Hashum, three 
hundred twenty and eight. 

23The children of Bezai, three 
hundred twenty and four. 

24The children of Hariph, a hundred 
and twelve. 

25The children of Gibeon, ninety 
and five. 

26The men of Beth-lehem and 
Netophah, a hundred fourscore and 
eight. 

27The men of Anathoth, a hundred 
twenty and eight. 

28The men of Beth-azmaveth, forty 
and two. 

29The men of Kiriath-jearim, 
Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven 
hundred forty and three. 

30The men of Ramah and Geba, six 
hundred twenty and one. 

31The men of Michmas, a hundred 
and twenty and two. 

32The men of Beth-el and Ai, a 
hundred twenty and three. 

33The men of the other Nebo, fifty 
and two. 

34The children of the other Elam, a 
thousand two hundred fifty and four. 


35The children of Harim, three 
hundred and twenty. 

36The children of Jericho, three 
hundred forty and five. 

37The children of Lod, Hadid, and 
Ono, seven hundred twenty and one. 

38The children of Senaah, three 
thousand nine hundred and thirty. 

 

39The priests: 

The children of Jedaiah, of the 
house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy 
and three. 

40The children of Immer, a 
thousand fifty and two. 

41The children of Pashhur, a 
thousand two hundred forty and seven. 

42The children of Harim, a 
thousand and seventeen. 

 

43The Levites: the children of 
Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the children of 
Hodeiah, seventy and four. 

 

44The singers: the children of 
Asaph, a hundred forty and eight. 

 

45The porters: the children of 
Shallum, the children of Ater, the 
children of Talmon, the children of 
Akkub, the children of Hatita, the 
children of Shobai, a hundred thirty 
and eight. 

 

46The Nethinim: the children of 
Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the 
children of Tabbaoth; 47the children of 
Keros, the children of Sia, the children 
of Padon; 48the children of Lebanah, 
the children of Hagaba, the children of 
Salmai; 49the children of Hanan, the 
children of Giddel, the children of 
Gahar; 50the children of Reaiah, the 
children of Rezin, the children of 
Nekoda; 51the children of Gazzam, the 
children of Uzza, the children of 
Paseah; 52the children of Besai, the 
children of Meunim, the children of 
Nephishesim; 53the children of 
Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the 
children of Harhur; 54the children of 
Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the 
children of Harsha; 55the children of 
Barkos, the children of Sisera, the 
children of Temah; 56the children of 
Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 

57The children of Solomon’s 
servants: the children of Sotai, the 
children of Sophereth, the children of 
Perida; 58the children of Jala, the 
children of Darkon, the children of 
Giddel; 59the children of Shephatiah, 
the children of Hattil, the children of 
Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of 
Amon. 

60All the Nethinim, and the children 
of Solomon’s servants, were three 
hundred ninety and two. 

 

61And these were they that went up 
from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, 
Addon, and Immer; but they could not 
tell their fathers’houses, nor their seed, 
whether they were of Israel: 62the 
children of Delaiah, the children of 
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six 
hundred forty and two. 63And of the 
priests: the children of Habaiah, the 


children of Hakkoz, the children of 
Barzillai, who took a wife of the 
daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, 
and was called after their name. 
64These sought their register, that is, 
the genealogy, but it was not found; 
therefore were they deemed polluted 
and put from the priesthood. 65And the 
Tirshatha said unto them, that they 
should not eat of the most holy things, 
till there stood up a priest with Urim 
and Thummim. 

 

66The whole congregation together 
was forty and two thousand three 
hundred and threescore, 67beside their 
men-servants and their maid-servants, 
of whom there were seven thousand 
three hundred thirty and seven; and 
they had two hundred forty and five 
singing men and singing women. 
[a68Their horses were seven hundred 
thirty and six; their mules, two 
hundred forty and five;] 69their camels, 
four hundred thirty and five; their 
asses, six thousand seven hundred and 
twenty. 

a This verse is placed in authorative 
codices in the margin. 

70And some from among the heads 
of fathers’houses gave unto the work. 
The Tirshatha gave to the treasury a 
thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, 
five hundred and thirty priests’tunics. 
71And some of the heads of 
fathers’houses gave into the treasury 
of the work twenty thousand darics of 
gold, and two thousand and two 

hundred pounds of silver. 72And that 
which the rest of the people gave was 
twenty thousand darics of gold, and 
two thousand pounds of silver, and 
threescore and seven priests’tunics. 

73So the priests, and the Levites, 
and the porters, and the singers, and 
some of the people, and the Nethinim, 
and all Israel, dwelt in their cities. 

 

And when the seventh month was 
come, and the children of Israel were 

in their cities, 1all the people 
gathered themselves together as 
one man into the broad place that was 
before the water gate; and they spoke 
unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book 
of the Law of Moses, which the LORD 
had commanded to Israel. 2And Ezra 
the priest brought the Law before the 
congregation, both men and women, 
and all that could hear with 
understanding, upon the first day of 
the seventh month. 3And he read 
therein before the broad place that was 
before the water gate from early 
morning until midday, in the presence 
of the men and the women, and of 
those that could understand; and the 
ears of all the people were attentive 
unto the book of the Law. 4And Ezra 
the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, 
which they had made for the purpose; 
and beside him stood Mattithiah, and 
Shema, and Anaiah, and Uriah, and 
Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right 
hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, 
and Mishael, and Malchijah, and 
Hashum, and Hashbaddanah, 
8 




Zechariah, and Meshullam. 5And Ezra 
opened the book in the sight of all the 
people—for he was above all the 
people—and when he opened it, all the 
people stood up. 6And Ezra blessed the 
LORD, the great God. And all the 
people answered: ‘Amen, Amen’, with 
the lifting up of their hands; and they 
bowed their heads, and fell down 
before the LORD with their faces to the 
ground. 7Also Jeshua, and Bani, and 
Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, 
Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, 
Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, even the 
Levites, caused the people to 
understand the Law; and the people 
stood in their place. 8And they read in 
the book, in the Law of God, 
distinctly; and they gave the sense, and 
caused them to understand the reading. 

9And Nehemiah, who was the 
Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the 
scribe, and the Levites that taught the 
people, said unto all the people: ‘This 
day is holy unto the LORD your God; 
mourn not, nor weep.’ For all the 
people wept, when they heard the 
words of the Law. 10Then he said unto 
them: ‘Go your way, eat the fat, and 
drink the sweet, and send portions unto 
him for whom nothing is prepared; for 
this day is holy unto our Lord; neither 
be ye grieved; for the joy of the LORD 
is your strength.’ 11So the Levites 
stilled all the people, saying: ‘Hold 
your peace, for the day is holy; neither 
be ye grieved.’ 12And all the people 
went their way to eat, and to drink, and 
to send portions, and to make great 
mirth, because they had understood the 
words that were declared unto them. 

13And on the second day were 
gathered together the heads of 
fathers’houses of all the people, the 
priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the 
scribe, even to give attention to the 
words of the Law. 14And they found 
written in the Law, how that the LORD 
had commanded by Moses, that the 
children of Israel should dwell in 
booths in the feast of the seventh 
month; 15and that they should publish 
and proclaim in all their cities, and in 
Jerusalem, saying: ‘Go forth unto the 
mount, and fetch olive branches, and 
branches of wild olive, and myrtle 
branches, and palm branches, and 
branches of thick trees, to make 
booths, as it is written.’ 16So the 
people went forth, and brought them, 
and made themselves booths, every 
one upon the roof of his house, and in 
their courts, and in the courts of the 
house of God, and in the broad place 
of the water gate, and in the broad 
place of the gate of Ephraim. 17And all 
the congregation of them that were 
come back out of the captivity made 
booths, and dwelt in the booths; for 
since the days of aJoshua the son of 
Nun unto that day had not the children 
of Israel done so. And there was very 
great gladness. 18Also day by day, 
from the first day unto the last day, he 
read in the book of the Law of God. 
And they kept the feast seven days; 

a Heb. Jeshua. 


and on the eighth day was a solemn 
assembly, according unto the 
ordinance. 

Now in the twenty and fourth day 
of this month the children of 
Israel were assembled with fasting, 
and with sackcloth, and earth upon 
them. 2And the seed of Israel separated 
themselves from all foreigners, and 
stood and confessed their sins, and the 
iniquities of their fathers. 3And they 
stood up in their place, and read in the 
book of the Law of the LORD their God 
a fourth part of the day; and another 
fourth part they confessed, and 
prostrated themselves before the LORD 
their God. 

4Then stood up upon the platform 
of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, 
Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, 
Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and 
cried with a loud voice unto the LORD 
their God. 5Then the Levites, Jeshua, 
and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, 
Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and 
Pethahiah, said: ‘Stand up and bless 
the LORD your God from everlasting to 
everlasting; and let them say: Blessed 
be Thy glorious Name, that is exalted 
above all blessing and praise. 

6Thou art the LORD, even Thou 
alone; Thou hast made heaven, the 
heaven of heavens, with all their host, 
the earth and all things that are 
thereon, the seas and all that is in 
them, and Thou preservest them all; 
and the host of heaven worshippeth 
Thee. 7Thou art the LORD the God, who 
didst choose Abram, and broughtest 
him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, 
and gavest him the name of Abraham; 
8and foundest his heart faithful before 
Thee, and madest a covenant with him 
to give the land of the Canaanite, the 
Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, 
and the Jebusite, and the Girgashite, 
even to give it unto his seed, and hast 
performed Thy words; for Thou art 
righteous; 9And Thou sawest the 
affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and 
heardest their cry by the Red Sea; 
10and didst show signs and wonders 
upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, 
and on all the people of his land; for 
Thou knewest that they dealt proudly 
against them; and didst get Thee a 
name, as it is this day. 11And Thou 
didst divide the sea before them, so 
that they went through the midst of the 
sea on the dry land; and their pursuers 
Thou didst cast into the depths, as a 
stone into the mighty waters. 
12Moreover in a pillar of cloud Thou 
didst lead them by day; and in a pillar 
of fire by night, to give them light in 
the way wherein they should go. 
13Thou camest down also upon mount 
Sinai, and spokest with them from 
heaven, and gavest them right 
ordinances and laws of truth, good 
statutes and commandments; 14and 
madest known unto them Thy holy 
sabbath, and didst command them 
commandments, and statutes, and a 
law, by the hand of Moses Thy 
servant; 15and gavest them bread from 
heaven for their hunger, and 
broughtest forth water for them out of 
9 




the rock for their thirst, and didst 
command them that they should go in 
to possess the land which Thou hadst 
lifted up Thy hand to give them. 

16But they and our fathers dealt 
proudly, and hardened their neck, and 
hearkened not to Thy commandments, 
17and refused to hearken, neither were 
mindful of Thy wonders that Thou 
didst among them; but hardened their 
neck, and in their rebellion appointed a 
captain to return to their bondage; but 
Thou art a God ready to pardon, 
gracious and full of compassion, slow 
to anger, and plenteous in mercy, and 
forsookest them not. 18Yea, when they 
had made them a molten calf, and said: 
‘This is thy God that brought thee up 
out of Egypt, and had wrought great 
provocations; 19yet Thou in Thy 
manifold mercies forsookest them not 
in the wilderness; the pillar of cloud 
departed not from over them by day, to 
lead them in the way; neither the pillar 
of fire by night, to show them light, 
and the way wherein they should go. 
20Thou gavest also Thy good spirit to 
instruct them, and withheldest not Thy 
manna from their mouth, and gavest 
them water for their thirst. 21Yea, forty 
years didst Thou sustain them in the 
wilderness, and they lacked nothing; 
their clothes waxed not old, and their 
feet swelled not. 

22Moreover Thou gavest them 
kingdoms and peoples, which Thou 
didst allot quarter by quarter; so they 
possessed the land of Sihon, even the 
land of the king of Heshbon, and the 
land of Og king of Bashan. 23Their 
children also didst Thou multiply as 
the stars of heaven, and didst bring 
them into the land, concerning which 
Thou didst say to their fathers, that 
they should go in to possess it. 24So the 
children went in and possessed the 
land, and Thou didst subdue before 
them the inhabitants of the land, the 
Canaanites, and gavest them into their 
hands, with their kings, and the 
peoples of the land, that they might do 
with them as they would. 25And they 
took fortified cities, and a fat land, and 
possessed houses full of all good 
things, cisterns hewn out, vineyards, 
and oliveyards, and fruit-trees in 
abundance; so they did eat, and were 
filled, and became fat, and luxuriated 
in Thy great goodness. 

26Nevertheless they were 
disobedient, and rebelled against Thee, 
and cast Thy law behind their back, 
and slew Thy prophets that did 
forewarn them to turn them back unto 
Thee, and they wrought great 
provocations. 27Therefore Thou didst 
deliver them into the hand of their 
adversaries, who distressed them; and 
in the time of their trouble, when they 
cried unto Thee, Thou heardest from 
heaven; and according to Thy 
manifold mercies Thou gavest them 
saviours who might save them out of 
the hand of their adversaries. 28But 
after they had rest, they did evil again 
before Thee; therefore didst Thou 
leave them in the hand of their 
enemies, so that they had the dominion 


over them; yet when they returned, and 
cried unto Thee, many times didst 
Thou hear from heaven, and deliver 
them according to Thy mercies; 29and 
didst forewarn them, that Thou 
mightest bring them back unto Thy 
law; yet they dealt proudly, and 
hearkened not unto Thy 
commandments, but sinned against 
Thine ordinances, which if a man do, 
he shall live by them, and presented a 
stubborn shoulder, and hardened their 
neck, and would not hear. 30Yet many 
years didst Thou extend mercy unto 
them, and didst forewarn them by Thy 
spirit through Thy prophets; yet would 
they not give ear; therefore gavest 
Thou them into the hand of the peoples 
of the lands. 31Nevertheless in Thy 
manifold mercies Thou didst not 
utterly consume them, nor forsake 
them; for Thou art a gracious and 
merciful God. 

32Now therefore, our God, the 
great, the mighty, and the awful God, 
who keepest covenant and mercy, let 
not all the travail seem little before 
Thee, that hath come upon us, on our 
kings, on our princes, and on our 
priests, and on our prophets, and on 
our fathers, and on all Thy people, 
since the time of the kings of Assyria 
unto this day. 33Howbeit Thou art just 
in all that is come upon us; for Thou 
hast dealt truly, but we have done 
wickedly; 34neither have our kings, our 
princes, our priests, nor our fathers, 
kept Thy law, nor hearkened unto Thy 
commandments and Thy testimonies, 
wherewith Thou didst testify against 
them. 35For they have not served Thee 
in their kingdom, and in Thy great 
goodness that Thou gavest them, and 
in the large and fat land which Thou 
gavest before them, neither turned they 
from their wicked works. 36Behold, we 
are servants this day, and as for the 
land that Thou gavest unto our fathers 
to eat the fruit thereof and the good 
thereof, behold, we are servants in it. 
37And it yieldeth much increase unto 
the kings whom Thou hast set over us 
because of our sins; also they have 
power over our bodies, and over our 
cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in 
great distress.’ 

And yet for all this we make a 
sure covenant, and subscribe 
it; and our princes, our Levites, and 
our priests, set their seal unto it. 

2Now those that set their seal were: 

Nehemiah the Tirshatha, the son of 
Hachaliah, and Zedekiah; 3Seraiah, 
Azariah, Jeremiah; 4Pashhur, Amariah, 
Malchijah; 5Hattush, Shebaniah, 
Malluch; 6Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah; 
7Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch; 
8Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin; 
9Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah. These 
were the priests. 

10And the Levites: Jeshua the son 
of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of 
Henadad, Kadmiel; 11and their 
brethren, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, 
Pelaiah, Hanan; 12Mica, Rehob, 
Hashabiah; 13Zaccur, Sherebiah, 
Shebaniah; 14Hodiah, Bani, Beninu. 
10 




15The chiefs of the people: Parosh, 
Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani; 
16Bunni, Azgad, Bebai; 17Adonijah, 
Bigvai, Adin; 18Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur; 
19Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai; 20Hariph, 
Anathoth, Nebai; 21Magpiash, 
Meshullam, Hezir; 22Meshezabel, 
Zadok, Jaddua; 23Pelatiah, Hanan, 
Anaiah; 24Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub; 
25Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek; 26Rehum, 
Hashabnah, Maaseiah; 27and Ahiah, 
Hanan, Anan; 28Malluch, Harim, 
Baanah. 

29And the rest of the people, the 
priests, the Levites, the porters, the 
singers, the Nethinim, and all they that 
had separated themselves from the 
peoples of the lands unto the law of 
God, their wives, their sons, and their 
daughters, every one that had 
knowledge and understanding; 30they 
cleaved to their brethren, their nobles, 
and entered into a curse, and into an 
oath, to walk in God’s law, which was 
given by Moses the servant of God, 
and to observe and do all the 
commandments of the LORD our Lord, 
and His ordinances and His statutes; 
31and that we would not give our 
daughters unto the peoples of the land, 
nor take their daughters for our sons; 
32and if the peoples of the land bring 
ware or any victuals on the sabbath 
day to sell, that we would not buy of 
them on the sabbath, or on a holy day; 
and that we would forego the seventh 
year, and the exaction of every debt. 

33Also we made ordinances for us, 
to charge ourselves yearly with the 
third part of a shekel for the service of 
the house of our God; 34for the 
showbread, and for the continual meal-
offering, and for the continual burnt-
offering, of the sabbaths, of the new 
moons, for the appointed seasons, and 
for the holy things, and for the sin-
offerings to make atonement for Israel, 
and for all the work of the house of our 
God. 35And we cast lots, the priests, 
the Levites, and the people, for the 
wood-offering, to bring it into the 
house of our God, according to our 
fathers’houses, at times appointed, 
year by year, to burn upon the altar of 
the LORD our God, as it is written in the 
Law; 36and to bring the first-fruits of 
our land, and the first-fruits of all fruit 
of all manner of trees, year by year, 
unto the house of the LORD; 37also the 
first-born of our sons, and of our 
cattle, as it is written in the Law, and 
the firstlings of our herds and of our 
flocks, to bring to the house of our 
God, unto the priests that minister in 
the house of our God; 38and that we 
should bring the first of our dough, 
and our heave-offerings, and the fruit 
of all manner of trees, the wine and the 
oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of 
the house of our God; and the tithes of 
our land unto the Levites; for they, the 
Levites, take the tithes in all the cities 
of our tillage. 39And the priest the son 
of Aaron shall be with the Levites, 
when the Levites take tithes; and the 
Levites shall bring up the tithe of the 
tithes unto the house of our God, to the 
chambers, into the treasure-house. 


40For the children of Israel and the 
children of Levi shall bring the heave-
offering of the corn, of the wine, and 
of the oil, unto the chambers, where 
are the vessels of the sanctuary, and 
the priests that minister, and the 
porters, and the singers; and we will 
not forsake the house of our God. 

And the princes of the people 
dwelt in Jerusalem; the rest of 
the people also cast lots, to bring one 
of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy 
city, and nine parts in the other cities. 
2And the people blessed all the men 
that willingly offered themselves to 
dwell in Jerusalem. 

3Now these are the chiefs of the 
province that dwelt in Jerusalem; but 
in the cities of Judah dwelt every one 
in his possession in their cities, to wit, 
Israelites, the priests, and the Levites, 
and the Nethinim, and the children of 
Solomon’s servants. 4And in Jerusalem 
dwelt certain of the children of Judah, 
and of the children of Benjamin. 

Of the children of Judah: Athaiah 
the son of Uzziah, the son of 
Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son 
of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of 
the children of Perez; 5and Maaseiah 
the son of Baruch, the son of 
Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son 
of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son 
of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite. 
6All the sons of Perez that dwelt in 
Jerusalem were four hundred 
threescore and eight valiant men. 

7And these are the sons of 
Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, 
the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the 
son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, 
the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah. 
8And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine 
hundred twenty and eight. 9And Joel 
the son of Zichri was their overseer; 
and Judah the son of Hassenuah was 
second over the city. 

10Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of 
Joiarib, Jachin, 11Seraiah the son of 
Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son 
of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son 
of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of 
God, 12and their brethren that did the 
work of the house, eight hundred 
twenty and two; and Adaiah the son of 
Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son 
of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son 
of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, 13and 
his brethren, chiefs of fathers’houses, 
two hundred forty and two; and 
Amashsai the son of Azarel, the son of 
Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the 
son of Immer, 14and their brethren, 
mighty men of valour, a hundred 
twenty and eight; and their overseer 
was Zabdiel, the son of Haggedolim. 

15And of the Levites: Shemaiah the 
son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, 
the son of Hashabiah, the son of 
Bunni; 16and Shabbethai and Jozabad, 
of the chiefs of the Levites, who had 
the oversight of the outward business 
of the house of God; 17and Mattaniah 
the son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the 
son of Asaph, who was the chief to 
begin the thanksgiving in prayer, and 
Bakbukiah, the second among his 
brethren; and Abda the son of 
11 




Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of 
Jeduthun. 18All the Levites in the holy 
city were two hundred fourscore and 
four. 

19Moreover the porters, Akkub, 
Talmon, and their brethren, that kept 
watch at the gates, were a hundred 
seventy and two. 

20And the residue of Israel, of the 
priests, the Levites, were in all the 
cities of Judah, every one in his 
inheritance. 21But the Nethinim dwelt 
in Ophel; and Ziha and Gishpa were 
over the Nethinim. 

22The overseer also of the Levites 
at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, 
the son of Hashabiah, the son of 
Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons 
of Asaph, the singers, over the 
business of the house of God. 23For 
there was a commandment from the 
king concerning them, and a sure 
ordinance concerning the singers, as 
every day required. 24And Pethahiah 
the son of Meshezabel, of the children 
of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the 
king’s hand in all matters concerning 
the people. 25And for the villages, with 
their fields, some of the children of 
Judah dwelt in Kiriath-arba and the 
towns thereof, and in Dibon and the 
towns thereof, and in Jekabzeel and 
the villages thereof; 26and in Jeshua, 
and in Moladah, and Beth-pelet; 27and 
in Hazar-shual, and in Beer-sheba and 
the towns thereof; 28and in Ziklag, and 
in Meconah and in the towns thereof; 
29and in En-rimmon, and in Zorah, and 
in Jarmuth; 30Zanoah, Adullam, and 
their villages, Lachish and the fields 
thereof, Azekah and the towns thereof. 
So they encamped from Beer-sheba 
unto the valley of Hinnom. 

31And the children of Benjamin 
from Geba onward, at Michmas and 
Aijah, and at Beth-el and the towns 
thereof; 32at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah; 
33Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim; 34Hadid, 
Zeboim, Neballat; 35Lod, and Ono, Ge-
harashim. 36And of the Levites, certain 
courses in Judah were joined to 
Benjamin. 

Now these are the priests and 
the Levites that went up with 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and 
Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra; 
2Amariah, Malluch, Hattush; 
3Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth; 4Iddo, 
Ginnethoi, Abijah; 5Mijamin, 
Maadiah, Bilgah; 6Shemaiah, and 
Joiarib, Jedaiah; 7Sallu, Amok, 
Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs 
of the priests and their brethren in the 
days of Jeshua. 

8Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, 
Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, 
and Mattaniah, who was over the 
thanksgiving, he and his brethren. 
9Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their 
brethren, were over against them in 
wards. 

10And Jeshua begot Joiakim, and 
Joiakim begot Eliashib, and Eliashib 
begot Joiada, 11and Joiada begot 
Jonathan and Jonathan begot Jaddua. 

12And in the days of Joiakim were 
priests, heads of fathers’houses: of 
Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, 
12 




Hananiah; 13of Ezra, Meshullam; of 
Amariah, Jehohanan; 14of Melicu, 
Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph; 15of 
Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai; 16of 
Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, 
Meshullam; 17of Abijah, Zichri; of 
Miniamin; of Moadiah, Piltai; 18of 
Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, 
Jehonathan; 19and of Joiarib, Mattenai; 
of Jedaiah, Uzzi; 20of Sallai, Kallai; of 
Amok, Eber; 21of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; 
of Jedaiah, Nethanel. 

22The Levites in the days of 
Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and 
Jaddua, were recorded heads of 
fathers’houses; also the priests, in the 
reign of Darius the Persian. 

23The sons of Levi, heads of 
fathers’houses, were written in the 
book of the chronicles, even until the 
days of Johanan the son of Eliashib. 
24And the chiefs of the Levites: 
Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the 
son of Kadmiel, with their brethren 
over against them, to praise and give 
thanks, according to the 
commandment of David the man of 
God, ward against ward. 25Mattaniah, 
and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, 
Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping 
the ward at the store-houses of the 
gates. 26These were in the days of 
Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of 
Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah 
the governor, and of Ezra the priest the 
scribe. 

 

27And at the dedication of the wall 
of Jerusalem they sought the Levites 
out of all their places, to bring them to 
Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with 
gladness, both with thanksgivings, and 
with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, 
and with harps. 28And the sons of the 
singers gathered themselves together, 
both out of the Plain round about 
Jerusalem, and from the villages of the 
Netophathites; 29also from Beth-gilgal, 
and out of the fields of Geba and 
Azmaveth; for the singers had builded 
them villages round about Jerusalem. 
30And the priests and the Levites 
purified themselves; and they purified 
the people, and the gates, and the wall. 

31Then I brought up the princes of 
Judah upon the wall, and appointed 
two great companies that gave thanks 
and went in procession: on the right 
hand upon the wall toward the dung 
gate; 32and after them went Hoshaiah, 
and half of the princes of Judah; 33and 
Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam, 
34Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, 
and Jeremiah; 35and certain of the 
priests’sons with trumpets: Zechariah 
the son of Jonathan, the son of 
Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the 
son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the 
son of Asaph; 36and his brethren, 
Shemaiah, and Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, 
Maai, Nethanel, and Judah, Hanani, 
with the musical instruments of David 
the man of God; and Ezra the scribe 
was before them; 37and by the fountain 
gate, and straight before them, they 
went up by the stairs of the city of 
David, at the going up of the wall, 
above the house of David, even unto 


the water gate eastward. 38And the 
other company of them that gave 
thanks went to meet them, and I after 
them, with the half of the people, upon 
the wall, above the tower of the 
furnaces, even unto the broad wall; 
39and above the gate of Ephraim, and 
by the gate of the old city and by the 
fish gate, and the tower of Hananel, 
and the tower of Hammeah, even unto 
the sheep gate; and they stood still in 
the gate of the guard. 40So stood the 
two companies of them that gave 
thanks in the house of God, and I, and 
the half of the rulers with me; 41and the 
priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, 
Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and 
Hananiah, with trumpets; 42and 
Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, 
and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and 
Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And 
the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah 
their overseer. 43And they offered great 
sacrifices that day, and rejoiced; for 
God had made them rejoice with great 
joy; and the women also and the 
children rejoiced; so that the joy of 
Jerusalem was heard even afar off. 

 

44And on that day were men 
appointed over the chambers for the 
treasures, for the heave-offerings, for 
the first-fruits, and for the tithes, to 
gather into them, according to the 
fields of the cities, the portions 
appointed by the law for the priests 
and Levites; for Judah rejoiced for the 
priests and for the Levites that took 
their stations. 45And they kept the ward 
of their God, and the ward of the 
purification, and so did the singers and 
the porters, according to the 
commandment of David, and of 
Solomon his son. 46For in the days of 
David and Asaph of old there were 
chief of the singers, and songs of 
praise and thanksgiving unto God. 
47And all Israel in the days of 
Zerubbabel, and in the days of 
Nehemiah, gave the portions of the 
singers and the porters, as every day 
required; and they hallowed for the 
Levites; and the Levites hallowed for 
the sons of Aaron. 

On that day they read in the 
book of Moses in the hearing 
of the people; and therein was found 
written, that an Ammonite and a 
Moabite should not enter into the 
assembly of God for ever; 2because 
they met not the children of Israel with 
bread and with water, but hired 
Balaam against them, to curse them; 
howbeit our God turned the curse into 
a blessing. 3And it came to pass, when 
they had heard the law, that they 
separated from Israel all the alien 
mixture. 

 

4Now before this, Eliashib the 
priest, who was appointed over the 
chambers of the house of our God, 
being allied unto Tobiah, 5had 
prepared for him a great chamber, 
where aforetime they laid the meal-
offerings, the frankincense, and the 
vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the 
wine, and the oil, which were given by 
13 




commandment to the Levites, and the 
singers, and the porters; and the heave-
offerings for the priests. 6But in all this 
time I was not at Jerusalem; for in the 
two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes 
king of Babylon I went unto the king, 
and after certain days asked I leave of 
the king; 7and I came to Jerusalem, and 
understood the evil that Eliashib had 
done for Tobiah, in preparing him a 
chamber in the courts of the house of 
God. 8And it grieved me sore; 
therefore I cast forth all the household 
stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber. 
9Then I commanded, and they cleansed 
the chambers; and thither brought I 
again the vessels of the house of God, 
with the meal-offerings and the 
frankincense. 

10And I perceived that the portions 
of the Levites had not been given 
them; so that the Levites and the 
singers, that did the work, were fled 
every one to his field. 11Then 
contended I with the rulers, and said: 
‘Why is the house of God forsaken?’ 
And I gathered them together, and set 
them in their place. 12Then brought all 
Judah the tithe of the corn and the 
wine and the oil unto the treasuries. 
13And I made treasurers over the 
treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and 
Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, 
Pedaiah; and next to them was Hanan 
the son of Zaccur, the son of 
Mattaniah; for they were counted 
faithful, and their office was to 
distribute unto their brethren. 
14Remember me, O my God, 
concerning this, and wipe not out my 
good deeds that I have done for the 
house of my God, and for the wards 
thereof. 

15In those days saw I in Judah some 
treading winepresses on the sabbath, 
and bringing in heaps of corn, and 
lading asses therewith; as also wine, 
grapes, and figs, and all manner of 
burdens, which they brought into 
Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and I 
forewarned them in the day wherein 
they sold victuals. 16There dwelt men 
of Tyre also therein, who brought in 
fish, and all manner of ware, and sold 
on the sabbath unto the children of 
Judah, and in Jerusalem. 17Then I 
contended with the nobles of Judah, 
and said unto them: ‘What evil thing is 
this that ye do, and profane the sabbath 
day? 18Did not your fathers thus, and 
did not our God bring all this evil upon 
us, and upon this city? yet ye bring 
more wrath upon Israel by profaning 
the sabbath.’ 

19And it came to pass that, when 
the gates of Jerusalem began to be 
dark before the sabbath, I commanded 
that the doors should be shut, and 
commanded that they should not be 
opened till after the sabbath; and some 
of my servants set I over the gates, that 
there should no burden be brought in 
on the sabbath day. 20So the merchants 
and sellers of all kind of ware lodged 
without Jerusalem once or twice. 
21Then I forewarned them, and said 
unto them: ‘Why lodge ye about the 
wall? if ye do so again, I will lay 


hands on you.’ From that time forth 
came they no more on the sabbath. 
22And I commanded the Levites that 
they should purify themselves, and 
that they should come and keep the 
gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. 
Remember unto me, O my God, this 
also, and spare me according to the 
greatness of Thy mercy. 

23In those days also saw I the Jews 
that had married women of Ashdod, of 
Ammon, and of Moab; 24and their 
children spoke half in the speech of 
Ashdod, and could not speak in the 
Jews’language, but according to the 
language of each people. 25And I 
contended with them, and cursed them, 
and smote certain of them, and 
plucked off their hair, and made them 
swear by God: ‘Ye shall not give your 
daughters unto their sons, nor take 
their daughters for your sons, or for 
yourselves. 26Did not Solomon king of 
Israel sin by these things? yet among 
many nations was there no king like 
him, and he was beloved of his God, 
and God made him king over all Israel; 
nevertheless even him did the foreign 
women cause to sin. 27Shall we then 
hearken unto you to do all this great 
evil, to break faith with our God in 
marrying foreign women?’ 

28And one of the sons of Joiada, the 
son of Eliashib the high priest, was 
son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite; 
therefore I chased him from me. 
29Remember them, O my God, because 
they have defiled the priesthood, and 
the covenant of the priesthood, and of 
the Levites. 

30Thus cleansed I them from 
everything foreign, and appointed 
wards for the priests and for the 
Levites, every one in his work; 31and 
for the wood-offering, at times 
appointed, and for the first-fruits. 
Remember me, O my God, for good. 

 

 

 

 




. ..... .... 

FIRST CHRONICLES 

 

ADAM, SETH, Enosh; 2Kenan, 
Mahalalel, Jared; 3Enoch, 
Methuselah, Lamech; 4Noah, Shem, 
Ham, and Japheth. 

5The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and 
Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and 
Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 6And 
the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and 
Diphath, and Togarmah. 7And the sons 
of Javan: Elishah, and Tarshish, 
Kittim, and Rodanim. 

8The sons of Ham: Cush, and 
Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. 9And the 
sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, and 
Sabta, and Raama, and Sabteca. And 
the sons of Raama: Sheba, and Dedan. 
10And Cush begot Nimrod; he began to 
be a mighty one in the earth. 11And 
Mizraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, 
and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 12and 
Pathrusim, and Casluhim—from 
whence came the Philistines—and 
Caphtorim. 13And Canaan begot Zidon 
his first-born, and Heth; 14and the 
Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the 
Girgashite; 15and the Hivite, and the 
Arkite, and the Sinite; 16and the 
Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the 
Hamathite. 

17The Sons of Shem: Elam, and 
Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and 
Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, 
and Meshech. 18And Arpachshad begot 
Shelah, and Shelah begot Eber. 19And 
unto Eber were born two sons: the 
name of the one was Peleg; for in his 
days the earth was divided; and his 
brother’s name was Joktan. 20And 
Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, 
and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah; 21and 
Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah; 22and 
Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba; 23and 
Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All 
these were the sons of Joktan. 

24Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah; 
25Eber, Peleg, Reu; 26Serug, Nahor, 
Terah; 27Abram—the same is 
Abraham. 28The sons of Abraham: 
Isaac, and Ishmael. 

29These are their generations: the 
first-born of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then 
Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 
30Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, 
and Tema, 31Jetur, Naphish, and 
Kedem. These are the sons of Ishmael. 

32And the sons of Keturah, 
Abraham’s concubine: she bore 
Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and 
Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And 
the sons of Jokshan: Sheba, and 
Dedan. 33And the sons of Midian: 
Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and 
Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the 
sons of Keturah. 

34And Abraham begot Isaac. The 
sons of Isaac: Esau, and Israel. 

35The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, 
and Jeush, and Jalam and Korah. 36The 
sons of Eliphaz: Teman, and Omar, 
Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, 
1 




and Amalek. 37The sons of Reuel: 
Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. 
38And the sons of Seir: Lotan, and 
Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and 
Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan. 39And 
the sons of Lotan: Hori, and Homam; 
and Timna was Lotan’s sister. 40The 
sons of Shobal: Alian, and Manahath, 
and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the 
sons of Zibeon: Aiah, and Anah. 41The 
sons of Anah: Dishon. And the sons of 
Dishon: Hamran, and Eshban, and 
Ithran, and Cheran. 42The sons of Ezer: 
Bilhan, and Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons 
of Dishan: Uz, and Aran. 

43Now these are the kings that 
reigned in the land of Edom, before 
their reigned any king over the 
children of Israel: Bela the son of 
Beor; and the name of his city was 
Dinhabah. 44And Bela died, and Jobab 
the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in 
his stead. 45And Jobab died, and 
Husham of the land of the Temanites 
reigned in his stead. 46And Husham 
died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, 
who smote Midian in the field of 
Moab, reigned in his stead; and the 
name of his city was Avith. 47And 
Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah 
reigned in his stead. 48And Samlah 
died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the 
River reigned in his stead. 49And Shaul 
died, and Baal-hanan the son of 
Achbor reigned in his stead. 50And 
Baal-hanan died, and Hadad reigned in 
his stead; and the name of his city was 
Pai; and his wife’s name was 
Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the 
daughter of Mezahab. 51And Hadad 
died. 

And the chiefs of Edom were: the 
chief of Timna, the chief of Alvah, the 
chief of Jetheth; 52the chief of 
Oholibamah, the chief of Elah, the 
chief of Pinon; 53the chief of Kenaz, 
the chief of Teman, the chief of 
Mibzar; 54the chief of Magdiel, the 
chief of Iram. These are the chiefs of 
Edom. 

These are the sons of Israel: 
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 
Issachar, and Zebulun; 2Dan, Joseph, 
and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and 
Asher. 

3The sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, 
and Shelah; which three were born 
unto him of Bath-shua the 
Canaanitess. And Er, Judah’s first-
born, was wicked in the sight of the 
LORD; and He slew him. 4And Tamar 
his daughter-in-law bore him Perez 
and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were 
five. 

5The sons of Perez: Hezron, and 
Hamul. 6And the sons of Zerah: Zimri, 
and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, 
and Dara: five of them in all. 7And the 
sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of 
Israel, who committed a trespass 
concerning the devoted thing. 8And the 
sons of Ethan: Azariah. 

9The sons also of Hezron, that were 
born unto him: Jerahmeel, and Ram, 
and Chelubai. 10And Ram begot 
Amminadab; and Amminadab begot 
Nahshon, prince of the children of 
Judah; 11and Nahshon begot Salma, 
2 




and Salma begot Boaz; 12and Boaz 
begot Obed, and Obed begot Jesse; 
13and Jesse begot his first-born Eliab, 
and Abinadab the second, and Shimea 
the third; 14Nethanel the fourth, Raddai 
the fifth; 15Ozem the sixth, David the 
seventh. 16And their sisters were 
Zeruiah and Abigail. And the sons of 
Zeruiah: aAbishai, and Joab, and 
Asahel, three. 17And Abigail bore 
Amasa; and the father of Amasa was 
Jether the Ishmaelite. 

a Heb. Abshai. 

18And Caleb the son of Hezron 
begot children of Azubah his wife—
and of Jerioth—and these were her 
sons: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon. 
19And Azubah died, and Caleb took 
unto him Ephrath, who bore him Hur. 
20And Hur begot Uri, and Uri begot 
Bezalel. 

21And afterward Hezron went in to 
the daughter of Machir the father of 
Gilead; whom he took to wife when he 
was threescore years old; and she bore 
him Segub. 22And Segub begot Jair, 
who had three and twenty cities in the 
land of Gilead. 23And Geshur and 
Aram took Havvoth-jair from them, 
with Kenath, and the villages thereof, 
even threescore cities. All these were 
the sons of Machir the father of 
Gilead. 24And after that Hezron was 
dead in Caleb-ephrath, then Abiah 
Hezron’s wife bore him Ashhur the 
father of Tekoa. 

25And the sons of Jerahmeel the 
first-born of Hezron were Ram the 

first-born, and Bunah, and Oren, and 
Ozem, Ahijah. 26And Jerahmeel had 
another wife, whose name was Atarah; 
she was the mother of Onam. 

27And the sons of Ram the first-
born of Jerahmeel were Maaz, and 
Jamin, and Eker. 28And the sons of 
Onam were Shammai, and Jada; and 
the sons of Shammai: Nadab, and 
Abishur. 29And the name of the wife of 
Abishur was Abihail; and she bore him 
Ahban, and Molid. 30And the sons of 
Nadab: Seled, and Appaim; but Seled 
died without children. 31And the sons 
of Appaim: Ishi. And the sons of Ishi: 
Sheshan. And the sons of Sheshan: 
Ahlai. 32And the sons of Jada the 
brother of Shammai: Jether, and 
Jonathan: and Jether died without 
children. 33And the sons of Jonathan: 
Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons 
of Jerahmeel. 

34Now Sheshan had no sons, but 
daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, 
an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha. 
35So Sheshan gave his daughter to 
Jarha his servant to wife; and she bore 
him Attai. 36And Attai begot Nathan, 
and Nathan begot Zabad; 37and Zabad 
begot Ephlal, and Ephlal begot Obed; 
38and Obed begot Jehu, and Jehu begot 
Azariah; 39and Azariah begot Helez, 
and Helez begot Eleasah; 40and 
Eleasah begot Sisamai, and Sisamai 
begot Shallum; 41and Shallum begot 
Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begot 
Elishama. 

42And the sons of Caleb the brother 
of Jerahmeel were Mesha his first-


born, who was the father of Ziph, and 
the sons of Mareshah the father of 
Hebron. 43And the sons of Hebron: 
Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and 
Shema. 44And Shema begot Raham, 
the father of Jorkeam; and Rekem 
begot Shammai. 45And the son of 
Shammai was Maon; and Maon was 
the father of Beth-zur. 46And Ephah, 
Caleb’s concubine, bore Haran, and 
Moza, and Gazez; and Haran begot 
Gazez. 47And the sons of Jahdai: 
Regem, and Jotham, and Geshan, and 
Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph. 
48Maacah, Caleb’s concubine, bore 
Sheber and Tirhanah. 49And [the wife 
of] Shaaph the father of Madmannah 
bore Sheva the father of Machbenah 
and the father of Gibea. And the 
daughter of Caleb was Achsah. 

50These were the sons of Caleb. 

The sons of Hur the first-born of 
Ephrath: Shobal the father of Kiriath-
jearim; 51Salma the father of Beth-
lehem, Hareph the father of Beth-
gader. 52And Shobal the father of 
Kiriath-jearim had sons: Haroeh, and 
half of the Menuhoth. 53And the 
families of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, 
and the Puthites, and the Shumathites, 
and the Mishraites; of them came the 
Zorathites, and the Eshtaolites. 

54The sons of Salma: Beth-lehem, 
and the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-
joab, and half of the Manahathites, the 
Zorites. 55And the families of scribes 
that dwelt at Jabez: the Tirathites, the 
Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are 
the Kenites that came of Hammath, the 
father of the house of Rechab. 

Now these were the sons of 
David, that were born unto him in 
Hebron: the first-born, Amnon, of 
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, 
Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess; 
2the third, Absalom the son of Maacah 
the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; 
the fourth, Adonijah the son of 
Haggith; 3the fifth, Shephatiah of 
Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his 
wife. 4Six were born unto him in 
Hebron; and there he reigned seven 
years and six months; and in Jerusalem 
he reigned thirty and three years. 

5And these were born unto him in 
Jerusalem: Shimea, and Shobab, and 
Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath-
shua the daughter of Ammiel; 6and 
Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet; 
7and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia; 
8and Elishama, and Eliada, and 
Eliphelet, nine. 9All these were the 
sons of David, beside the sons of the 
concubines; and Tamar was their 
sister. 

10And Solomon’s son was 
Rehoboam; Abijah his son, Asa his 
son, Jehoshaphat his son; 11Joram his 
son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son; 
12Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, 
Jotham his son; 13Ahaz his son, 
Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son; 
14Amon his son, Josiah his son. 15And 
the sons of Josiah: the firstborn 
Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the 
third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum. 
3 




16And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah 
his son, Zedekiah his son. 

17And the sons of Jeconiah—the 
same is Assir—Shealtiel his son; 18and 
Malchiram, and Pedaiah, and 
Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and 
Nedabiah. 19And the sons of Pedaiah: 
Zerubbabel, and Shimei. And the sons 
of Zerubbabel: Meshullam, and 
Hananiah; and Shelomith was their 
sister; 20and Hashubah and Ohel, and 
Berechiah, and Hasadiah, 
Jushabhesed, five. 21And the sons of 
Hananiah: Pelatiah, and Jeshaiah; the 
sons of [Jeshaiah]: Rephaiah; the sons 
of [Rephaiah]: Arnan; the sons of 
[Arnan]: Obadiah; the sons of 
[Obadiah]: Shecaniah. 22And the sons 
of Shecaniah: Shemaiah; and the sons 
of Shemaiah: Hattush, and Igal, and 
Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six. 
23And the sons of Neariah: Elioenai, 
and Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three. 
24And the sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, 
and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, 
and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, 
seven. 

4 



The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, 
and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal. 
2And Reaiah the son of Shobal begot 
Jahath; and Jahath begot Ahumai, and 
Lahad. These are the families of the 
Zorathites. 

3And these were [the sons of] the 
father of Etam: Jezreel, and Ishma, and 
Idbash; and the name of their sister 
was Hazlelponi; 4and Penuel the father 
of Gedor, and Ezer the father of 
Hushah. These are the sons of Hur the 
first-born of Ephrath, the father of 
Beth-lehem. 

5And Ashhur the father of Tekoa 
had two wives, Helah and Naarah. 
6And Naarah bore him Ahuzam, and 
Hepher, and Timeni, and Ahashtari. 
These were the sons of Naarah. 7And 
the sons of Helah were Zereth, and 
Zohar, and Ethnan. 8And Koz begot 
Anub, and Zobebah, and the families 
of Aharhel the son of Harum. 9And 
Jabez was more honourable than his 
brethren; and his mother called his 
name Jabez, saying: ‘Because I bore 
him with pain.’ 10And Jabez called on 
the God of Israel, saying: ‘Oh that 
Thou wouldest bless me indeed, and 
enlarge my border, and that Thy hand 
might be with me, and that Thou 
wouldest work deliverance from evil, 
that it may not pain me! ’ And God 
granted him that which he requested. 

11And Chelub the brother of 
Shuhah begot Mehir, who was the 
father of Eshton. 12And Eshton begot 
Beth-rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah 
the father of Ir-nahash. These are the 
men of Recah. 

13And the sons of Kenaz: Othniel, 
and Seraiah; and the sons of Othniel: 
Hathath. 14And Meonothai begot 
Ophrah; and Seraiah begot Joab the 
father of aGe-harashim; for they were 
craftsmen. 15And the sons of Caleb the 
son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and 
Naam; and the sons of Elah: Kenaz. 
16And the sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, and 

a That is, The valley of craftsmen. 


Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel. 17And the 
sons of Ezrah: Jether, and Mered, and 
Epher, and Jalon. And she bore 
Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the 
father of Eshtemoa—18and his wife 
Hajehudijah bore Jered the father of 
Gedor, and Heber the father of Soco, 
and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah—
and these are the sons of Bithiah the 
daughter of Pharaoh whom Mered 
took. 

19And the sons of the wife of 
Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the 
father of Keilah the Garmite, and 
Eshtemoa the Maacathite. 20And the 
sons of Shimon: Amnon, and Rinnah, 
Ben-hanan, and Tilon. And the sons of 
Ishi: Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth. 

21The sons of Shelah the son of 
Judah: Er the father of Lecah, and 
Ladah the father of Mareshah, and the 
families of the house of them that 
wrought fine linen, of the house of 
Ashbea; 22and Jokim, and the men of 
Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who 
had dominion in Moab, and Jashubi-
lehem. And the records are ancient. 
23These were the potters, and those 
that dwelt among plantations and 
hedges; there they dwelt occupied in 
the king’s work. 

24The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, and 
Jamim, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul; 25Shallum 
his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his 
son. 26And the sons of Mishma: 
Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, 
Shimei his son. 27And Shimei had 
sixteen sons and six daughters; but his 
brethren had not many children, 
neither did all their family multiply, 
like to the children of Judah. 

28And they dwelt at Beer-sheba, 
and Moladah, and Hazar-shual; 29and 
at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad; 
30and at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and 
at Ziklag; 31and at Beth-marcaboth, 
and Hazar-susim, and at Beth-biri, and 
at Shaaraim. These were their cities 
unto the reign of David. 32And their 
villages were Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, 
and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities; 
33and all their villages that were round 
about the same cities, unto Baal. These 
were their habitations, and they have 
their genealogy. 

34And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and 
Joshah the son of Amaziah; 35and Joel, 
and Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son 
of Seraiah, the son of Asiel; 36and 
Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshoaiah, 
and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, 
and Benaiah; 37and Ziza the son of 
Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of 
Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of 
Shemaiah; 38these mentioned by name 
were princes in their families; and 
their fathers’houses increased greatly. 
39And they went to the entrance of 
Gedor, even unto the east side of the 
valley, to seek pasture for their flocks. 
40And they found fat pasture and good, 
and the land was wide, and quiet, and 
peaceable; for they that dwelt there 
aforetime were of Ham. 41And these 
written by name came in the days of 
Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote 
their tents, and the Meunim that were 
found there, and destroyed them 


utterly, unto this day, and dwelt in 
their stead; because there was pasture 
there for their flocks. 42And some of 
them, even of the sons of Simeon, five 
hundred men, went to mount Seir, 
having for their captains Pelatiah, and 
Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the 
sons of Ishi. 43And they smote the 
remnant of the Amalekites that 
escaped, and dwelt there unto this day. 

And the sons of Reuben the first-
born of Israel—for he was the 
first-born; but, forasmuch as he defiled 
his father’s couch, his birthright was 
given unto the sons of Joseph the son 
of Israel, yet not so that he was to be 
reckoned in the genealogy as first-
born. 2For Judah prevailed above his 
brethren, and of him came he that is 
the prince; but the birthright was 
Joseph’s— 3the sons of Reuben the 
first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, 
Hezron, and Carmi. 4The sons of Joel: 
Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei 
his son; 5Micah his son, Reaiah his 
son, Baal his son; 6Beerah his son, 
whom Tillegath-pilneser king of 
Assyria carried away captive; he was 
prince of the Reubenites. 7And his 
brethren by their families, when the 
genealogy of their generations was 
reckoned: the chief Jeiel, and 
Zechariah, 8and Bela the son of Azaz, 
the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who 
dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and 
Baal-meon; 9and eastward he dwelt 
even unto the entrance of the 
wilderness from the river Euphrates; 
because their cattle were multiplied in 
the land of Gilead. 10And in the days 
of Saul they made war with the 
Hagrites, who fell by their hand; and 
they dwelt in their tents throughout all 
the land east of Gilead. 

11And the sons of Gad dwelt over 
against them, in the land of Bashan 
unto Salcah: 12Joel the chief, and 
Shapham the second, and Janai, and 
Shaphat in Bashan; 13and their 
brethren of their fathers’houses: 
Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, 
and Jorai, and Jacan, and Zia, and 
Eber, seven. 14These were the sons of 
Abihail the son of Huri, the son of 
Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of 
Michael, the son of Jehishai, the son of 
Jahdo, the son of Buz; 15Ahi the son of 
Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of their 
fathers’houses. 16And they dwelt in 
Gilead in Bashan, and in the towns 
thereof, and in all the open lands of the 
plain, upon their borders. 17All these 
were reckoned by genealogies in the 
days of Jotham king of Judah and in 
the days of Jeroboam king of Israel. 

18The sons of Reuben, and the 
Gadites, and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh, as many as were valiant 
men, men able to bear buckler and 
sword, and to shoot with bow, and 
skilful in war, were forty and four 
thousand seven hundred and 
threescore, that were able to go forth 
to war. 19And they made war with the 
Hagrites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and 
Nodab. 20And they were helped against 
them, and the Hagrites were delivered 
into their hand, and all that were with 
5 




them; for they cried to God in the 
battle, and He was entreated of them, 
because they put their trust in Him. 
21And they took away their cattle: of 
their camels fifty thousand, and of 
sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, 
and of asses two thousand; and of 
souls of men a hundred thousand. 
22For there fell many slain, because the 
war was of God. And they dwelt in 
their stead until the captivity. 

23And the children of the half-tribe 
of Manasseh dwelt in the land, from 
Bashan unto Baal-hermon and Senir 
and mount Hermon, where they 
increased. 24And these were the heads 
of their fathers’houses: Epher, and 
Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and 
Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, 
mighty men of valour, famous men, 
heads of their fathers’houses. 

25And they broke faith with the 
God of their fathers, and went astray 
after the gods of the peoples of the 
land, whom God destroyed before 
them. 26And the God of Israel stirred 
up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, 
and the spirit of Tillegath-pilneser king 
of Assyria, and he carried them away, 
even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and 
brought them unto Halah, and Habor, 
and Hara, and to the river of Gozan, 
unto this day. 

27The sons of Levi: Gershon, 
Kohath, and Merari. 28And the sons of 
Kohath: Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, 
and Uzziel. 29And the children of 
Amram: Aaron, and Moses, and 
Miriam. And the sons of Aaron: Nadab 
and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 
30Eleazar begot Phinehas, Phinehas 
begot Abishua; 31and Abishua begot 
Bukki, and Bukki begot Uzzi; 32and 
Uzzi begot Zerahiah, and Zerahiah 
begot Meraioth; 33Meraioth begot 
Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub; 
34and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok 
begot Ahimaaz; 35and Ahimaaz begot 
Azariah, and Azariah begot Johanan; 1 
36and Johanan begot Azariah—he it is 
that executed the priest’s office in the 
house that Solomon built in 
Jerusalem—:37and Azariah begot 
Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub; 
38and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok 
begot Shallum; 39and Shallum begot 
Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begot Azariah; 
40and Azariah begot Seraiah, and 
Seraiah begot Jehozadak; 41and 
Jehozadak went into captivity, when 
the LORD carried away Judah and 
Jerusalem by the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

The sons of Levi: Gershom, 
Kohath and Merari. 2And these 
are the names of the sons of Gershom: 
Libni, and Shimei. 3And the sons of 
Kohath were Amram, and Izhar, and 
Hebron, and Uzziel. 4The sons of 
Merari: Mahli, and Mushi. And these 
are the families of the Levites 
according to their fathers’houses. 

5Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath 
his son, Zimmah his son; 6Joah his 
son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, 
Jeatherai his son. 
6 




7The sons of Kohath: Amminadab 
his son, Korah his son, Assir his son; 
8Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his 
son, and Assir his son; 9Tahath his son, 
Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and 
Shaul his son. 10And the sons of 
Elkanah: Amasai, and Ahimoth. 11As 
for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah: 
Zophai his son, and Nahath his son; 
12Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, 
Elkanah his son. 13And the sons of 
Samuel: the first-born Vashni; then 
Abiah. 

14The sons of Merari: Mahli; Libni 
his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son; 
15Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, 
Asaiah his son. 

16And these are they whom David 
set over the service of song in the 
house of the LORD, after that the ark 
had rest. 17And they ministered with 
song before the tabernacle of the tent 
of meeting, until Solomon had built 
the house of the LORD in Jerusalem; 
and they took their station at their 
service according to their order. 18And 
these are they that took their station, 
and their sons. Of the sons of the 
Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son 
of Joel, the son of Samuel; 19the son of 
Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son 
of Eliel, the son of Toah; 20the son of 
Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of 
Mahath, the son of Amasai; 21the son 
of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of 
Azariah, the son of Zephaniah; 22the 
son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son 
of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah; 23the 
son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the 
son of Levi, the son of Israel. 24And 
his brother Asaph, who stood on his 
right hand; even Asaph the son of 
Berechiah, the son of Shimea; 25the 
son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, 
the son of Malchijah; 26the son of 
Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of 
Adaiah; 27the son of Ethan, the son of 
Zimmah, the son of Shimei; 28the son 
of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son 
of Levi. 29And on the left hand their 
brethren the sons of Merari: Ethan the 
son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son 
of Malluch; 30the son of Hashabiah, 
the son of Amaziah, the son of 
Hilkiah; 31the son of Amzi, the son of 
Bani, the son of Shemer; 32the son of 
Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of 
Merari, the son of Levi. 33And their 
brethren the Levites were appointed 
for all the service of the tabernacle of 
the house of God. 

34But Aaron and his sons offered 
upon the altar of burnt-offering, and 
upon the altar of incense, for all the 
work of the most holy place, and to 
make atonement for Israel, according 
to all that Moses the servant of God 
had commanded. 35And these are the 
sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, 
Phinehas his son, Abishua his son; 
36Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah 
his son; 37Meraioth his son, Amariah 
his son, Ahitub his son; 38Zadok his 
son, Ahimaaz his son. 

39Now these are their dwelling-
places according to their encampments 
in their borders: to the sons of Aaron, 
of the families of the Kohathites, for 


theirs was the [first] lot, 40to them they 
gave Hebron in the land of Judah, and 
the open land round about it; 41but the 
fields of the city, and the villages 
thereof, they gave to Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh. 42And to the sons of Aaron 
they gave the acity of refuge, Hebron; 
Libnah also with the open land about 
it, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa with the 
open land about it; 43and Hilen with 
the open land about it, Debir with the 
open land about it; 44and Ashan with 
the open land about it, and Beth-
shemesh with the open land about it; 
45and out of the tribe of Benjamin: 
Geba with the open land about it, and 
Alemeth with the open land about it, 
and Anathoth with the open land about 
it. All their cities throughout their 
families were thirteen cities. 

a Heb. Cities. 

46And unto the rest of the sons of 
Kohath were given by lot, out of the 
family of the tribe, out of the half-
tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities. 
47And to the sons of Gershom, 
according to their families, out of the 
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of 
Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, 
and out of the tribe of Manasseh in 
Bashan, thirteen cities. 48Unto the sons 
of Merari were given by lot, according 
to their families, out of the tribe of 
Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, 
and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve 
cities. 

49So the children of Israel gave to 
the Levites the cities with the open 

land about them. 50And they gave by 
lot out of the tribe of the children of 
Judah, and out of the tribe of the 
children of Simeon, and out of the 
tribe of the children of Benjamin, these 
cities which are mentioned by name. 

51And some of the families of the 
sons of Kohath had cities of their 
borders out of the tribe of Ephraim. 
52And they gave unto them the bcity of 
refuge, Shechem in the hill-country of 
Ephraim with the open land about it; 
Gezer also with the open land about it; 
53and Jokmeam with the open land 
about it, and Bethhoron with the open 
land about it; 54and Aijalon with the 
open land about it, and Gath-rimmon 
with the open land about it; 55and out 
of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Aner 
with the open land about it, and 
Bileam with the open land about it, for 
the rest of the family of the sons of 
Kohath. 

b Heb. Cities. 

56Unto the sons of Gershom were 
given, out of the family of the half-
tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan 
with the open land about it, and 
Ashtaroth with the open land about it; 
57and out of the tribe of Issachar: 
Kedesh with the open land about it, 
Dobrath with the open land about it; 
58and Ramoth with the open land about 
it, and Anem with the open land about 
it; 59and out of the tribe of Asher: 
Mashal with the open land about it, 
and Abdon with the open land about it; 
60and Hukok with the open land about 


it; and Rehob with the open land about 
it; 61and out of the tribe of Naphtali: 
Kedesh in Galilee with the open land 
about it, and Hammon with the open 
land about it, and Kiriathaim with the 
open land about it. 

62Unto the rest [of the Levites], the 
sons of Merari, were given, out of the 
tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with the 
open land about it, Tabor with the 
open land about it; 63and beyond the 
Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of 
the Jordan, were given them, out of the 
tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the 
wilderness with the open land about it, 
and Jahaz with the open land about it, 
64and Kedemoth with the open land 
about it, and Mephaath with the open 
land about it; 65and out of the tribe of 
Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with the open 
land about it, and Mahanaim with the 
open land about it, 66and Heshbon with 
the open land about it, and Jazer with 
the open land about it. 

7 



And of the sons of Issachar: Tola, 
and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, 
four. 2And the sons of Tola: Uzzi and 
Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and 
Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their 
fathers’houses, mighty men of valour 
according to their generations, even of 
Tola; their number in the days of 
David was two and twenty thousand 
and six hundred. 3And the sons of 
Uzzi: Izrahiah; and the sons of 
Izrahiah: Michael, and Obadiah, and 
Joel, Isshiah, five; all of them chief 
men. 4And with them, by their 
generations, after their fathers’houses, 
were bands of the host for war, six and 
thirty thousand; for they had many 
wives and sons. 5And their brethren 
among all the families of Issachar, 
mighty men of valour, reckoned in all 
by genealogy, were fourscore and 
seven thousand. 

6[The sons of] Benjamin: Bela, and 
Becher, and Jediael, three. 7And the 
sons of Bela: Ezbon, and Uzzi, and 
Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; 
heads of fathers’houses, mighty men 
of valour; and they were reckoned by 
genealogy twenty and two thousand 
and thirty and four. 8And the sons of 
Becher: Zemirah, and Joash, and 
Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and 
Jeremoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, 
and Alemeth. All these were the sons 
of Becher. 9And they were reckoned 
by genealogy, after their generations, 
heads of their fathers’houses, mighty 
men of valour, twenty thousand and 
two hundred. 10And the sons of 
Jediael: Bilhan; and the sons of 
Bilhan: Jeush, and Benjamin, and 
Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and 
Tarshish, and Ahishahar. 11All these 
were sons of Jediael, even heads of 
their fathers’houses, mighty men of 
valour, seventeen thousand and two 
hundred, that were able to go forth in 
the host for war. 12Shuppim also, and 
Huppim, the sons of Ir, Hushim, the 
son of aanother. 

a That is, Dan. 


13The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and 
Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons 
of Bilhah. 

14The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, 
whom his wife bore—his concubine 
the Aramitess bore Machir the father 
of Gilead; 15and Machir took a wife of 
Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister’s 
name was Maacah—and the name of 
the second was Zelophehad; and 
Zelophehad had daughters. 16And 
Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, 
and she called his name Peresh; and 
the name of his brother was Sheresh; 
and his sons were Ulam and Rekem. 
17And the sons of Ulam: Bedan. These 
were the sons of Gilead the son of 
Machir, the son of Manasseh. 18And 
his sister Hammolecheth bore Ish-hod, 
and Abiezer, and Mahlah. 19And the 
sons of Shemida were Ahian, and 
Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam. 

20And the sons of Ephraim: 
Shuthelah—and Bered was his son, 
and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his 
son, and Tahath his son, 21and Zabad 
his son, and Shuthelah his son—and 
Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of 
Gath that were born in the land slew, 
because they came down to take away 
their cattle. 22And Ephraim their father 
mourned many days, and his brethren 
came to comfort him. 23And he went in 
to his wife, and she conceived, and 
bore a son, and he called his name 
Beriah, because ait went evil with his 
house. 24And his daughter was 

a Heb. Beraah. 

Sheerah, who built Beth-horon the 
nether and the upper, and Uzzen-
sheerah. 25And Rephah was his son, 
and Resheph, and Telah his son, and 
Tahan his son; 26Ladan his son, 
Ammihud his son, Elishama his son; 
27bNun his son, Joshua his son. 28And 
their possessions and habitations were 
Beth-el and the towns thereof, and 
eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, 
with the towns thereof; Shechem also 
and the towns thereof, unto Aiah and 
the towns thereof; 29and by the borders 
of the children of Manasseh, Beth-
shean and the towns thereof, Taanach 
and the towns thereof, Megiddo and 
the towns thereof, Dor and the towns 
thereof. In these dwelt the children of 
Joseph the son of Israel. 

b Heb. Non. 

30The sons of Asher: Imnah, and 
Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and 
Serah their sister. 31And the sons of 
Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel, who was 
the father of Birzaith. 32And Heber 
begot Japhlet, and Shomer, and 
Hotham, and Shua their sister. 33And 
the sons of Japhlet: Pasach, and 
Bimhal, and Asvath. These are the 
children of Japhlet. 34And the sons of 
Shemer: Ahi, and Rohgah, and 
Hubbah, and Aram. 35And the sons of 
Helem his brother: Zophah, and Imna, 
and Shelesh, and Amal. 36The sons of 
Zophah: Suah, and Harnepher, and 
Shaul, and Beri, and Imrah; 37Bezer, 
and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilsha, 
and Ithran, and Beera. 38And the sons 


of Jether: Jephunneh, and Pispa, and 
Ara. 39And the sons of Ulla: Arah, and 
Hanniel, and Rizia. 40All these were 
the children of Asher, heads of the 
fathers’houses, choice and mighty men 
of valour, chief of the princes. And the 
number of them reckoned by 
genealogy for service in war was 
twenty and six thousand men. 

 

8 



And Benjamin begot Bela his 
first-born, Ashbel the second, and 
Aharah the third; 2Nohah the fourth, 
and Rapha the fifth. 3And Bela had 
sons, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud; 
4and Abishua, and Naaman, and 
Ahoah; 5and Gera, and Shephuphan, 
and Huram. 6And these are the sons of 
Ehud—these are the heads of 
fathers’houses of the inhabitants of 
Geba, and they were carried captive to 
Manahath; 7and Naaman, and Ahijah, 
and Gera, were they that carried them 
captive—and he begot Uzza, and 
Ahihud. 8And Shaharaim begot 
children in the field of Moab, after he 
had sent them away, to wit, Hushim 
and Baara his wives; 9he begot of 
Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and 
Mesha, and Malcam; 10and Jeuz, and 
Sachiah, and Mirmah. These were his 
sons, heads of fathers’houses. 11and of 
Hushim he begot Abitub, and Elpaal. 

12And the sons of Elpaal: Eber, and 
Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono, 
and Lod, with the towns thereof; 13and 
Beriah, and Shema, who were heads of 
fathers’houses of the inhabitants of 
Aijalon, who put to flight the 
inhabitants of Gath. 14And Ahio, 
Shashak, and Jeremoth; 15and 
Zebadiah, and Arad, and Eder; 16and 
Michael, and Ishpah, and Joha, were 
the sons of Beriah. 17And Zebadiah, 
and Meshullam, and Hizki, and Heber; 
18and Ishmerai, and Izliah, and Jobab, 
were the sons of Elpaal. 19And Jakim, 
and Zichri, and Zabdi; 20and Elienai, 
and Zillethai, and Eliel; 21and Adaiah, 
and Beraiah, and Shimrath, were the 
sons of Shimei. 22And Ishpan, and 
Ebed, and Eliel; 23and Abdon, and 
Zichri, and Hanan; 24and Hananiah, 
and Elam, and Anthothiah; 25and 
Iphdeiah, and Penuel, were the sons of 
Shashak. 26And Shamsherai, and 
Shehariah, and Athaliah; 27and 
Jaareshiah, and Elijah, and Zichri, 
were the sons of Jeroham. 28These 
were heads of fathers’houses 
throughout their generations, chief 
men; these dwelt in Jerusalem. 

29And in Gibeon there dwelt the 
father of Gibeon [, aJeiel], whose 
wife’s name was Maacah; 30and his 
first-born son Abdon, and Zur, and 
Kish, and Baal, and Nadab; 31and 
Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecher. 32And 
Mikloth begot Shimeah. And they also 
dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, 
over against their brethren. 

a See ch. ix. 35. 

33And Ner begot Kish; and Kish 
begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, 
and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and 
Eshbaal. 34And the son of Jonathan 
was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begot 


Micah. 35And the sons of Micah; 
Pithon, and Melech, and Taarea, and 
Ahaz. 36And Ahaz begot Jehoaddah; 
and Jehoaddah begot Alemeth, and 
Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot 
Moza; 37and Moza begot Binea; 
Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, 
Azel his son. 38And Azel had six sons, 
whose names are these: Azrikam, 
Bocru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were 
the sons of Azel. 39And the sons of 
Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, 
Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the 
third. 40And the sons of Ulam were 
mighty men of valour, archers; and 
had many sons, and sons’sons, a 
hundred and fifty. All these were of 
the sons of Benjamin. 

 

So all Israel were reckoned by 
genealogies; and, behold, they are 
written in the book of the kings of 
Israel; and Judah was carried away 
captive to Babylon because of their 
transgression. 2Now the first 
inhabitants that dwelt in their 
possessions in their cities were, 
Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and 
the Nethinim. 3And in Jerusalem dwelt 
of the children of Judah, and of the 
children of Benjamin, and of the 
children of Ephraim and Manasseh: 
4Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of 
Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, 
of the children of Perez the son of 
Judah. 5And of the Shilonites: Asaiah 
the first-born and his sons. 6And of the 
sons of Zerah: Jeuel, and their 
brethren, six hundred and ninety. 7And 
of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son 
of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, 
the son of Hassenuah, 8and Ibneiah the 
son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of 
Uzzi, the son of Michri, and 
Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the 
son of Reuel, the son of Ibneiah; 9and 
their brethren, according to their 
generations, nine hundred and fifty 
and six. All these men were heads of 
fathers’houses by their fathers’houses. 

10And of the priests: Jedaiah, and 
Jehoiarib, and Jachin; 11and Azariah 
the son of Hilkiah, the son of 
Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son 
of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the 
ruler of the house of God; 12and 
Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of 
Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and 
Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of 
Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the 
son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer; 
13and their brethren, heads of their 
fathers’houses, a thousand and seven 
hundred and threescore; very able men 
for the work of the service of the 
house of God. 

14And of the Levites: Shemaiah the 
son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, 
the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of 
Merari; 15and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and 
Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, 
the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph; 
16and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, 
the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, 
and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son 
of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages 
of the Netophathites. 
9 




17And the porters: Shallum, and 
Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and 
their brother Shallum the chief; 18who 
hitherto waited in the king’s gate 
eastward; they were the porters for the 
camp of the children of Levi. 19And 
Shallum the son of Kore, the son of 
Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his 
brethren, of his father’s house, the 
Korahites, were over the work of the 
service, keepers of the gates of the 
Tent; and their fathers had been over 
the camp of the LORD, keepers of the 
entry; 20and Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar was ruler over them in time 
past, the LORD being with him. 
21Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah 
was porter of the door of the tent of 
meeting. 22All these that were chosen 
to be porters in the gates were two 
hundred and twelve. These were 
reckoned by genealogy in their 
villages, whom David and Samuel the 
seer did ordain in their set office. 23So 
they and their children had the 
oversight of the gates of the house of 
the LORD, even the house of the Tent, 
by wards. 24On the four sides were the 
porters, toward the east, west, north, 
and south. 25And their brethren, in 
their villages, were to come in every 
seven days from time to time to be 
with them; 26for the four chief porters 
were in a set office. These were the 
Levites. 

They were also over the chambers 
and over the treasuries in the house of 
God. 27And they lodged round about 
the house of God, because the charge 
thereof was upon them, and to them 
pertained the opening thereof morning 
by morning. 28And certain of them had 
charge of the vessels of service; for by 
tale were they brought in and by tale 
were they taken out. 29Some of them 
also were appointed over the furniture, 
and over all the holy vessels, and over 
the fine flour, and the wine, and the 
oil, and the frankincense, and the 
spices. 30And some of the sons of the 
priests prepared the confection of the 
spices. 31And Mattithiah, one of the 
Levites, who was the firstborn of 
Shallum the Korahite, had the set 
office over the things that were baked 
on griddles. 32And some of their 
brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, 
were over the showbread, to prepare it 
every sabbath. 

33And these are the singers, heads 
of fathers’houses of the Levites, who 
dwelt in the chambers and were free 
from other service; for they were 
employed in their work day and night. 
34These were heads of fathers’houses 
of the Levites, by their generations, 
chief men; these dwelt at Jerusalem. 

35And in Gibeon there dwelt the 
father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife’s 
name was Maacah; 36and his first-born 
son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and 
Baal, and Ner, and Nadab; 37and 
Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and 
Mikloth. 38And Mikloth begot 
Shimeam. And they also dwelt with 
their brethren in Jerusalem, over 
against their brethren. 


39And Ner begot Kish; and Kish 
begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, 
and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and 
Eshbaal. 40And the son of Jonathan 
was Merib-baal; and aMerib-baal begot 
Micah. 41And the sons of Micah: 
Pithon, and Melech, and Taharea[,band 
Ahaz]. 42And Ahaz begot Jarah; and 
Jarah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, 
and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza. 
43And Moza begot Binea; and 
Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, 
Azel his son. 44And Azel had six sons, 
whose names are these: Azrikam, 
Bocru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan; these were the 
sons of Azel. 

a Heb. Meri-baal. 

b See ch. viii, 35. 

 

Now the Philistines fought 
against Israel; and the men of 
Israel fled from before the Philistines, 
and fell down slain in mount Gilboa. 
2And the Philistines followed hard 
after Saul and after his sons; and the 
Philistines slew Jonathan, and 
Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons 
of Saul. 3And the battle went sore 
against Saul, and the archers overtook 
him; and he was in anguish by reason 
of the archers. 4Then said Saul unto his 
armour-bearer: ‘Draw thy sword, and 
thrust me through therewith; lest these 
uncircumcised come and make a mock 
of me.’ But his armour-bearer would 
not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore 
Saul took his sword, and fell upon it. 

5And when his armour-bearer saw that 
Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon 
his sword, and died. 6So Saul died, and 
his three sons; and all his house died 
together. 7And when all the men of 
Israel that were in the valley saw that 
[Israel] fled, and that Saul and his sons 
were dead, they forsook their cities, 
and fled; and the Philistines came and 
dwelt in them. 

8And it came to pass on the 
morrow, when the Philistines came to 
strip the slain, that they found Saul and 
his sons fallen in mount Gilboa. 9And 
they stripped him, and took his head, 
and his armour, and sent into the land 
of the Philistines round about, to carry 
the tidings unto their idols, and to the 
people. 10And they put his armour in 
the house of their gods, and fastened 
his head in the house of Dagon. 11And 
when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that 
the Philistines had done to Saul, 12all 
the valiant men arose, and took away 
the body of Saul, and the bodies of his 
sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and 
buried their bones under the terebinth 
in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. 

13So Saul died for his transgression 
which he committed against the LORD, 
because of the word of the LORD, 
which he kept not; and also for that he 
asked counsel of a ghost, to inquire 
thereby, 14and inquired not of the 
LORD; therefore He slew him, and 
turned the kingdom unto David the son 
of Jesse. 

 
10 




Then all Israel gathered 
themselves to David unto 
Hebron, saying: ‘Behold, we are thy 
bone and thy flesh. 2In times past, even 
when Saul was king, it was thou that 
didst lead out and bring in Israel; and 
the LORD thy God said unto thee: Thou 
shalt feed My people Israel, and thou 
shalt be prince over My people Israel.’ 
3So all the elders of Israel came to the 
king to Hebron; and David made a 
covenant with them in Hebron before 
the LORD; and they anointed David 
king over Israel, according to the word 
of the LORD by the hand of Samuel. 

4And David and all Israel went to 
Jerusalem—the same is Jebus—and 
the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the 
land, were there. 5And the inhabitants 
of Jebus said to David: ‘Thou shalt not 
come in hither.’ Nevertheless David 
took the stronghold of Zion; the same 
is the city of David. 6And David said: 
‘Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first 
shall be chief and captain.’ And Joab 
the son of Zeruiah went up first, and 
was made chief. 7And David dwelt in 
the stronghold; therefore they called it 
the city of David. 8And he built the 
city round about, from Millo even 
round about; and Joab repaired the rest 
of the city. 9And David waxed greater 
and greater; for the LORD of hosts was 
with him. 

10Now these are the chief of the 
mighty men whom David had, who 
held strongly with him in his kingdom, 
together with all Israel, to make him 
king, according to the word of the 
LORD concerning Israel. 11And this is 
the number of the mighty men whom 
David had: Jashobeam, the son of a 
Hachmonite, the chief of the captains; 
he lifted up his spear against three 
hundred and slew them at one time. 

12And after him was Eleazar the 
son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was 
one of the three mighty men. 13He was 
with David at Pas-dammim, and there 
the Philistines were gathered together 
to battle, where was a plot of ground 
full of barley; and the people fled from 
before the Philistines. 14But they stood 
in the midst of the plot, and defended 
it, and slew the Philistines; and the 
LORD saved them by a great victory. 

15And three of the thirty chiefs 
went down to the rock to David, unto 
the cave of Adullam; and the host of 
the Philistines were encamped in the 
valley of Rephaim. 16And David was 
then in the stronghold, and the garrison 
of the Philistines was then in Beth-
lehem. 17And David longed, and said: 
‘Oh that one would give me water to 
drink of the well of Beth-lehem, which 
is by the gate! ’ 18And the three broke 
through the host of the Philistines, and 
drew water out of the well of Beth-
lehem, that was by the gate, and took 
it, and brought it to David; but David 
would not drink thereof, but poured it 
out unto the LORD, 19and said: ‘My 
God forbid it me, that I should do this; 
shall I drink the blood of these men 
that have put their lives in jeopardy? 
for with the jeopardy of their lives they 
brought it.’ Therefore he would not 
11 




drink it. These things did the three 
mighty men. 

20And aAbishai, the brother of Joab, 
he was chief of the three; for he lifted 
up his spear against three hundred and 
slew them, and had a name among the 
three. 21Of the three in the second rank 
he was the most honourable, and was 
made their captain; howbeit he 
attained not to the first three. 

a Heb. Abshai. 

22Beniah the son of Jehoiada, the 
son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who 
had done mighty deeds, he smote the 
two altar-hearths of Moab; he went 
down also and slew a lion in the midst 
of a pit in time of snow. 23And he slew 
an Egyptian, a man of great stature, 
five cubits high; and in the Egyptian’s 
hand was a spear like a weaver’s 
beam; and he went down to him with a 
staff, and plucked the spear out of the 
Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with 
his own spear. 24These things did 
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had a 
name among the three mighty men. 
25Behold, he was more honourable 
than the thirty, but he attained not to 
the first three; and David set him over 
his guard. 

26Also the mighty men of valour: 
Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan 
the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem; 
27Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the 
Pelonite; 28Ira the son of Ikkesh the 
Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite; 
29Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the 
Ahohite; 30Mahrai the Netophathite, 

Heled the son of Baanah the 
Netophathite; 31Ithai the son of Ribai 
of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, 
Benaiah the Pirathonite; 32Hurai of 
Nahale-gaash, Abiel the Arbathite; 
33Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba 
the Shaalbonite; 34the sons of Hashem 
the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of 
Shageh the Hararite; 35Ahiam the son 
of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son 
of Ur; 36Hepher the Mecherathite, 
Ahijah the Pelonite; 37Hezro the 
Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai; 
38Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar 
the son of Hagri; 39Zelek the 
Ammonite, Nahrai the Berothite, the 
armour-bearer of Joab the son of 
Zeruiah; 40Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the 
Ithrite; 41Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the 
son of Ahlai; 42Adina the son of Shiza 
the Reubenite, a chief of the 
Reubenites, and thirty with him; 
43Hanan the son of Maacah, and 
Joshaphat the Mithnite; 44Uzzia the 
Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons 
of Hotham the Aroerite; 45Jediael the 
son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, 
the Tizite; 46Eliel the Mahavite, and 
Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of 
Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite; 
47Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the 
Mezobaite. 

Now these are they that came 
to David to Ziklag, while he 
was yet shut up because of Saul the 
son of Kish; and they were among the 
mighty men, his helpers in war. 2They 
were armed with bows, and could use 
both the right hand and the left in 
12 




slinging stones and in shooting arrows 
from the bow; they were of Saul’s 
brethren of Benjamin. 3The chief was 
Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of 
Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, 
and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and 
Beracah, and Jehu the Anathothite; 
4and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty 
man among the thirty, and over the 
thirty; 5and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and 
Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite; 
6Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, 
and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the 
Hariphite; 7Elkanah, and Isshiah, and 
Azarel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, 
the Korahites; 8and Joelah, and 
Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of the 
troop. 

9And of the Gadites there separated 
themselves unto David to the 
stronghold in the wilderness, mighty 
men of valour, men trained for war, 
that could handle shield and spear; 
whose faces were like the faces of 
lions, and they were as swift as the 
roes upon the mountains; 10Ezer the 
chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the 
third; 11Mashmannah the fourth, 
Jeremiah the fifth; 12Attai the sixth, 
Eliel the seventh; 13Johanan the eighth, 
Elzabad the ninth; 14Jeremiah the 
tenth, Machbannai the eleventh. 
15These of the sons of Gad were 
captains of the host; he that was least 
was equal to a hundred, and the 
greatest to a thousand. 16These are they 
that went over the Jordan in the first 
month, when it had overflown all its 
banks; and they put to flight all them 
of the valleys, both toward the east, 
and toward the west. 

17And there came of the children of 
Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold 
unto David. 18And David went out to 
meet them, and answered and said 
unto them: ‘If ye be come peaceably 
unto me to help me, my heart shall be 
knit unto you; but if ye be come to 
betray me to mine adversaries, seeing 
there is no wrong in my hands, the 
God of our fathers look thereon, and 
give judgment.’ 19Then the spirit 
clothed Amasai, who was chief of the 
captains: 

Thine are we, David, 

And on thy side, thou son of Jesse; 

Peace, peace be unto thee, 

And peace be to thy helpers; 

For thy God helpeth thee. 

Then David received them, and made 
them captains of the band. 

20Of Manasseh also there fell away 
some to David, when he came with the 
Philistines against Saul to battle, but 
athey helped them not; for the lords of 
the Philistines upon advisement sent 
him away, saying: ‘He will fall away 
to his master Saul to the jeopardy of 
our heads.’ 21As he went to Ziklag, 
there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, 
and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, 
and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zillethai, 
captains of thousands that were of 
Manasseh. 22And they helped David 
against the troop, for they were all 
mighty men of valour, and were 

a That is, David and his men. 


captains in the host. 23For from day to 
day men came to David to help him, 
until there was a great host, like the 
host of God. 

24And these are the numbers of the 
heads of them that were armed for 
war, who came to David to Hebron, to 
turn the kingdom of Saul to him, 
according to the word of the LORD. 
25The children of Judah that bore 
shield and spear were six thousand and 
eight hundred, armed for war. 26Of the 
children of Simeon, mighty men of 
valour for the war, seven thousand and 
one hundred. 27Of the children of Levi 
four thousand and six hundred. 28And 
Jehoiada was the leader of the house of 
Aaron, and with him were three 
thousand and seven hundred; 29and 
Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, 
and of his father’s house twenty and 
two captains. 30And of the children of 
Benjamin, the brethren of Saul, three 
thousand; for hitherto the greatest part 
of them had kept their allegiance to the 
house of Saul. 31And of the children of 
Ephraim twenty thousand and eight 
hundred, mighty men of valour, 
famous men in their fathers’houses. 
32And of the half-tribe of Manasseh 
eighteen thousand, who were 
mentioned by name, to come and make 
David king. 33And of the children of 
Issachar, men that had understanding 
of the times, to know what Israel ought 
to do; the heads of them were two 
hundred; and all their brethren were at 
their commandment. 34Of Zebulun, 
such as were able to go out in the host, 
that could set the battle in array, with 
all manner of instruments of war, fifty 
thousand; and that could order the 
battle array, and were not of double 
heart. 35And of Naphtali a thousand 
captains, and with them with shield 
and spear thirty and seven thousand. 
36And of the Danites that could set the 
battle in array, twenty and eight 
thousand and six hundred. 37And of 
Asher, such as were able to go out in 
the host, that could set the battle in 
array, forty thousand. 38And on the 
other side of the Jordan, of the 
Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the 
half-tribe of Manasseh, with all 
manner of instruments of war for the 
battle, a hundred and twenty thousand. 
39All these, being men of war, that 
could order the battle array, came with 
a whole heart to Hebron, to make 
David king over all Israel; and all the 
rest also of Israel were of one heart to 
make David king. 40And they were 
there with David three days, eating and 
drinking; for their brethren had made 
preparation for them. 41Moreover they 
that were nigh unto them, even as far 
as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, 
brought bread on asses, and on camels, 
and on mules, and on oxen, victual of 
meal, cakes of figs, and clusters of 
raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, 
and sheep in abundance; for there was 
joy in Israel. 

And David consulted with the 
captains of thousands and of 
hundreds, even with every leader. 
2And David said unto all the assembly 
13 




of Israel: ‘If it seem good unto you, 
and if it be of the LORD our God, let us 
send abroad everywhere unto our 
brethren that are left in all the land of 
Israel, and with them to the priests and 
Levites that are in their cities that have 
open land about them, that they may 
gather themselves unto us; 3and let us 
bring back the ark of our God to us; 
for we sought not unto it in the days of 
Saul.’ 4And all the assembly said that 
they would do so; for the thing was 
right in the eyes of all the people. 5So 
David assembled all Israel together, 
from Shihor the brook of Egypt even 
unto the entrance of Hamath, to bring 
the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim. 

6And David went up, and all Israel, 
to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, 
which belonged to Judah, to bring up 
from thence the ark of God, the LORD 
that sitteth upon the cherubim, 
whereon is called the Name. 7And they 
set the ark of God upon a new cart, 
[and brought it] out of the house of 
Abinadab; and Uzza and Ahio drove 
the cart. 8And David and all Israel 
played before God with all their might; 
even with songs, and with harps, and 
with psalteries, and with timbrels, and 
with cymbals, and with trumpets. 9And 
when they came unto the threshing-
floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his 
hand to hold the ark; for the oxen 
stumbled. 10And the anger of the LORD 
was kindled against Uzza, and He 
smote him, because he put forth his 
hand to the ark; and there he died 
before God. 11And David was 
displeased, because the LORD had 
broken forth upon Uzza; and that place 
was called aPerez-uzza unto this day. 
12And David was afraid of God that 
day, saying: ‘How shall I bring the ark 
of God home to me?’ 13So David 
removed not the ark unto him into the 
city of David, but carried it aside into 
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 
14And the ark of God remained with 
the family of Obed-edom in his house 
three months; and the LORD blessed the 
house of Obed-edom, and all that he 
had. 

a That is, The breach of Uzza. 

14 



And Huram king of Tyre sent 
messengers to David, and 
cedar-trees, and masons, and 
carpenters, to build him a house. 2And 
David perceived that the LORD had 
established him king over Israel, for 
his kingdom was exalted exceedingly, 
for His people Israel’s sake. 

3And David took more wives at 
Jerusalem; and David begot more sons 
and daughters. 4And these are the 
names of the children whom he had in 
Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, 
Nathan, and Solomon; 5and Ibhar, and 
Elishua, and Elpelet; 6and Nogah, and 
Nepheg, and Japhia; 7and Elishama, 
and Beeliada, and Eliphelet. 

8And when the Philistines heard 
that David was anointed king over all 
Israel, all the Philistines went up to 
seek David; and David heard of it, and 
went out to meet them. 9Now the 
Philistines had come and made a raid 


in the valley of Rephaim. 10And David 
inquired of God, saying: ‘Shall I go up 
against the Philistines? and wilt Thou 
deliver them into my hand?’ And the 
LORD said unto him: ‘Go up; for I will 
deliver them into thy hand.’ 11So they 
came up to Baal-perazim, and David 
smote them there; and David said: 
‘God hath broken mine enemies by my 
hand, like the breach of waters.’ 
Therefore they called the name of that 
place aBaal-perazim. 12And they left 
their gods there; and David gave 
commandment, and they were burned 
with fire. 

a That is, The possessor of breaches. 

13And the Philistines yet again 
made a raid in the valley. 14And David 
inquired again of God; and God said 
unto him: ‘Thou shalt not go up after 
them; turn away from them, and come 
upon them over against the mulberry-
trees. 15And it shall be, when thou 
hearest the sound of marching in the 
tops of the mulberry-trees, that then 
thou shalt go out to battle; for God is 
gone out before thee to smite the host 
of the Philistines.’ 16And David did as 
God commanded him; and they smote 
the host of the Philistines from Gibeon 
even to Gezer. 17And the fame of 
David went out into all lands; and the 
LORD brought the fear of him upon all 
nations. 

And [David] made him houses 
in the city of David; and he 
prepared a place for the ark of God, 
and pitched for it a tent. 2Then David 

said: ‘None ought to carry the ark of 
God but the Levites; for them hath the 
LORD chosen to carry the ark of the 
LORD, and to minister unto Him for 
ever.’ 3And David assembled all Israel 
at Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the 
LORD unto its place, which he had 
prepared for it. 4And David gathered 
together the sons of Aaron, and the 
Levites; 5of the sons of Kohath: Uriel 
the chief, and his brethren a hundred 
and twenty; 6of the sons of Merari: 
Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two 
hundred and twenty; 7of the sons of 
Gershom: Joel the chief, and his 
brethren a hundred and thirty; 8of the 
sons of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the chief, 
and his brethren two hundred; 9of the 
sons of Hebron: Eliel the chief, and his 
brethren fourscore; 10of the sons of 
Uzziel: Amminadab the chief, and his 
brethren a hundred and twelve. 11And 
David called for Zadok and Abiathar 
the priests, and for the Levites, for 
Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and 
Eliel, and Amminadab, 12and said unto 
them: ‘Ye are the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the Levites; sanctify 
yourselves, both ye and your brethren, 
that ye may bring up the ark of the 
LORD, the God of Israel, unto the place 
that I have prepared for it. 13For 
because ye [bore it] not at the first, the 
LORD our God made a breach upon us, 
for that we sought Him not according 
to the ordinance.’ 14So the priests and 
the Levites sanctified themselves to 
bring up the ark of the LORD, the God 
of Israel. 15And the children of the 
15 




Levites bore the ark of God upon their 
shoulders with the bars thereon, as 
Moses commanded according to the 
word of the LORD. 

16And David spoke to the chief of 
the Levites to appoint their brethren 
the singers, with instruments of music, 
psalteries and harps and cymbals, 
sounding aloud and lifting up the voice 
with joy. 17So the Levites appointed 
Heman the son of Joel; and of his 
brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; 
and of the sons of Merari their 
brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; 
18and with them their brethren of the 
second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and 
Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, 
and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and 
Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and 
Eliphalehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-
edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers. 19So 
the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan 
[, were appointed], with cymbals of 
brass to sound aloud; 20and Zechariah, 
and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and 
Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and 
Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries 
set to Alamoth; 21and Mattithiah, and 
Eliphalehu, and Mikneiahu, and Obed-
edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with 
harps on the Sheminith, to lead. 22And 
Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was 
over the song; he was master in the 
song, because he was skilful. 23And 
Berechiah and Elkanah were door-
keepers for the ark. 24And Shebaniah, 
and Joshaphat, and Nethanel, and 
Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, 
and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with 
the trumpets before the ark of God; 
and Obed-edom and Jehiah were 
doorkeepers for the ark. 

25So David, and the elders of Israel, 
and the captains over thousands, went 
to bring up the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD out of the house of Obed-
edom with joy. 26And it came to pass, 
when God helped the Levites that bore 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD, 
that they sacrificed seven bullocks and 
seven rams. 27And David was clothed 
with a robe of fine linen, and all the 
Levites that bore the ark, and the 
singers, and Chenaniah the master of 
the singers in the song; and David had 
upon him an ephod of linen. 28Thus all 
Israel brought up the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD with shouting, 
and with sound of the horn, and with 
trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding 
aloud with psalteries and harps. 29And 
it came to pass, as the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD came to the city 
of David, that Michal the daughter of 
Saul looked out at the window, and 
saw king David dancing and making 
merry; and she despised him in her 
heart. 

And they brought in the ark of 
God, and set it in the midst of 
the tent that David had pitched for it, 
and they offered burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings before God. 2And 
when David had made an end of 
offering the burnt-offering and the 
peace-offerings, he blessed the people 
in the name of the LORD. 3And he dealt 
to every one of Israel, both man and 
16 




woman, to every one a loaf of bread, 
and a cake made in a pan, and a sweet 
cake. 

4And he appointed certain of the 
Levites to minister before the ark of 
the LORD, and to celebrate and to thank 
and praise the LORD, the God of Israel: 
5Asaph the chief, and second to him 
Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, 
and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, 
and Benaiah, and Obed-edom, and 
Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps; 
and Asaph with cymbals, sounding 
aloud; 6and Benaiah and Jahaziel the 
priests with trumpets continually, 
before the ark of the covenant of God. 

7Then on that day did David first 
ordain to give thanks unto the LORD, by 
the hand of Asaph and his brethren. 

8O give thanks unto the LORD, call 
upon His name; 

Make known His doings among the 
peoples. 

9Sing unto Him, sing praises unto 
Him; 

Speak ye of all His marvellous 
works. 

10Glory ye in His holy name; 

Let the heart of them rejoice that 
seek the LORD. 

11Seek ye the LORD and His strength; 

Seek His face continually. 

12Remember His marvellous works 
that He hath done, 

His wonders, and the judgments of 
His mouth; 

13O ye seed of Israel His servant, 

Ye children of Jacob, His chosen 
ones. 

14He is the LORD our God; 

His judgments are in all the earth. 

15Remember His covenant for ever, 

The word which He commanded to 
a thousand generations; 

16[The covenant] which He made 
with Abraham, 

And His oath unto Isaac; 

17And He established it unto Jacob 
for a statute, 

To Israel for an everlasting 
covenant; 

18Saying: ‘Unto thee will I give the 
land of Canaan, 

The lot of your inheritance.’ 

 

19When ye were but a few men in 
number, 

Yea, very few, and sojourners in it, 

20And when they went about from 
nation to nation, 

And from one kingdom to another 
people, 

21He suffered no man to do them 
wrong, 

Yea, for their sake He reproved 
kings: 

22’Touch not Mine anointed ones, 

And do My prophets no harm.’ 

 

23Sing unto the LORD, all the earth; 

Proclaim His salvation from day to 
day. 

24Declare His glory among the 
nations, 

His marvellous works among all the 
peoples. 

25For great is the LORD, and highly to 
be praised; 


He also is to be feared above all 
gods. 

26For all the gods of the peoples are 
things of nought; 

But the LORD made the heavens. 

27Honour and majesty are before 
Him; 

Strength and gladness are in His 
place. 

28Ascribe unto the LORD, ye kindreds 
of the peoples, 

Ascribe unto the LORD glory and 
strength. 

29Ascribe unto the LORD the glory 
due unto His name; 

Bring an offering, and come before 
Him; 

Worship the LORD in the beauty of 
holiness. 

30Tremble before Him, all the earth; 

The world also is established that it 
cannot be moved. 

31Let the heavens be glad, and let 
the earth rejoice; 

And let them say among the nations: 
‘The LORD reigneth.’ 

32Let the sea roar, and the fulness 
thereof; 

Let the field exult, and all that is 
therein; 

33Then shall the trees of the wood 
sing for joy, 

Before the LORD, for He is come to 
judge the earth. 

 

34O give thanks unto the LORD; for 
He is good; 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

35And say ye: ‘Save us, O God of 
our salvation, 

And gather us together and deliver 
us from the nations, 

That we may give thanks unto Thy 
holy name, 

That we may triumph in Thy 
praise.’ 

36Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, 

From everlasting even to 
everlasting. 

And all the people said: ‘Amen, ‘and 
praised the LORD. 

37So he left there, before the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, Asaph and his 
brethren, to minister before the ark 
continually, as every day’s work 
required; 38and Obed-edom with their 
brethren, threescore and eight; Obed-
edom also the son of Jedithun and 
Hosah to be door-keepers; 39and Zadok 
the priest, and his brethren the priests, 
before the tabernacle of the LORD in 
the high place that was at Gibeon, 40to 
offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD 
upon the altar of burnt-offering 
continually morning and evening, even 
according to all that is written in the 
Law of the LORD, which He 
commanded unto Israel; 41and with 
them Heman and Jeduthun, and the 
rest that were chosen, who were 
mentioned by name, to give thanks to 
the LORD, because His mercy endureth 
for ever; 42and with them Heman and 
Jeduthun, to sound aloud with 
trumpets and cymbals, and with 
instruments for the songs of God; and 


the sons of Jeduthun to be at the gate. 
43And all the people departed every 
man to his house; and David returned 
to bless his house. 

And it came to pass, when 
David dwelt in his house, that 
David said to Nathan the prophet: ‘Lo, 
I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark 
of the covenant of the LORD dwelleth 
under curtains.’ 2And Nathan said unto 
David: ‘Do all that is in thy heart; for 
God is with thee.’ 3And it came to pass 
the same night, that the word of God 
came to Nathan, saying: 4’Go and tell 
David My servant: Thus saith the 
LORD: Thou shalt not build Me a house 
to dwell in; 5for I have not dwelt in a 
house since the day that I brought up 
Israel, unto this day; but have [gone] 
from tent to tent, and from one 
tabernacle [to another[. 6In all places 
wherein I have walked among all 
Israel, spoke I a word with any of the 
judges of Israel, whom I commanded 
to feed My people, saying: Why have 
ye not built Me a house of cedar? 
7Now therefore thus shalt thou say 
unto My servant David: Thus saith the 
LORD of hosts: I took thee from the 
sheepcote, from following the sheep, 
that thou shouldest be prince over My 
people Israel; 8and I have been with 
thee whithersoever thou wentest, and 
have cut off all thine enemies from 
before thee; and I will make thee a 
name, like unto the name of the great 
ones that are in the earth. 9And I will 
appoint a place for My people Israel, 
and will plant them, that they may 
dwell in their own place, and be 
disquieted no more; neither shall the 
children of wickedness waste them any 
more, as at the first, 10even from the 
day that I commanded judges to be 
over My people Israel; and I will 
subdue all thine enemies. Moreover I 
tell thee that the LORD will build thee a 
house. 11And it shall come to pass, 
when thy days are fulfilled that thou 
must go to be with thy fathers, that I 
will set up thy seed after thee, who 
shall be of thy sons; and I will 
establish his kingdom. 12He shall build 
Me a house, and I will establish his 
throne for ever. 13I will be to him for a 
father, and he shall be to Me for a son; 
and I will not take My mercy away 
from him, as I took it from him that 
was before thee; 14but I will settle him 
in My house and in My kingdom for 
ever; and his throne shall be 
established for ever.’ 15According to 
all these words, and according to all 
this vision, so did Nathan speak unto 
David. 

16Then David the king went in, and 
sat before the LORD; and he said: ‘Who 
am I, O LORD God, and what is my 
house, that Thou hast brought me thus 
far? 17And this was a small thing in 
Thine eyes, O God; but Thou hast 
spoken of Thy servant’s house for a 
great while to come, and hast regarded 
me after the manner of a man of high 
degree, O LORD God. 18What can 
David say yet more unto Thee 
concerning the honour which is done 
to Thy servant? for Thou knowest Thy 
17 




servant. 19O LORD, for Thy servant’s 
sake, and according to Thine own 
heart, hast Thou wrought all this 
greatness, to make known all these 
great things. 20O LORD, there is none 
like Thee, neither is there any God 
beside Thee, according to all that we 
have heard with our ears. 21And who is 
like Thy people Israel, a nation one in 
the earth, whom God went to redeem 
unto Himself for a people, to make 
Thee a name by great and tremendous 
things, in driving out nations from 
before Thy people, whom Thou didst 
redeem out of Egypt. 22For Thy people 
Israel didst Thou make Thine own 
people for ever; and Thou, LORD, 
becamest their God. 23And now, O 
LORD, let the word that Thou hast 
spoken concerning Thy servant, and 
concerning his house, be established 
for ever, and do as Thou hast spoken. 
24Yea, let it be established, and let Thy 
name be magnified for ever, that it 
may be said: The LORD of hosts is the 
God of Israel, even a God to Israel; 
and the house of David Thy servant 
shall be established before Thee. 25For 
Thou, O my God, hast revealed to Thy 
servant that Thou wilt build him a 
house; therefore hath Thy servant 
taken heart to pray before Thee. 26And 
now, O LORD, Thou alone art God, and 
hast promised this good thing unto 
Thy servant; 27and now it hath pleased 
Thee to bless the house of Thy servant, 
that it may continue for ever before 
Thee; for Thou, O LORD, hast blessed, 
and so let [Thy servant] be blessed for 
ever.’ 

And after this it came to pass, 
that David smote the 
Philistines, and subdued them, and 
took Gath and its towns out of the 
hand of the Philistines. 

2And he smote Moab; and the 
Moabites became servants to David, 
and brought presents. 

3And David smote Hadarezer king 
of Zobah by Hamath, as he went to 
establish his dominion at the river 
Euphrates. 4And David took from him 
a thousand chariots, and seven 
thousand horsemen, and twenty 
thousand footmen; and David houghed 
all the chariot horses, but reserved of 
them for a hundred chariots. 5And 
when the Arameans of Damascus 
came to succour Hadarezer king of 
Zobah, David smote of the Arameans 
two and twenty thousand men. 6Then 
David put [garrisons] in Aram 
Damascus; and the Arameans became 
servants to David, and brought 
presents. And the LORD gave victory to 
David whithersoever he went. 7And 
David took the shields of gold that 
were on the servants of Hadarezer, and 
brought them to Jerusalem. 8And from 
Tibhath and from Cun, cities of 
Hadarezer, David took very much 
brass, wherewith Solomon made the 
brazen sea, and the pillars, and the 
vessels of brass. 

9And when Tou king of Hamath 
heard that David had smitten all the 
host of Hadarezer king of Zobah, 10he 
18 




sent Hadoram his son to king David, to 
salute him, and to bless him—because 
he had fought against Hadarezer and 
smitten him; for Hadarezer had wars 
with Tou—and [he had with him] all 
manner of vessels of gold and silver 
and brass. 11These also did king David 
dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver 
and the gold that he carried away from 
all the nations; from Edom, and from 
Moab, and from the children of 
Ammon, and from the Philistines, and 
from Amalek. 12Moreover aAbishai the 
son of Zeruiah smote of the Edomites 
in the Valley of Salt eighteen 
thousand. 13And he put garrisons in 
Edom; and all the Edomites became 
servants to David. And the LORD gave 
victory to David whithersoever he 
went. 

a Heb. Abshai, and in xix. 11, 15. 

14And David reigned over all Israel; 
and he executed justice and 
righteousness unto all his people. 
15And Joab the son of Zeruiah was 
over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son 
of Ahilud was recorder. 16And Zadok 
the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the 
son of Abiathar, were priests; and 
Shavsha was scribe; 17and Beniah the 
son of Jehoiada was over the 
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the 
sons of David were chief about the 
king. 

And it came to pass after this, 
that Nahash the king of the 
children of Ammon died, and his son 
reigned in his stead. 2And David said: 

‘l will show kindness unto Hanun the 
son of Nahash, because his father 
showed kindness to me.’ So David 
sent messengers to comfort him 
concerning his father. And David’s 
servants came into the land of the 
children of Ammon to Hanun, to 
comfort him. 3But the princes of the 
children of Ammon said to Hanun: 
‘Thinkest thou that David doth honour 
thy father, that he hath sent comforters 
unto thee? are not his servants come 
unto thee to search, and to overthrow, 
and to spy out the land?’ 4So Hanun 
took David’s servants, and shaved 
them, and cut off their garments in the 
middle, even to their hips, and sent 
them away. 5Then there went certain 
persons, and told David how the men 
were served. And he sent to meet 
them; for the men were greatly 
ashamed. And the king said: ‘Tarry at 
Jericho until your beards be grown, 
and then return.’ 

6And when the children of Ammon 
saw that they had made themselves 
odious to David, Hanun and the 
children of Ammon sent a thousand 
talents of silver to hire them chariots 
and horsemen out of Aram-naharaim, 
and out of Aram-maacah, and out of 
Zobah. 7So they hired them thirty and 
two thousand chariots, and the king of 
Maacah and his people; who came and 
encamped before Medeba. And the 
children of Ammon gathered 
themselves together from their cities, 
and came to battle. 8And when David 
heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the 
19 




host of the mighty men. 9And the 
children of Ammon came out and put 
the battle in array at the gate of the 
city; and the kings that were come 
were by themselves in the field. 

10Now when Joab saw that the 
battle was set against him before and 
behind, he chose of all the choice men 
of Israel, and put them in array against 
the Arameans. 11And the rest of the 
people he committed into the hand of 
Abishai his brother, and they put 
themselves in array against the 
children of Ammon. 12And he said: ‘If 
the Arameans be too strong for me, 
then thou shalt help me; but if the 
children of Ammon be too strong for 
thee, then I will help thee. 13Be of 
good courage, and let us prove strong 
for our people, and for the cities of our 
God; and the LORD do that which 
seemeth Him good.’ 14So Joab and the 
people that were with him drew nigh 
unto the battle to meet the Arameans; 
and they fled before him. 15And when 
the children of Ammon saw that the 
Arameans were fled, they likewise fled 
before Abishai his brother, and entered 
into the city. Then Joab came to 
Jerusalem. 

16And when the Arameans saw that 
they were put to the worse before 
Israel, they sent messengers, and 
brought out the Arameans that were 
beyond the River, with Shophach the 
captain of the host of Hadarezer at 
their head. 17And it was told David; 
and he gathered all Israel together, and 
passed over the Jordan, and came upon 
them, and set the battle in array against 
them. So when David had put the 
battle in array against the Arameans, 
they fought with him. 18And the 
Arameans fled before Israel; and 
David slew of the Arameans the men 
of seven thousand chariots, and forty 
thousand footmen, and killed 
Shophach the captain of the host. 
19And when the servants of Hadarezer 
saw that they were put to the worse 
before Israel, they made peace with 
David, and served him; neither would 
the Arameans help the children of 
Ammon any more. 

And it came to pass, at the 
time of the return of the year, 
at the time when kings go out to battle, 
that Joab led forth the power of the 
army, and wasted the country of the 
children of Ammon, and came and 
besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at 
Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, 
and overthrew it. 2And David took the 
crown of Malcam from off his head, 
and found it to weigh a talent of gold, 
and there were precious stones in it; 
and it was set upon David’s head; and 
he brought forth the spoil of the city, 
exceeding much. 3And he brought 
forth the people that were therein, and 
cut them with saws, and with harrows 
of iron, and with axes. And thus did 
David unto all the cities of the children 
of Ammon. And David and all the 
people returned to Jerusalem. 

4And it came to pass after this, that 
there arose war at Gezer with the 
Philistines; then Sibbecai the 
20 




Hushathite slew Sippai, of the sons of 
the giants; and they were subdued. 
5And there was again war with the 
Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair 
slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the 
Gittite, the staff of whose spear was 
like a weaver’s beam. 6And there was 
again war at Gath, where was a man of 
great stature, whose fingers and toes 
were four and twenty, six [on each 
hand], and six [on each foot]; and he 
also was born unto the giant. 7And 
when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the 
son of Shimea David’s brother slew 
him. 8These were born unto the giant 
in Gath; and they fell by the hand of 
David and by the hand of his servants. 

And Satan stood up against 
Israel, and moved David to 
number Israel. 2And David said to 
Joab and to the princes of the people: 
‘Go, number Israel from Beersheba 
even to Dan; and bring me word, that I 
may know the sum of them.’ 3And 
Joab said: ‘The LORD make His people 
a hundred times so many more as they 
are; but, my lord the king, are they not 
all my lord’s servants? why doth my 
lord require this thing? why will he be 
a cause of guilt unto Israel?’ 
4Nevertheless the king’s word 
prevailed against Joab. Wherefore 
Joab departed and went throughout all 
Israel, and came to Jerusalem. 5And 
Joab gave up the sum of the 
numbering of the people unto David. 
And all they of Israel were a thousand 
thousand and a hundred thousand men 
that drew sword; and Judah was four 
hundred three-score and ten thousand 
men that drew sword. 6But Levi and 
Benjamin he did not number among 
them; for the king’s word was 
abominable to Joab. 

7And God was displeased with this 
thing; therefore He smote Israel. 8And 
David said unto God: ‘I have sinned 
greatly, in that I have done this thing; 
but now, put away, I beseech Thee, the 
iniquity of Thy servant; for I have 
done very foolishly.’ 9And the LORD 
spoke unto Gad, David’s seer, saying: 
10’Go and speak unto David, saying: 
Thus saith the LORD: I offer thee three 
things; choose thee one of them, that I 
may do it unto thee.’ 11So Gad came to 
David, and said unto him: ‘Thus saith 
the LORD: Take which thou wilt: 
12either three years of famine; or three 
months to be swept away before thy 
foes, while the sword of thine enemies 
overtaketh thee; or else three days the 
sword of the LORD, even pestilence in 
the land, and the angel of the LORD 
destroying throughout all the borders 
of Israel. Now therefore consider what 
answer I shall return to Him that sent 
me.’ 13And David said unto Gad: ‘I am 
in a great strait; let me fall now into 
the hand of the LORD, for very great are 
His mercies; and let me not fall into 
the hand of man.’ 

14So the LORD sent a pestilence 
upon Israel; and there fell of Israel 
seventy thousand men. 15And God sent 
an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it; 
and as he was about to destroy, the 
LORD beheld, and He repented Him of 
21 




the evil, and said to the destroying 
angel: ‘It is enough; now stay thy 
hand.’ And the angel of the LORD was 
standing by the threshing-floor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 16And David lifted 
up his eyes, and saw the angel of the 
LORD standing between the earth and 
the heaven, having a drawn sword in 
his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. 
Then David and the elders, clothed in 
sackcloth, fell upon their faces. 17And 
David said unto God: ‘Is it not I that 
commanded the people to be 
numbered? even I it is that have sinned 
and done very wickedly; but these 
sheep, what have they done? let Thy 
hand, I pray Thee, O LORD my God, be 
against me, and against my father’s 
house; but not against Thy people, that 
they should be plagued.’ 

18Then the angel of the LORD 
commanded Gad to say to David, that 
David should go up, and rear an altar 
unto the LORD in the threshing-floor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 19And David went 
up at the saying of Gad, which he 
spoke in the name of the LORD. 20And 
Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; 
and his four sons that were with him 
hid themselves. Now Ornan was 
threshing wheat. 21And as David came 
to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw 
David, and went out of the threshing-
floor, and bowed down to David with 
his face to the ground. 22Then David 
said to Ornan: ‘Give me the place of 
this threshing-floor, that I may build 
thereon an altar unto the LORD; for the 
full price shalt thou give it me; that the 
plague may be stayed from the 
people.’ 23And Ornan said unto David: 
‘Take it to thee, and let my lord the 
king do that which is good in his eyes; 
lo, I give thee the oxen for burnt-
offerings, and the threshing-
instruments for wood, and the wheat 
for the meal-offering; I give it 
all’24And king David said to Ornan: 
‘Nay, but I will verily buy it for the 
full price; for I will not take that which 
is thine for the LORD, nor offer a burnt-
offering without cost.’ 25So David 
gave to Ornan for the place six 
hundred shekels of gold by weight. 
26And David built there an altar unto 
the LORD, and offered burnt-offerings 
and peace-offerings, and called upon 
the LORD; and He answered him from 
heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt-
offering. 27And the LORD commanded 
the angel; and he put up his sword 
back into the sheath thereof. 

28At that time, when David saw that 
the LORD had answered him in the 
threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, 
then he sacrificed there. 29For the 
tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses 
made in the wilderness, and the altar 
of burnt-offering, were at that time in 
the high place at Gibeon. 30But David 
could not go before it to inquire of 
God; for he was terrified because of 
the sword of the angel of the LORD. 

Then David said: ‘This is the 
house of the LORD God, and 
this is the altar of burnt-offering for 
Israel.’ 
22 




2And David commanded to gather 
together the strangers that were in the 
land of Israel; and he set masons to 
hew wrought stones to build the house 
of God. 3And David prepared iron in 
abundance for the nails for the doors 
of the gates, and for the couplings; and 
brass in abundance without weight; 
4and cedar-trees without number; for 
the Zidonians and they of Tyre 
brought cedar-trees in abundance to 
David. 5And David said: ‘Solomon my 
son is young and tender, and the house 
that is to be builded for the LORD must 
be exceeding magnificent, of fame and 
of glory throughout all countries; I will 
therefore make preparation for him.’ 
So David prepared abundantly before 
his death. 

6Then He called for Solomon his 
son, and charged him to build a house 
for the LORD, the God of Israel. 7And 
David said to Solomon: ‘My son, as 
for me, it was in my heart to build a 
house unto the name of the LORD my 
God. 8But the word of the LORD came 
to me, saying: Thou hast shed blood 
abundantly, and hast made great wars; 
thou shalt not build a house unto My 
name, because thou hast shed much 
blood upon the earth in My sight. 
9Behold, a son shall be born to thee, 
who shall be a man of rest; and I will 
give him rest from all his enemies 
round about; for his name shall be 
aSolomon, and I will give peace and 
quietness unto Israel in his days. 10He 

a That is, Peaceful. 

shall build a house for My name; and 
he shall be to Me for a son, and I will 
be to him for a father; and I will 
establish the throne of his kingdom 
over Israel for ever. 11Now, my son, 
the LORD be with thee; and prosper 
thou, and build the house of the LORD 
thy God, as He hath spoken 
concerning thee. 12Only the LORD give 
thee discretion and understanding, and 
give thee charge concerning Israel; 
that so thou mayest keep the law of the 
LORD thy God. 13Then shalt thou 
prosper, if thou observe to do the 
statutes and the ordinances which the 
LORD charged Moses with concerning 
Israel; be strong, and of good courage; 
fear not, neither be dismayed. 14Now, 
behold, in my straits I have prepared 
for the house of the LORD a hundred 
thousand talents of gold, and a 
thousand thousand talents of silver; 
and of brass and iron without weight, 
for it is in abundance; timber also and 
stone have I prepared; and thou mayest 
add thereto. 15Moreover there are 
workmen with thee in abundance, 
hewers and workers of stone and 
timber, and all men that are skilful in 
any manner of work; 16of the gold, the 
silver, and the brass, and the iron, 
there is no number. Arise and be 
doing, and the LORD be with thee.’ 

17David also commanded all the 
princes of Israel to help Solomon his 
son: 18’Is not the LORD your God with 
you? and hath He not given you rest 
on every side? for He hath delivered 
the inhabitants of the land into my 


hand; and the land is subdued before 
the LORD, and before His people. 
19Now set your heart and your soul to 
seek after the LORD your God; arise 
therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of 
the LORD God, to bring the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, and the holy 
vessels of God, into the house that is to 
be built to the name of the LORD.’ 

Now David was old and full of 
days; and he made Solomon 
his son king over Israel. 2And he 
gathered together all the princes of 
Israel, with the priests and the Levites. 
3And the Levites were numbered from 
thirty years old and upward; and their 
number by their polls, man by man, 
was thirty and eight thousand. 4Of 
these, twenty and four thousand were 
to oversee the work of the house of the 
LORD; and six thousand were officers 
and judges; 5and four thousand were 
doorkeepers; and four thousand 
praised the LORD ‘with the instruments 
which I made to praise therewith.’ 

6And David divided them into 
courses according to the sons of Levi: 
Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 7Of the 
Gershonites: Ladan, and Shimei. 8The 
sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, and 
Zetham, and Joel, three. 9The sons of 
Shimei: Shelomith, and Haziel, and 
Haran, three. These were the heads of 
the fathers’houses of Ladan. 10And the 
sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, and 
Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the 
sons of Shimei. 11And Jahath was the 
chief, and Zizah the second; but Jeush 
and Beriah had not many sons; 
therefore they became a fathers’house 
in one reckoning. 

12The sons of Kohath: Amram, 
Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four. 13The 
sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; 
and Aaron was separated, that he 
should be sanctified as most holy, he 
and his sons for ever, to offer before 
the LORD, to minister unto Him, and to 
bless in His name for ever. 14But as for 
Moses the man of God, his sons are 
named among the tribe of Levi. 15The 
sons of Moses: Gershom, and Eliezer. 
16The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the 
chief. 17And the sons of Eliezer were: 
Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had 
no other sons; but the sons of 
Rehabiah were very many. 18The sons 
of Izhar: Shelomith the chief. 19The 
sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, 
Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, 
and Jekameam the fourth. 20The sons 
of Uzziel: Micah the chief, and Isshiah 
the second. 

21The sons of Merari: Mahli, and 
Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar, 
and Kish. 22And Eleazar died, and had 
no sons, but daughters only; and their 
brethren the sons of Kish took them to 
wife. 23The sons of Mushi: Mahli, and 
Eder, and Jeremoth, three. 

24These were the sons of Levi after 
their fathers’houses, even the heads of 
the fathers’houses, according to their 
muster, in the number of names by 
their polls, who did the work for the 
service of the house of the LORD, from 
twenty years old and upward. 25For 
David said: ‘The LORD, the God of 
23 




Israel, hath given rest unto His people, 
and He dwelleth in Jerusalem for ever; 
26and also the Levites shall no more 
have need to carry the tabernacle and 
all the vessels of it for the service 
thereof.’ 27For by the last ordinances 
of David the sons of Levi were 
numbered from twenty years old and 
upward. 28For their station was at the 
side of the sons of Aaron for the 
service of the house of the LORD, in the 
courts, and in the chambers, and in the 
purifying of all holy things, even the 
work of the service of the house of 
God; 29for the showbread also, and for 
the fine flour for a meal-offering, 
whether of unleavened wafers, or of 
that which is baked on the griddle, or 
of that which is soaked, and for all 
manner of measure and size; 30and to 
stand every morning to thank and 
praise the LORD, and likewise at even; 
31and to offer all burnt-offerings unto 
the LORD, on the sabbaths, on the new 
moons, and in the appointed seasons, 
in number according to the ordinance 
concerning them, continually, before 
the LORD; 32and that they should keep 
the charge of the tent of meeting, and 
the charge of the holy place, and the 
charge of the sons of Aaron their 
brethren, for the service of the house 
of the LORD. 

And the courses of the sons of 
Aaron were these. The sons of 
Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and 
Ithamar. 2But Nadab and Abihu died 
before their father, and had no 
children; therefore Eleazar and 
Ithamar executed the priest’s office. 
3And David with Zadok of the sons of 
Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of 
Ithamar, divided them according to 
their ordering in their service. 4And 
there were more chief men found of 
the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of 
Ithamar; and thus were they divided: 
of the sons of Eleazar there were 
sixteen, heads of fathers’houses; and 
of the sons of Ithamar, according to 
their fathers’houses, eight. 5Thus were 
they divided by lot, one sort with 
another; for they were princes of the 
sanctuary and princes of God, both of 
the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of 
Ithamar. 6And Shemaiah the son of 
Nethanel the scribe, who was of the 
Levites, wrote them in the presence of 
the king, and the princes, and Zadok 
the priest, and Ahimelech the son of 
Abiathar, and the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the priests and of the 
Levites: one father’s house being taken 
for Eleazar, and proportionately for 
Ithamar. 

7Now the first lot came forth to 
Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah; 8the 
third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim; 
9the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to 
Mijamin; 10the seventh to Hakkoz, the 
eighth to Abijah; 11the ninth to Jeshua, 
the tenth to Shecaniah; 12the eleventh 
to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim; 13the 
thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to 
Jeshebeab; 14the fifteenth to Bilgah, 
the sixteenth to Immer; 15the 
seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to 
Happizzez; 16the nineteenth to 
24 




Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel; 
17the one and twentieth to Jachin, the 
two and twentieth to Gamul; 18the 
three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four 
and twentieth to Maaziah. 19These 
were the orderings of them in their 
service, to come into the house of the 
LORD according to the ordinance given 
unto them by the hand of Aaron their 
father, as the LORD, the God of Israel, 
had commanded him. 

20And of the rest of the sons of 
Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; 
of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah. 21Of 
Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, 
Isshiah the chief. 22Of the Izharites, 
Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, 
Jahath. 23And Benai, Jeriah, Amariah 
the second, Jahaziel the third, 
Jekameam the fourth. 24The sons of 
Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, 
Shamir. 25The brother of Micah, 
Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, 
Zechariah. 26The sons of Merari: Mahli 
and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah, his 
son, 27even the sons of Merari through 
Jaaziah his son: Shoham, and Zaccur, 
and Ibri. 28Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had 
no sons. 29Of Kish: the sons of Kish, 
Jerahmeel. 30And the sons of Mushi: 
Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These 
were the sons of the Levites after their 
fathers’houses. 31These likewise cast 
lots even as their brethren the sons of 
Aaron in the presence of David the 
king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and 
the heads of the fathers’houses of the 
priests and of the Levites; the 
fathers’houses of the chief even as 
those of his younger brother. 

Moreover David and the 
captains of the host separated 
for the service certain of the sons of 
Asaph, and of Heman, and of 
Jeduthun, who should prophesy with 
harps, with psalteries, and with 
cymbals; and the number of them that 
did the work according to their service 
was: 2of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, 
and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and 
Asarelah, the sons of Asaph; under the 
hand of Asaph, who prophesied 
according to the direction of the king. 
3Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun: 
Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, 
Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six; under 
the hands of their father Jeduthun with 
the harp, who prophesied in giving 
thanks and praising the LORD. 4Of 
Heman: the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, 
Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and 
Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, 
Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer, 
Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, 
Mahazioth; 5all these were the sons of 
Heman the king’s seer in the things 
pertaining to God, to lift up the horn. 
And God gave to Heman fourteen sons 
and three daughters. 6All these were 
under the hands of their fathers for 
song in the house of the LORD, with 
cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the 
service of the house of God, according 
to the direction of the king—Asaph, 
Jeduthun, and Heman. 7And the 
number of them, with their brethren 
that were instructed in singing unto the 
25 




LORD, even all that were skilful, was 
two hundred fourscore and eight. 8And 
they cast lots ward against [ward], as 
well the small as the great, the teacher 
as the scholar. 

9Now the first lot came forth for 
Asaph to Joseph; 

The second to Gedaliah; he and his 
brethren and sons were twelve; 

10The third to Zaccur, his sons and 
his brethren, twelve; 

11The fourth to Izri, his sons and his 
brethren, twelve; 

12The fifth to Nethaniah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

13The sixth to Bukkiah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

14The seventh to Jesarelah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

15The eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

16The ninth to Mattaniah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

17The tenth to Shimei, his sons and 
his brethren, twelve; 

18The eleventh to Azarel, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

19The twelfth to Hashabiah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

20For the thirteenth, Shubael, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

21For the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

22For the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

23For the sixteenth to Hananiah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

24For the seventeenth to 
Joshbekashah, his sons and his 
brethren, twelve; 

25For the eighteenth to Hanani, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 2 

6For the nineteenth to Mallothi, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

27For the twentieth to Eliathah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

28For the one and twentieth to 
Hothir, his sons and his brethren, 
twelve; 

29For the two and twentieth to 
Giddalti, his sons and his brethren, 
twelve; 

30For the three and twentieth to 
Mahazioth, his sons and his brethren, 
twelve; 

31For the four and twentieth to 
Romamti-ezer, his sons and his 
brethren, twelve. 

 

For the courses of the 
doorkeepers: of the Korahites: 
Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the 
sons of Asaph. 2And Meshelemiah had 
sons: Zechariah the first-born, Jediael 
the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel 
the fourth; 3Elam the fifth, Jehohanan 
the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh. 4And 
Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the 
first-born, Jehozabad the second, Joah 
the third, and Sacar the fourth, and 
Nethanel the fifth; 5Ammiel the sixth, 
Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the 
eighth; for God blessed him. 6Also 
unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, 
that ruled over the house of their 
father; for they were mighty men of 
26 




valour. 7The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, 
and Rephael and Obed and Elzabad his 
brethren, valiant men; Elihu also, and 
Semachiah. 8All these were of the sons 
of Obed-edom: they and their sons and 
their brethren, able men in strength for 
the service; threescore and two of 
Obed-edom. 9And Meshelemiah had 
sons and brethren, valiant men, 
eighteen. 10Also Hosah, of the children 
of Merari, had sons: Shimri the 
chief—for though he was not the 
firstborn, yet his father made him 
chief—11Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah 
the third, Zechariah the fourth; all the 
sons and brethren of Hosah were 
thirteen. 

12These courses of the doorkeepers, 
even the chief men, had wards over 
against their brethren, to minister in 
the house of the LORD. 13And they cast 
lots, as well the small as the great, 
according to their fathers’houses, for 
every gate. 14And the lot eastward fell 
to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his 
son, a discreet counsellor, they cast 
lots; and his lot came out northward. 
15To Obed-edom southward; and to his 
sons the Storehouse. 16To Shuppim 
and Hosah westward, by the gate of 
Shallecheth, at the causeway that 
goeth up, ward against ward. 
17Eastward were six Levites, 
northward four a day, southward four a 
day, and for the Storehouse two and 
two. 18For the Precinct westward, four 
at the causeway, and two at the 
Precinct. 19These were the courses of 
the doorkeepers; of the sons of the 
Korahites, and of the sons of Merari. 

20And of the Levites, Ahijah was 
over the treasuries of the house of 
God, and over the treasuries of the 
hallowed things. 21The sons of Ladan, 
the sons of the Gershonites belonging 
to Ladan, the heads of the 
fathers’houses belonging to Ladan the 
Gershonite: Jehieli. 22The sons of 
Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his brother, 
over the treasuries of the house of the 
LORD. 23Of the Amramites, of the 
Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the 
Uzzielites; 24Shebuel the son of 
Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler 
over the treasuries. 25And his brethren 
by Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, and 
Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, 
and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his 
son. 26This aShelomith and his brethren 
were over all the treasuries of the 
dedicated things, which David the 
king, and the heads of the 
fathers’houses, the captains over 
thousands and hundreds, and the 
captains of the host, had dedicated. 
27Out of the spoil won in battles did 
they dedicate to repair the house of the 
LORD. 28And all that Samuel the seer, 
and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner 
the son of Ner, and Joab the son of 
Zeruiah, had dedicated; whosoever had 
dedicated any thing, it was under the 
hand of Shelomith, and of his brethren. 

a Heb. Shelomoth. 

29Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and 
his sorts were for the outward business 


over Israel, for officers and judges. 
30Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his 
brethren, men of valour, a thousand 
and seven hundred, had the oversight 
of Israel beyond the Jordan westward; 
for all the business of the LORD, and 
for the service of the king. 31Of the 
Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even 
of the Hebronites, according to their 
generations by fathers’houses. In the 
fortieth year of the reign of David they 
were sought for, and there were found 
among them mighty men of valour at 
Jazer of Gilead. 32And his brethren, 
men of valour, were two thousand and 
seven hundred, heads of 
fathers’houses, whom king David 
made overseers over the Reubenites, 
and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of 
the Manassites, for every matter 
pertaining to God, and for the affairs 
of the king. 

Now the children of Israel 
after their number, to wit, the 
heads of fathers’houses and the 
captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
and their officers that served the king, 
in any matter of the courses which 
came in and went out month by month 
throughout all the months of the year, 
of every course were twenty and four 
thousand. 2Over the first course for the 
first month was Jashobeam the son of 
Zabdiel; and in his course were twenty 
and four thousand. 3Of the children of 
Perez was he, and the chief of all the 
captains of the host for the first month. 
4And over the course of the second 
month was Dodai the Ahohite, and his 
course, and Mikloth the ruler; and in 
his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 5The third captain of the 
host for the third month was Benaiah 
the son of Jehoiada, the priest, chief; 
and in his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 6This is that Benaiah, who 
was the mighty man of the thirty, and 
over the thirty; and of his course was 
Ammizabad his son. 7The fourth 
captain for the fourth month was 
Asahel the brother of Joab, and 
Zebadiah his son after him; and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 
8The fifth captain for the fifth month 
was Shamhuth the Izrahite; and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 
9The sixth captain for the sixth month 
was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; 
and in his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 10The seventh captain for the 
seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, 
of the children of Ephraim; and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 
11The eighth captain for the eighth 
month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of 
the Zerahites; and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 12The ninth 
captain for the ninth month was 
Abiezer the Anathothite, of the 
Benjamites; and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 13The tenth 
captain for the tenth month was 
Mahrai, the Netophathite, of the 
Zerahites; and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 14The 
eleventh captain for the eleventh 
month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of 
the children of Ephraim; and in his 
27 




course were twenty and four thousand. 
15The twelfth captain for the twelfth 
month was Heldai the Netophathite, of 
Othniel; and in his course were twenty 
and four thousand. 

16Furthermore over the tribes of 
Israel: of the Reubenites was Eliezer 
the son of Zichri the ruler; of the 
Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of 
Maacah; 17of Levi, Hashabiah the son 
of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok; 18of 
Judah, Elihu, one of the brethren of 
David; of Issachar, Omri the son of 
Michael; 19of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the 
son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jerimoth 
the son of Azriel; 20of the children of 
Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; 
of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the 
son of Pedaiah; 21of the half-tribe of 
Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of 
Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the 
son of Abner; 22of Dan, Azarel the son 
of Jeroham. These were the captains of 
the tribes of Israel. 23But David took 
not the number of them from twenty 
years old and under; because the LORD 
had said He would increase Israel like 
to the stars of heaven. 24Joab the son of 
Zeruiah began to number, but finished 
not; and there came wrath for this 
upon Israel; neither was the number 
put into the account in the chronicles 
of king David. 

25And over the king’s treasuries 
was Azmaveth the son of Adiel; and 
over the treasuries in the fields, in the 
cities, and in the villages, and in the 
towers, was Jonathan the son of 
Uzziah; 26and over them that did the 
work of the field for tillage of the 
ground was Ezri the son of Chelub; 
27and over the vineyards was Shimei 
the Ramathite; and over the increase of 
the vineyards for the wine-cellars was 
Zabdi the Shiphmite; 28and over the 
olive-trees and the sycomore-trees that 
were in the Lowland was Baal-hanan 
the Gederite; and over the cellars of oil 
was Joash; 29and over the herds that 
fed in Sharon was Shirtai the 
Sharonite; and over the herds that were 
in the valleys was Shaphat the son of 
Adlai; 30and over the camels was Obil 
the Ishmaelite; and over the asses was 
Jehdeiah the Meronothite; 31and over 
the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite. All 
these were the rulers of the substance 
which was king David’s. 

32Also Jonathan David’s uncle was 
a counsellor, a man of understanding, 
and a scribe; and Jehiel the son of 
Hachmoni was with the king’s sons; 
33and Ahithophel was the king’s 
counsellor; and Hushai the Archite 
was the king’s friend; 34and after 
Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of 
Benaiah, and Abiathar; and the captain 
of the king’s host was Joab. 

And David assembled all the 
princes of Israel, the princes of 
the tribes, and the captains of the 
companies that served the king by 
course, and the captains of thousands, 
and the captains of hundreds, and the 
rulers over all the substance and cattle 
of the king and of his sons, with the 
officers, and the mighty men, even all 
the mighty men of valour, unto 
28 




Jerusalem. 2Then David the king stood 
up upon his feet, and said: ‘Hear me, 
my brethren, and my people; as for 
me, it was in my heart to build a house 
of rest for the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD, and for the footstool of our 
God; and I had made ready for the 
building. 3But God said unto me: Thou 
shalt not build a house for My name, 
because thou art a man of war, and 
hast shed blood. 4Howbeit the LORD, 
the God of Israel, chose me out of all 
the house of my father to be king over 
Israel for ever; for He hath chosen 
Judah to be prince, and in the house of 
Judah, the house of my father, and 
among the sons of my father He took 
pleasure in me to make me king over 
all Israel; 5and of all my sons—for the 
LORD hath given me many sons—He 
hath chosen Solomon my son to sit 
upon the throne of the kingdom of the 
LORD over Israel. 6And He said unto 
me: Solomon thy son, he shall build 
My house and My courts; for I have 
chosen him to be to Me for a son, and I 
will be to him for a father. 7And I will 
establish his kingdom for ever, if he be 
constant to do My commandments and 
Mine ordinances, as at this day. 8Now 
therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the 
congregation of the LORD, and in the 
hearing of our God, observe and seek 
out all the commandments of the LORD 
your God; that ye may possess this 
good land, and leave it for an 
inheritance to your children after you 
for ever. 

9And thou, Solomon my son, know 
thou the God of thy father, and serve 
Him with a whole heart and with a 
willing mind; for the LORD searcheth 
all hearts, and understandeth all the 
imaginations of the thoughts; if thou 
seek Him, He will be found of thee; 
but if thou forsake Him, He will cast 
thee off for ever. 10Take heed now; for 
the LORD hath chosen thee to build a 
house for the sanctuary; be strong, and 
do it.’ 

11Then David gave to Solomon his 
son the pattern of the porch [of the 
temple], and of the houses thereof, and 
of the treasuries thereof, and of the 
upper rooms thereof, and of the inner 
chambers thereof, and of the place of 
the ark-cover; 12and the pattern of all 
that he had by the spirit, for the courts 
of the house of the LORD, and for all 
the chambers round about, for the 
treasuries of the house of God, and for 
the treasuries of the hallowed things; 
13also for the courses of the priests and 
the Levites, and for all the work of the 
service of the house of the LORD, and 
for all the vessels of service in the 
house of the LORD: 14of gold by weight 
for the vessels of gold, for all vessels 
of every kind of service; of silver for 
all the vessels of silver by weight, for 
all vessels of every kind of service; 
15by weight also for the candlesticks of 
gold, and for the lamps thereof, of 
gold, by weight for every candlestick 
and for the lamps thereof; and for the 
candlesticks of silver, silver by weight 
for every candlestick and for the lamps 


thereof, according to the use of every 
candlestick; 16and the gold by weight 
for the tables of showbread, for every 
table; and silver for the tables of silver; 
17and the flesh-hooks, and the basins, 
and the jars, of pure gold; and for the 
golden bowls by weight for every 
bowl; and for the silver bowls by 
weight for every bowl; 18and for the 
altar of incense refined gold by 
weight; and gold for the pattern of the 
chariot, even the cherubim, that spread 
out their wings, and covered the ark of 
the covenant of the LORD. 19’All this 
[do I give thee] in writing, as the LORD 
hath made me wise by His hand upon 
me, even all the works of this pattern.’ 

20And David said to Solomon his 
son: ‘Be strong and of good courage, 
and do it; fear not, nor be dismayed; 
for the LORD God, even my God, is 
with thee; He will not fail thee, nor 
forsake thee, until all the work for the 
service of the house of the LORD be 
finished. 21And, behold, there are the 
courses of the priests and the Levites, 
for all the service of the house of God; 
and there shall be with thee in all 
manner of work every willing man that 
hath skill, for any manner of service; 
also the captains and all the people 
will be wholly at thy commandment.’ 

And David the king said unto 
all the congregation: ‘Solomon 
my son, whom alone God hath chosen, 
is yet young and tender, and the work 
is great; for the palace is not for man, 
but for the LORD God. 2Now I have 
prepared with all my might for the 
house of my God the gold for the 
things of gold, and the silver for the 
things of silver, and the brass for the 
things of brass, the iron for the things 
of iron, and wood for the things of 
wood; onyx stones, and stones to be 
set, glistering stones, and of divers 
colours, and all manner of precious 
stones, and marble stones in 
abundance. 3Moreover also, because I 
have set my affection on the house of 
my God, seeing that I have a treasure 
of mine own of gold and silver, I give 
it unto the house of my God, over and 
above all that I have prepared for the 
holy house, 4even three thousand 
talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, 
and seven thousand talents of refined 
silver, wherewith to overlay the walls 
of the houses; 5of gold for the things of 
gold, and of silver for the things of 
silver, and for all manner of work to be 
made by the hands of artificers. Who 
then offereth willingly to consecrate 
himself this day unto the LORD?’ 

6Then the princes of the 
fathers’houses, and the princes of the 
tribes of Israel, and the captains of 
thousands and of hundreds, with the 
rulers over the king’s work, offered 
willingly; 7and they gave for the 
service of the house of God of gold 
five thousand talents and ten thousand 
darics, and of silver ten thousand 
talents, and of brass eighteen thousand 
talents, and of iron a hundred thousand 
talents. 8And they with whom precious 
stones were found gave them to the 
treasure of the house of the LORD, 
29 




under the hand of Jehiel the 
Gershonite. 9Then the people rejoiced, 
for that they offered willingly, because 
with a whole heart they offered 
willingly to the LORD; and David the 
king also rejoiced with great joy. 

10Wherefore David blessed the 
LORD before all the congregation; and 
David said: ‘Blessed be Thou, O LORD, 
the God of Israel our father, for ever 
and ever. 11Thine, O LORD, is the 
greatness, and the power, and the 
glory, and the victory, and the majesty; 
for all that is in the heaven and in the 
earth is Thine; Thine is the kingdom, 
O LORD, and Thou art exalted as head 
above all. 12Both riches and honour 
come of Thee, and Thou rulest over 
all; and in Thy hand is power and 
might; and in Thy hand it is to make 
great, and to give strength unto all. 
13Now therefore, our God, we thank 
Thee, and praise Thy glorious name. 
14But who am I, and what is my 
people, that we should be able to offer 
so willingly after this sort? for all 
things come of Thee, and of Thine 
own have we given Thee. 15For we are 
strangers before Thee, and sojourners, 
as all our fathers were: our days on the 
earth are as a shadow, and there is no 
abiding. 16O LORD our God, all this 
store that we have prepared to build 
Thee a house for Thy holy name 
cometh of Thy hand, and is all Thine 
own. 17I know also, my God, that Thou 
triest the heart, and hast pleasure in 
uprightness. As for me, in the 
uprightness of my heart I have 
willingly offered all these things; and 
now have I seen with joy Thy people, 
that are present here, offer willingly 
unto Thee. 18O LORD, the God of 
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our 
fathers, keep this for ever, even the 
imagination of the thoughts of the 
heart of Thy people, and direct their 
heart unto Thee; 19and give unto 
Solomon my son a whole heart, to 
keep Thy commandments, Thy 
testimonies, and Thy statutes, and to 
do all these things, and to build the 
palace, for which I have made, 
provision.’ 

20And David said to all the 
congregation: ‘Now bless the LORD 
your God.’ And all the congregation 
blessed the LORD, the God of their 
fathers, and bowed down their heads, 
and prostrated themselves before the 
LORD, and before the king. 21And they 
sacrificed sacrifices unto the LORD, and 
offered burnt-offerings unto the LORD, 
on the morrow after that day, even a 
thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, 
and a thousand lambs, with their drink-
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance 
for all Israel; 22and did eat and drink 
before the LORD on that day with great 
gladness. And they made Solomon the 
son of David king the second time, and 
anointed him unto the LORD to be 
prince, and Zadok to be priest. 23Then 
Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD 
as king instead of David his father, and 
prospered; and all Israel hearkened to 
him. 24And all the princes, and the 
mighty men, and all the sons likewise 


of king David, submitted themselves 
unto Solomon the king. 25And the 
LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly 
in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed 
upon him such royal majesty as had 
not been on any king before him in 
Israel. 

26Now David the son of Jesse 
reigned over all Israel. 27And the time 
that he reigned over Israel was forty 
years: seven years reigned he in 
Hebron, and thirty and three years 
reigned he in Jerusalem. 28And he died 
in a good old age, full of days, riches, 
and honour; and Solomon his son 
reigned in his stead. 29Now the acts of 
David the king, first and last, behold, 
they are written in the words of 
Samuel the seer, and in the words of 
Nathan the prophet, and in the words 
of Gad the seer; 30with all his reign and 
his might, and the times that went over 
him, and over Israel, and over all the 
kingdoms of the countries. 

 

 

 

 




. ..... .... 

SECOND CHRONICLES 

 

AND SOLOMON the son of David 
was strengthened in his kingdom, 
and the LORD his God was with him, 
and magnified him exceedingly. 2And 
Solomon spoke unto all Israel, to the 
captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
and to the judges, and to every prince 
in all Israel, the heads of the 
fathers’houses. 3So Solomon, and all 
the congregation with him, went to the 
high place that was at Gibeon; for 
there was the tent of meeting of God, 
which Moses the servant of the LORD 
had made in the wilderness. 4But the 
ark of God had David brought up from 
Kiriath-jearim to the place that David 
had prepared for it; for he had pitched 
a tent for it at Jerusalem. 5Moreover 
the brazen altar, that Bezalel the son of 
Uri, the son of Hur, had made, had 
been put before the tabernacle of the 
LORD; and Solomon and the 
congregation sought unto it. 6And 
Solomon offered there, upon the 
brazen altar before the LORD, which 
was at the tent of meeting, he offered a 
thousand burnt-offerings upon it. 

7In that night did God, appear unto 
Solomon, and said unto him: ‘Ask 
what I shall give thee.’ 8And Solomon 
said unto God: ‘Thou hast shown great 
kindness unto David my father, and 
hast made me king in his stead. 9Now, 
O LORD God, let Thy promise unto 
David my father be established; for 
Thou hast made me king over a people 
like the dust of the earth in multitude. 
10Give me now wisdom and 
knowledge, that I may go out and 
come in before this people; for who 
can judge this Thy people, that is so 
great?’ 11And God said to Solomon: 
‘Because this was in thy heart, and 
thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or 
honour, nor the life of them that hate 
thee, neither yet hast asked long life, 
but hast asked wisdom and knowledge 
for thyself, that thou mayest judge My 
people, over whom I have made thee 
king; 12wisdom and knowledge is 
granted unto thee, and I will give thee 
riches, and wealth, and honour, such as 
none of the kings have had that have 
been before thee, neither shall there 
any after thee have the like.’ 13So 
Solomon came [from his journey] to 
the high place that was at Gibeon, 
from before the tent of meeting, unto 
Jerusalem; and he reigned over Israel. 

14And Solomon gathered chariots 
and horsemen; and he had a thousand 
and four hundred chariots, and twelve 
thousand horsemen, that he placed in 
the chariot cities, and with the king at 
Jerusalem. 15And the king made silver 
and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones, 
and cedars made he to be as the 
sycamore-trees that are in the 
Lowland, for abundance. 16And the 
horses which Solomon had were 
1 




brought out of Egypt; also out of 
Keve, the king’s merchants buying 
them of the men of Keve at a price. 
17And they fetched up, and brought out 
of Egypt a chariot for six hundred 
shekels of silver, and a horse for a 
hundred and fifty; and so for all the 
kings of the Hittites, and the kings of 
Aram, did they bring them out by their 
means. 

18Now Solomon purposed to build a 
house for the name of the LORD, and a 

house for his kingdom. 1And 
Solomon counted out threescore 
and ten thousand men to bear burdens, 
and fourscore thousand men that were 
hewers in the mountains, and three 
thousand and six hundred to oversee 
them. 2And Solomon sent to Huram 
the king of Tyre, saying: ‘As thou 
didst deal with David my father, and 
didst send him cedars to build him a 
house to dwell therein [, even so deal 
with me]. 3Behold, I am about to build 
a house for the name of the LORD my 
God, to dedicate it to Him, and to burn 
before Him incense of sweet spices, 
and for the continual showbread, and 
for the burnt-offerings morning and 
evening, on the sabbaths, and on the 
new moons, and on the appointed 
seasons of the LORD our God. This is 
an ordinance for ever to Israel. 4And 
the house which I build is great; for 
great is our God above all gods. 5But 
who is able to build Him a house, 
seeing the heaven and the heaven of 
heavens cannot contain Him? who am 
I then, that I should build Him a house, 
save only to offer before Him? 6Now 
therefore send me a man skilful to 
work in gold, and in silver, and in 
brass, and in iron, and in purple, and 
crimson, and blue, and that hath skill 
to grave all manner of gravings, to be 
with the skilful men that are with me 
in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom 
David my father did provide. 7Send 
me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and 
sandal-wood, out of Lebanon; for I 
know that thy servants have skill to cut 
timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my 
servants shall be with thy servants, 
8even to prepare me timber in 
abundance; for the house which I am 
about to build shall be great and 
wonderful. 9And, behold, I will give to 
thy servants, the hewers that cut 
timber, twenty thousand measures of 
beaten wheat, and twenty thousand 
measures of barley, and twenty 
thousand baths of wine, and twenty 
thousand baths of oil.’ 

10Then Huram the king of Tyre 
answered in writing, which he sent to 
Solomon: ‘Because the LORD loveth 
His people, He hath made thee king 
over them.’ 11Huram said moreover: 
‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, that made heaven and earth, 
who hath given to David the king a 
wise son, endued with discretion and 
understanding, that should build a 
house for the LORD, and a house for his 
kingdom. 12And now I have sent a 
skilful man, endued with 
understanding, even Huram my master 
craftsman, 13the son of a woman of the 
2 




daughters of Dan, and his father was a 
man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, 
and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, 
and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in 
fine linen, and in crimson; also to 
grave any manner of graving, and to 
devise any device; to do whatever may 
be set before him, with thy skilful 
men, and with the skilful men of my 
lord David thy father. 14Now therefore 
the wheat and the barley, the oil and 
the wine, which my lord hath spoken 
of, let him send unto his servants; 
15and we will cut wood out of 
Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need; 
and we will bring it to thee in floats by 
sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up 
to Jerusalem.’ 

16And Solomon numbered all the 
strangers that were in the land of 
Israel, after the numbering wherewith 
David his father had numbered them; 
and they were found a hundred and 
fifty thousand and three thousand and 
six hundred. 17And he set threescore 
and ten thousand of them to bear 
burdens, and fourscore thousand to be 
hewers in the mountains, and three 
thousand and six hundred overseers to 
set the people at work. 

Then Solomon began to build the 
house of the LORD at Jerusalem in 
mount Moriah, where [the LORD] 
appeared unto David his father; for 
which provision had been made in the 
Place of David, in the threshingfloor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 2And he began to 
build in the second day of the second 
month, in the fourth year of his reign. 
3Now these are the foundations which 
Solomon laid for the building of the 
house of God. The length by cubits 
after the ancient measure was 
threescore cubits, and the breadth 
twenty cubits. 4And the porch that was 
before [the house], the length of it, 
according to the breadth of the house, 
was twenty cubits, and the height a 
hundred and twenty; and he overlaid it 
within with pure gold. 5And the greater 
house he covered with cypress-wood, 
which he overlaid with fine gold, and 
wrought thereon palm-trees and 
chains. 6And he garnished the house 
with precious stones for beauty; and 
the gold was gold of Parvaim. 7He 
overlaid also the house, the beams, the 
thresholds, and the walls thereof, and 
the doors thereof, with gold; and 
graved cherubim on the walls. 

8And he made the most holy place; 
the length thereof, according to the 
breadth of the house, was twenty 
cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty 
cubits; and he overlaid it with fine 
gold, amounting to six hundred talents. 
9And the weight of the nails was fifty 
shekels of gold. And he overlaid the 
upper chambers with gold. 

10And in the most holy place he 
made two cherubim of image work; 
and they overlaid them with gold. 
11And the wings of the cherubim were 
twenty cubits long: the wing of the one 
cherub was five cubits, reaching to the 
wall of the house; and the other wing 
was likewise five cubits, reaching to 
the wing of the other cherub. 12And the 
3 




wing of the other cherub was five 
cubits, reaching to the wall of the 
house; and the other wing was five 
cubits also, joining to the wing of the 
other cherub. 13The wings of these 
cherubim spread themselves forth 
twenty cubits; and they stood on their 
feet, and their faces were inward. 

14And he made the veil of blue, and 
purple, and crimson, and fine linen, 
and wrought cherubim thereon. 

15Also he made before the house 
two pillars of thirty and five cubits 
high, and the capital that was on the 
top of each of them was five cubits. 

16And he made chains in the 
Sanctuary, and put them on the tops of 
the pillars; and he made a hundred 
pomegranates, and put them on the 
chains. 17And he set up the pillars 
before the temple, one on the right 
hand, and the other on the left; and 
called the name of that on the right 
hand Jachin, and the name of that on 
the left Boaz. 

Moreover he made an altar of 
brass, twenty cubits the length 
thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth 
thereof, and ten cubits the height 
thereof. 

2Also he made the molten sea of ten 
cubits from brim to brim, round in 
compass, and the height thereof was 
five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits 
did compass it round about. 3And 
under it was the similitude of oxen, 
which did compass it round about, for 
ten cubits, compassing the sea round 
about. The oxen were in two rows, cast 
when it was cast. 4It stood upon twelve 
oxen, three looking toward the north, 
and three looking toward the west, and 
three looking toward the south, and 
three looking toward the east; and the 
sea was set upon them above, and all 
their hinder parts were inward. 5And it 
was a handbreadth thick; and the brim 
thereof was wrought like the brim of a 
cup, like the flower of a lily: it 
received and held three thousand 
baths. 

6He made also ten lavers, and put 
five on the right hand, and five on the 
left, to wash in them; such things as 
belonged to the burnt-offering they 
washed in them; but the sea was for 
the priests to wash in. 

7And he made the ten candlesticks 
of gold according to the ordinance 
concerning them; and he set them in 
the temple, five on the right hand, and 
five on the left. 

8He made also ten tables, and placed 
them in the temple, five on the right 
side, and five on the left. And he made 
a hundred basins of gold. 

9Furthermore he made the court of 
the priests, and the great court, and 
doors for the court, and overlaid the 
doors of them with brass. 

10And he set the sea on the right side 
[of the house] eastward, toward the 
south. 

11And Huram made the pots, and the 
shovels, and the basins. So Huram 
made an end of doing the work that he 
wrought for king Solomon in the 
house of God: 12the two pillars, and the 
4 




bowls, and the two capitals which 
were on the top of the pillars; and the 
two networks to cover the two bowls 
of the capitals that were on the top of 
the pillars; 13and the four hundred 
pomegranates for the two networks: 
two rows of pomegranates for each 
network, to cover the two bowls of the 
capitals that were upon the top of the 
pillars. 14He made also the bases, and 
the lavers made he upon the bases; 
15one sea, and the twelve oxen under 
it. 16The pots also, and the shovels, and 
the flesh-hooks, and all the vessels 
thereof, did Huram his master 
craftsman make for king Solomon for 
the house of the LORD of bright brass. 
17In the plain of the Jordan did the king 
cast them, in the clay ground between 
Succoth and Zeredah. 18Thus Solomon 
made all these vessels in great 
abundance; for the weight of the brass 
could not be found out. 

19And Solomon made all the vessels 
that were in the house of God, the 
golden altar also, and the tables 
whereon was the showbread; 20and the 
candlesticks with their lamps, that they 
should burn according to the ordinance 
before the Sanctuary, of pure gold; 
21and the flowers, and the lamps, and 
the tongs, of gold, and that perfect 
gold; 22and the snuffers, and the 
basins, and the pans, and the fire-pans, 
of pure gold. And as for the entry of 
the house, the inner doors thereof for 
the most holy place, and the doors of 
the house, that is, of the temple, were 
of gold. 

Thus all the work that Solomon 
wrought for the house of the LORD 
was finished. And Solomon brought in 
the things that David his father had 
hallowed; even the silver, and the 
gold, and all the vessels, and put them 
in the treasuries of the house of God. 

2Then Solomon assembled the 
elders of Israel, and all the heads of the 
tribes, the princes of the fathers’houses 
of the children of Israel, unto 
Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD out of the city of 
David, which is Zion. 3And all the men 
of Israel assembled themselves unto 
the king at the feast, which was in the 
seventh month. 4And all the elders of 
Israel came, and the Levites took up 
the ark. 5And they brought up the ark, 
and the tent of meeting, and all the 
holy vessels that were in the Tent; 
these did the priests and the Levites 
bring up. 6And king Solomon and all 
the congregation of Israel, that were 
assembled unto him, were before the 
ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that 
could not be counted nor numbered for 
multitude. 7And the priests brought in 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD 
unto its place, into the Sanctuary of the 
house, to the most holy place, even 
under the wings of the cherubim. 8For 
the cherubim spread forth their wings 
over the place of the ark, and the 
cherubim covered the ark and the 
staves thereof above. 9And the staves 
were so long that the ends of the staves 
were seen from the ark before the 
Sanctuary; but they could not be seen 
5 




without; and there they are unto this 
day. 10There was nothing in the ark 
save the two tables which Moses put 
there at Horeb, when the LORD made a 
covenant with the children of Israel, 
when they came out of Egypt. 

11And it came to pass, when the 
priests were come out of the holy 
place—for all the priests that were 
present had sanctified themselves, and 
did not keep their courses; 12also the 
Levites who were the singers, all of 
them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, 
and their sons and their brethren, 
arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and 
psalteries and harps, stood at the east 
end of the altar, and with them a 
hundred and twenty priests sounding 
with trumpets—13it came even to pass, 
when the trumpeters and singers were 
as one, to make one sound to be heard 
in praising and thanking the LORD; and 
when they lifted up their voice with 
the trumpets and cymbals and 
instruments of music, and praised the 
LORD: ‘for He is good, for His mercy 
endureth for ever’; that then the house 
was filled with a cloud, even the house 
of the LORD, 14so that the priests could 
not stand to minister by reason of the 
cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled 
the house of God. 

Then spoke Solomon: 

The LORD hath said that He 
would dwell in the thick 
darkness. 

2But I have built Thee a house of 
habitation, 

And a place for Thee to dwell in for 
ever. 

3And the king turned his face, and 
blessed all the congregation of Israel; 
and all the congregation of Israel 
stood. 4And he said: ‘Blessed be the 
LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke 
with His mouth unto David my father, 
and hath with His hands fulfilled it, 
saying: 5Since the day that I brought 
forth My people out of the land of 
Egypt, I chose no city out of all the 
tribes of Israel to build a house in, that 
My name might be there; neither chose 
I any man to be prince over My people 
Israel; 6but I have chosen Jerusalem, 
that My name might be there; and have 
chosen David to be over My people 
Israel. 7Now it was in the heart of 
David my father to build a house for 
the name of the LORD, the God of 
Israel. 8But the LORD said unto David 
my father: Whereas it was in thy heart 
to build a house for My name, thou 
didst well that it was in thy heart; 
9nevertheless thou shalt not build the 
house, but thy son that shall come 
forth out of thy loins, he shall build the 
house for My name. 10And the LORD 
hath established His word that He 
spoke; for I am risen up in the room of 
David my father, and sit on the throne 
of Israel, as the LORD promised, and 
have built the house for the name of 
the LORD, the God of Israel. 11And 
there have I set the ark, wherein is the 
covenant of the LORD, which He made 
with the children of Israel.’ 
6 




12And he stood before the altar of 
the LORD in the presence of all the 
congregation of Israel, and spread 
forth his hands—13for Solomon had 
made a brazen scaffold, of five cubits 
long, and five cubits broad, and three 
cubits high, and had set it in the midst 
of the court; and upon it he stood, and 
kneeled down upon his knees before 
all the congregation of Israel, and 
spread forth his hands toward 
heaven—14and he said: ‘O LORD, the 
God of Israel, there is no God like 
Thee, in the heaven, or in the earth; 
who keepest covenant and mercy with 
Thy servants, that walk before Thee 
with all their heart; 15who hast kept 
with Thy servant David my father that 
which Thou didst promise him; yea, 
Thou spokest with Thy mouth, and 
hast fulfilled it with Thy hand, as it is 
this day. 16Now therefore, O LORD, the 
God of Israel, keep with Thy servant 
David my father that which Thou hast 
promised him, saying: There shall not 
fail thee a man in My sight to sit on 
the throne of Israel; if only thy 
children take heed to their way, to 
walk in My law as thou hast walked 
before Me. 17Now therefore, O LORD, 
the God of Israel, let Thy word be 
verified, which Thou spokest unto Thy 
servant David. 

18But will God in very truth dwell 
with men on the earth? behold, heaven 
and the heaven of heavens cannot 
contain Thee; how much less this 
house which I have builded! 19Yet 
have Thou respect unto the prayer of 
Thy servant, and to his supplication, O 
LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry 
and to the prayer which Thy servant 
prayeth before Thee; 20that Thine eyes 
may be open toward this house day 
and night, even toward the place 
whereof Thou hast said that thou 
wouldest put Thy name there; to 
hearken unto the prayer which Thy 
servant shall pray toward this place. 
21And hearken Thou to the 
supplications of Thy servant, and of 
Thy people Israel, when they shall 
pray toward this place; yea, hear Thou 
from Thy dwelling-place, even from 
heaven; and when Thou hearest, 
forgive. 

22If a man sin against his neighbour, 
and an oath be exacted of him to cause 
him to swear, and he come and swear 
before Thine altar in this house; 23then 
hear Thou from heaven, and do, and 
judge Thy servants, requiting the 
wicked, to bring his way upon his own 
head; and justifying the righteous, to 
give him according to his 
righteousness. 

24And if Thy people Israel be 
smitten down before the enemy, when 
they sin against Thee, and shall turn 
again and confess Thy name, and pray 
and make supplication before Thee in 
this house; 25then hear Thou from 
heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy 
people Israel, and bring them back 
unto the land which Thou gavest to 
them and to their fathers. 

26When the heaven is shut up, and 
there is no rain, when they sin against 


Thee; if they pray toward this place, 
and confess Thy name, turning from 
their sin, when Thou dost afflict them; 
27then hear Thou in heaven, and 
forgive the sin of Thy servants, and of 
Thy people Israel, when Thou dost 
direct them on the good way wherein 
they should walk; and send rain upon 
Thy land, which Thou hast given to 
Thy people for an inheritance. 

28If there be in the land famine, if 
there be pestilence, if there be blasting 
or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their 
enemies besiege them in the land of 
their cities; whatsoever plague or 
whatsoever sickness there be; 29what 
prayer and supplication soever be 
made by any man, or by all Thy people 
Israel, who shall know every man his 
own plague and his own pain, and 
shall spread forth his hands toward this 
house; 30then hear Thou from heaven 
Thy dwelling-place, and forgive, and 
render unto every man according to all 
his ways, whose heart Thou 
knowest—for Thou, even Thou only, 
knowest the hearts of the children of 
men—31that they may fear Thee, to 
walk in Thy ways, all the days that 
they live in the land which Thou 
gavest unto our fathers. 

32Moreover concerning the stranger, 
that is not of Thy people Israel, when 
be shall come out of a far country for 
Thy great name’s sake, and Thy 
mighty hand, and Thine outstretched 
arm; when they shall come and pray 
toward this house; 33then hear Thou 
from heaven, even from Thy dwelling-
place, and do according to all that the 
stranger calleth to Thee for; that all the 
peoples of the earth may know Thy 
name, and fear Thee, as doth Thy 
people Israel, and that they may know 
that Thy name is called upon this 
house which I have built. 

34If Thy people go out to battle 
against their enemies, by whatsoever 
way Thou shalt send them, and they 
pray unto Thee toward this city which 
Thou hast chosen, and the house which 
I have built for Thy name; 35then hear 
Thou from heaven their prayer and 
their supplication, and maintain their 
cause. 36If they sin against Thee—for 
there is no man that sinneth not—and 
Thou be angry with them, and deliver 
them to the enemy, so that they carry 
them away captive unto a land far off 
or near; 37yet if they shall bethink 
themselves in the land whither they are 
carried captive, and turn, and make 
supplication unto Thee in the land of 
their captivity, saying: We have 
sinned, we have done iniquitously, and 
have dealt wickedly; 38if they return 
unto Thee with all their heart and with 
all their soul in the land of their 
captivity, whither they have carried 
them captive, and pray toward their 
land, which Thou gavest unto their 
fathers, and the city which Thou hast 
chosen, and toward the house which I 
have built for Thy name; 39then hear 
Thou from heaven, even from Thy 
dwelling-place, their prayer and their 
supplications, and maintain their 


cause; and forgive Thy people who 
have sinned against Thee. 

40Now, O my God, let, I beseech 
Thee, Thine eyes be open, and let 
Thine ears be attent, unto the prayer 
that is made in this place. 

41Now therefore arise, O LORD God, 
into Thy resting-place, 

Thou, and the ark of Thy strength; 

Let Thy priests, O LORD God, be 
clothed with salvation, 

And let Thy saints rejoice in good. 

42O LORD God, turn not away the 
face of Thine anointed; 

Remember the good deeds of David 
Thy servant.’ 

 

Now when Solomon had made an 
end of praying, the fire came 
down from heaven, and consumed the 
burnt-offering and the sacrifices; and 
the glory of the LORD filled the house. 
2And the priests could not enter into 
the house of the LORD, because the 
glory of the LORD filled the LORD’S 
house. 3And all the children of Israel 
looked on, when the fire came down, 
and the glory of the LORD was upon the 
house; and they bowed themselves 
with their faces to the ground upon the 
pavement, and prostrated themselves, 
and gave thanks unto the LORD; ‘for He 
is good, for His mercy endureth for 
ever.’ 

4And the king and all the people 
offered sacrifice before the LORD. 5And 
king Solomon offered a sacrifice of 
twenty and two thousand oxen, and a 
hundred and twenty thousand sheep. 
So the king and all the people 
dedicated the house of God. 6And the 
priests stood, according to their 
offices; the Levites also with 
instruments of music of the LORD, 
which David the king had made, to 
give thanks unto the LORD, for His 
mercy endureth for ever, with the 
praises of David by their hand; and the 
priests sounded trumpets over against 
them; and all Israel stood. 7Moreover 
Solomon hallowed the middle of the 
court that was before the house of the 
LORD; for there he offered the burnt-
offerings, and the fat of the peace-
offerings; because the brazen altar 
which Solomon had made was not able 
to receive the burnt-offering, and the 
meal-offering, and the fat. 

8So Solomon held the feast at that 
time seven days, and all Israel with 
him, a very great congregation, from 
the entrance of Hamath unto the Brook 
of Egypt. 9And on the eighth day they 
held a solemn assembly; for they kept 
the dedication of the altar seven days, 
and the feast seven days. 10And on the 
three and twentieth day of the seventh 
month he sent the people away unto 
their tents, joyful and glad of heart for 
the goodness that the LORD had shown 
unto David, and to Solomon, and to 
Israel His people. 

11Thus Solomon finished the house 
of the LORD, and the king’s house; and 
all that came into Solomon’s heart to 
make in the house of the LORD, and in 
his own house, he prosperously 
effected. 12And the LORD appeared to 
7 




Solomon by night, and said unto him: 
‘I have heard thy prayer, and have 
chosen this place to Myself for a house 
of sacrifice. 13If I shut up heaven that 
there be no rain, or if I command the 
locust to devour the land, or if I send 
pestilence among My people; 14if My 
people, upon whom My name is 
called, shall humble themselves, and 
pray, and seek My face, and turn from 
their evil ways; then will I hear from 
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and 
will heal their land. 15Now Mine eyes 
shall be open, and Mine ears attent, 
unto the prayer that is made in this 
place. 16For now have I chosen and 
hallowed this house, that My name 
may be there for ever; and Mine eyes 
and My heart shall be there 
perpetually. 17And as for thee, if thou 
wilt walk before Me as David thy 
father walked, and do according to all 
that I have commanded thee, and wilt 
keep My statutes and Mine ordinances; 
18then I will establish the throne of thy 
kingdom, according as I covenanted 
with David thy father, saying: There 
shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in 
Israel. 19But if ye turn away, and 
forsake My statutes and My 
commandments which I have set 
before you, and shall go and serve 
other gods, and worship them; 20then 
will I pluck them up by the roots out of 
My land which I have given them; and 
this house, which I have hallowed for 
My name, will I cast out of My sight, 
and I will make it a proverb and a 
byword among all peoples. 21And this 
house, which is so high, every one that 
passeth by it shall be astonished, and 
shall say: Why hath the LORD done 
thus unto this land, and to this house? 
22And they shall answer: Because they 
forsook the LORD, the God of their 
fathers, who brought them forth out of 
the land of Egypt, and laid hold on 
other gods, and worshipped them, and 
served them; therefore hath He 
brought all this evil upon them.’ 

And it came to pass at the end of 
twenty years, wherein Solomon 
had built the house of the LORD, and 
his own house, 2that the cities which 
Huram had given to Solomon, 
Solomon built them, and caused the 
children of Israel to dwell there. 

3And Solomon went to Hamath-
zobah, and prevailed against it. 4And 
he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and 
all the store-cities, which he built in 
Hamath. 5Also he built Beth-horon the 
upper, and Beth-horon the nether, 
fortified cities, with walls, gates, and 
bars; 6and Baalath, and all the store-
cities that Solomon had, and all the 
cities for his chariots, and the cities for 
his horsemen, and all that Solomon 
desired to build for his pleasure in 
Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all 
the land of his dominion. 

7As for all the people that were left 
of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and 
the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the 
Jebusites, who were not of Israel; 8of 
their children that were left after them 
in the land, whom the children of 
Israel consumed not, of them did 
8 




Solomon raise a levy of bondservants, 
unto this day. 9But of the children of 
Israel did Solomon make no servants 
for his work; but they were men of 
war, and chief of his captains, and 
rulers of his chariots and of his 
horsemen. 

10And these were the chief officers 
of king Solomon, even two hundred 
and fifty, that bore rule over the 
people. 

11And Solomon brought up the 
daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of 
David unto the house that he had built 
for her; for he said: ‘No wife of mine 
shall dwell in the house of David king 
of Israel, because the places are holy, 
whereunto the ark of the LORD hath 
come.’ 

12Then Solomon offered burnt-
offerings unto the LORD on the altar of 
the LORD, which he had built before the 
porch, 13even as the duty of every day 
required, offering according to the 
commandment of Moses, on the 
sabbaths, and on the new moons, and 
on the appointed seasons, three times 
in the year, even in the feast of 
unleavened bread, and in the feast of 
weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles. 
14And he appointed, according to the 
ordinance of David his father, the 
courses of the priests to their service, 
and the Levites to their charges, to 
praise, and to minister before the 
priests, as the duty of every day 
required; the doorkeepers also by their 
courses at every gate; for so had David 
the man of God commanded. 15And 
they departed not from the 
commandment of the king unto the 
priests and Levites concerning any 
matter, or concerning the treasures. 
16So all the work of Solomon was set 
in order from the day of the foundation 
of the house of the LORD, and until it 
was finished. So the house of the LORD 
was perfected. 

17Then went Solomon to Ezion-
geber, and to Eloth, on the sea-shore in 
the land of Edom. 18And Huram sent 
him by the hands of his servants ships, 
and servants that had knowledge of the 
sea; and they came with the servants of 
Solomon to Ophir, and fetched from 
thence four hundred and fifty talents of 
gold, and brought them to king 
Solomon. 

And when the queen of Sheba 
heard of the fame of Solomon, 
she came to prove Solomon with hard 
questions at Jerusalem, with a very 
great train, and camels that bore spices 
and gold in abundance, and precious 
stones; and when she was come to 
Solomon, she spoke with him of all 
that was in her heart. 2And Solomon 
told her all her questions; and there 
was not any thing hid from Solomon 
which he told her not. 3And when the 
queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom 
of Solomon, and the house that he had 
built, 4and the food of his table, and 
the sitting of his servants, and the 
attendance of his ministers, and their 
apparel; his cupbearers also, and their 
apparel; and his ascent by which he 
went up into the house of the LORD; 
9 




there was no more spirit in her. 5And 
she said to the king: ‘It was a true 
report that I heard in mine own land of 
thine acts, and of thy wisdom. 
6Howbeit I believed not their words, 
until I came, and mine eyes had seen 
it; and, behold, the half of the 
greatness of thy wisdom was not told 
me; thou exceedest the fame that I 
heard. 7Happy are thy men, and happy 
are these thy servants, that stand 
continually before thee, and hear thy 
wisdom. 8Blessed be the LORD thy 
God, who delighted in thee, to set thee 
on His throne, to be king for the LORD 
thy God; because thy God loved Israel, 
to establish them for ever, therefore 
made He thee king over them, to do 
justice and righteousness.’ 

9And she gave the king a hundred 
and twenty talents of gold, and spices 
in great abundance, and precious 
stones; neither was there any such 
spice as the queen of Sheba gave to 
king Solomon. 10And the servants also 
of Huram, and the servants of 
Solomon that brought gold from 
Ophir, brought sandal-wood and 
precious stones. 11And the king made 
of the sandal-wood paths for the house 
of the LORD, and for the king’s house, 
and harps and psalteries for the 
singers; and there were none such seen 
before in the land of Judah. 12And king 
Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba 
all her desire, whatsoever she asked, 
beside that which she had brought unto 
the king. So she turned, and went to 
her own land, she and her servants. 
13Now the weight of gold that came 
to Solomon in one year was six 
hundred and threescore and six talents 
of gold; 14beside that which the 
traffickers and merchants brought; and 
all the kings of Arabia and the 
governors of the country brought gold 
and silver to Solomon. 15And king 
Solomon made two hundred targets of 
beaten gold: six hundred shekels of 
beaten gold went to one target; 16three 
hundred shields of beaten gold also: 
three hundred shekels of gold went to 
one shield; and the king put them in 
the house of the forest of Lebanon. 

17Moreover the king made a great 
throne of ivory, and overlaid it with 
pure gold. 18And there were six steps 
to the throne, with a footstool of gold, 
which were fastened to the throne, and 
arms on either side by the place of the 
seat, and two lions standing beside the 
arms. 19And twelve lions stood there 
on the one side and on the other upon 
the six steps; there was not the like 
made in any kingdom. 

20And all king Solomon’s drinking-
vessels were of gold, and all the 
vessels of the house of the forest of 
Lebanon were of pure gold; silver was 
nothing accounted of in the days of 
Solomon. 21For the king had ships that 
went to Tarshish with the servants of 
Huram; once every three years came 
the ships of Tarshish, bringing gold, 
and silver, ivory, and apes, and 
peacocks. 

22So king Solomon exceeded all the 
kings of the earth in riches and 


wisdom. 23And all the kings of the 
earth sought the presence of Solomon, 
to hear his wisdom, which God had 
put in his heart. 24And they brought 
every man his present, vessels of 
silver, and vessels of gold, and 
raiment, armour, and spices, horses, 
and mules, a rate year by year. 

25And Solomon had four thousand 
stalls for horses and chariots, and 
twelve thousand horsemen, that he 
bestowed in the chariot cities, and with 
the king at Jerusalem. 26And he ruled 
over all the kings from the River even 
unto the land of the Philistines, and to 
the border of Egypt. 27And the king 
made silver to be in Jerusalem as 
stones, and cedars made he to be as the 
sycamore-trees that are in the 
Lowland, for abundance. 28And they 
brought horses for Solomon out of 
Egypt, and out of all lands. 

29Now the rest of the acts of 
Solomon, first and last, are they not 
written in the words of Nathan the 
prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah 
the Shilonite, and in the visions of 
Jedo the seer concerning Jeroboam the 
son of Nebat? 30And Solomon reigned 
in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years. 
31And Solomon slept with his fathers; 
they buried him in the city of David 
his father; and Rehoboam his son 
reigned in his stead. 

And Rehoboam went to 
Shechem; for all Israel were 
come to Shechem to make him king. 
2And it came to pass, when Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat heard of it—for he 
was in Egypt, whither he had fled from 
the presence of king Solomon—that 
Jeroboam returned out of Egypt. 3And 
they sent and called him; and 
Jeroboam and all Israel came, and they 
spoke to Rehoboam, saying: 4’Thy 
father made our yoke grievous; now 
therefore make thou the grievous 
service of thy father, and his heavy 
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, 
and we will serve thee.’ 5And he said 
unto them: ‘Come again unto me after 
three days.’ And the people departed. 

6And king Rehoboam took counsel 
with the old men, that had stood before 
Solomon his father while he yet lived, 
saying: ‘What counsel give ye me to 
return answer to this people?’ 7And 
they spoke unto him, saying: ‘If thou 
be kind to this people, and please 
them, and speak good words to them, 
then they will be thy servants for 
ever.’ 8But he forsook the counsel of 
the old men which they had given him, 
and took counsel with the young men 
that were grown up with him, that 
stood before him. 9And he said unto 
them: ‘What counsel give ye, that we 
may return answer to this people, who 
have spoken to me, saying: Make the 
yoke that thy father did put upon us 
lighter?’ 10And the young men that 
were grown up with him spoke unto 
him, saying: ‘Thus shalt thou say unto 
the people that spoke unto thee, 
saying: Thy father made our yoke 
heavy, but make thou it lighter unto 
us; thus shalt thou say unto them: My 
little finger is thicker than my father’s 
10 




loins. 11And now whereas my father 
did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will 
add to your yoke; my father chastised 
you with whips, but I will chastise you 
with scorpions.’ 

12So Jeroboam and all the people 
came to Rehoboam the third day, as 
the king bade, saying: ‘Come to me 
again the third day.’ 13And the king 
answered them roughly; and king 
Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the 
old men, 14and spoke to them after the 
counsel of the young men, saying: 
‘[My father] made your yoke heavy, 
but I will add thereto; my father 
chastised you with whips, but I will 
chastise you with scorpions.’ 15So the 
king hearkened not unto the people; 
for it was brought about of God, that 
the LORD might establish His word, 
which He spoke by the hand of Ahijah 
the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat. 

16And when all Israel [saw] that the 
king hearkened not unto them, the 
people answered the king, saying: 
‘What portion have we in David? 
neither have we inheritance in the son 
of Jesse; every man to your tents, O 
Israel; now see to thine own house, 
David.’ So all Israel departed unto 
their tents. 17But as for the children of 
Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, 
Rehoboam reigned over them. 18Then 
king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who 
was over the levy; and the children of 
Israel stoned him with stones, so that 
he died. And king Rehoboam made 
speed to get him up to his chariot, to 
flee to Jerusalem. 19So Israel rebelled 
against the house of David unto this 
day. 

And when Rehoboam was 
come to Jerusalem, he 
assembled the house of Judah and 
Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore 
thousand chosen men, that were 
warriors, to fight against Israel, to 
bring the kingdom back to Rehoboam. 
2But the word of the LORD came to 
Shemaiah the man of God, saying: 
3’Speak unto Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon, king of Judah, and to all 
Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying: 
4Thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not go 
up, nor fight against your brethren; 
return every man to his house, for this 
thing is of Me.’ So they hearkened 
unto the words of the LORD, and 
returned from going against Jeroboam. 

5And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, 
and built cities for defence in Judah. 
6He built even Beth-lehem, and Etam, 
and Tekoa, 7and Beth-zur, and Soco, 
and Adullam, 8and Gath, and 
Mareshah, and Ziph, 9and Adoraim, 
and Lachish, and Azekah, 10and Zorah, 
and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in 
Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities. 
11And he fortified the strongholds, and 
put captains in them, and store of 
victual, and oil and wine. 12And in 
every city he put shields and spears, 
and made them exceeding strong. And 
Judah and Benjamin adhered to him. 

13And the priests and the Levites 
that were in all Israel presented 
themselves to him out of all their 
11 




border. 14For the Levites left their open 
land and their possession, and came to 
Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam 
and his sons cast them off, that they 
should not execute the priest’s office 
unto the LORD; 15and he appointed him 
priests for the high places, and for the 
satyrs, and for the calves which he had 
made. 16And after them, out of all the 
tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts 
to seek the LORD, the God of Israel, 
came to Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the 
LORD, the God of their fathers. 17So 
they strengthened the kingdom of 
Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon strong, three years; for they 
walked three years in the way of David 
and Solomon. 

18And Rehoboam took him a wife, 
Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the 
son of David, and of Abihail the 
daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse; 
19and she bore him sons: Jeush, and 
Shemariah, and Zaham. 20And after 
her he took Maacah the daughter of 
Absalom; and she bore him Abijah, 
and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith. 
21And Rehoboam loved Maacah the 
daughter of Absalom above all his 
wives and his concubines—for he took 
eighteen wives, and threescore 
concubines, and begot twenty and 
eight sons and threescore daughters. 
22And Rehoboam appointed Abijah the 
son of Maacah to be chief, even the 
prince among his brethren; for he was 
minded to make him king. 23And he 
dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his 
sons throughout all the lands of Judah 
and Benjamin, unto every fortified 
city; and he gave them victual in 
abundance. And he sought for them 
many wives. 

And it came to pass, when the 
kingdom of Rehoboam was 
established, and he was strong, that he 
forsook the law of the LORD, and all 
Israel with him. 2And it came to pass 
in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, 
that Shishak king of Egypt came up 
against Jerusalem, because they had 
dealt treacherously with the LORD, 
3with twelve hundred chariots, and 
threescore thousand horsemen; and the 
people were without number that came 
with him out of Egypt; the Lubim, the 
Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians. 4And he 
took the fortified cities which 
pertained to Judah, and came unto 
Jerusalem. 5Now Shemaiah the 
prophet came to Rehoboam, and to the 
princes of Judah, that were gathered 
together to Jerusalem because of 
Shishak, and said unto them: ‘Thus 
saith the LORD: Ye have forsaken Me, 
therefore have I also left you in the 
hand of Shishak.’ 6Then the princes of 
Israel and the king humbled 
themselves; and they said: ‘The LORD 
is righteous.’ 7And when the LORD saw 
that they humbled themselves, the 
word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, 
saying: ‘They have humbled 
themselves; I will not destroy them; 
but I will grant them some deliverance, 
and My wrath shall not be poured out 
upon Jerusalem by the hand of 
Shishak. 8Nevertheless they shall be 
12 




his servants; that they may know My 
service, and the service of the 
kingdoms of the countries.’ 

9So Shishak king of Egypt came up 
against Jerusalem, and took away the 
treasures of the house of the LORD, and 
the treasures of the king’s house; he 
took all away; he took away also the 
shields of gold which Solomon had 
made. 10And king Rehoboam made in 
their stead shields of brass, and 
committed them to the hands of the 
captains of the guard, that kept the 
door of the king’s house. 11And it was 
so, that as oft as the king entered into 
the house of the LORD, the guard came 
and bore them, and brought them back 
into the guard-chamber. 12And when 
he humbled himself, the anger of the 
LORD turned from him, that He would 
not destroy him altogether; and 
moreover in Judah there were good 
things found. 

13So king Rehoboam strengthened 
himself in Jerusalem, and reigned; for 
Rehoboam was forty and one years old 
when he began to reign, and he 
reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, 
the city which the LORD had chosen out 
of all the tribes of Israel, to put His 
name there; and his mother’s name 
was Naamah the Ammonitess. 14And 
he did that which was evil, because he 
set not his heart to seek the LORD. 

15Now the acts of Rehoboam, first 
and last, are they not written in the 
histories of Shemaiah the prophet and 
of Iddo the seer, after the manner of 
genealogies? And there were wars 
between Rehoboam and Jeroboam 
continually. 16And Rehoboam slept 
with his fathers, and was buried in the 
city of David; and Abijah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

In the eighteenth year of king 
Jeroboam began Abijah to 
reign over Judah. 2Three years reigned 
he in Jerusalem; and his mother’s 
name was Micaiah the daughter of 
Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war 
between Abijah and Jeroboam. 3And 
Abijah joined battle with an army of 
valiant men of war, even four hundred 
thousand chosen men; and Jeroboam 
set the battle in array against him with 
eight hundred thousand chosen men, 
who were mighty men of valour. 4And 
Abijah stood up upon mount 
Zemaraim, which is in the hill-country 
of Ephraim, and said: ‘Hear me, O 
Jeroboam and all Israel; 5ought ye not 
to know that the LORD, the God of 
Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to 
David for ever, even to him and to his 
sons by a covenant of salt? 6Yet 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant 
of Solomon the son of David, rose up, 
and rebelled against his lord. 7And 
there were gathered unto him vain 
men, base fellows that strengthened 
themselves against Rehoboam the son 
of Solomon, when Rehoboam was 
young and faint-hearted, and could not 
withstand them. 8And now ye think to 
withstand the kingdom of the LORD in 
the hand of the sons of David; and ye 
are a great multitude, and there are 
with you the golden calves which 
13 




Jeroboam made you for gods. 9Have 
ye not driven out the priests of the 
LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the 
Levites, and have made you priests 
after the manner of the peoples of 
other lands? so that whosoever cometh 
to consecrate himself with a young 
bullock and seven rams, the same 
becometh a priest of them that are no 
gods. 10But as for us, the LORD is our 
God, and we have not forsaken Him; 
and we have priests ministering unto 
the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the 
Levites in their work; 11and they burn 
unto the LORD every morning and 
every evening burnt-offerings and 
sweet incense; the showbread also set 
they in order upon the pure table; and 
the candlestick of gold with the lamps 
thereof, to burn every evening; for we 
keep the charge of the LORD our God; 
but ye have forsaken Him. 12And, 
behold, God is with us at our head, and 
His priests with the trumpets of alarm 
to sound an alarm against you. O 
children of Israel, fight ye not against 
the LORD, the God of your fathers; for 
ye shall not prosper.’ 

13But Jeroboam caused an 
ambushment to come about behind 
them; so they were before Judah, and 
the ambushment was behind them. 
14And when Judah looked back, 
behold, the battle was before and 
behind them; and they cried unto the 
LORD, and the priests sounded with the 
trumpets. 15Then the men of Judah 
gave a shout; and as the men of Judah 
shouted, it came to pass, that God 
smote Jeroboam and all Israel before 
Abijah and Judah. 16And the children 
of Israel fled before Judah; and God 
delivered them into their hand. 17And 
Abijah and his people slew them with 
a great slaughter; so there fell down 
slain of Israel five hundred thousand 
chosen men. 18Thus the children of 
Israel were brought under at that time, 
and the children of Judah prevailed, 
because they relied upon the LORD, the 
God of their fathers. 19And Abijah 
pursued after Jeroboam, and took 
cities from him, Bethel with the towns 
thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns 
thereof, and Ephrain with the towns 
thereof. 20Neither did Jeroboam 
recover strength again in the days of 
Abijah; and the LORD smote him, and 
he died. 21But Abijah waxed mighty, 
and took unto himself fourteen wives, 
and begot twenty and two sons, and 
sixteen daughters. 22And the rest of the 
acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his 
sayings, are written in the commentary 
of the prophet Iddo. 

23So Abijah slept with his fathers, 
and they buried him in the city of 
David, and Asa his son reigned in his 
stead; in his days the land was quiet 

ten years. 1And Asa did that 
which was good and right in 
the eyes of the LORD his God; 2for he 
took away the strange altars, and the 
high places, and broke down the 
pillars, and hewed down the Asherim; 
3and commanded Judah to seek the 
LORD, the God of their fathers, and to 
do the law and the commandment. 
14 




4Also he took away out of all the cities 
of Judah the high places and the sun-
images; and the kingdom was quiet 
before him. 5And he built fortified 
cities in Judah; for the land was quiet, 
and he had no war in those years; 
because the LORD had given him rest. 
6For he said unto Judah: ‘Let us build 
these cities, and make about them 
walls, and towers, gates, and bars; the 
land is yet before us, because we have 
sought the LORD our God; we have 
sought Him, and He hath given us rest 
on every side.’ So they built and 
prospered. 7And Asa had an army that 
bore bucklers and spears, out of Judah 
three hundred thousand; and out of 
Benjamin, that bore shields and drew 
bows, two hundred and fourscore 
thousand; all these were mighty men 
of valour. 

8And there came out against them 
Zerah the Ethiopian with an army of a 
thousand thousand, and three hundred 
chariots; and he came unto Mareshah. 
9Then Asa went out to meet him, and 
they set the battle in array in the valley 
of Zephath at Mareshah. 10And Asa 
cried unto the LORD his God, and said: 
‘LORD, there is none beside Thee to 
help, between the mighty and him that 
hath no strength; help us, O LORD our 
God; for we rely on Thee, and in Thy 
name are we come against this 
multitude. Thou art the LORD our God; 
let not man prevail against Thee.’ 11So 
the LORD smote the Ethiopians before 
Asa, and before Judah; and the 
Ethiopians fled. 12And Asa and the 
people that were with him pursued 
them unto Gerar; and there fell of the 
Ethiopians so that none remained 
alive; for they were shattered before 
the LORD, and before His host; and 
they carried away very much booty. 
13And they smote all the cities round 
about Gerar; for a terror from the LORD 
came upon them; and they spoiled all 
the cities; for there was much spoil in 
them. 14They smote also the tents of 
cattle, and carried away sheep in 
abundance and camels, and returned to 
Jerusalem. 

And the spirit of God came 
upon Azariah the son of Oded; 
2and he went out to meet Asa, and said 
unto him: ‘Hear ye me, Asa, and all 
Judah and Benjamin: the LORD is with 
you, while ye are with Him; and if ye 
seek Him, He will be found of you; but 
if ye forsake Him, He will forsake you. 
3Now for long seasons Israel was 
without the true God, and without a 
teaching priest, and without law; 4but 
when in their distress they turned unto 
the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought 
Him, He was found of them. 5And in 
those times there was no peace to him 
that went out, nor to him that came in, 
but great discomfitures were upon all 
the inhabitants of the lands. 6And they 
were broken in pieces, nation against 
nation, and city against city; for God 
did discomfit them with all manner of 
adversity. 7But be ye strong, and let 
not your hands be slack; for your work 
shall be rewarded.’ 
15 




8And when Asa heard these words, 
even the prophecy of Oded the 
prophet, he took courage, and put 
away the detestable things out of all 
the land of Judah and Benjamin, and 
out of the cities which he had taken 
from the hill-country of Ephraim; and 
he renewed the altar of the LORD, that 
was before the porch of the LORD. 
9And he gathered all Judah and 
Benjamin, and them that sojourned 
with them out of Ephraim and 
Manasseh, and out of Simeon; for they 
fell to him out of Israel in abundance, 
when they saw that the LORD his God 
was with him. 10So they gathered 
themselves together at Jerusalem in the 
third month, in the fifteenth year of the 
reign of Asa. 11And they sacrificed 
unto the LORD in that day, of the spoil 
which they had brought, seven 
hundred oxen and seven thousand 
sheep. 12And they entered into the 
covenant to seek the LORD, the God of 
their fathers, with all their heart and 
with all their soul; 13and that 
whosoever would not seek the LORD, 
the God of Israel, should be put to 
death, whether small or great, whether 
man or woman. 14And they swore unto 
the LORD with a loud voice, and with 
shouting, and with trumpets, and with 
horns. 15And all Judah rejoiced at the 
oath; for they had sworn with all their 
heart, and sought Him with their whole 
desire; and He was found of them; and 
the LORD gave them rest round about. 

16And also Maacah the mother of 
Asa the king, he removed her from 
being queen, because she had made an 
abominable image for an Asherah; and 
Asa cut down her image, and made 
dust of it, and burnt it at the brook 
Kidron. 17But the high places were not 
taken away out of Israel; nevertheless 
the heart of Asa was whole all his 
days. 18And he brought into the house 
of God the things that his father had 
hallowed, and that he himself had 
hallowed, silver, and gold, and vessels. 
19And there was no more war unto the 
five and thirtieth year of the reign of 
Asa. 

16 



In the six and thirtieth year of 
the reign of Asa, Baasa king of 
Israel went up against Judah, and built 
Ramah, that he might not suffer any to 
go out or come in to Asa king of 
Judah. 2Then Asa brought out silver 
and gold out of the treasures of the 
house of the LORD and of the king’s 
house, and sent to Ben-hadad king of 
Aram, that dwelt at aDamascus, 
saying: 3’There is a league between me 
and thee, as there was between my 
father and thy father; behold, I have 
sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy 
league with Baasa king of Israel, that 
he may depart from me.’ 4And Ben-
hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and 
sent the captains of his armies against 
the cities of Israel; and they smote 
Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and all 
the store-cities of Naphtali. 5And it 
came to pass, when Baasa heard 

a Heb. Darmesek, and in xxiv 23; 
xxviii, 5, 23. 


thereof, that he left off building 
Ramah, and let his work cease. 6Then 
Asa the king took all Judah; and they 
carried away the stones of Ramah, and 
the timber thereof, wherewith Baasa 
had builded; and he built therewith 
Geba and Mizpah. 

7And at that time Hanani the seer 
came to Asa king of Judah, and said 
unto him: ‘Because thou hast relied on 
the king of Aram, and hast not relied 
on the LORD thy God, therefore is the 
host of the king of Aram escaped out 
of thy hand. 8Were not the Ethiopians 
and the Lubim a huge host, with 
chariots and horsemen exceeding 
many? yet, because thou didst rely on 
the LORD, He delivered them into thy 
hand. 9For the eyes of the LORD run to 
and fro throughout the whole earth, to 
show Himself strong in the behalf of 
them whose heart is whole toward 
Him. Herein thou hast done foolishly; 
for from henceforth thou shalt have 
wars.’ 10Then Asa was wroth with the 
seer, and put him in the prison-house; 
for he was in a rage with him because 
of this thing. And Asa oppressed some 
of the people the same time. 

11And, behold, the acts of Asa, first 
and last, lo, they are written in the 
book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
12And in the thirty and ninth year of 
his reign Asa was diseased in his feet; 
his disease was exceeding great; yet in 
his disease he sought not to the LORD, 
but to the physicians. 13And Asa slept 
with his fathers, and died in the one 
and fortieth year of his reign. 14And 
they buried him in his own sepulchres, 
which he had hewn out for himself in 
the city of David, and laid him in the 
bed which was filled with sweet 
odours and divers kinds [of spices] 
prepared by the perfumers’art; and 
they made a very great burning for 
him. 

And Jehoshaphat his son 
reigned in his stead, and 
strengthened himself against Israel. 
2And he placed forces in all the 
fortified cities of Judah, and set 
garrisons in the land of Judah, and in 
the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his 
father had taken. 3And the LORD was 
with Jehoshaphat, because he walked 
in the first ways of his father David, 
and sought not unto the Baalim; 4but 
sought to the God of his father, and 
walked in His commandments, and not 
after the doings of Israel. 5Therefore 
the LORD established the kingdom in 
his hand; and all Judah brought to 
Jehoshaphat presents; and he had 
riches and honour in abundance. 6And 
his heart was lifted up in the ways of 
the LORD; and furthermore he took 
away the high places and the Asherim 
out of Judah. 

7Also in the third year of his reign 
he sent his princes, even Ben-hail, and 
Obadiah, and Zechariah, and Nethanel, 
and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of 
Judah; 8and with them the Levites, 
even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and 
Zebadiah, and Asahel, and 
Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and 
Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob-
17 




adonijah, the Levites; and with them 
Elishama and Jehoram, the priests. 
9And they taught in Judah, having the 
book of the Law of the LORD with 
them; and they went about throughout 
all the cities of Judah, and taught 
among the people. 

10And a terror from the LORD fell 
upon all the kingdoms of the lands that 
were round about Judah, so that they 
made no war against Jehoshaphat. 
11And some of the Philistines brought 
Jehoshaphat presents, and silver for 
tribute; the Arabians also brought him 
flocks, seven thousand and seven 
hundred rams, and seven thousand and 
seven hundred he-goats. 12And 
Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; 
and he built in Judah castles and cities 
of store. 13And he had many works in 
the cities of Judah; and men of war, 
mighty men of valour, in Jerusalem. 
14And this was the numbering of them 
according to their fathers’houses: of 
Judah, the captains of thousands: 
Adnah the captain, and with him 
mighty men of valour three hundred 
thousand; 15and next to him Jehohanan 
the captain, and with him two hundred 
and fourscore thousand; 16and next to 
him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who 
willingly offered himself unto the 
LORD, and with him two hundred 
thousand mighty men of valour; 17and 
of Benjamin: Eliada a mighty man of 
valour, and with him two hundred 
thousand armed with bow and shield; 
18and next to him Jehozabad, and with 
him a hundred and fourscore thousand 
ready prepared for war. 19These were 
they that waited on the king beside 
those whom the king put in the 
fortified cities throughout all Judah. 

Now Jehoshaphat had riches 
and honour in abundance; and 
he allied himself with Ahab by 
marriage. 2And after a lapse of years 
he went down to Ahab to Samaria. 
And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for 
him in abundance, and for the people 
that were with him, and persuaded him 
to go up with him to Ramoth-gilead. 
3And Ahab king of Israel said unto 
Jehoshaphat king of Judah: ‘Wilt thou 
go with me to Ramoth-gilead?’ And he 
answered him: ‘I am as thou art, and 
my people as thy people; and we will 
be with thee in the war.’ 

4And Jehoshaphat said unto the king 
of Israel: ‘Inquire, I pray thee, at the 
word of the LORD today.’ 5Then the 
king of Israel gathered the prophets 
together, four hundred men, and said 
unto them: ‘Shall we go to Ramoth-
gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?’ 
And they said: ‘Go up; for God will 
deliver it into the hand of the king.’ 
6But Jehoshaphat said: ‘Is there not 
here besides a prophet of the LORD, 
that we might inquire of him?’ 7And 
the king of Israel said unto 
Jehoshaphat: ‘There is yet one man by 
whom we may inquire of the LORD; but 
I hate him; for he never prophesieth 
good concerning me, but always evil; 
the same is Micaiah the son of Imla.’ 
And Jehoshaphat said: ‘Let not the 
king say so.’ 8Then the king of Israel 
18 




called an officer, and said: ‘Fetch 
quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.’ 
9Now the king of Israel and 
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each 
on his throne, arrayed in their robes, 
and they sat in a threshing-floor at the 
entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all 
the prophets were prophesying before 
them. 10And Zedekiah the son of 
Chenaanah made him horns of iron, 
and said: ‘Thus saith the LORD: With 
these shalt thou gore the Arameans, 
until they be consumed.’ 11And all the 
prophets prophesied so, saying: ‘Go up 
to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the 
LORD will deliver it into the hand of the 
king.’ 

12And the messenger that went to 
call Micaiah spoke to him, saying: 
‘Behold, the words of the prophets 
declare good to the king with one 
mouth; let thy word therefore, I pray 
thee, be like one of theirs, and speak 
thou good.’ 13And Micaiah said: ‘As 
the LORD liveth, what my God saith, 
that will I speak.’ 14And when he was 
come to the king, the king said unto 
him: ‘aMicaiah, shall we go to 
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I 
forbear?’ And he said: ‘Go ye up, and 
prosper; and they shall be delivered 
into your hand.’ 15And the king said to 
him: ‘How many times shall I adjure 
thee that thou speak unto me nothing 
but the truth in the name of the LORD.’ 
16And he said: ‘I saw all Israel 
scattered upon the mountains, as sheep 

a Heb. Micah. 

that have no shepherd; and the LORD 
said: These have no master, let them 
return every man to his house in 
peace.’ 17And the king of Israel said to 
Jehoshaphat: ‘Did I not tell thee that 
he would not prophesy good 
concerning me, but evil?’ 18And he 
said: ‘Therefore hear ye the word of 
the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting upon 
His throne, and all the host of heaven 
standing on His right hand and on His 
left. 19And the LORD said: who shall 
entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may 
go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And 
one spoke saying after this manner, 
and another saying after that manner. 
20And there came forth the spirit, and 
stood before the LORD, and said: I will 
entice him. And the LORD said unto 
him: Wherewith? 21And he said: I will 
go forth, and will be a lying spirit in 
the mouth of all his prophets. And He 
said: Thou shalt entice him, and shalt 
prevail also; go forth, and do so. 
22Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath 
put a lying spirit in the mouth of these 
thy prophets; and the LORD hath 
spoken evil concerning thee.’ 

23Then Zedekiah the son of 
Chenaanah came near, and smote 
Micaiah upon the check, and said: 
‘Which way went the spirit of the 
LORD from me to speak unto thee?’ 
24And Micaiah said: ‘Behold, thou 
shalt see on that day, when thou shalt 
go into an inner chamber to hide 
thyself.’ 25And the king of Israel said: 
‘Take ye Micaiah; and carry him back 
unto Amon the governor of the city, 


and to Joash the king’s son; 26and say: 
Thus saith the king: Put this fellow in 
the prison, and feed him with scant 
bread and with scant water, until I 
return in peace.’ 27And Micaiah said: 
‘If thou return at all in peace, the LORD 
hath not spoken by me.’ And he said: 
‘Hear, ye peoples, all of you.’ 

28So the king of Israel and 
Jehoshaphat the kind of Judah went up 
to Ramoth-gilead. 29And the king of 
Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: ‘I will 
disguise myself, and go into the battle; 
but put thou on thy robes.’ So the king 
of Israel disguised himself; and they 
went into the battle. 30Now the king of 
Aram had commanded the captains of 
his chariots, saying: ‘Fight neither 
with small nor great, save only with 
the king of Israel.’ 31And it came to 
pass, when the captains of the chariots 
saw Jehoshaphat, that they said: ‘It is 
the king of Israel.’ Therefore they 
turned about to fight against him; but 
Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD 
helped him; and God moved them to 
depart from him. 32And it came to 
pass, when the captains of the chariots 
saw that it was not the king of Israel, 
that they turned back from pursuing 
him. 33And a certain man drew his bow 
at a venture, and smote the king of 
Israel between the lower armour and 
the breastplate; wherefore he said to 
the driver of the chariot: ‘Turn thy 
hand, and carry me out of the host; for 
I am sore wounded.’ 34And the battle 
increased that day; howbeit the king of 
Israel stayed himself up in his chariot 
against the Arameans until the even; 
and about the time of the going down 
of the sun he died. 

And Jehoshaphat the king of 
Judah returned to his house in 
peace to Jerusalem. 2And Jehu the son 
of Hanani the seer went out to meet 
him, and said to king Jehoshaphat: 
‘Shouldest thou help the wicked, and 
love them that hate the LORD? for this 
thing wrath is upon thee from before 
the LORD. 3Nevertheless there are good 
things found in thee, in that thou hast 
put away the Asheroth out of the land, 
and hast set thy heart to seek God.’ 

4And Jehoshaphat dwelt at 
Jerusalem; and he went out again 
among the people from Beer-sheba to 
the hill-country of Ephraim, and 
brought them back unto the LORD, the 
God of their fathers. 5And he set 
judges in the land throughout all the 
fortified cities of Judah, city by city, 
6and said to the judges: ‘Consider what 
ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for 
the LORD; and [He is] with you in 
giving judgment. 7Now therefore let 
the fear of the LORD be upon you; take 
heed and do it; for there is no iniquity 
with the LORD our God, nor respect of 
persons, nor taking of bribes.’ 
8Moreover in Jerusalem did 
Jehoshaphat set of the Levites and the 
priests, and of the heads of the 
fathers’houses of Israel, for the 
judgment of the LORD, and for 
controversies. And they returned to 
Jerusalem. 9And he charged them, 
saying: ‘Thus shall ye do in the fear of 
19 




the LORD, faithfully, and with a whole 
heart. 10And whensoever any 
controversy shall come to you from 
your brethren that dwell in their cities, 
between blood and blood, between law 
and commandment, statutes and 
ordinances, ye shall warn them, that 
they be not guilty towards the LORD, 
and so wrath come upon you and upon 
your brethren; thus shall ye do, and ye 
shall not be guilty. 11And, behold, 
Amariah the chief priest is over you in 
all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah 
the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the 
house of Judah, in all the king’s 
matters; also the officers of the Levites 
before you. Deal courageously, and the 
LORD be with the good.’ 

And it came to pass after this, 
that the children of Moab, and 
the children of Ammon, and with them 
some of the Ammonites, came against 
Jehoshaphat to battle. 2Then there 
came some that told Jehoshaphat, 
saying: ‘There cometh a great 
multitude against thee from beyond the 
sea from Aram; and, behold, they are 
in Hazazon-tamar’—the same is En-
gedi. 3And Jehoshaphat feared, and set 
himself to seek unto the LORD; and he 
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. 
4And Judah gathered themselves 
together, to seek help of the LORD; 
even out of all the cities of Judah they 
came to seek the LORD. 5And 
Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation 
of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house 
of the LORD, before the new court; 6and 
he said: ‘O LORD, the God of our 
fathers, art not Thou alone God in 
heaven? and art not Thou ruler over all 
the kingdoms of the nations? and in 
Thy hand is power and might, so that 
none is able to withstand Thee. 7Didst 
not Thou, O our God, drive out the 
inhabitants of this land before Thy 
people Israel, and gavest it to the seed 
of Abraham Thy friend for ever? 8And 
they dwelt therein, and have built Thee 
a sanctuary therein for Thy name, 
saying: 9If evil come upon us, the 
sword, judgment, or pestilence, or 
famine, we will stand before this 
house, and before Thee—for Thy 
name is in this house—and cry unto 
Thee in our affliction, and Thou wilt 
hear and save. 10And now, behold, the 
children of Ammon and Moab and 
mount Seir, whom Thou wouldest not 
let Israel invade, when they came out 
of the land of Egypt, but they turned 
aside from them, and destroyed them 
not; 11behold, they render unto us 
[evil], to come to cast us out of Thy 
possession, which Thou hast given us 
to inherit. 12O our God, wilt Thou not 
execute judgment on them? for we 
have no might against this great 
multitude that cometh against us; 
neither know we what to do; but our 
eyes are upon Thee.’ 13And all Judah 
stood before the LORD, with their little 
ones, their wives, and their children. 
14Then upon Jahaziel the son of 
Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son 
of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, the 
Levite, of the sons of Asaph, came the 
spirit of the LORD in the midst of the 
20 




congregation; 15and he said: ‘Hearken 
ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat: 
thus saith the LORD unto you: Fear not 
ye, neither be dismayed by reason of 
this great multitude; for the battle is 
not yours, but God’s. 16To-morrow go 
ye down against them; behold, they 
come up by the ascent of Ziz; and ye 
shall find them at the end of the valley, 
before the wilderness of Jeruel. 17Ye 
shall not need to fight in this battle; set 
yourselves, stand ye still, and see the 
salvation of the LORD with you, O 
Judah and Jerusalem; fear not, nor be 
dismayed; to-morrow go out against 
them; for the LORD is with you.’ 18And 
Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his 
face to the ground; and all Judah and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down 
before the LORD, worshipping the 
LORD. 19And the Levites, of the 
children of the Kohathites and of the 
children of the Korahites, stood up to 
praise the LORD, the God of Israel, with 
an exceeding loud voice. 

20And they rose early in the morning, 
and went forth into the wilderness of 
Tekoa; and as they went forth, 
Jehoshaphat stood and said: ‘Hear me, 
O Judah, and ye inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; believe in the LORD your 
God, so shall ye be established; 
believe His prophets, so shall ye 
prosper.’ 21And when he had taken 
counsel with the people, he appointed 
them that should sing unto the LORD, 
and praise in the beauty of holiness, as 
they went out before the army, and 
say: ‘Give thanks unto the LORD, for 
His mercy endureth for ever.’ 22And 
when they began to sing and to praise, 
the LORD set liers-in-wait against the 
children of Ammon, Moab, and mount 
Seir, that were come against Judah; 
and they were smitten. 23For the 
children of Ammon and Moab stood 
up against the inhabitants of mount 
Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them; 
and when they had made an end of the 
inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to 
destroy another. 

24And when Judah came to the watch-
tower of the wilderness, they looked 
upon the multitude; and, behold, they 
were dead bodies fallen to the earth, 
and there were none that escaped. 
25And when Jehoshaphat and his 
people came to take the spoil of them, 
they found among them in abundance 
both riches and dead bodies, and 
precious jewels, which they stripped 
off for themselves, more than they 
could carry away; and they were three 
days in taking the spoil, it was so 
much. 26And on the fourth day they 
assembled themselves in the valley of 
aBeracah; for there they blessed the 
LORD; therefore the name of that place 
was called The valley of Beracah, unto 
this day. 27Then they returned, every 
man of Judah and Jerusalem, and 
Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, 
to go back to Jerusalem with joy; for 
the LORD had made them to rejoice 
over their enemies. 28And they came to 

a That is, Blessing. 


Jerusalem with psalteries and harps 
and trumpets unto the house of the 
LORD. 29And a terror from God was on 
all the kingdoms of the countries, 
when they heard that the LORD fought 
against the enemies of Israel. 30So the 
realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet; for his 
God gave him rest round about. 

31And Jehoshaphat reigned over 
Judah; he was thirty and five years old 
when he began to reign; and he 
reigned twenty and five years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 32And 
he walked in the way of Asa his father, 
and turned not aside from it, doing that 
which was right in the eyes of the 
LORD. 33Howbeit the high places were 
not taken away; neither as yet had the 
people set their hearts unto the God of 
their fathers. 34Now the rest of the acts 
of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, 
they are written in the words of Jehu 
the son of Hanani, which is inserted in 
the book of the kings of Israel. 

35And after this did Jehoshaphat 
king of Judah join himself with 
Ahaziah king of Israel; the same did 
very wickedly; 36and he joined him 
with himself to make ships to go to 
Tarshish; and they made the ships in 
Ezion-geber. 37Then Eliezer the son of 
Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied 
against Jehoshaphat, saying: ‘Because 
thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, 
the LORD hath made a breach in thy 
works.’ And the ships were broken, 
that they were not able to go to 
Tarshish. 

And Jehoshaphat slept with his 
fathers, and was buried with 
his fathers in the city of David; and 
Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. 
2And he had brethren the sons of 
Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and 
Zechariah, and Azariahu, and Michael, 
and Shephatiah; all these were the sons 
of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 3And 
their father gave them great gifts, of 
silver, and of gold, and of precious 
things, with fortified cities in Judah; 
but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram, 
because he was the first-born. 4Now 
when Jehoram was risen up over the 
kingdom of his father, and had 
strengthened himself, he slew all his 
brethren with the sword, and divers 
also of the princes of Israel. 5Jehoram 
was thirty and two years old when he 
began to reign; and he reigned eight 
years in Jerusalem. 6And he walked in 
the way of the kings of Israel, as did 
the house of Ahab; for he had the 
daughter of Ahab to wife; and he did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD. 7Howbeit the LORD would not 
destroy the house of David, because of 
the covenant that He had made with 
David, and as He promised to give a 
lamp to him and to his children alway. 
8In his days Edom revolted from 
under the hand of Judah, and made a 
king over themselves. 9Then Jehoram 
passed over with his captains, and all 
his chariots with him; and he rose up 
by night, and smote the Edomites that 
compassed him about, and the captains 
of the chariots. 10So Edom revolted 
21 




from under the hand of Judah unto this 
day; then did Libnah revolt at the same 
time from under his hand; because he 
had forsaken the LORD, the God of his 
fathers. 11Moreover he made high 
places in the mountains of Judah, and 
made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to 
go astray, and drew Judah away. 12And 
there came a writing to him from 
Elijah the prophet, saying: ‘Thus saith 
the LORD, the God of David thy father: 
Because thou hast not walked in the 
ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in 
the ways of Asa king of Judah; 13but 
hast walked in the way of the kings of 
Israel, and hast made Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to go astray, 
like as the house of Ahab made [Israel] 
to go astray; and also hast slain thy 
brethren of thy father’s house, who 
were better than thyself; 14behold, the 
LORD will smite with a great plague thy 
people, and thy children, and thy 
wives, and all thy substance; 15and 
thou shalt have great sickness by 
disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels 
fall out by reason of the sickness, day 
by day.’ 

16And the LORD stirred up against 
Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, 
and of the Arabians that are beside the 
Ethiopians; 17and they came up against 
Judah, and broke into it, and carried 
away all the substance that was found 
in the king’s house, and his sons also, 
and his wives; so that there was never 
a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the 
youngest of his sons. 

18And after all this the LORD smote 
him in his bowels with an incurable 
disease. 19And it came to pass, that in 
process of time, at the end of two 
years, his bowels fell out by reason of 
his sickness, and he died of sore 
diseases. And his people made no 
burning for him, like the burning of his 
fathers. 20Thirty and two years old was 
he when he began to reign, and he 
reigned in Jerusalem eight years; and 
he departed joyless; and they buried 
him in the city of David, but not in the 
sepulchres of the kings. 

And the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem made Ahaziah his 
youngest son king in his stead; for the 
band of men that came with the 
Arabians to the camp had slain all the 
eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram 
king of Judah reigned. 2Forty and two 
years old was Ahaziah when he began 
to reign; and he reigned one year in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 3He 
also walked in the ways of the house 
of Ahab; for his mother was his 
counsellor to do wickedly. 4And he did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, as did the house of Ahab; for 
they were his counsellors after the 
death of his father, to his destruction. 
5He walked also after their counsel, 
and went with Jehoram the son of 
Ahab king of Israel to war against 
Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-
gilead; and the Arameans wounded 
Joram. 6And he returned to be healed 
in Jezreel of the wounds which they 
22 




had given him at Ramah, when he 
fought against Hazael king of Aram. 
And Azariah the son of Jehoram king 
of Judah went down to see Jehoram 
the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he 
was sick. 

7Now the downfall of Ahaziah was 
of God, in that he went unto Joram; for 
when he was come, he went out with 
Jehoram against Jehu the son of 
Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed 
to cut off the house of Ahab. 8And it 
came to pass, when Jehu was 
executing judgment upon the house of 
Ahab, that he found the princes of 
Judah, and the sons of the brethren of 
Ahaziah, ministering to Ahaziah, and 
slew them. 9And he sought Ahaziah, 
and they caught him—now he was 
hiding in Samaria—and they brought 
him to Jehu, and slew him; and they 
buried him, for they said: ‘He is the 
son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the 
LORD with all his heart.’ And there was 
none of the house of Ahaziah that had 
power to hold the kingdom. 

10Now when Athaliah the mother of 
Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, 
she arose and destroyed all the seed 
royal of the house of Judah. 11But 
Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, 
took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and 
stole him away from among the king’s 
sons that were slain, and put him and 
his nurse in the bed-chamber. So 
Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king 
Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the 
priest—for she was the sister of 
Ahaziah—hid him from Athaliah, so 
that she slew him not. 12And he was 
with them hid in the house of God six 
years; and Athaliah reigned over the 
land. 

And in the seventh year 
Jehoiada strengthened himself, 
and took the captains of hundreds, 
Azariah the son of Jeroham, and 
Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and 
Azariah the son of Obed, and 
Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and 
Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into 
covenant with him. 2And they went 
about in Judah, and gathered the 
Levites out of all the cities of Judah, 
and the heads of fathers’houses of 
Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 
3And all the congregation made a 
covenant with the king in the house of 
God. And he said unto them: ‘Behold, 
the king’s son shall reign, as the LORD 
hath spoken concerning the sons of 
David. 4This is the thing that ye shall 
do: a third part of you, that come in on 
the sabbath, of the priests and of the 
Levites, shall be porters of the doors; 
5and a third part shall be at the king’s 
house; and a third part at the gate of 
the foundation; and all the people shall 
be in the courts of the house of the 
LORD. 6But let none come into the 
house of the LORD, save the priests, 
and they that minister of the Levites; 
they shall come in, for they are holy; 
but all the people shall keep the charge 
of the LORD. 7And the Levites shall 
compass the king round about, every 
man with his weapons in his hand; and 
whosoever cometh into the house, let 
23 




him be slain; and be ye with the king 
when he cometh in, and when he goeth 
out.’ 

8So the Levites and all Judah did 
according to all that Jehoiada the priest 
commanded; and they took every man 
his men, those that were to come in on 
the sabbath, with those that were to go 
out on the sabbath; for Jehoiada the 
priest dismissed not the courses. 9And 
Jehoiada the priest delivered to the 
captains of hundreds the spears, and 
bucklers, and shields, that had been 
king David’s, which were in the house 
of God. 10And he set all the people, 
every man with his weapon in his 
hand, from the right side of the house 
to the left side of the house, along by 
the altar and the house, by the king 
round about. 11Then they brought out 
the king’s son, and put upon him the 
crown and the insignia, and made him 
king; and Jehoiada and his sons 
anointed him; and they said: ‘Long 
live the king.’ 

12And when Athaliah heard the 
noise of the people running and 
praising the king, she came to the 
people into the house of the LORD; 
13and she looked, and, behold, the king 
stood on his platform at the entrance, 
and the captains and the trumpets by 
the king; and all the people of the land 
rejoiced, and blew with trumpets; the 
singers also [played] on instruments of 
music, and led the singing of praise. 
Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and 
said: ‘Treason, treason.’ 14And 
Jehoiada the priest brought out the 
captains of hundreds that were set over 
the host, and said unto them: ‘Have 
her forth between the ranks; and 
whoso followeth her, let him be slain 
with the sword’; for the priest said: 
‘Slay her not in the house of the LORD.’ 
15So they made way for her; and she 
went to the entry of the horse gate to 
the king’s house; and they slew her 
there. 

16And Jehoiada made a covenant 
between himself, and all the people, 
and the king, that they should be the 
LORD’S people. 17And all the people 
went to the house of Baal, and broke it 
down, and broke his altars and his 
images in pieces, and slew Mattan the 
priest of Baal before the altars. 18And 
Jehoiada appointed the offices of the 
house of the LORD under the hand of 
the priests the Levites, whom David 
had distributed in the house of the 
LORD, to offer the burnt-offerings of 
the LORD, as it is written in the Law of 
Moses, with rejoicing and with 
singing, according to the direction of 
David. 19And he set the porters at the 
gates of the house of the LORD, that 
none that was unclean in any thing 
should enter in. 20And he took the 
captains of hundreds, and the nobles, 
and the governors of the people, and 
all the people of the land, and brought 
down the king from the house of the 
LORD; and they came through the upper 
gate unto the king’s house, and set the 
king upon the throne of the kingdom. 
21So all the people of the land rejoiced, 


and the city was quiet; and they slew 
Athaliah with the sword. 

Joash was seven years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; 
and his mother’s name was Zibiah of 
Beer-sheba. 2And Joash did that which 
was right in the eyes of the LORD all 
the days of Jehoiada the priest. 3And 
Jehoiada took for him two wives; and 
he begot sons and daughters. 

4And it came to pass after this, that 
Joash was minded to restore the house 
of the LORD. 5And he gathered together 
the priests and the Levites, and said to 
them: ‘Go out unto the cities of Judah, 
and gather of all Israel money to repair 
the house of your God from year to 
year, and see that ye hasten the 
matter.’ Howbeit the Levites hastened 
it not. 6And the king called for 
Jehoiada the chief, and unto him: 
‘Why hast thou not required of the 
Levites to bring in out of Judah and 
out of Jerusalem the tax of Moses the 
servant of the LORD, and of the 
congregation of Israel, for the tent of 
the testimony?’ 7For the sons of 
Athaliah, that wicked woman, had 
broken up the house of God; and also 
all the hallowed things of the house of 
the LORD did they bestow upon the 
Baalim. 

8So the king commanded, and they 
made a chest, and set it without at the 
gate of the house of the LORD. 9And 
they made a proclamation through 
Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in for 
the LORD the tax that Moses the servant 
of God laid upon Israel in the 
wilderness. 10And all the princes and 
all the people rejoiced, and brought in, 
and cast into the chest, until they had 
made an end. 11And it was so, that at 
what time the chest was brought unto 
the king’s officers by the hand of the 
Levites, and when they saw that there 
was much money, the king’s scribe 
and the chief priest’s officer came and 
emptied the chest, and took it, and 
carried it back to its place. Thus they 
did day by day, and gathered money in 
abundance. 12And the king and 
Jehoiada gave it to such as did the 
work of the service of the house of the 
LORD; and they hired masons and 
carpenters to restore the house of the 
LORD, and also such as wrought iron 
and brass to repair the house of the 
LORD. 13So the workmen wrought, and 
the work was perfected by them, and 
they set up the house of God in its 
state, and strengthened it. 14And when 
they had made an end, they brought 
the rest of the money before the king 
and Jehoiada, whereof were made 
vessels for the house of the LORD, even 
vessels wherewith to minister, and 
buckets, and pans, and vessels of gold 
and silver. And they offered burnt-
offerings in the house of the LORD 
continually all the days of Jehoiada. 

15But Jehoiada waxed old and was 
full of days, and he died; a hundred 
and thirty years old was he when he 
died. 16And they buried him in the city 
of David among the kings, because he 
had done good in Israel, and toward 
24 




God and His house. 17Now after the 
death of Jehoiada came the princes of 
Judah, and prostrated themselves 
before the king. Then the king 
hearkened unto them. 18And they 
forsook the house of the LORD, the God 
of their fathers, and served the 
Asherim and the idols; and wrath came 
upon Judah and Jerusalem for this 
their guiltiness. 19Yet He sent prophets 
to them, to bring them back unto the 
LORD; and they admonished them, but 
they would not give ear. 

20And the spirit of God clothed 
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the 
priest; and he stood above the people, 
and said unto them: ‘Thus saith God: 
Why transgress ye the commandments 
of the LORD, that ye cannot prosper? 
because ye have forsaken the LORD, He 
hath also forsaken you.’ 21And they 
conspired against him, and stoned him 
with stones at the commandment of 
the king in the court of the house of 
the LORD. 22Thus Joash the king 
remembered not the kindness which 
Jehoiada his father had done to him, 
but slew his son. And when he died, he 
said: ‘The LORD look upon it, and 
require it.’ 

23And it came to pass, when the year 
was come about, that the army of the 
Arameans came up against him; and 
they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and 
destroyed all the princes of the people 
from among the people, and sent all 
the spoil of them unto the king of 
Damascus. 24For the army of the 
Arameans came with a small company 
of men; and the LORD delivered a very 
great host into their hand, because they 
had forsaken the LORD, the God of 
their fathers. So they executed 
judgment upon Joash. 25And when 
they were departed from him—for 
they left him in great diseases—his 
own servants conspired against him for 
the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the 
priest, and slew him on his bed, and he 
died; and they buried him in the city of 
David, but they buried him not in the 
sepulchres of the kings. 26And these 
are they that conspired against him: 
Zabad the son of Shimeath the 
Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of 
Shimrith the Moabitess. 27Now 
concerning his sons, and the multitude 
of the burdens against him, and the 
rebuilding of the house of God, 
behold, they are written in the 
commentary of the book of the kings. 
And Amaziah his son reigned in his 
stead. 

Amaziah was twenty and five 
years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned twenty and nine 
years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s 
name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 
2And he did that which was right in the 
eyes of the LORD, but not with a whole 
heart. 3Now it came to pass, when the 
kingdom was established unto him, 
that he slew his servants who had 
killed the king his father. 4But he put 
not their children to death, but did 
according to that which is written in 
the law in the book of Moses, as the 
LORD commanded, saying: ‘The fathers 
25 




shall not die for the children, neither 
shall the children die for the fathers; 
but every man shall die for his own 
sin.’ 

5Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah 
together, and ordered them according 
to their fathers’houses, under captains 
of thousands and captains of hundreds, 
even all Judah and Benjamin; and he 
numbered them from twenty years old 
and upward, and found them three 
hundred thousand chosen men, able to 
go forth to war, that could handle 
spear and shield. 6He hired also a 
hundred thousand mighty men of 
valour out of Israel for a hundred 
talents of silver. 7But there came a man 
of God to him, saying: ‘O king, let not 
the army of Israel go with thee; for the 
LORD is not with Israel, even with all 
the children of Ephraim. 8But if thou 
wilt go, and do engage never so 
valiantly in battle, God will cast thee 
down before the enemy; for God hath 
power to help, and to cast down.’ 9And 
Amaziah said to the man of God: ‘But 
what shall we do for the hundred 
talents which I have given to the army 
of Israel?’ And the man of God 
answered: ‘The LORD is able to give 
thee much more than this.’ 10Then 
Amaziah separated them, to wit, the 
army that was come to him out of 
Ephraim, to go back home; wherefore 
their anger was greatly kindled against 
Judah, and they returned home in 
fierce anger. 

11And Amaziah took courage, and 
led forth his people, and went to the 
Valley of Salt, and smote of the 
children of Seir ten thousand. 12And 
other ten thousand did the children of 
Judah carry away alive, and brought 
them unto the top of the Rock, and cast 
them down from the top of the Rock, 
that they all were broken in pieces. 
13But the men of the army whom 
Amaziah sent back, that they should 
not go with him to battle, fell upon the 
cities of Judah, from Samaria even 
unto Beth-horon, and smote of them 
three thousand, and took much spoil. 

14Now it came to pass, after that 
Amaziah was come from the slaughter 
of the Edomites, that he brought the 
gods of the children of Seir, and set 
them up to be his gods, and prostrated 
himself before them, and offered unto 
them. 15Wherefore the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against Amaziah, 
and He sent unto him a prophet, who 
said unto him: ‘Why hast thou sought 
after the gods of the people, which 
have not delivered their own people 
out of thy hand?’ 16And it came to 
pass, as he talked with him, that [the 
king] said unto him: ‘Have we made 
thee of the king’s counsel? forbear; 
why shouldest thou be smitten?’ Then 
the prophet forbore, and said: ‘I know 
that God hath determined to destroy 
thee, because thou hast done this, and 
hast not hearkened unto my counsel.’ 

17Then Amaziah king of Judah took 
advice, and sent to Joash, the son of 
Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, king of 
Israel, saying: ‘Come, let us look one 
another in the face.’ 18And Joash king 


of Israel sent to Amaziah king of 
Judah, saying: ‘The thistle that was in 
Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in 
Lebanon, saying: Give thy daughter to 
my son to wife; and there passed by 
the wild beasts that were in Lebanon, 
and trod down the thistle. 19Thou 
sayest—lo, thou hast smitten Edom; 
will thy heart therefore lift thee up to 
glory therein? abide now at home; why 
shouldest thou meddle with evil, that 
thou shouldest fall, even thou, and 
Judah with thee?’ 20But Amaziah 
would not hear; for it was of God, that 
He might deliver them into the hand 
[of their enemies], because they had 
sought after the gods of Edom. 21So 
Joash king of Israel went up; and he 
and Amaziah king of Judah looked one 
another in the face at Beth-shemesh, 
which belongeth to Judah. 22And Judah 
was put to the worse before Israel; and 
they fled every man to his tent. 23And 
Joash king of Israel took Amaziah 
king of Judah, the son of Joash, the 
son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-shemesh, and 
brought him to Jerusalem, and broke 
down the wall of Jerusalem from the 
gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, 
four hundred cubits. 24And [he took] 
all the gold and silver, and all the 
vessels that were found in the house of 
God with Obed-edom, and the 
treasures of the king’s house, the 
hostages also, and returned to Samaria. 

25And Amaziah the son of Joash 
king of Judah lived after the death of 
Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel 
fifteen years. 26Now the rest of the acts 
of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are 
they not written in the book of the 
kings of Judah and Israel? 27Now from 
the time that Amaziah did turn away 
from following the LORD they made a 
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; 
and he fled to Lachish; but they sent 
after him to Lachish, and slew him 
there. 28And they brought him upon 
horses, and buried him with his fathers 
in the city of Judah. 

And all the people of Judah 
took Uzziah, who was sixteen 
years old, and made him king in the 
room of his father Amaziah. 2He built 
Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after 
that the king slept with his fathers. 
3Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he 
began to reign; and he reigned fifty 
and two years in Jerusalem; and his 
mother’s name was Jecoliah of 
Jerusalem. 4And he did that, which 
was right in the eyes of the LORD, 
according to all that his father 
Amaziah had done. 5And he set 
himself to seek God in the days of 
Zechariah, who had understanding in 
the vision of God; and as long as he 
sought the LORD, God made him to 
prosper. 

6And he went forth and warred 
against the Philistines, and broke down 
the wall of Gath, and the wall of 
Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod; and 
he built cities in [the country of] 
Ashdod, and among the Philistines. 
7And God helped him against the 
Philistines, and against the Arabians 
that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the 
26 




Meunim. 8And the Ammonites gave 
gifts to Uzziah; and his name spread 
abroad even to the entrance of Egypt; 
for he waxed exceeding strong. 
9Moreover Uzziah built towers in 
Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the 
valley gate, and at the Turning, and 
fortified them. 10And be built towers in 
the wilderness, and hewed out many 
cisterns, for he had much cattle; in the 
Lowland also, and in the table-land; 
and he had husbandmen and 
vinedressers in the mountains and in 
the fruitful fields; for he loved 
husbandry. 

11Moreover Uzziah had an army of 
fighting men, that went out to war by 
bands, according to the number of 
their reckoning made by Jeiel the 
scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under 
the hand of Hananiah, one of the 
king’s captains. 12The whole number 
of the heads of fathers’houses, even 
the mighty men of valour, was two 
thousand and six hundred. 13And under 
their hand was a trained army, three 
hundred thousand and seven thousand 
and five hundred, that made war with 
mighty power, to help the king against 
the enemy. 14And Uzziah prepared for 
them, even for all the host, shields, and 
spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, 
and bows, and stones for slinging. 
15And he made in Jerusalem engines, 
invented by skilful men, to be on the 
towers and upon the corners, 
wherewith to shoot arrows and great 
stones. And his name spread far 
abroad; for he was marvellously 
helped, till he was strong. 

16But when he was strong, his heart 
was lifted up so that he did corruptly, 
and he trespassed against the LORD his 
God; for he went into the temple of the 
LORD to burn incense upon the altar of 
incense. 17And Azariah the priest went 
in after him, and with him fourscore 
priests of the LORD, that were valiant 
men; 18and they withstood Uzziah the 
king, and said unto him: ‘It pertaineth 
not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense 
unto the LORD, but to the priests the 
sons of Aaron that are consecrated it 
pertaineth to burn incense; go out of 
the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; 
neither shall it be for thy honour from 
the LORD God.’ 19Then Uzziah was 
wroth; and he had a censer in his hand 
to burn incense; and while he was 
wroth with the priests, the leprosy 
broke forth in his forehead before the 
priests in the house of the LORD, beside 
the altar of incense. 20And Azariah the 
chief priest, and all the priests, looked 
upon him, and, behold, he was leprous 
in his forehead, and they thrust him 
out quickly from thence; yea, himself 
made haste also to go out, because the 
LORD had smitten him. 21And Uzziah 
the king was a leper unto the day of his 
death, and dwelt in a house set apart, 
being a leper; for he was cut off from 
the house of the LORD; and Jotham his 
son was over the king’s house, judging 
the people of the land. 22Now the rest 
of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did 
Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, 


write. 23So Uzziah slept with his 
fathers; and they buried him with his 
fathers in the field of burial which 
belonged to the kings; for they said: 
‘He is a leper’; and Jotham his son 
reigned in his stead. 

Jotham was twenty and five 
years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned sixteen years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Jerushah the daughter of Zadok. 2And 
he did that which was right in the eyes 
of the LORD, according to all that his 
father Uzziah had done; howbeit he 
entered not into the temple of the 
LORD. And the people did yet 
corruptly. 3He built the upper gate of 
the house of the LORD, and on the wall 
of Ophel he built much. 4Moreover he 
built cities in the hill-country of Judah, 
and in the forest he built castles and 
towers. 5He fought also with the king 
of the children of Ammon, and 
prevailed against them. And the 
children of Ammon gave him the same 
year a hundred talents of silver, and 
ten thousand measures of wheat, and 
ten thousand of barley. So much did 
the children of Ammon render unto 
him, in the second year also, and in the 
third. 6So Jotham became mighty, 
because he ordered his ways before the 
LORD his God. 7Now the rest of the acts 
of Jotham, and all his wars, and his 
ways, behold, they are written in the 
book of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
8He was five and twenty years old 
when he began to reign, and reigned 
sixteen years in Jerusalem. 9And 
Jotham slept with his fathers, and they 
buried him in the city of David; and 
Ahaz his son reigned in his stead. 

Ahaz was twenty years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; 
and he did not that which was right in 
the eyes of the LORD, like David his 
father; 2but he walked in the ways of 
the kings of Israel, and made also 
molten images for the Baalim. 
3Moreover he offered in the valley of 
the son of Hinnom, and burnt his 
children in the fire, according to the 
abominations of the heathen, whom 
the LORD cast out before the children 
of Israel. 4And he sacrificed and 
offered in the high places, and on the 
hills, and under every leafy tree. 
5Wherefore the LORD his God delivered 
him into the hand of the king of Aram; 
and they smote him, and carried away 
of his a great multitude of captives, 
and brought them to Damascus. And 
he was also delivered into the hand of 
the king of Israel, who smote him with 
a great slaughter. 6For Pekah the son of 
Remaliah slew in Judah a hundred and 
twenty thousand in one day, all of 
them valiant men; because they had 
forsaken the LORD, the God of their 
fathers. 7And Zichri, a mighty man of 
Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s 
son, and Azrikam the ruler of the 
house, and Elkanah that was next to 
the king. 8And the children of Israel 
carried away captive of their brethren 
two hundred thousand women, sons, 
and daughters, and took also away 
27 

28 




much spoil from them, and brought the 
spoil to Samaria. 

9But a prophet of the LORD was 
there, whose name was Oded; and he 
went out to meet the host that came to 
Samaria, and said unto them: ‘Behold, 
because the LORD, the God of your 
fathers, was wroth with Judah, He hath 
delivered them into your hand, and ye 
have slain them in a rage which hath 
reached up unto heaven. 10And now ye 
purpose to bring the children of Judah 
and Jerusalem into subjection for 
bondmen and bondwomen unto you; 
but are there not even with you acts of 
guilt of your own against the LORD 
your God? 11Now hear me therefore, 
and send back the captives, that ye 
have taken captive of your brethren; 
for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon 
you.’ 12Then certain of the heads of the 
children of Ephraim, Azariah the son 
of Jehohanan, Berechiah the son of 
Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son 
of Shallum, and Amasa the son of 
Hadlai, stood up against them that 
came from the war, 13and said unto 
them: ‘Ye shall not bring in the 
captives hither; for ye purpose that 
which will bring upon us guilt against 
the LORD, to add unto our sins and to 
our guilt; for our guilt is great, and 
there is fierce wrath against Israel.’ 
14So the armed men left the captives 
and the spoil before the princes and all 
the congregation. 15And the men that 
have been mentioned by name rose up, 
and took the captives, and with the 
spoil clothed all that were naked 
among them, and arrayed them, and 
shod them, and gave them to eat and to 
drink, and anointed them, and carried 
all the feeble of them upon asses, and 
brought them to Jericho, the city of 
palm-trees, unto their brethren; then 
they returned to Samaria. 

16At that time did king Ahaz send 
unto the kings of Assyria to help him. 
17For again the Edomites had come 
and smitten Judah, and carried away 
captives. 18The Philistines also had 
invaded the cities of the Lowland, and 
of the South of Judah, and had taken 
Beth-shemesh, and Aijalon, and 
Gederoth, and Soco with the towns 
thereof, and Timnah with the towns 
thereof, Gimzo also and the towns 
thereof; and they dwelt there. 19For the 
LORD brought Judah low because of 
Ahaz king of Israel; for he had cast 
away restraint in Judah, and acted 
treacherously against the LORD. 20And 
Tillegath-pilneser king of Assyria 
came unto him, and distressed him, but 
strengthened him not. 21For Ahaz 
stripped the house of the LORD, and the 
house of the king and the princes, and 
gave thereof unto the king of Assyria; 
but it helped him not. 

22And in the time of his distress did 
he act even more treacherously against 
the LORD, this same king Ahaz. 23For 
he sacrificed unto the gods of 
Damascus, which smote him; and he 
said: ‘Because the gods of the kings of 
Aram helped them, therefore will I 
sacrifice to them, that they may help 
me.’ But they were the ruin of him, 


and of all Israel. 24And Ahaz gathered 
together the vessels of the house of 
God, and cut in pieces the vessels of 
the house of God, and shut up the 
doors of the house of the LORD; and he 
made him altars in every corner of 
Jerusalem. 25And in every city of 
Judah he made high places to offer 
unto other gods, and provoked the 
LORD, the God of his fathers. 26Now 
the rest of his acts, and all his ways, 
first and last, behold, they are written 
in the book of the kings of Judah and 
Israel. 27And Ahaz slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
city, even in Jerusalem; for they 
brought him not into the sepulchres of 
the kings of Israel; and Hezekiah his 
son reigned in his stead. 

Hezekiah began to reign when 
he was five and twenty years 
old; and he reigned nine and twenty 
years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s 
name was Abijah the daughter of 
Zechariah. 2And he did that which was 
right in the eyes of the LORD, according 
to all that David his father had done. 
3He in the first year of his reign, in the 
first month, opened the doors of the 
house of the LORD, and repaired them. 
4And he brought in the priests and the 
Levites, and gathered them together 
into the broad place on the east; 5and 
said unto them: ‘Hear me, ye Levites: 
now sanctify yourselves, and sanctify 
the house of the LORD, the God of your 
fathers, and carry forth the filthiness 
out of the holy place. 6For our fathers 
have acted treacherously, and done 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD our God, and have forsaken Him, 
and have turned away their faces from 
the habitation of the LORD, and turned 
their backs. 7Also they have shut up 
the doors of the porch, and put out the 
lamps, and have not burned incense 
nor offered burnt-offerings in the holy 
place unto the God of Israel. 
8Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was 
upon Judah and Jerusalem, and He 
hath delivered them to be a horror, an 
astonishment, and a hissing, as ye see 
with your eyes. 9For, lo, our fathers 
have fallen by the sword, and our sons 
and our daughters and our wives are in 
captivity for this. 10Now it is in my 
heart to make a covenant with the 
LORD, the God of Israel, that His fierce 
anger may turn away from us. 11My 
sons, be not now negligent; for the 
LORD hath chosen you to stand before 
Him, to minister unto Him, and that ye 
should be His ministers, and offer unto 
Him.’ 

12Then the Levites arose, Mahath 
the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of 
Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites; 
and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son 
of Abdi, and Azariah the son of 
Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah 
the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son 
of Joah; 13and of the sons of Elizaphan, 
Shimri and Jeiel; and of the sons of 
Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah; 14and 
of the sons of Heman, Jehiel and 
Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun, 
Shemaiah and Uzziel. 15And they 
gathered their brethren, and sanctified 
29 




themselves, and went in, according to 
the commandment of the king by the 
words of the LORD, to cleanse the 
house of the LORD. 16And the priests 
went in unto the inner part of the 
house of the LORD, to cleanse it, and 
brought out all the uncleanness that 
they found in the temple of the LORD 
into the court of the house of the LORD. 
And the Levites took it, to carry it out 
abroad to the brook Kidron. 17Now 
they began on the first day of the first 
month to sanctify, and on the eighth 
day of the month came they to the 
porch of the LORD; and they sanctified 
the house of the LORD in eight days; 
and on the sixteenth day of the first 
month they made an end. 18Then they 
went in to Hezekiah the king within 
[the palace], and said: ‘We have 
cleansed all the house of the LORD, 
even the altar of burnt-offering, with 
all the vessels thereof, and the table of 
showbread, with all the vessels 
thereof. 19Moreover all the vessels, 
which king Ahaz in his reign did cast 
away when he acted treacherously, 
have we prepared and sanctified; and, 
behold, they are before the altar of the 
LORD.’ 

20Then Hezekiah the king arose 
early, and gathered the princes of the 
city, and went up to the house of the 
LORD. 21And they brought seven 
bullocks, and seven rams, and seven 
lambs, and seven he-goats, for a sin-
offering for the kingdom and for the 
sanctuary and for Judah. And he 
commanded the priests the sons of 
Aaron to offer them on the altar of the 
LORD. 22So they killed the bullocks, 
and the priests received the blood, and 
dashed it against the altar; and they 
killed the rams, and dashed the blood 
against the altar; they killed also the 
lambs, and dashed the blood against 
the altar. 23And they brought near the 
he-goats for the sin-offering before the 
king and the congregation, and they 
laid their hands upon them; 24and the 
priests killed them, and they made a 
sin-offering with their blood upon the 
altar, to make atonement for all Israel; 
for the king commanded that the 
burnt-offering and the sin-offering 
should be made for all Israel. 

25And he set the Levites in the house 
of the LORD with cymbals, with 
psalteries, and with harps, according to 
the commandment of David, and of 
Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the 
prophet; for the commandment was of 
the LORD by His prophets. 26And the 
Levites stood with the instruments of 
David, and the priests with the 
trumpets. 27And Hezekiah commanded 
to offer the burnt-offering upon the 
altar. And when the burnt-offering 
began, the song of the LORD began 
also, and the trumpets, together with 
the instruments of David king of 
Israel. 28And all the congregation 
prostrated themselves, and the singers 
sang, and the trumpeters sounded; all 
this continued until the burnt-offering 
was finished. 29And when they had 
made an end of offering, the king and 
all that were present with him bowed 


themselves and prostrated themselves. 
30Moreover Hezekiah the king and the 
princes commanded the Levites to sing 
praises unto the LORD with the words 
of David, and of Asaph the seer. And 
they sang praises with gladness, and 
they bowed their heads and prostrated 
themselves. 

31Then Hezekiah answered and said: 
‘Now ye have consecrated yourselves 
unto the LORD, come near and bring 
sacrifices and thank-offerings into the 
house of the LORD.’ And the 
congregation brought in sacrifices and 
thank-offerings; and as many as were 
of a willing heart brought burnt-
offerings. 32And the number of the 
burnt-offerings, which the 
congregation brought, was threescore 
and ten bullocks, a hundred rams, and 
two hundred lambs; all these were for 
a burnt-offering to the LORD. 33And the 
consecrated things were six hundred 
oxen and three thousand sheep. 34But 
the priests were too few, so that they 
could not flay all the burnt-offerings; 
wherefore their brethren the Levites 
did help them, till the work was ended, 
and until the priests had sanctified 
themselves; for the Levites were more 
upright in heart to sanctify themselves 
than the priests. 35And also the burnt-
offerings were in abundance, with the 
fat of the peace-offerings, and the 
drink-offerings for every burnt-
offering. So the service of the house of 
the LORD was firmly established. 36And 
Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, 
because of that which God had 
prepared for the people; for the thing 
was done suddenly. 

And Hezekiah sent to all Israel 
and Judah, and wrote letters 
also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that 
they should come to the house of the 
LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the 
passover unto the LORD, the God of 
Israel. 2For the king had taken counsel, 
and his princes, and all the 
congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the 
passover in the second month. 3For 
they could not keep it at that time, 
because the priests had not sanctified 
themselves in sufficient number, 
neither had the people gathered 
themselves together to Jerusalem. 
4And the thing was right in the eyes of 
the king and of all the congregation. 
5So they established a decree to make 
proclamation throughout all Israel, 
from Beer-sheba even to Dan, that 
they should come to keep the passover 
unto the LORD, the God of Israel, at 
Jerusalem; for they had not kept it in 
great numbers according as it is 
written. 

6So the posts went with the letters 
from the king and his princes 
throughout all Israel and Judah, and 
according to the commandment of the 
king, saying: ‘Ye children of Israel, 
turn back unto the LORD, the God of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that He 
may return to the remnant that are 
escaped of you out of the hand of the 
kings of Assyria. 7And be not ye like 
your fathers, and like your brethren, 
who acted treacherously against the 
30 




LORD, the God of their fathers, so that 
He delivered them to be an 
astonishment, as ye see. 8Now be ye 
not stiffnecked, as your fathers were; 
but yield yourselves unto the LORD, 
and enter into His sanctuary, which He 
hath sanctified for ever, and serve the 
LORD your God, that His fierce anger 
may turn away from you. 9For if ye 
turn back unto the LORD, your brethren 
and your children shall find 
compassion before them that led them 
captive, and shall come back into this 
land; for the LORD your God is 
gracious and merciful, and will not 
turn away His face from you, if ye 
return unto Him.’ 

10So the posts passed from city to 
city through the country of Ephraim 
and Manasseh, even unto Zebulun; but 
they laughed them to scorn, and 
mocked them. 11Nevertheless divers of 
Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun 
humbled themselves, and came to 
Jerusalem. 12Also in Judah was the 
hand of God to give them one heart, to 
do the commandment of the king and 
of the princes by the word of the LORD. 

13And there assembled at Jerusalem 
much people to keep the feast of 
unleavened bread in the second month, 
a very great congregation. 14And they 
arose and took away the altars that 
were in Jerusalem, and all the altars 
for incense took they away, and cast 
them into the brook Kidron. 15Then 
they killed the passover lamb on the 
fourteenth day of the second month; 
and the priests and the Levites were 
ashamed, and sanctified themselves, 
and brought burnt-offerings into the 
house of the LORD. 16And they stood in 
their place after their order, according 
to the law of Moses the man of God; 
the priests dashed the blood, which 
they received of the hand of the 
Levites. 17For there were many in the 
congregation that had not sanctified 
themselves; therefore the Levites had 
the charge of killing the passover 
lambs for every one that was not clean, 
to sanctify them unto the LORD. 18For a 
multitude of the people, even many of 
Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and 
Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, 
yet did they eat the passover otherwise 
than it is written. For Hezekiah had 
prayed for them, saying: ‘The good 
LORD pardon 19every one that setteth 
his heart to seek God, the LORD, the 
God of his fathers, though [he be] not 
[cleansed] according to the 
purification that pertaineth to holy 
things.’ 20And the LORD hearkened to 
Hezekiah, and healed the people. 
21And the children of Israel that were 
present at Jerusalem kept the feast of 
unleavened bread seven days with 
great gladness; and the Levites and the 
priests praised the LORD day by day, 
singing with loud instruments unto the 
LORD. 22And Hezekiah spoke 
encouragingly unto all the Levites that 
were well skilled in the service of the 
LORD. So they did eat throughout the 
feast for the seven days, offering 
sacrifices of peace-offerings, and 


giving thanks to the LORD, the God of 
their fathers. 

23And the whole congregation took 
counsel to keep other seven days; and 
they kept other seven days with 
gladness. 24For Hezekiah king of Judah 
did give to the congregation for 
offerings a thousand bullocks and 
seven thousand sheep; and the princes 
gave to the congregation a thousand 
bullocks and ten thousand sheep; and 
priests sanctified themselves in great 
numbers. 25And all the congregation of 
Judah, with the priests and the Levites, 
and all the congregation that came out 
of Israel, and the strangers that came 
out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt 
in Judah, rejoiced. 26So there was great 
joy in Jerusalem; for since the time of 
Solomon the son of David king of 
Israel there was not the like in 
Jerusalem. 27Then the priests the 
Levites arose and blessed the people; 
and their voice was heard [of the 
LORD], and their prayer came up to His 
holy habitation, even unto heaven. 

Now when all this was 
finished, all Israel that were 
present went out to the cities of Judah, 
and broke in pieces the pillars, and 
hewed down the Asherim, and broke 
down the high places and the altars out 
of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim 
also and Manasseh, until they had 
destroyed them all. Then all the 
children of Israel returned, every man 
to his possession, into their own cities. 

2And Hezekiah appointed the 
courses of the priest and the Levites 
after their courses, every man 
according to his service, both the 
priests and the Levites, for burnt-
offerings and for peace-offerings, to 
minister, and to give thanks, and to 
praise in the gates of the camp of the 
LORD. 3He appointed also the king’s 
portion of his substance for the burnt-
offerings, to wit, for the morning and 
evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-
offerings for the sabbaths, and for the 
new moons, and for the appointed 
seasons, as it is written in the Law of 
the LORD. 4Moreover he commanded 
the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to 
give the portion of the priests and the 
Levites, that they might give 
themselves to the law of the LORD. 
5And as soon as the commandment 
came abroad, the children of Israel 
gave in abundance the first-fruits of 
corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of 
all the increase of the field; and the 
tithe of all things brought they in 
abundantly. 6And the children of Israel 
and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of 
Judah, they also brought in the tithe of 
oxen and sheep, and the tithe of 
hallowed things which were hallowed 
unto the LORD their God, and laid them 
by heaps. 7In the third month they 
began to lay the foundation of the 
heaps, and finished them in the 
seventh month. 8And when Hezekiah 
and the princes came and saw the 
heaps, they blessed the LORD, and His 
people Israel. 9Then Hezekiah 
questioned the priests and the Levites 
concerning the heaps. 10And Azariah 
31 




the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, 
answered him and said: ‘Since the 
people began to bring the offerings 
into the house of the LORD, we have 
eaten and had enough, and have left 
plenty; for the LORD hath blessed His 
people; and that which is left is this 
great store.’ 

11Then Hezekiah commanded to 
prepare chambers in the house of the 
LORD; and they prepared them. 12And 
they brought in the offerings and the 
tithes and the hallowed things 
faithfully; and over them Conaniah the 
Levite was ruler, and Shimei his 
brother was second. 13And Jehiel, and 
Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and 
Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and 
Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, 
were overseers under the hand of 
Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by 
the appointment of Hezekiah the king, 
and Azariah the ruler of the house of 
God. 14And Kore the son of Imnah the 
Levite, the porter at the east gate, was 
over the freewill-offerings of God, to 
distribute the offerings of the LORD, 
and the most holy things. 15And under 
him were Eden, and Miniamin, and 
Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and 
Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, 
in their office of trust, to give to their 
brethren by courses, as well to the 
great as to the small; 16beside them 
that were reckoned by genealogy of 
males, from three years old and 
upward, even every one that entered 
into the house of the LORD, for his 
daily portion, for their service in their 
charges according to their courses; 
17and them that were reckoned by 
genealogy of the priests by their 
fathers’houses, and the Levites from 
twenty years old and upward, in their 
charges by their courses; 18even to give 
to them that were reckoned by 
genealogy of all their little ones, their 
wives, and their sons, and their 
daughters, through all the 
congregation; for in their office of 
trust they administered the sacred 
gifts; 19also for the sons of Aaron the 
priests, that were in the fields of the 
open land about their cities, in every 
city, there were men that were 
mentioned by name, to give portions to 
all the males among the priests, and to 
all that were reckoned by genealogy 
among the Levites. 

20And thus did Hezekiah throughout 
all Judah; and he wrought that which 
was good and right and faithful before 
the LORD his God. 21And in every work 
that he began in the service of the 
house of God, and in the law, and in 
the commandments, to seek his God, 
he did it with all his heart, and 
prospered. 

After these things, and this 
faithfulness, Sennacherib king 
of Assyria came, and entered into 
Judah, and encamped against the 
fortified cities, and thought to make a 
breach therein for himself. 2And when 
Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was 
come, and that he was purposed to 
fight against Jerusalem, 3he took 
counsel with his princes and his 
32 




mighty men to stop the waters of the 
fountains which were without the city; 
and they helped him. 4So there was 
gathered much people together, and 
they stopped all the fountains, and the 
brook that flowed through the midst of 
the land, saying: ‘Why should the 
kings of Assyria come, and find much 
water?’ 5And he took courage, and 
built up all the wall that was broken 
down, and raised it up to the towers, 
and another wall without, and 
strengthened Millo in the city of 
David, and made weapons and shields 
in abundance. 6And he set captains of 
war over the people, and gathered 
them together to him in the broad 
place at the gate of the city, and spoke 
encouragingly to them, saying: 7’Be 
strong and of good courage, be not 
afraid nor dismayed for the king of 
Assyria, nor for all the multitude that 
is with him; for there is a Greater with 
us than with him: 8with him is an arm 
of flesh; but with us is the LORD our 
God to help us, and to fight our 
battles.’ And the people rested 
themselves upon the words of 
Hezekiah king of Judah. 

9After this did Sennacherib king of 
Assyria send his servants to 
Jerusalem—now he was before 
Lachish, and all his power with him—
unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto 
all Judah that were at Jerusalem, 
saying: 10’Thus saith Sennacherib king 
of Assyria: Whereon do ye trust, that 
ye abide the siege in Jerusalem? 
11Doth not Hezekiah persuade you, to 
give you over to die by famine and by 
thirst, saying: The LORD our God will 
deliver us out of the hand of the king 
of Assyria? 12Hath not the same 
Hezekiah taken away His high places 
and His altars, and commanded Judah 
and Jerusalem, saying: Ye shall 
worship before one altar, and upon it 
shall ye offer? 13Know ye not what I 
and my fathers have done unto all the 
peoples of the lands? Were the gods of 
the nations of the lands in any wise 
able to deliver their land out of my 
hand? 14Who was there among all the 
gods of those nations which my fathers 
utterly destroyed, that could deliver his 
people out of my hand, that your God 
should be able to deliver you out of 
my hand? 15Now therefore let not 
Hezekiah beguile you, nor persuade 
you after this manner, neither believe 
ye him; for no god of any nation or 
kingdom was able to deliver his people 
out of my hand, and out of the hand of 
my fathers; how much less shall your 
God deliver you out of my hand?’ 

16And his servants spoke yet more 
against the LORD God, and against His 
servant Hezekiah. 17He wrote also a 
letter, to taunt the LORD, the God of 
Israel, and to speak against Him, 
saying: ‘As the gods of the nations of 
the lands, which have not delivered 
their people out of my hand, so shall 
not the God of Hezekiah deliver His 
people out of my hand.’ 18And they 
cried with a loud voice in the 
Jews’language unto the people of 
Jerusalem that were on the wall, to 


terrify them, and to affright them; that 
they might take the city. 19And they 
spoke of the God of Jerusalem, as of 
the gods of the peoples of the earth, 
which are the work of men’s hands. 

20And Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah 
the prophet the son of Amoz, prayed 
because of this, and cried to heaven. 
21And the LORD sent an angel, who cut 
off all the mighty men of valour, and 
the leaders and captains, in the camp 
of the king of Assyria. So he returned 
with shame of face to his own land. 
And when he was come into the house 
of his god, they that came forth of his 
own bowels slew him there with the 
sword. 22Thus the LORD saved 
Hezekiah and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem from the hand of 
Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and 
from the hand of all, and guided them 
on every side. 23And many brought 
gifts unto the LORD to Jerusalem, and 
precious things to Hezekiah king of 
Judah; so that he was exalted in the 
sight of all nations from thenceforth. 

24In those days Hezekiah was sick 
even unto death; and he prayed unto 
the LORD; and He spoke unto him, and 
gave him a sign. 25But Hezekiah 
rendered not according to the benefit 
done unto him; for his heart was lifted 
up; therefore there was wrath upon 
him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. 
26Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled 
himself for the pride of his heart, both 
he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so 
that the wrath of the LORD came not 
upon them in the days of Hezekiah. 

27And Hezekiah had exceeding 
much riches and honour; and he 
provided him treasuries for silver, and 
for gold, and for precious stones, and 
for spices, and for shields, and for all 
manner of goodly vessels; 28store-
houses also for the increase of corn, 
and wine, and oil; and stalls for all 
manner of beasts, and flocks in folds. 
29Moreover he provided him cities, and 
possessions of flocks and herds in 
abundance; for God had given him 
very much substance. 30This same 
Hezekiah also stopped the upper 
spring of the waters of Gihon, and 
brought them straight down on the 
west side of the city of David. And 
Hezekiah prospered in all his works. 
31Howbeit in the business of the 
ambassadors of the princes of 
Babylon, who sent unto him to inquire 
of the wonder that was done in the 
land, God left him, to try him, that He 
might know all that was in his heart. 

32Now the rest of the acts of 
Hezekiah, and his good deeds, behold, 
they are written in the vision of Isaiah 
the prophet the son of Amoz, and in 
the book of the kings of Judah and 
Israel. 33And Hezekiah slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
ascent of the sepulchres of the sons of 
David; and all Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem did him 
honour at his death. And Manasseh his 
son reigned in his stead. 

Manasseh was twelve years 
old when he began to reign; 
and he reigned fifty and five years in 
33 




Jerusalem. 2And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD, after the 
abominations of the nations, whom the 
LORD cast out before the children of 
Israel. 3For he built again the high 
places which Hezekiah his father had 
broken down; and he reared up altars 
for the Baalim, and made Asheroth, 
and worshipped all the host of heaven, 
and served them. 4And he built altars 
in the house of the LORD, whereof the 
LORD said: ‘In Jerusalem shall My 
name be for ever.’ 5And he built altars 
for all the host of heaven in the two 
courts of the house of the LORD. 6He 
also made his children to pass through 
the fire in the valley of the son of 
Hinnom; and he practised soothsaying, 
and used enchantments, and practised 
sorcery, and appointed them that 
divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit; 
he wrought much evil in the sight of 
the LORD, to provoke Him. 7And he set 
the graven image of the idol, which he 
had made, in the house of God, of 
which God said to David and to 
Solomon his son: ‘In this house, and in 
Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of 
all the tribes of Israel, will I put My 
name for ever; 8neither will I any more 
remove the foot of Israel from off the 
land which I have appointed for your 
fathers; if only they will observe to do 
all that I have commanded them, even 
all the law and the statutes and the 
ordinances by the hand of Moses.’ 
9And Manasseh made Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, so that 
they did evil more than did the nations, 
whom the LORD destroyed before the 
children of Israel. 

10And the LORD spoke to Manasseh, 
and to his people; but they gave no 
heed. 11Wherefore the LORD brought 
upon them the captains of the host of 
the king of Assyria, who took 
Manasseh with hooks, and bound him 
with fetters, and carried him to 
Babylon. 12And when he was in 
distress, he besought the LORD his God, 
and humbled himself greatly before 
the God of his fathers. 13And he prayed 
unto Him; and He was entreated of 
him, and heard his supplication, and 
brought him back to Jerusalem into his 
kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that 
the LORD He was God. 

14Now after this he built an outer 
wall to the city of David, on the west 
side of Gihon, in the valley, even to 
the entrance at the fish gate; and he 
compassed about Ophel, and raised it 
up a very great height; and he put 
captains of the army in all the fortified 
cities of Judah. 15And he took away the 
strange gods, and the idol out of the 
house of the LORD, and all the altars 
that he had built in the mount of the 
house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, 
and cast them out of the city. 16And he 
built up the altar of the LORD, and 
offered thereon sacrifices of peace-
offerings and of thanksgiving, and 
commanded Judah to serve the LORD, 
the God of Israel. 17Nevertheless the 
people did sacrifice still in the high 
places, but only unto the LORD their 
God. 


18Now the rest of the acts of 
Manasseh, and his prayer unto his 
God, and the words of the seers that 
spoke to him in the name of the LORD, 
the God of Israel, behold, they are 
written among the acts of the kings of 
Israel. 19His prayer also, and how 
[God] was entreated of him, and all his 
sin and his transgression, and the 
places wherein he built high places, 
and set up the Asherim and the graven 
images, before he humbled himself; 
behold, they are written in the history 
of the seers. 20So Manasseh slept with 
his fathers, and they buried him in his 
own house; and Amon his son reigned 
in his stead. 

21Amon was twenty and two years 
old when he began to reign; and he 
reigned two years in Jerusalem. 22And 
he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the LORD, as did Manasseh his 
father; and Amon sacrificed unto all 
the graven images which Manasseh his 
father had made, and served them. 
23And he humbled not himself before 
the LORD, as Manasseh his father had 
humbled himself; but this same Amon 
became guilty more and more. 24And 
his servants conspired against him, and 
put him to death in his own house. 
25But the people of the land slew all 
them that had conspired against king 
Amon; and the people of the land 
made Josiah his son king in his stead. 

Josiah was eight years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned thirty and one years in 
Jerusalem. 2And he did that which was 
right in the eyes of the LORD, and 
walked in the ways of David his 
father, and turned not aside to the right 
hand or to the left. 3For in the eighth 
year of his reign, while he was yet 
young, he began to seek after the God 
of David his father; and in the twelfth 
year he began to purge Judah and 
Jerusalem from the high places, and 
the Asherim, and the graven images, 
and the molten images. 4And they 
broke down the altars of the Baalim in 
his presence; and the sun-images, that 
were on high above them, he hewed 
down; and the Asherim, and the 
graven images, and the molten images, 
he broke in pieces, and made dust of 
them, and strewed it upon the graves 
of them that had sacrificed unto them. 
5And he burnt the bones of the priests 
upon their altars, and purged Judah 
and Jerusalem. 6And so did he in the 
cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and 
Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their 
axes round about. 7And he broke down 
the altars, and beat the Asherim and 
the graven images into powder, and 
hewed down all the sun-images 
throughout all the land of Israel, and 
returned to Jerusalem. 

8Now in the eighteenth year of his 
reign, when he had purged the land, 
and the house, he sent Shaphan the son 
of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor 
of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz 
the recorder, to repair the house of the 
LORD his God. 9And they came to 
Hilkiah the high priest, and delivered 
the money that was brought into the 
34 




house of God, which the Levites, the 
keepers of the door, had gathered of 
the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, 
and of all the remnant of Israel, and of 
all Judah and Benjamin, and they 
returned to Jerusalem. 10And they 
delivered it into the hand of the 
workmen that had the oversight of the 
house of the LORD; and the workmen 
that wrought in the house of the LORD 
gave it to mend and repair the house; 
11even to the carpenters and to the 
builders gave they it, to buy hewn 
stone, and timber for couplings, and to 
make beams for the houses which the 
kings of Judah had destroyed. 12And 
the men did the work faithfully; and 
the overseers of them were Jahath and 
Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of 
Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, 
of the sons of the Kohathites, to 
preside over it; and other of the 
Levites, all that had skill with 
instruments of music. 13Also they were 
over the bearers of burdens, and 
presided over all that did the work in 
every manner of service; and of the 
Levites there were scribes, and 
officers, and porters. 

14And when they brought out the 
money that was brought into the house 
of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found 
the book of the Law of the LORD given 
by Moses. 15and Hilkiah answered and 
said to Shaphan the scribe: ‘I have 
found the book of the Law in the 
house of the LORD.’ And Hilkiah 
delivered the book to Shaphan. 16And 
Shaphan carried the book to the king, 
and moreover brought back word unto 
the king, saying: ‘All that was 
committed to thy servants, they do it. 
17And they have poured out the money 
that was found in the house of the 
LORD, and have delivered it into the 
hand of the overseers, and into the 
hand of the workmen.’ 18And Shaphan 
the scribe told the king, saying: 
‘Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a 
book.’ And Shaphan read therein 
before the king. 19And it came to pass, 
when the king had heard the words of 
the Law, that he rent his clothes. 20And 
the king commanded Hilkiah, and 
Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and 
Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan 
the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s 
servant, saying: 21’Go ye, inquire of 
the LORD for me, and for them that are 
left in Israel and in Judah, concerning 
the words of the book that is found; for 
great is the wrath of the LORD that is 
poured out upon us, because our 
fathers have not kept the word of the 
LORD, to do according unto all that is 
written in this book.’ 

22So Hilkiah, and they whom the 
king [had commanded], went to 
Huldah the prophetess, the wife of 
Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of 
Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe—now 
she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second 
quarter—and they spoke to her to that 
effect. 23And she said unto them: 
‘Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel: Tell ye the man that sent you 
unto me: 24Thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, I will bring evil upon this 


place, and upon the inhabitants 
thereof, even all the curses that are 
written in the book which they have 
read before the king of Judah; 
25because they have forsaken Me, and 
have offered unto other gods, that they 
might provoke Me with all the works 
of their hands; therefore is My wrath 
poured out upon this place, and it shall 
not be quenched. 26But unto the king 
of Judah, who sent you to inquire of 
the LORD, thus shall ye say to him: 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 
As touching the words which thou hast 
heard, 27because thy heart was tender, 
and thou didst humble thyself before 
God, when thou heardest His words 
against this place, and against the 
inhabitants thereof, and hast humbled 
thyself before Me, and hast rent thy 
clothes, and wept before Me; I also 
have heard thee, saith the LORD. 
28Behold, I will gather thee to thy 
fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to 
thy grave in peace, neither shall thine 
eyes see all the evil that I will bring 
upon this place, and upon the 
inhabitants thereof.’ And they brought 
back word unto the king. 

29Then the king sent and gathered 
together all the elders of Judah and 
Jerusalem. 30And the king went up to 
the house of the LORD, and all the men 
of Judah and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and the priests, and the 
Levites, and all the people, both great 
and small; and he read in their ears all 
the words of the book of the covenant 
that was found in the house of the 
LORD. 31And the king stood in his 
place, and made a covenant before the 
LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to 
keep His commandments, and His 
testimonies, and His statutes, with all 
his heart, and with all his soul, to 
perform the words of the covenant that 
were written in this book. 32And he 
caused all that were found in 
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. 
And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did 
according to the covenant of God, the 
God of their fathers. 33And Josiah took 
away all the abominations out of all 
the countries that pertained to the 
children of Israel, and made all that 
were found in Israel to serve, even to 
serve the LORD their God. All his days 
they departed not from following the 
LORD, the God of their fathers. 

And Josiah kept a passover 
unto the LORD in Jerusalem; 
and they killed the passover lamb on 
the fourteenth day of the first month. 
2And he set the priests in their charges, 
and encouraged them to the service of 
the house of the LORD. 3And he said 
unto the Levites that taught all Israel, 
that were holy unto the LORD: ‘Put the 
holy ark in the house which Solomon 
the son of David king of Israel did 
build; there shall no more be a burden 
upon your shoulders; now serve the 
LORD your God, and His people Israel. 
4And prepare ye after your 
fathers’houses by your courses, 
according to the writing of David king 
of Israel, and according to the writing 
of Solomon his son. 5And stand in the 
35 




holy place according to the divisions 
of the fathers’houses of your brethren 
the children of the people, and [let 
there be for each] a portion of a 
father’s house of the Levites. 6And kill 
the passover lamb, and sanctify 
yourselves, and prepare for your 
brethren, to do according to the word 
of the LORD by the hand of Moses.’ 

7And Josiah gave to the children of 
the people, of the flock, lambs and 
kids, all of them for the passover-
offerings, unto all that were present, to 
the number of thirty thousand, and 
three thousand bullocks; these were of 
the king’s substance. 8And his princes 
gave willingly unto the people, to the 
priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah and 
Zechariah and Jehiel, the rulers of the 
house of God, gave unto the priests for 
the passover-offerings two thousand 
and six hundred [small cattle], and 
three hundred oxen. 9Conaniah also, 
and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his 
brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and 
Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, 
gave unto the Levites for the passover-
offerings five thousand [small cattle], 
and five hundred oxen. 

10So the service was prepared, and 
the priests stood in their place, and the 
Levites by their courses, according to 
the king’s commandment. 11And they 
killed the passover lamb, and the 
priests dashed [the blood, which they 
received] of their hand, and the Levites 
flayed them. 12And they removed the 
portions that were to be burnt, that 
they might give them to the divisions 
of the fathers’houses of the children of 
the people, to present unto the LORD, as 
it is written in the book of Moses. And 
so did they with the oxen. 13And they 
roasted the passover with fire 
according to the ordinance; and the 
holy offerings sod they in pots, and in 
caldrons, and in pans, and carried them 
quickly to all the children of the 
people. 14And afterward they prepared 
for themselves, and for the priests; 
because the priests the sons of Aaron 
were busied in offering the portions 
that were to be burnt and the fat until 
night; therefore the Levites prepared 
for themselves, and for the priests the 
sons of Aaron. 15And the singers the 
sons of Asaph were in their place, 
according to the commandment of 
David, and Asaph, and Heman, and 
Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the 
porters were at every gate; they needed 
not to depart from their service, for 
their brethren the Levites prepared for 
them. 

16So all the service of the LORD was 
prepared the same day, to keep the 
passover, and to offer burnt-offerings 
upon the altar of the LORD, according 
to the commandment of king Josiah. 
17And the children of Israel that were 
present kept the passover at that time, 
and the feast of unleavened bread 
seven days. 18And there was no 
passover like to that kept in Israel from 
the days of Samuel the prophet; 
neither did any of the kings of Israel 
keep such a passover as Josiah kept, 
and the priests, and the Levites, and all 


Judah and Israel that were present, and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 19In the 
eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah 
was this passover kept. 

20After all this, when Josiah had 
prepared the temple, Neco king of 
Egypt went up to fight against 
Carchemish by the Euphrates; and 
Josiah went out against him. 21But he 
sent ambassadors to him, saying: 
‘What have I to do with thee, thou 
king of Judah? I come not against thee 
this day, but against the house 
wherewith I have war; and God hath 
given command to speed me; forbear 
thee from meddling with God, who is 
with me, that He destroy thee not.’ 
22Nevertheless Josiah would not turn 
his face from him, but disguised 
himself, that he might fight with him, 
and hearkened not unto the words of 
Neco, from the mouth of God, and 
came to fight in the valley of Megiddo. 
23And the archers shot at king Josiah; 
and the king said to his servants: 
‘Have me away; for I am sore 
wounded.’ 24So his servants took him 
out of the chariot, and put him in the 
second chariot that he had, and 
brought him to Jerusalem; and he died, 
and was buried in the sepulchres of his 
fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem 
mourned for Josiah. 25And Jeremiah 
lamented for Josiah; and all the 
singing men and singing women spoke 
of Josiah in their lamentations, unto 
this day; and they made them an 
ordinance in Israel; and, behold, they 
are written in the lamentations. 26Now 
the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his 
good deeds, according to that which is 
written in the Law of the LORD, 27and 
his acts, first and last, behold, they are 
written in the book of the kings of 
Israel and Judah. 

Then the people of the land 
took Jehoahaz the son of 
Josiah, and made him king in his 
father’s stead in Jerusalem. 2Joahaz 
was twenty and three years old when 
he began to reign; and he reigned three 
months in Jerusalem. 3And the king of 
Egypt deposed him at Jerusalem, and 
fined the land a hundred talents of 
silver and a talent of gold. 4And the 
king of Egypt made Eliakim his 
brother king over Judah and 
Jerusalem, and changed his name to 
Jehoiakim. And Neco took Joahaz his 
brother, and carried him to Egypt. 

5Jehoiakim was twenty and five 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; 
and he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD his God. 6Against 
him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to 
carry him to Babylon. 
7Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the 
vessels of the house of the LORD to 
Babylon, and put them in his temple at 
Babylon. 8Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehoiakim, and his abominations 
which he did, and that which was 
found in him, behold, they are written 
in the book of the kings of Israel and 
Judah; and Jehoiachin his son reigned 
in his stead. 
36 




9Jehoiachin was eight years old 
when he began to reign; and he 
reigned three months and ten days in 
Jerusalem; and he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD. 10And at 
the return of the year king 
Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him 
to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of 
the house of the LORD, and made 
Zedekiah his brother king over Judah 
and Jerusalem. 

11Zedekiah was twenty and one 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; 
12and he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD his God; he humbled 
not himself before Jeremiah the 
prophet speaking from the mouth of 
the LORD. 13And he also rebelled 
against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had 
made him swear by God; but he 
stiffened his neck, and hardened his 
heart from turning unto the LORD, the 
God of Israel. 14Moreover all the 
chiefs of the priests, and the people, 
transgressed very greatly after all the 
abominations of the nations; and they 
polluted the house of the LORD which 
He had hallowed in Jerusalem. 15And 
the LORD, the God of their fathers, sent 
to them by His messengers, sending 
betimes and often; because He had 
compassion on His people, and on His 
dwelling-place; 16but they mocked the 
messengers of God, and despised His 
words, and scoffed at His prophets, 
until the wrath of the LORD arose 
against His people, till there was no 
remedy. 

17Therefore He brought upon them 
the king of the Chaldeans, who slew 
their young men with the sword in the 
house of their sanctuary, and had no 
compassion upon young man or 
maiden, old man or hoary-headed; He 
gave them all into his hand. 18And all 
the vessels of the house of God, great 
and small, and the treasures of the 
house of the LORD, and the treasures of 
the king, and of his princes; all these 
he brought to Babylon. 19And they 
burnt the house of God, and broke 
down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt 
all the palaces thereof with fire, and 
destroyed all the goodly vessels 
thereof. 20And them that had escaped 
from the sword carried he away to 
Babylon; and they were servants to 
him and his sons until the reign of the 
kingdom of Persia; 21to fulfil the word 
of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, 
until the land had been paid her 
sabbaths; for as long as she lay 
desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil 
threescore and ten years. 

22Now in the first year of Cyrus king 
of Persia, that the word of the LORD by 
the mouth of Jeremiah might be 
accomplished, the LORD stirred up the 
spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he 
made a proclamation throughout all his 
kingdom, and put it also in writing, 
saying: 23’Thus saith Cyrus king of 
Persia: All the kingdoms of the earth 
hath the LORD, the God of heaven, 
given me; and He hath charged me to 
build Him a house in Jerusalem, which 
is in Judah. Whosoever there is among 


you of all His people—the LORD his 
God be with him—let him go up.’ 

 

 


