Parah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
If a pumpkin shell was immersed in water that was not fit for the mixing, it is permissible to mix in it the ashes with the water, as long as it had not been defiled. 
If it has been defiled, one cannot mix in it the ashes with the water. 
Rabbi Joshua says: if one is allowed to mix in it the ashes and water at the beginning, one should also be allowed to do so at the end; and if one is not allowed to do this at the end one should not be allowed to do it at the beginning. 
In either case it is not permissible to collect in it water that has already had ashes mixed in.

Explanation
Section one: If one designs a dried out pumpkin shell to be a vessel for holding water, then he can immerse it even in a regular mikveh (water not fit for mixing) and he doesn't need to dry it off before mixing in the water to be used with the ashes. This is because the water that remains after the immersion will be absorbed into the pumpkin shell. We are not concerned lest it expel some of this water (which cannot be used with the ashes) into water that will be used for the ashes.
Section two: However, if the pumpkin shell had previously been defiled then it can't be used ever to hold the water and ashes because we are concerned that it will expel some impure water that had been held in its absorbent walls, thereby invalidating the hatat waters.
Section three: Rabbi Joshua points out the obvious inconsistency with the previous opinion. In section one (at the beginning, before it had been defiled) we were not concerned lest it expel any water that it had absorbed. But in section two (at the end, after it had been defiled) we are concerned that it will do so. The inconsistency does not make sense. It seems that this leads Rabbi Joshua to rule strictly. Even if the pumpkin has never been defiled, he still can't use it for fear that it will expel unusable water into the living waters needed for the hatat ritual.
Section four: Whether or not the pumpkin has ever been defiled, it cannot be used to collect water that has already had ashes mixed in. This is because we fear that it will expel water that had not had the ashes in it, into the water that did (see the end of yesterday's mishnah). 
We should note that there is some disagreement among the commentators whether this last line belongs to Rabbi Joshua or to the sages. 

