Parah, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
If a person sprinkled and it is doubtful whether the water came from the thread or the spindle-reed or the buds, the sprinkling is invalid. 
If he sprinkled upon two vessels and it is doubtful whether he sprinkled on both or whether some water from the one dripped on to the other, it is invalid. 
If a needle was on a piece of earthenware and one sprinkled upon it, and it is doubtful whether he sprinkled on the needle or whether some water dripped on it from the earthenware, his sprinkling is invalid. 
A flask with a narrow mouth, one may dip in and draw out in the usual way.
Rabbi Judah says: this may be done only for the first sprinkling. 
Hatat waters which were diminished, one may dip only the tips of the buds and sprinkle, provided the hyssop does not absorb [any of the moisture on the sides of the flask]. 
If one intended to sprinkle in front of him and he sprinkled behind him, or behind him and he sprinkled in front of him, his sprinkling is invalid. 
If he intended to sprinkle in front of him and he sprinkled to the sides in front of him, his sprinkling is valid. 
It is permitted to sprinkle upon a person with his knowledge or without his knowledge.
It is permitted to sprinkle upon a person and vessels even though there are a hundred of them.

Explanation
Section one: If the sprinkling was done from the hyssop buds, it is valid; but if it came from the thread or spindle, it is invalid (see yesterday's mishnah). Since there is a doubt whether it was performed correctly, the sprinkling is invalid.
Section two: Both vessels look wet, but it is unclear whether he sprinkled on both or whether he sprinkled directly onto one and from there it dripped onto the other. Again, since there is a doubt, the sprinkling is invalid.
Section three: Similar to the situation in section two, here we again have a doubt whether he sprinkled directly onto the needle which would purify it, or onto the earthenware and from there onto the needle, which would not purify the needle. Since we don't know what happened, the needle is still impure.
Section four: This section refers to a flask with a narrow opening. When the hyssop is pulled out, we might have thought that some of its liquids would be squeezed out and fall back into the water. This would cause the water to be a mixture of hyssop juice and hatat waters, which would make it invalid. The first opinion in the mishnah is not concerned with this possibility and therefore lets one use this flask in a normal manner. Rabbi Judah disagrees and says that such a flask can be used only one time. The second dipping might contain some hyssop resin and therefore is invalid.
Section five: If there is not a lot of water left in the flask, it is still allowed to dip the hyssop back in to absorb whatever water is left. However, he shouldn't scrape the sides of the flask with the hyssop to pick up any extra moisture. 
Section six: For the sprinkling to be valid, he must sprinkle in the direction in which he intended. If he intended to sprinkle in front of him, and it landed to the sides but still in front of him, the sprinkling is still valid, because this still counts as "in front."
Section seven: One does not require the person's consent to sprinkle on him and purify him.
Section eight: It is possible to sprinkle on multiple vessels and people at the same time, as long as water reaches each of them directly. 

  
