Parah, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
If he intended to sprinkle upon a thing that is susceptible to uncleanness and he sprinkled upon something that is not susceptible to uncleanness, if any of the water still remained on the hyssop he should not sprinkle with it again. 
[If he intended to sprinkle] upon a thing that is not susceptible to uncleanness and he sprinkled on that which is susceptible to uncleanness, even though there was still some water on the hyssop, he can sprinkle with it again. 
[If he intended to sprinkle] upon a man and he sprinkled upon a beast, if any of the water remained on the hyssop he should not sprinkle with it again; 
But [if he intended to sprinkle] upon a beast and he sprinkled upon a man, even though there was still some water on the hyssop, he can sprinkle with it again. 
The water that drips off is valid, and therefore it conveys uncleanness as the usual hatat waters. 

Explanation
Section one: He intended to sprinkle upon something that is susceptible to impurity, such as a person (as in section three). Unintentionally, he sprinkled upon an animal (which is not susceptible to impurity). If there is still water left on the hyssop he shouldn't sprinkle with it again. Since the water that was sprinkled upon the animal has been made invalid for sprinkling, the water that remains on the hyssop is also invalid for sprinkling. 
Section two: This is the opposite case. Since he sprinkled on something that is susceptible to uncleanness (such as an animal), meaning something that does require sprinkling, the water has not been disqualified. Therefore he can use the remaining water to sprinkle and cleanse something else. 
Sections three and four: These two sections explain sections one and two.
Section five: Water that simply drips off the hyssop is still valid for sprinkling. Therefore, it continues to convey uncleanness as do hatat waters in general, which defile one who carries them or touches them. This water is not treated as hatat waters that have already been sprinkled which do not defile (see below in mishnah four).   

