Parah, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Except for section one of our mishnah (which teaches another stringency with regard to the purity laws of the hatat waters), the rest of the mishnah discusses what parts of various vessels are considered "connected" to other parts. With regard to Parah, the implication of parts being "connected" is that if the water is sprinkled on one part, the other part is pure. 

Mishnah Eight
A flask for hatat waters whose outer part has become unclean, its inner part also becomes unclean, and it conveys uncleanness to another flask, and the other to another, even if they are a hundred. 
A bell and a clapper are regarded as connected. 
In the case of a spindle stick used for coarse material, one should not sprinkle on its stick or ring, but if he sprinkled on one, both are regarded as having been sprinkled upon.
A spindle stick used for flax they are regarded as connected. 
If a leather cover of a crib is fastened to its knobs, both are regarded as connected. 
The base is not regarded as connected either in respect of uncleanness or cleanness. 
All drilled handles of utensils are regarded as connected. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: also those that are wedged into holes in the utensils. 

Explanation
Section one: If the outside of a vessel becomes impure, the inside remains pure such that it can be used with pure food or liquid items (see Kelim 25: 1, 6). This is not true when it comes to using the flask to hold hatat waters. If the outside is unclean, the inside is unclean as well. 
Section two: If one sprinkles the hatat waters on the bell or on its clapper, the other is pure because they are regarded as connected.
Section three: The spindle stick referred to here is used to weave the coarse material for the production of reed mats. The mishnah says that he should sprinkle on the spindle itself. But if he does sprinkle upon one of the other parts, they are all clean. 
When it comes to a spindle used to weave flax, all the parts are considered connected and therefore he can sprinkle on one and thereby purify the other. 
Section four: The leather is attached to knobs on the edges of a crib. The leather is considered connected to the crib and therefore if one sprinkles on one, the other is clean. 
The base of the crib (or other type of bed) is put in the frame and upon it one places the sheets and blankets. 
Section five: Drilled handles of utensils are handles that are drilled out so that the metal part can be inserted. An example would be a knife. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri adds that the same is true for handles that are inserted into holes made into the vessels themselves such that the handles cannot be easily removed. These too are considered to be attached. 
 
