Parah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Most of today's mishnah deals with Numbers 19:2 which states, "Instruct the Israelite people to bring you a red cow without blemish, in which there is no defect and on which no yoke has been laid." 

Mishnah Three
One that is born from the side, the hire of a harlot or the price of a dog is invalid. 
Rabbi Eliezer says that it is valid, as it says, "You shall not bring the hire of a harlot or the price of a dog into the house of the Lord your God," (Deuteronomy 23:19) and this was not brought into the house. 
All blemishes that cause consecrated animals to be invalid cause also the [red] cow to be invalid. 
If one had ridden on it, leaned on it, hung on its tail, crossed a river by its help, doubled up its leading rope, or put one's cloak on it, it is invalid. 
But if one had only tied it up by its leading rope or made for it a sandal to prevent it from slipping or spread one's cloak on it because of flies, it is valid. 
This is the general rule: wherever anything is done for its own sake, it remains valid; but if for the sake of another, it becomes invalid.

Explanation
Section one: Deuteronomy 23:19 forbids one from bringing as a sacrifice an animal that was used to pay a harlot or an animal that was sold to buy a dog. The first opinion in the mishnah states that if a red cow was used for either of these purposes, it too is invalid as a hatat cow. However, Rabbi Eliezer says that the verse only prohibits actually sacrifices to be brought from such animals. The red cow is not brought into the Temple and thus if used for either of these purposes, it is valid.
In addition, there is a debate concerning a red cow that is born through a caesarean section—literally in Hebrew one that is born from the side of its mother. In Bekhorot 7:7 we learned that an animal born through caesarean section cannot be sacrificed. Here we learn that it can also not be used as a red cow hatat, according to the sages. Again, Rabbi Eliezer says that it is valid.
Section two: The Torah explicitly states that the red cow must have no blemish. The list of what constitutes a blemish can be found in Bekhorot chapter 6. 
Section three: These are all considered making use of the animal and therefore disqualify it from being used as a red cow. "Doubled up its leading rope" seems to mean that one doubled up the rope and laid it on the cow as a place to put it. This too is considered making use of the animal.
Section four: In contrast, in these cases the person doesn't make use of the animal, rather does something for the animal's sake. These do not fall under the category of "on which no yoke has been laid" and therefore the animal is still valid. 
Section five: This is the general rule that summarizes the distinction drawn between the cases in section three and those in section four. 

