Parah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with some stringencies that apply to the ritual purity of vessels and people involved in the hatat water ritual. The mishnah refers to a type of impurity called "madaf impurity." This is a light form of impurity that only has relevance in the preparation of the hatat. 
The mishnah also refers to "midras impurity." Midras impurity is impurity conveyed by leaning upon or moving an object. 
Mishnah Hagigah 2:7 taught: "The garments of [those who eat] sacred things possess midras-impurity for [those who occupy themselves with the waters of] purification." What this means is that all garments, even those which have been cleansed enough so that they could be used with holy things, still convey midras impurity to anyone who wishes to perform an action in connection with the red cow ritual. This is an extra stringency taken with regard to the hatat ashes and waters. Our mishnah teaches that the same is true with regard to other objects and with regard to people. If they have not been immersed for the sake of the red cow ritual, they are impure.  

Mishnah One
Any object that is susceptible to midras uncleanness is for the purpose of the hatat waters deemed to have madaf uncleanness, whether it was otherwise unclean or clean. 
A person too is subject to the same rule. 
Any object that is susceptible to corpse uncleanness, whether it is otherwise unclean or clean: 
Rabbi Eliezer says: it does not have madaf uncleanness.
Rabbi Joshua says: it has madaf uncleanness; 
And the sages say: that which was unclean has madaf uncleanness, and that which was clean does not have madaf uncleanness.

Explanation
Section one: Any object that is susceptible to midras uncleanness, for instance an object that is made to sit upon or to lie upon, has "madaf uncleanness" vis a vis the hatat waters. This is true even if the object is pure with regards to terumah and other holy things. Thus if a person has contact with any object that is subject to midras uncleanness, he will have to immerse himself again before performing any part of the red cow ritual. 
Section two: The same is true with regard to a person. This means that a person who has not immersed himself in order to be occupied with the red cow ritual will defile another person who wishes to perform the ritual. This is true even if the first person is pure enough to eat terumah or other holy things. 
Section three: This section deals with a more general classification of objects—those that are subject to corpse uncleanness but are not subject to midras uncleanness. (See chapter twenty-four of Kelim for a list of such objects). 
There are three opinions as to whether such an object defiles people who wish to prepare the hatat waters. Rabbi Eliezer says that they do not. Rabbi Joshua says that they always do. If such an object is lifted or moved by the person he will not be able to perform the ritual. The sages take an in-between position. If the object actually became impure through contact with a corpse, then it will defile a person who wishes to occupy himself with the red cow rituals if the person carries it or moves it. But if the object is clean, it does not defile through midras. Nevertheless, it still defiles through contact. 
