Parah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with how many non-red hairs, and the placement of such hairs, will disqualify a red cow from being used as a hatat. 

Mishnah Five
If it had two black or white hairs growing within one follicle, it is invalid. 
Rabbi Judah said: within one kos; if they grew within two kosot that were adjacent to one another, it is invalid.
Rabbi Akiva says: even if there were four or five but they were dispersed, they may be plucked out. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: even as many as fifty. 
Rabbi Joshua ben Batera says: even if it had but one on its head and one on its tail, it is invalid. 
If it had two hairs with their roots black and their tips red or with their roots red and their tips black, everything goes according to what is visible, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But the sages say: by the root.

Explanation
Section one: According to the first opinion, if two black or white hairs grow within one follicle they disqualify the cow from use as a hatat. 
Rabbi Judah says "within one kos." According to Albeck, kos is another word for follicle, in which case, Rabbi Judah does not disagree with the first opinion, he just uses different language (the word used for follicle was "guma.") 
In addition, Rabbi Judah says that if two white or black hairs grow in two adjacent follicles (kosot) and the hairs are directed to one another, then they disqualify the cow.
Section two:  Rabbi Akiva is more lenient. As long as the hairs are not adjacent, they don't disqualify the cow. However, he must remove the white or black hairs before the cow can be used. Rabbi Eliezer has a similar opinion, except it is not clear if he requires the hairs to be removed. If he does require removal, then he has virtually the same opinion as Rabbi Akiva, he just words it slightly differently.
Section three: Rabbi Joshua ben Batera rules strictly—even two white or black hairs on opposite sides of the body will disqualify the cow.
Section four: According to Rabbi Meir, we judge the color according to the tip—the more visible part. But the sages say we judge by the root—if the roots are white or black, the cow is not considered red. [This sort of reminds me of someone who has colored their hair and has let it grow out a bit.]

