   Parshat Vayikra.
   1,1. ויקרא אל משה, “He called to Moses, etc.” Nachmanides, explaining the sequence of the portions in the Torah, writes that after having concluded with the construction of the Tabernacle, a subject which dominated the last four portions with the exception of <i>Parshat Ki Tissa,</i> the Torah now turns its attention to the legislation governing the sacrificial offerings to be brought in the Tabernacle. This is the logical corollary after we have been told that G’d’s glory manifested itself and enveloped the Tabernacle.
   Part of the legislation about the offerings, are the laws governing who has access to the Tabernacle, and who, even if basically entitled to perform service in the Tabernacle, is temporarily forbidden to do so due to his being in a state of ritual impurity or due to his being drunk. Even the High Priest himself, without being drunk or impure, is forbidden to enter certain parts of the Tabernacle except for a specific purpose on a specific day. (Leviticus,16,2). The priests not only must not be ritually impure when entering the Tabernacle, but they must sanctify themselves prior to performing their service. This additional requirement is based on the presence of the “glory of G’d” in the Tabernacle.
   Most of the Book of Leviticus deals with sacrificial offerings, the kind of people who present these sacrifices, either voluntary or mandatory, as well as the precise location where these sacrifices are to be offered. There is also a relatively short list of commandments which in one way or another are directly linked to such sacrifices, i.e. which bring in their wake the need to present such sacrifices by the individuals concerned. For instance, the Book opens with voluntary offerings by individuals, and the laws pertaining to them, necessitating the recording of the prohibition for certain fat parts of the animals, as well as all blood, to be forbidden to be eaten.
   Afterwards, as a corollary of the sin offering, parts of which are consumed by the priests, this brings in its wake the need to inform us generally about which animals may and which may not be eaten. These animals, or even basically “kosher” animals, that have not been killed by ritual slaughter, bring in their wake ritual uncleanness, and confer such on people in contact with them. We read about certain diseases that have a religious background, and therefore are not subject to treatment by physicians, but require the offering of sacrifices upon their termination. Women who have given birth are required to offer certain sacrifices, and are subject to varying degrees of ritual uncleanness for a period of time after they have given birth. The subject of ritual purity is enlarged upon by the laws about incest, and forbidden sexual unions. Women who are menstruating become ritually unclean even to their husbands, until, in due course, they have purified themselves in a ritual bath. The majority of the portions of this Book address themselves specifically to the priests in one way or another.
   <i>Parshat Kedoshim</i> contains a number of laws applying to all Israelites equally, especially laws governing inter-personal relationships, laws designed to ensure a civilization that functions with minimum inequalities.
   If the Book commences with the words “Someone called to Moses,” instead of the customary “G’d called to Moses, or similar, this is to remind us that though we are dealing with a separate Book, the train of thought with which the Book of Exodus concluded, i.e. that the glory of <i>Hashem</i> filled and enveloped the Tabernacle is continued here without a break, the Torah now detailing the service to be performed in that Tabernacle. In other words, the subject of the word ויקרא is the כבוד ה' described in Exodus 40,34.
   Nachmanides also writes that our sages derive from this introductory word ויקרא, that all conversations initiated by G’d were preceded by a call to prepare Moses that he was about to be addressed by the <i>Shechinah.</i> The word appears only here, as this was the first time Moses was being addressed by a dimension of <i>Hashem</i> in His terrestrial domain, the Tabernacle. Henceforth, this was the standard procedure all the time the Israelites remained in the desert. According to our sages’ understanding, the words מאהל מועד in our context actually have to be understood as if they had been written in an earlier part of our verse, i.e. ויקרא אליו מאהל מועד וידבר אליו באהל כי משה היה שם, “He called to him from the Tent of Meeting and spoke to him because Moses was there.” 
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the meaning is slightly different. Seeing that the glory of G’d filled the Tabernacle, Moses was unable to enter it until he would be invited in, (Exodus 40,35) just as had happened at the revelation at Mount Sinai seven months earlier, when he had been invited to ascend the Mountain. Our verse then describes that on the seventh day of the inaugural rites, the day preceding the first of <i>Nissan,</i> G’d called to Moses out of the Tabernacle, the voice appearing to come out of the cloud.
   Some commentators believe that what is described here is the basis of the statement in the Talmud <i>Chagigah</i> 14 that every utterance of the Almighty creates an angel that (allegorically speaking) walks in front of Him, as would the page or standard bearer of a terrestrial king. After this angel had alerted Moses to the approach of G’d, He would commence to speak to him directly, or to anyone else whom G’d wished to speak to.
   @אליו, “to him;” This apparently superfluous word is meant to alert us to the fact that G’d addressed Moses exclusively, and that Aaron was not included in this communication. Whenever, elsewhere, the Torah writes: “G’d spoke to Moses and Aaron,” the meaning is that Moses was to inform Aaron of what G’d had communicated to him at that time. Aaron was to be a go between, שליח, from that moment on, equal to Moses in carrying out G’d’s instructions.
   1,2. מן הבהמה, “from a category of animals,” seeing that free-roaming beasts that have the distinguishing marks that make them fit for consumption by Jews are also referred to as בהמה on occasion, [although they are generally described as חיה, or חית השדה, Ed.] the Torah had to narrow down the description further, adding the words: מן הבקר ומן הצאן, from either the category of cattle (בקר), or flock, (צאן). The reason why G’d did not include the free-roaming beasts that are listed in chapter 11 as fit to eat, to also serve as potential sacrifices, was to save the Israelites the tiresome work of catching these animals without inflicting the kind of injury on them that would disqualify them on account of their being blemished.
   Alternatively, the reason why the Torah did not command us to bring sacrifices from the free-roaming types of animals is that during the period of creation these animals had not received a special blessing. If they had received such a special blessing the serpent would have been included. That animal certainly did not qualify for a blessing. [after the statement that G’d saw that what He had created on the sixth day before reporting the creation of man was good, the blessing which followed at the end of the creative activity on the fourth day is noticeably absent. Ed.]
   The practical result of this is that the חלב, certain fat parts covering the kidneys, etc., are not included in the prohibited parts of the free-roaming beasts, and may be eaten. [King Solomon served gazelles, roebucks, etc. as a part of what he served his guests on a regular basis. He and his guests did not need to remove this part of the gazelle. Ed.] (compare Kings I 5,3). Seeing that the blood of these animals could not be sprinkled on the altar, the Torah commanded that upon slaughtering them, their blood be covered with earth, a symbolic kind of funeral. (Leviticus 17,13)
   @מן הבקר, “from the cattle;” to exclude “<i>treifah</i>” animals, i.e. animals injured to the point where they are not expected to live for 12 months. The reason why a special word had to be written to exclude such animals, was in the event that at the time when said animal had been sanctified as a sacrifice it had been in completely good health we might have thought that the donor of the animal had discharged his duty when the animal he selected had been healthy at the time he dedicated it, The Torah teaches that what is forbidden for the Israelite to eat is likewise forbidden to tender to G’d as an offering (unless specially permitted.)
   1,3. אל פתח אהל מועד, “to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.” The Torah needs to tell us that the donor cannot ask the priest to come to his house and pick up the animal he designated as a sacrificial offering. The owner or his messenger has to bring it.
   1,4. וסמך ידו, “He shall lean his hand on it with all his strength.” Although the word ידו is spelled in the singular mode, the meaning is: “his hands.” We find elsewhere that the Torah spells this out, for instance in Leviticus 16,1. The reason that here the word is spelled in the singular mode is to enable us to derive the <i>halachah</i> that the owner of the sacrificial animal personally must do this and not anyone whom he has deputized. This is an exception to the rule that normally שלוחו של אדם כמותו, “a person’s designated messenger has the same legal status as the person himself.”
   @ונרצה לו לכפר עליו, “and it shall become acceptable for him to afford him atonement.” <i>Rashi</i> already questions where the idea of the donor requiring “atonement” suddenly comes from. He argues that surely, if the guilt of the donor to be atoned for involves capital sins for which execution or death at the hands of heaven is in order, there should have been a warning somewhere spelling out which sin this donor had committed! Even if the sin had “only” been one warranting 39 lashes as penalty, it should have been spelled out somewhere. He concludes that the only sins such a sacrifice could atone for is omission to fulfill some positive commandment, or a negative commandment which is inextricably involved with a positive commandment so that non-observance is not punishable by lashes. <i>Rashi</i> is supported by a <i>baraitha</i> in <i>Torat Kohanim.</i>
   Nachmanides questions “whence do we know that the sacrifice atones for all inadvertently committed sins which when committed intentionally carry the penalty of 39 lashes or death at the hands of heavenly decree altogether?” Perhaps we may assume that this sacrifice atones for sins that are subject to premature death by heavenly decree when committed intentionally, but which have been committed inadvertently, and the Torah had not provided atonement in such a case by a sin offering or guilt offering. as a way of atonement. Striking father or mother are an example of such sins committed inadvertently for which the Torah did not provide explicit penalties when these sins were committed inadvertently. Nachmanides suggests as a possible solution to our query that seeing that in some cases the Torah lists penalties for deliberately committed capital crimes, as well as methods of atonement when these crimes were committed inadvertently, it is reasonable to suppose that where the Torah fails to be specific on that point, the burnt offering, עולה, may well be the vehicle through which such atonement can be secured. This would make the wording of <i>Rashi’s</i> commentary more intelligible. The absence of a procedure to secure atonement for such inadvertently committed sins in cases where the Torah failed to spell this out, might otherwise have led us to believe that there is no mechanism for such inadvertently committed sins to be forgiven. <i>Rashi</i> picked the two categories of sin by omission for which the Torah had failed to specify a specific path to atonement, i.e. failure to observe a positive commandment [when it is the type which we must look for opportunities to perform, such as the <i>lulav</i> on <i>Sukkot,</i> as opposed to the building of a protective railing on one’s roof, a commandment only applicable to people who own a house. Ed.] 
   It is further possible that seeing that when the Torah lists specific voluntary offerings, without the wording specifying that such offering atones for a specific sin committed [וכפר על חטאתו אשר חטא, “it will atone for his sin which he had committed unintentionally (or similar as in Leviticus 42, and 5,2),” Ed.], it is clear that the “atonement” mentioned in our verse is for sins of omission (מצות עשה) committed inadvertently. The expression ונרצה, “it will be received with grace,” implies that the person offering this burnt offering had lacked grace in the eyes of the Lord prior to his presenting this offering. If our sages in <i>Torat</i> Kohanim interpreted the verse as the offering conferring atonement for intentionally committed sins when the sinner had repented, their reasoning is that anyone who committed inadvertent sins has not fallen out of grace with <i>Hashem</i>, so that he does not need to be reinstated in a state of grace, as is suggested by our verse. If that is so, the only deliberate sins that these burnt offerings could atone for are sins of omission, and sins of omission directly involving the transgression of a negative commandment, rather than sins of commission. [seeing, as <i>Rashi</i> pointed out, the Torah had spelled out the penalties for violating negative commandments deliberately].
   Even though we have a principle according to which if someone commits a sin of omission or one involving a sin of omission involving also a negative commandment, that repentance achieves atonement immediately, without the offering, or the act of leaning on the animal to be sacrificed, (<i>Yuma</i> 86), whereas if he offers the sacrifice without repenting, his offering is rejected as זבח רשעים, the offering of a wicked individual, we need to say that the “forgiveness” mentioned in <i>Yuma</i> is not complete until the person concerned has also offered the burnt offering discussed in our verse.
   1,5. ושחט את בן הבקר, “He will slaughter the young bull, etc.” the word בן means that the bull must not be over age. The word בן is used in a similar way when the Torah refers to בני אהרן in our verse, i.e. over aged priests are not fit to perform this service in the Tabernacle.
   Alternately, the meaning of the word בן here could be that seeing that Aaron personally, as opposed to his sons, had had some active part in the disastrous affair of the golden calf, he is not now charged personally with performing this sacrificial service, and it is reserved for his sons. This led to a prayer by Aaron asking for G’d’s mercy on him. This accounts for the fact that the next portion addresses G’d’s command specifically to Aaron himself, and instructs him as well as his sons to perform the rites involving the burnt offering (as well as others).
   1,6. והפשיט את העולה, ”he is to skin the burnt offering.” The reason the Torah spelled this out is that other sacrificial offerings that are totally burned up on the altar, do not have their skin removed before their carcass is being burned. (<i>Zevachim</i> 5,2)
   @והפשיט ונתח, “after he skins it he cuts the carcass into its pieces.” This verse addresses itself to the owners of this offering, just as the verse speaking about the owner leaning on the animal prior to its being slaughtered is addressed to the owner, not to the priest. Seeing that this could cause some confusion, the Torah repeats in verse 7 that the functions described there are to be performed by the young priests.
   1,7. ונתנו בני אהרן, ”the sons of Aaron are to place the blood, etc.” The reason why the Torah uses the plural mode, -as if one priest by himself could not perform this task- is that it is customary for the Torah when describing the functions performed by the priests in the Tabernacle, to use the plural mode. There used to be numerous priests milling around in the Temple precincts, seeing that there they would be in the proximity of the <i>Shechinah.</i> We have the principle of ברוב עם הדרת מלך, when the king is surrounded by a multitude of his subjects this reflects positively on the degree of his glory.” [<i>Menachot</i> 62 (et al) where a function is distributed amongst 3 priests although a single one could easily have performed it by himself. Ed.]
   @והפשיט ונתח ונתנו בני אהרן הכהן על האש, “after skinning it, the sons of Aaron are to cut it up and place fire on the altar.” Nachmanides points out that the Torah does not describe these procedures in their traditional sequence. The first step in the procedure was the arranging of the woodpile on the altar on which the remains of the animal would be burned. Only after this had been put in place, was the carcass of the burnt offering cut up into pieces.
   Similarly, when the Torah, in verse 8, describes the priests as arranging the pieces in the following order: the head, the fat parts, followed by (verse 9) the innards and the feet, after the latter two have first been washed. This is incorrect, seeing that as soon as the carcass has been cut up the parts that need to be washed are being washed. The sequence reported here is not one that is mandatory. Our verse (5) was only concerned with the sprinkling of the blood being the first step in the various procedures necessary to complete the offering. The final step was the burning up of the <i>eyvarim,</i> (Talmud <i>Tamid 30)</i>. The Torah hints at this when it adds the words והקטיר הכהן את הכל, “the priest is to burn it all.” 
   The reason why the Torah repeated the command to burn up the various pieces, having first mentioned some parts being placed on the fire, is to teach that after being placed on the fire the priest must not wait until the fire has consumed it all before placing the other parts on the fire to be burned up. When dealing with a burnt offering that is a voluntary offering, there was no need to first arrange the fire properly before proceeding with other steps of the procedure. On the other hand, the daily <i>tamid</i> burnt offering, a mandatory public offering both in the morning and evening, paid for by public funds as it represented the whole nation, had to follow the sequence outlined by the Torah in every detail. The woodpile for consuming that offering was arranged meticulously every morning. (Leviticus 6,5)
   1,8. ואת הפדר, “and the fats.” Nachmanides in commenting on Onkelos translating the word פדר as meaning ”fat,” writes that this is not a generic term for all the various fat parts of the animal, but refers only to a thin fatty membrane separating between different parts of the innards. The origin of the word פדר is that it is one of the words which appear in forward and backward spelling, i.e. פרד, the same root, spelled in a different order of the letters means “to separate.” The membrane in question separates upper from lower parts within the innards of the ruminants. This is why our sages have said that the priest is to spread out this membrane above the place where the knife made the incision when it slaughtered the animal. This is a way of showing respect for the animal that becomes the instrument of the donor’s achieving atonement for his sin. Dignitaries among the nations of the world were in the habit of spreading this membrane over the part of it that they roasted. If the name פדר were to apply to fatty parts of the animal in general, this would be because the fat parts separate the flesh from the bones, etc.
   Maimonides (<i>Moreh</i>, <i>Nevuchim</i> third part chapter 46<i>)</i> writes that the underlying reason of the legislation involving animal sacrifices is connected to the practices of the Egyptians and the Sumerians. (inhabitants of Mesopotamia, the competing civilization of that of the Egyptians.) Jews who had lived within either civilization observed these people actually deifying cattle and sheep, the Egyptians worshipping sheep, and the Chaldaeans male goats, (satyrs) whereas the Indians worship cows to this day, believing them to be their reincarnated ancestors. It is forbidden to slaughter cows in India, as it is considered equivalent to murdering a god. G’d, in order to instill in us an abhorrence of such forms of paganism, demanded from us to sacrifice these animals, in order to demonstrate that we had been weaned from such mistaken beliefs. By means of these animals being sacrificed as gifts to G’d, we are absolved from deviant philosophical and theological thoughts. False philosophies represent a disease of the soul and therefore the personality, and just like any other disease, can be cured only by applying a medicine that represents the opposite of the harmful substance that causes the disease.
   Nachmanides writes that Maimonides’ writing concerning this subject are worthless, believing that if we are to look for a rationale for animal sacrifice at all, it is better to accept the view that seeing that man’s deeds are the final result of the brain’s thought, the spoken intention to do certain things, and finally, the carrying out in practice of what had been planned and discussed, G’d commanded that in order to rid ourselves of all vestiges of sin we must reverse the process, by first sanctifying the sacrificial animal in our mind, then leaning on it and expressing our remorse with words, and finally, by utterly destroying the symbol of our sin through sprinkling its blood on the altar and burning up the physical remains by fire, we rid ourselves of our having been involved in the sin that led to this process of expiation. During the procedures involving these activities of the priest with the sacrificial animal, the owner is to reflect on all that he had done wrong, as well as on the mercy of the Lord Who accepts the animal’s blood instead of the sinner’s blood. The bodily remains of the animal are accepted by G’d in lieu of our own body, and the animal’s blood is accepted in lieu of our own contaminated soul. Burning of the innards and kidneys are symbolic of the seat of the thoughts of man (according to our tradition). The gifts to the priests performing these procedures are designed to inspire them to pray on our behalf so that the bulk of the Jewish people will be spared and not become enmeshed in sin.
   1,10.ואם מן הצאן , “and if from the category of flocks, etc.” Seeing that the <i>halachic</i> procedures when offering a member of the category known as “flocks,” is the same as that for offering bulls, the only thing emphasised here is that the slaughtering will take place on the northern side of the altar. The use of the singular mode וערך הכהן, as opposed to the normal plural mode וערכו הכהנים, indicates that from an <i>halachic</i> point of view a single priest is enough to perform all the procedures listed.
   1,14. מן התורים או מן היונים, “from the turtledoves or from young doves.” Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah selected only these two birds as suitable for bird-offerings, out of a vast amount of biologically suitable birds, [there being only 24 categories of predatory birds which are disqualified by their inherent unsuitability, the Torah referring to them as “impure,” Ed.] is that they have a degree of domesticity in common with the three categories of ruminants which are suitable for sacrifice. Any of the species mentioned can be raised by man in his backyard quite easily, and he does not have to hunt for them when he is in need of offering them as a sacrifice. (<i>Vayikra Rabbah</i> 27,6)
   The reason why, apparently, G’d prefers the fully grown turtledoves as sacrificial birds, is that these have demonstrated a degree of chastity in their sex lives, and if one loses its mate, it is a well known fact that it does not mate again ever. In this example of undying loyalty to a life’s partner, they resemble the Jewish people, who, having chosen G’d as their “partner,” will never consider trading Him for another.
   On the other hand, the young doves, יונים, are very jealous by nature, as a result of which they frequently exchange mates, more so even than other species of birds. None of the members of this species are acceptable as sacrificial birds, except the very young, ones that have not yet had a chance to display their indiscriminate sexual habits. While very young, these doves display exceptional patience in staying in their nests, not feeling the urge to explore the world around them. Chickens, though also domesticated, as they cannot fly, are rejected as potential sacrifices due to their promiscuity.
   1,15. והקריבו הכהן אל המזבח, “ the priest will present it to the altar.” This “הקרבה” consists of the priest raising the bird onto the altar before nipping its head.
   @ומלק, “and he will nip,” והקטיר, “and cause it to go up in smoke,” ונמצה דמו, “and squeeze out its blood.” It is impossible to explain this verse in the sequence the procedures are described, i.e. to cause the head of the bird to go up in smoke and to squeeze out its blood after that, followed by the burning up of the rest of its body. We find no instance in which atonement is effected through burning up the body parts before the blood has been utilized in that process.
   Therefore, our sages (<i>Zevachim</i> 65) interpreted this verse as only drawing a conceptual link, הקש, between the performance of the nipping of the bird’s head and the procedure known as הקטרה, burning it up so that it goes up in smoke. Just as the burning up of the head of the bird and the rest of its body are two independent procedures, so the nipping of the head and the squeezing out of the blood from the rest of the body are two separate independent procedures.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, we have to understand that the nipping of the bird’s head and the burning up of it on the altar, precede one another, as the priest had already burned up the rest of the bird’s body.
   The reason why the Torah writes here: (verse 17) והקטיר אותו הכהן, [where the word הכהן appears completely redundant, Ed.] instead of writing והקטיר את הכל, as the Torah did when describing the parallel procedure for four legged beasts (verse 9), is because in this instance the parts that were to be burned up were in fact not all burned up at the same time. After having burned up the head, the priest proceeded to remove the bird’s crop with its feathers, for instance.
   @ונמצה דמו, “having pressed out its blood.” As opposed to the burnt offerings of the ruminants, no mention is made here of the blood from the area where the slaughtering had been performed being caught up in a special pan. The reason is that the quantity of blood involved was too miniscule to be usefully accumulated within such a pan. On the contrary, this blood would stick to the walls of the pan, and there would not be any blood left to sprinkle on the wall of the altar
   1,16. והסיר את מוראתו, “he shall remove its crop;”<i> Rashi</i> explained that seeing that this bird had consumed food which was basically stolen, [as opposed to the ruminants, which feed on grass owned by its owners or in areas which are ownerless, Ed.] this had to be removed prior to the bird being able to serve as a vehicle for its owner’s atonement. The reason why not the whole entrails had to be removed for the same reason, is that the food in it had already been digested and could not be identified as such.
   1,17. ושסע אותו בכנפיו, “he is to split it with its wings (feathers);” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the priest need not tear out the feathers from the wings, literally.
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation is not correct, for if it were, he did not give us an indication of where precisely the wings were to be torn off, whether at the front or at the back. Therefore, he claims that the correct interpretation of the words ושסע אותו is that the priest is to tear off the wings at the place where the feathers grow out of them. The word כנפים therefore is not another word describing the נוצה, the plume. The word means the same as every time we read about birds in the Torah when the Torah describes birds as צפור כנף, a winged bird, [one that is capable of flying. Ed.] The word נוצה describes the skin of the birds.
   2,2. וקמץ, “he shall scoop three fingers full;” this is the first part of the procedure that only the priests were allowed to perform. The procedures mentioned up until this point, i.e. the pouring of oil, the adding of frankincense to the flour before handing the mass to the priest could be performed by the owner/donor, even if he was not a priest. There is only one step in the procedure prior to the scooping up by the priest of three fingers full of the mixture, that also necessitated a priest, and this was the presentation of the mass at the southwestern corner of the altar. 
   2,11. כל המנחה אשר תקריבו לה' לא תעשה חמץ, “Any meal-offering that you present to <i>Hashem</i> must not be made of or contain anything leavened.” This is the initial prohibition not to add any leavening to the meal offering. It is followed by a second warning that even after the priest has already scooped up the three fingers full of the meal, it must not be allowed to become leavened before being burned up, i.e. לא תקטירו ממנו אשה לה'.
   Concerning the rationale of why both leavening and honey are forbidden to be part of this type of offering, Maimonides writes that it was the custom of the pagans to prepare all their offerings of this type containing leavening and some honey. (<i>Moreh Nevuchim</i> 3,46); once such materials symbolized a pagan practice, they became forbidden as an offering to the Eternal G’d. This is also the reason why private altars, known as מצבה were forbidden Seeing that the pagans never used salt in their offerings to their deities, the Torah insisted that we must always add some salt to our offerings. This was in spite of the fact that during the period of the patriarchs, private altars bearing the name מצבה were welcome in the eyes of <i>Hashem.</i>
   Some commentators hold that the prohibition of leaven and honey derives from the fact that the <i>kometz</i> had to be complete, and that, had it contained any leaven or honey, the priest’s hands would have retained some of it, or the air holes in the dough would have reduced the required of amount of meal.
   @לא תקטירו ממנו, “you must not burn up from it.” The reason why the Torah again uses the plural mode is that both Aaron and his sons were included in this prohibition.
   2,12. קרבן ראשית תקריבו אותם, “You shall offer them as a first-fruit offering.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that for the presenting of the two loaves on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> of the first wheat harvest, leavened loaves were in order, though on the altar no leavened products were to be presented. It was also in order to bring to the Temple honey as part of the first ripe dates of the season. The Torah writes a special dispensation for this in Leviticus 23,17. The common denominator of these two offerings is that both are described as בכורים, “first fruit offerings.”
   2,13. וכל קרבן מנחה במלח תמלח, “and you are to add a portion of salt to every meal-offering.” The reason why the Torah again reverted to the singular mode is that the command is directed at the owners presenting the offering to the priest as their deputy. You will recall that at the beginning of this paragraph, (verse 7) when speaking of מנחת מרחשת, a meal offering in a deep pan, the Torah had also used the singular mode. The reason is that the adding of the salt is something permitted to be done by the ordinary Israelite who is not a priest. The same rule applies here as it does to the pouring and mixing of the oil of the meal offering.
   @לא תשבית מלח ברית אלוקיך, “You must not discontinue adding the salt representing the covenant with the Lord your G’d from all your offerings.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the covenant referred to is one made with the universe ever since the conclusion of the six days of creation, when the “lower” waters were assured by G’d that some of them would be presented on the Holy Altar on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> as libations accompanied by salt.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason for the presence of salt is that G’d concluded a covenant with Israel that they would not offer something that is תפל, tasteless (as anything which is devoid of salt). It would be considered insulting to present such an offering.
   Nachmanides writes that seeing that salt has become a constituent covenant as far as sacrifices are concerned, it has become the basic symbol of all covenants. This surfaces in connection with the various gifts, primarily by the farmers, allocated by the Torah to the priests. The concept also resurfaces as a corollary to the Davidic dynasty, which will endure in a manner similar to that of the covenant governing the use of salt in the sacrifices. It is possible that salt is an integral part of the waters of the oceans, in the sense of being a natural process, seeing that G’d’s attribute אלוקים instead of <i>Hashem</i> is associated with it. It may have been distilled into solids due to the warming power of the sun’s rays. Water, by definition, is meant to irrigate the earth to enable it to be worked agriculturally. Once he earth has been contaminated by salt, it ceases to be a potential life-giver. In fact it destroys everything planted in its vicinity. [We observe a similar phenomenon in the earth surrounding the area from which volcanic gases escape. Ed.] Seeing that salt displays such negative influences, the Torah stresses its use in connection with the sacrifices where the presence of salt makes the flesh of the animals tasty. Assuring the endurance of the dynasty of King David throughout the generations, it is a similar promise of something positive, and salt is associated with this to demonstrate that we perceive of salt as something positive.
   2,14. ואם תקריב מנחת בכורים, “When you bring a meal-offering of the first (grain) etc.” <i>Rashi</i> states that the meaning of the word אם here is the same as the meaning of the word כי, “when,” as opposed to when the same word is conditional and means “if.”
   Nachmanides writes that the justification for using this word at this juncture, [although every time the Torah used this introductory word thus far in our chapter it meant “if,” Ed.] is the fact that first ripe specimens of any of the seven categories of produce qualifying for the commandment of בכורים, are not immediately capable of being performed as one has to await the time when nature enables us to harvest such fruit. The word refers to the previous paragraph in which the meal offering in a deep pan had been discussed. The rules applying to that meal offering also apply to the offering of <i>bikkurim</i> consisting of grain products.
   Nachmanides explains in similar fashion the use of the word אם where it prefaces some of the legislation of the Jubilee year (Numbers 36,4) It cannot be translated there as “if,” as the Jubilee will occur every 50 years and is not subject to man’s whims. The verse speaks of the time after the Israelites will have taken possession of their homeland. The Torah promises that as long as the Jewish people will observe that legislation the land will remain their ancestral possession.
   Another approach to the meaning of the word ואם here, could be simply: “if” the Lord will bring you to the land and you will in due course reap your harvest and bring the first fruit offerings, then you shall do so in the manner here described. Inheritance of the land of Israel is always described as conditional on our observing the relevant legislation pertaining to the earth of that land. Failure to observe this legislation will result in our expulsion from that land.
   3,2. וזרקו בני אהרן את הדם, “the sons of Aaron are to sprinkle the blood, etc.” The Torah employs the verb זרק when describing the sprinkling of the blood of goats, sheep, or bulls because their blood is so similar to that of human beings. By employing a verb that really means “throwing,” we are reminded that seeing that this blood is so similar to ours, the animal is enduring something that the sinner offering this sacrifice was meant to endure. [I suppose that the author means that the word השליך would otherwise have been more appropriate for the blood being poured, or the word שפך, “to pour.” The verb זרק is singularly inappropriate otherwise, as animals cannot “throw.” Ed.]
   3,6. זכר או נקבה, “male or female.” In connection with the flocks the Torah writes זכר או נקבה, whereas in connection with the sacrificial animal בן בקר, a young bull, we have the wording אם זכר אם נקבה. The reason for the different wording is that the word או is necessary to include the פלגס, a sheep thirteen months old, so that a plural mode is needed here. The word אם does not allow for use in a plural mode.
   3,7. אם כבש הוא מקריב, “if he offers a male sheep, etc.” The term כשב always refers to a fully grown sheep, as we know from Genesis 30,40 והכשבים הפריד יעקב, “and Yaakov set aside the fully grown sheep, etc.” the term כבש by contrast, refers to immature sheep. The word עגל refers to a fully grown calf, whereas the term בן בקר refers to a bull not yet fully grown. The latter is so named, as it is still dependent on its mother. The term פר בן בקר refers to an animal that is more than 12 months old. The parallel term בן כבש does not occur anywhere as sheep do not become pregnant during the first year of their lives.
   3,9. חלבו האליה תמימה, “the entire tail;” Nachmanides writes that in classical Hebrew the word חלב refers to fat which is separate, not integrally attached to flesh. The fat that is attached to the flesh is called שומן. This is why in Deut. 32,15, when Moses described Israel waxing fat, i.e. becoming a victim of affluence, he writes וישמן ישורון ויבעט, “that Yeshurun put on fat as a result of which it kicked,” (became unruly and overbearing).” The prophet Isaiah 6,10 speaks of the heart of the Jewish people becoming “fat,” and uses the term השמן לב העם, “the people’s heart grows fat.” The fact is that the tail called אליה does not have any חלב, i.e. separate fat parts at all, whether in name or in substance, whereas it does have שומן, fatty tissue intertwined with the flesh, tissue which is not subject to being separated like the fat which is separated from the kidneys with the membrane which supports it. Seeing that this is so, the wording כל חלב וכל דם לא תאכלו, “you must not eat any fat or any blood,” does not include the fat that is part of the tail, seeing that the tail does not contain any tissue called חלב. If what we described as שומן, were forbidden under the heading of חלב, practically all the flesh of the animals would be forbidden. We must pay attention to the fact that the Torah did not writeכל חלב אשר תקריבו לא תאכלו, “any ‘fat’ which you offer as sacrifice you must not eat” (when the animal in question had not been sanctified as a prospective sacrifice, Ed.] for if so, the kidneys and the exterior parts of the lungs would be forbidden to us as food, but the Torah wrote: כל בהמה אשר תקריבו ממנה על המזבח, “that the חלב of any sacrificial animal offered on the altar is forbidden to be eaten.” As a result of this distinction, fatty tissue on the spleen, milt, טחול, is also forbidden, even though it has not been presented on the altar under the heading of קרב “innards,” as have the fatty substances enclosed by a separate membrane that was originally attached to lungs and kidneys. The reason is that it too can easily be separated from the spleen itself. The reason why the Torah writes לעמת העצה יסירנה, “the one (fat) that is opposite the flanks,” is that if the tail is removed in its entirety, תמימה, then some fatty substance which qualifies under our definition of חלב is included at its interior end.
   It is also possible to explain that just as the other verse speaks of ואת כל חלבו, “he is to remove as a sacrifice all its fatty substances from it,” (7,3) that just as in the description of the meat offerings there, [most of which is consumed by its owners, Ed.] when the Torah first uses the term את כל חלבו as a general heading, describing the organs which are covered by such substances in detail later at the same time mentioning the organs themselves, i.e. שתי הכליות, יותרת הכבד, here too the mention of the word אליה does not imply that this part of the body itself contains something defined as חלב.
   3,12. ואם עז קרבנו, ”and if his offering is a goat;” according to Nachmanides the word עז describes the species, and does not narrowly refer to the female of the species only. I do not believe that classical Hebrew, i.e. the Holy Tongue, distinguishes between the male and the female of the species of animals as the Torah, generally, lumps together the males and the females, such as when speaking of the גמל, a camel, or יחמור, שפן or ארנבת or חזיר. (Deut. 14) Even those categories in which the Torah does distinguish between the males and the females, such as תיש and עז, or כבש and כבשה, the distinction is even <i>halachically</i> hard to notice such as in the legislation not to slaughter the mother animal and its young on the same day. The Torah in Leviticus 22,25 uses the masculine mode, אותו ואת בנו “him and his son,” although clearly what is meant is “its mother and her young,” seeing that no one is certain about the paternity of the young, [there not having been any D.N.A. tests in those days. Ed.] Some of our sages (Rabbi Yehudah) hold that the Torah does not worry about the semen of the male that fathered the calf or lamb. (<i>Chulin</i> 75). [This depends on the context of the <i>halachic</i> problems involved. Ed.] When the Torah has to address the distinction, for instance in connection with the burnt offering in chapter one, it adds that the gender used for this offering must be the male, i.e. the תיש, in the event the donor chose the species of goats. When the Torah does not specify, either gender of the species referred to is acceptable.
   4,2. נפש כי תחטא בשגגה, “when a person commits a sin of commission inadvertently, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah prefaced this verse with the word נפש instead of the customary איש, is that we find when a person of no particular category is meant, that sin originates in our thoughts, and the biological soul, life force, is where our thoughts originate from, the Torah implies that the source of our sins lies not in a biological necessity, instinctive behaviour, but in our spiritual part.
   The rationale for the need of the person who has sinned inadvertently to have to atone by means of animal sacrifice, is that all sins bring in their wake stains which leave their marks on our souls, something which interferes with our ability to receive beneficial Divine input from celestial sources. Our personalities are only fully receptive to divine input when we can be described as ritually pure, in the sense of being free from unexpiated sin. To impress these thoughts upon us, the Torah chose the introductory word נפש here. Interestingly, in the case of the High Priest becoming guilty of any of the inadvertent sins the Torah does not mention in connection with the atonement for his sin the words וכפר עליו ונסלח לו, “he will provide atonement for him and it shall be forgiven to him.” Perhaps the Torah here hints at a criticism directed at the High Priest concerned, who, in spite of his stature, could become guilty of a sin caused by negligence. Possibly, for such a person the sacrifice will not obtain total forgiveness. The High Priest may have to add prayers asking G’d for forgiveness and apologising for being somehow remiss in his conduct before the balance of his guilt will be forgiven. Seeing that he has been likened to מלאך ה' צבאות, “an angel of the Lord of Hosts”, he needs to –allegorically speaking- have clean hands at all times.
   Some commentators see in the absence of the words וכפר עליו ונסלח לו, an allusion to the Talmudic rule (<i>Baba Metzia</i> 33) that שגגת תלמוד עולה זדון, “errors committed by a scholar are accounted as if they were deliberate,” because their standing in the community does not permit them to be careless.”
   When speaking of the פרים הנשרפים, the sin offerings by such High Priests, (<i>Zevachim</i> 5,2) and their being burned up, the customary statements that this will be a source of pleasant aroma, ריח ניחוח for <i>Hashem,</i> is missing, also indicating that the High Priest’s negligence has not yet been forgiven completely, even though he has offered the requisite offering. 
   4,12. אל שפך הדשן ישרף אותו, “on the place where the ash is poured and burn it.” The Torah commanded that the burning of this sin offering including its skin must be performed outside the precincts of the Temple so that it would be observed by the public at large. This would show the people that even a High Priest would acknowledge that he had sinned and ask G’d to forgive him.
   4,14. ונודעה החטאת, “when the sin becomes known, etc.” Nachmanides derives from this that the sinner is not to offer a sin offering until the precise nature of the inadvertently committed sin has become known to himself. It is not unusual for the text to speak in generalities, so that we might have thought that others having heard or seen the sin committed in question is sufficient cause for the sinner to have to bring this offering. Possibly, the intent of the verse is to inform us that unless there is definitive knowledge that the sin has been committed, no sin offering is called for, or even approved.
   4,22. אשר נשיא יחטא, “when the political head of the nation commits an inadvertent sin, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that it is a happy day for the people of Israel when a political head of the nation is called upon to bring this offering [It shows that such a head does not consider that he is infallible, and that he accepts admonitions by his subjects. Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra feels that the text is inverted and should be understood as if the Torah had written; “when a political head sins, etc.” The whole verse is a continuation of what has been written before, i.e. “in the event that the entire community of Israel has committed an inadvertent sin, etc.” The word אשר, according to Ibn Ezra, is not a statement of fact, but is conditional just as the word אם.
   @מכל מצוות ה' אלוקיו, “of any of the negative commandments of his G’d.” Although up until now the Torah also spoke of violations of G’d’s commandments, the words מצוות אלוקיו underline that even the High Priest and the king, or other political leader, who owe obeisance only to G’d and not to a terrestrial ruler, need to be reminded by the Torah that they must always remain in awe of <i>Hashem.</i> He is the Supreme authority, including that of the King and High Priest.
   4,23, או הודע אליו חטאתו, “or the sin that he is guilty of comes to his attention.” The Torah here abbreviated, seeing that earlier it had spoken of the example where the king himself had realized that he had committed an error. Here we speak about a situation where the king had been unaware himself that he had sinned, but that the fact and the nature of the sin had been brought to his attention by others. 
   Nachmanides claims that there is no need for such convoluted ways of justifying the syntax of the Torah. The matter is simple. The word אשר simply means the same as כאשר, “when, or “as soon as,” There are many examples in Scripture where the word אשר appears meaning כאשר. As a result, the words או הודע אליו חטאתו refer to what had been stated previously in verse 1, i.e. ואשם, “he was conscious of some guilt.” and he became aware that he was guilty. At that time the sinner had either not taken any action in order to deal with how to atone for his transgression, or he had brought the offering but was not sure if it had been welcome in the eyes of G’d and had atoned for him.
   Other commentators feel that the reason why the Torah had not used wording such as או הודע אליו חטאתו except when the subject is the political head of the nation, or another individual, but not in connection with the community having sinned, or a High Priest having sinned, is that both a political head and an ordinary individual bring an אשם תלוית a contingent guilt offering, which protects them against punishment as long as the nature of their guilt has not been determined with certainty. After that, another offering, אשם ודאי, is called for. Our verse, accordingly would have to be understood thus: “if the person discussed entertains some doubt as to the precise nature of his guilt, he is to bring this אשם תלוי contingent guilt offering, pending clarification of his status. On the other hand, או הודע אליו חטאתו, if he is certain that he has to bring a sin offering to expiate his sin, he is only obliged to bring one offering, i.e. the sin offering under discussion.” The same rule applies to an ordinary priest who is subject to the same law as the ordinary Israelite. However, a High Priest or a political head of the people for whom the Torah has not made any provision to bring such contingent guilt offering in the event of doubt, as we know from the rider לאשמת העם, the guilt of the people which the Torah had added in the pertinent paragraph, (4,3) is treated in the same manner as the guilt of the community.
   5,1. והוא עד או ראה או ידע, “and he is a witness, either having seen or having definitive knowledge.” The Torah does not speak of three different scenarios here, for it is impossible for someone to be a witness to something that he has neither seen nor otherwise has definitive knowledge of. It must deal therefore with the case of someone beseeching his friend or acquaintance to testify on his behalf to a matter which he has definitive knowledge of by having been an eye witness of it, or having ironclad knowledge of when the matter is not subject to eyesight, such as testifying to words spoken. He may have heard a party admit owing money to another party, for instance. The presence of such a party when money changed hands, would be “seeing” something, the hearing of an admission, would be “knowing” something without the benefit of having seen it.
   It is also possible to explain the words והוא עד, to mean that this refers to knowledge which includes both having seen what happens and having understood its impact, such as having been present when the loan was handed over and receipt was confirmed by the recipient. The subsequent או ידע would then mean that although the party had been fully aware of the loan having been transacted, the recipient having acknowledged it, he had not seen the money change hands. The Torah, in this case, does not write: ונעלם ממנו, “it was concealed from him,” as it did in the next three verses, seeing that the refusal to testify is not an inadvertent sin but a deliberately committed one. If, at the time when requested to render an oath, the witness had indeed forgotten what he had known at the time, he does not need to render such an oath. 
   5,3. ונעלם ממנו והוא טמא, “but it was concealed from him,” the same applies when the party asked to swear had forgotten the occurrence which he was now asked to swear about Nachmanides writes that actually, the Torah abbreviated, meaning to tell us that the sin occurred due to the party having forgotten something of relevance. There was no need to spell out the nature of the sin, seeing it was well known (except to the party who had committed it) He would only become guilty of the “sin” of being ritually unclean if he were to enter the precincts of the Holy Temple, or he would attempt to eat sacrificial meat, before either being alerted to it, or undergoing ritual purification in order to be on the safe side. Forgetting an undertaking by an oath is culpable only if in addition to having forgotten about it he had violated the terms of the oath.
   5,5. והתודה אשר חטא עליה, “and he shall confess what he had sinned.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah does not report the correct sequence of the procedure involved here. The leaning on the animal prior to it being slaughtered has been omitted here. It was omitted as previously it has been made plain that before any sin offering is slaughtered the owner must lean his hands on the sacrificial animal and confess his sin. On the other hand, in the verses where the leaning is mentioned, no mention was made of the confession that accompanied this part of the procedure.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the reason why the confession is made a part of the procedure here is because in both instances involving the oath the sin to be expiated had been committed deliberately, as opposed to the other instances when the sin offering is offered on account of inadvertently committed sins. According to this approach no confession accompanies the bringing of ordinary sin offerings. However, our sages claim that the word והתודה concerns all the examples of sin offerings mentioned up until now including entering holy precincts in a state of ritual impurity when it occurred unintentionally. The same applies to all other sin offerings, each one requiring a confession immediately prior to the animal being slaughtered. The reason why the confession was mentioned especially in this verse, is that the news is that the sin mentioned does not carry the <i>karet</i> penalty, as do the other sins for which a sin offering if they were committed only inadvertently. How much more so would a confession be required when the sin concerned would require a definitive sin offering when committed unintentionally!
   5,7. ואם לא תגיע ידו, ”and if he cannot afford it, etc.” There are some sages who believe that the reason why the Torah showed a degree of leniency to financially strapped sinners by allowing them to bring an inexpensive guilt offering consisting of a bunt offering of one bird and a sin offering of another bird, is that in all of the examples concerned the sinner did not derive any meaningful personal advantage from the sin he had committed. On the other hand, someone eating <i>chelev</i> or eating ordinary food on the Day of Atonement, or someone performing work on the Sabbath, and a host of similar examples of sins, did derive personal satisfaction or financial benefit from them, not to mention people indulging in forbidden sexual relations, or people who have misappropriated property belonging to someone else, such sinners most certainly have to bring an offering that sets them back financially. Some of these have committed a twofold transgression, seeing that it occurred in holy precincts that were out of bounds to them. These offerings cost at least a <i>shekel.</i>
   As to the guilt offering designed to ward off punishment for transgressions of an indeterminate nature, the אשם תלוי, the conditional guilt offering, this must also be one that costs at least one <i>shekel.</i> It is relatively expensive, as people who are not sure they have committed a transgression are in the habit of giving themselves the benefit of the doubt. They must not think that they can do so with relative impunity.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why the guilt offering for transgressions related to oaths is relatively inexpensive for people with restricted means, is that the transgressions in respect of which his offering is brought do not carry a type of death penalty such as <i>karet</i> even if they had been committed deliberately. The reason that this is so in ritual impurity related transgressions, is that the transgression itself was committed in the course of fulfilling a commandment. 
   When reflecting on his words one has difficulty in reconciling them to a situation where a father was supposed to circumcise his son after the Sabbath, and he had forgotten the correct date, i.e. the 8th day, and circumcised his son on the Sabbath instead, who is guilty, and must bring the expensive sin offering according to the opinions of all our scholars. The reason might be that seeing that the performance of the commandment was not performed at the right time, and the father had not involved himself in as many preparations prior to fulfilling this commandments, he is not entitled to the leniency shown by the Torah in the other examples.
   @שתי תורים, “two turtledoves;” the reason this person has to offer two sacrifices (two birds) is that between them the two birds correspond in some manner to the parallel offering brought by a wealthy person guilty of the same transgression, namely offerings which contain parts that are burned up on the altar, and meat consumed by the priests. In the case of the offerings consisting of the two turtledoves, the one that is called עולה, burnt offering, is all dedicated to heaven, whereas the one known as חטאת, sin offering, this is consumed by the priests. If only a burnt offering had been sacrificed, the priest performing the procedure would not have been compensated at all. On the other hand, if only a sin offering had been presented, the altar would not have received anything as no <i>eymurim</i> of birds are burnt up on the altar.
   5,15. והביא את אשמו לה', “and he is to present his guilt offering to <i>Hashem.”</i> Nachmanides explains that the reason why this offering is called אשם, “guilt,” although it is not of the same type of animal (rather a female of the species of sheep or goats and only worth one shekel, or even less for the poor who bring birds) as the ones mentioned in our verse and worth at least 2 shekel, is that it is not the same as the sin-offering of which the Torah spoke in verse 6 and it is offered as expiation of guilt. The offering mentioned in verse 6 is actually a sin offering, and the word אשמו used by the Torah there does not refer to the name of the offering, but describes the reason, i.e. the guilt of the party who presents this offering. 
   In trying to understand why one of these types of offerings is called חטאת whereas the other is called אשם, seeing that both are designed to atone for sins committed, Nachmanides speculates that the word אשם implies a major guilt, whereas the word חטאת, related as it is to the causative החטיא, suggests that the guilty party aimed at what he should have aimed at, but he missed the target through lack of concentration or through not taking proper aim. This would explain why a more expensive offering, without allowance for sinners who are in financial distress being made is required, whereas when the basic offering is described by the Torah as a חטאת, this involves a transgression which G’d views more leniently. Misappropriating Temple property, even when using it, does not diminish its value, disregarding laws of ritual purity involving either sacred locations or sanctified food is certainly not a simple carelessness, seeing that the nature of the sites or meats demand especial care. Nachmanides continues examining all the examples of a קרבן עולה ויורד, a sin offering in which the Torah makes allowance for the economic condition of the party required to offer it, using the yardstick of the degree of negligence that is involved in the transgression. The offerings brought by a person cured from the skin disorder known as <i>tzoraat</i> are both referred to as אשם and חטאת, seeing that the afflicted person was considered as if dead, being completely ostracized from human society. The first offering sort of acts as protective shield against retribution that would have awaited him, the second as a sin-offering expiating, and paving the way for re-admission to society. The latter is to be worth at least two “regular” shekels. This is why it is called אשם instead. [I have restated some of the foregoing after comparing text in our editions of Nachmanides. Ed.]
   Parshat Tzav
   6,1. צו את אהרן ואת בניו לאמר, “command Aaron and his sons to say”. Nachmanides writes that whereas in <i>Parshat Vayikra</i> Moses had been directed to issue laws to the Children of Israel, here the directives are addressed to the priests. The reason is that in <i>Vayikra</i> the subject is the offering of sacrifices, which are brought on behalf of the Israelites at large. Here the people who act as the Israelites’ executives in this matter, i.e. the priests, are addressed.
   In the <i>Midrash</i> we find Moses being quoted as saying to G’d: “where do we ever find that when the well, i.e. the source of the water is despised and hated that the water it produces is beloved?” Moses had referred to the fact that in all the sacrifices mentioned thus far the sons of Aaron were addressed and not Aaron himself. When G’d heard this, He immediately changed the format of the directives and included Aaron personally in them so as no to leave the impression that Aaron himself was less beloved by G’d.
    <i>Rashi,</i> quoting the words of Rabbi Shimon says that whenever fulfilling one of G’d’s commandments involves expense to the party fulfilling it, the Torah must use language which is designed to spur on the party concerned to fulfill the directive. Nachmanides writes that this <i>Rashi</i> has been printed in the wrong place seeing that here no expense is involved for the addressees, the sons of Aaron. On the contrary, the sons of Aaron benefit from all the sacrifices, including even that of the burnt offering where the priests share in the skin of the animal that is offered up on the altar. The reason why Rabbi Shimon is quoted by <i>Rashi</i> at this point, must be in order to draw attention to the difference of opinion between him and the opinion expressed in the Talmud (<i>Kidushin</i> 29) before that, that the wording is intended to teach that the directive is effective immediately and in subsequent generations. Rabbi Shimon does not disagree with the principle that the wording used here generally means that the directive becomes effective immediately and remains if force throughout the generations; he only claims that in some instances this is not the reason why the Torah employed this wording, and then the reason has to do with the expense involved in carrying out G’d’s directive. One such example is the oil to be provided for lighting the <i>Menorah.</i> (Exodus 27,20) a directive that could not be fulfilled until at least 8 or nine months later after the Tabernacle had been constructed and inaugurated. Similarly, in Numbers 35,2 where the Israelites are instructed to cede to the Levites certain cities including a strip of land around these cities. Seeing that the directives of the Torah were issued before the Israelites had even crossed the Jordan, and they had certainly not yet taken possession of their own lands, the directive could not have been intended to be carried out immediately.
   Alternatively, it is possible to argue that even carrying out the present directive involved expense to the priests, seeing that immediately following this, we hear about the offerings that Aaron and his sons had to bring on their own behalf, paying out of their own pockets. (compare 12-15)
   Still another approach to the meaning of the wording of our verse is that seeing Aaron and his sons would experience considerable personal inconvenience in carrying out the instructions following, this is considered as if they had been asked to spend their own funds in performing this commandment.
   6,2. זאת תורת העולה, “this is the law concerning the burnt offering.” Ibn Ezra explains the term עולה as justified, seeing the entire animal is burnt up on the altar and the smoke rises heavenwards. The priests do not share in any of the meat of this offering.
   @היא העולה על מוקדה על המזבח כל הלילה, “it is the burnt offering that stays on its firewood on the altar the whole night long, etc.” The Torah’s purpose in giving us this detail is to teach that this offering [as all others. Ed.] must not be slaughtered, etc., after nightfall. If it has been slaughtered, and its blood sprinkled on the altar as long as it was still daylight, the burning of the remains may take place during the whole night. Interestingly, the Torah refers to these parts of the burnt offerings a היא, i.e. “she.” in the feminine mode.
   There is a problem here for we have another verse from which we derive that the remains of the flesh of burnt offering are burnt up at night, seeing that the Torah writes: (Exodus 23,18) ולא ילין חלב חגי עד בוקר, “and the fat of My festive offering may not remain on the altar until morning.” This means that the fat must not remain below the altar until morning but must be burned up at night, but the pieces must be placed on the altar during the night. We must therefore conclude that our verse here speaks of אברים, remains left for being burned up, which though they had been placed on the altar still by day, had not been placed on the fire until after it had become night. Concerning such remainders of a burnt offering, [generally one offered on weekdays, not like the example in Exodus 23,18. Ed.], the Torah writes the somewhat superfluous word היא. In other words, the Torah refers to something that had already been on the altar, but had not yet had the final procedure performed upon it. We must also consider that the Torah uses three (זאת, היא, העולה) expressions known as מיעוטין, words or letters that limit the applicability of something previously understood to apply generally. In this instance, the word היא forbids the throwing back onto the altar of any parts of the bones or flesh that had fallen off the altar while they were burning up.
   @ואש המזבח תוקד בו, “and the fire of the altar should be kept burning on it.” According to Nachmanides the Torah here issues a command that the fire on the altar be kept going all night long, seeing that it commands that a great deal of firewood be put on the pile by day so that there is no danger that all of this wood will be consumed by the fire during the daylight hours. As to the words ואש תמיד המזבח לא תכבה, “that the fire on the altar not go out,” (6,5 and 6,6) this means that it must be kept going on a year round basis, and it is the task of the priests to see to it that it is kept going. The Torah simply repeats, in order to underline what it had said in verse 5 ובער עליה הכהן עצים בבוקר בבוקר, “the priest shall kindle it every morning,” this is a reminder to see to it that enough firewood is always on hand on the large מערכת, woodpile, to ensure that the fire on the altar never goes out completely. Our sages derive from the impersonal styling of this command, i.e. the Torah warns of what should not happen, not only instructing the priest what to do, that if any person would extinguish a single coal of that fire it would be considered a violation of a negative commandment. [a <i>Midrash</i> even makes a calculation that this fire, started in the second year of the Israelites in the desert was kept going without interruption for 116 years. Ed.] The whole reason why there was a secondary smaller woodpile on the altar was to act as insurance in the event that due to some negligence by some priest, the primary woodpile had been allowed to become extinguished. The sages derive the negative commandment here from the words [not really needed. Ed] והאש על המזבח “and the fire on the altar.” Although they say that this results in the penalty of lashes when committed deliberately, I do not believe that there are separate lashes on account of each coal that was allowed to go out or was extinguished deliberately.
   6,3. ולבש הכהן מדו בד ומכנסי בד, “the priest is to don his linen tunic and his linen trousers.” The Torah mentions the tunic and trousers in connection with the procedure of removing the ashes, although according to Nachmanides, [alluded to here by the author not by name but uncharacteristically as “ה'הג” הרב הגאון, Ed.] needs to wear all four of his priestly garments as there is no kind of Temple service that may be performed with fewer than four garments. The reason why only two of these garments were mentioned here is, that they both have a feature we did not hear about previously. The Torah, by writing מדו, indicates that these garments were not of standard measure but were fitted according to the size of the individual priest who would wear them, both the tunic and the trousers. It was important that nothing should separate the garments from the skin of the wearer.
   Nachmanides refers to Onkelos who translates מדו, as לבישין, writes: it appears that he understood the word as the name of a comprehensive garment, something we would refer to nowadays as the “uniform” worn by liveried people, for instance. The expression מדיו, in Samuel I 17,28 where Saul gave David his uniform also refers to a uniform tailored for him especially, [which because David was much shorter would have been a hindrance rather than a help to David in his fight against Goliath. Ed.] In Samuel I 4,12 we read about ומדיו קרועים ואדמה על ראשו, “the torn uniform and the earth on his head described the state of mourning of its wearer who brought news of the capture of the Holy Ark by the Philistines”, not to mention the thirty thousand men who had fallen in that battle.
   6,4. ופשט את בגדיו ולבש בגדים אחרים, “the priest will divest himself of his clothes and shall don other garments.” <i>Rashi</i> writes that this language does not make this procedure obligatory. (although it is good manners to do so, so as not to soil the special garments he wears during performing other duties)
   Nachmanides writes that he does not know of any reason that would indicate that what is written here is not obligatory. Surely it is a duty for the priest not to wear the regular priestly garments while engaged in a task that would soil those garments, such as when he removes the ashes. Even when engaged in just הרמת הדשן, the removal of the ash, or incompletely consumed incense, from the golden altar in the Sanctuary itself, an activity that is rated as part of the Temple service, priestly garments must be worn, though they may be of an inferior quality.
   There is an opinion according to which the word אחרים that we understood as “alternate, others,” but sacred garments, does not refer to inferior priestly garments, but to ordinary garments such as the ones worn by non-priests. The carrying of the ashes outside the Temple precincts was simply not considered as part of the Temple service.
   6,10. חלקם נתתי אותה מאשי, “I have presented it as their share from My fire-offerings.” The meaning of the entire verse, which on the face of it contains nothing new, is that none of the remains becomes the property of the priests until all the parts of the sacrifice slated for burning up have done so. From this verse we derive the rule that what applies to the three fingers full of the <i>minchah</i> offering applies to all the offerings, seeing that the Torah adds the words קודש קדשים היא כחטאת וכאשם, i.e. the meal offering is just as holy of holies to G’d as are the sin and guilt offerings.
   6,16. וכל מנחת כהן כליל תהיה, “and every meal offering offered by a priest must be complete, (not just the three fingers full) none of it may be consumed by the priests. 
   Maimonides (<i>Moreh Nevuchim,</i> 3,46<i>)</i> explains that the reason for the above is simple, i.e. that the priest cannot consume his own offering. Were he allowed to partake of it, the impression would be created that he had in fact not brought an offering to G’d at all. After all, the altar receives only three fingers full of any meal offering, pus a small amount of frankincense. By legislating that the entire meal/oil mixture is to be burned, the priest will be seen to have brought an offering of his own. The treatment by the Torah of the meal offering differently from the sin offering, for instance, is that in the case of the latter, substantial parts of the sacrificial animal are burned up on the altar in addition to the parts that the priests may consume.
   6,18. וזאת תורת החטאת, “and this is the law of the sin offering.” Nachmanides points out that in <i>Parshat Vayikra</i> the order in which the various sacrifices are listed is: עולה-מנחה-זבח שלמים חטאת, אשם, the reason being that the Torah first wanted to deal with all the voluntary offerings, followed by the list of mandatory sacrifices, offered in order to expiate various types of sins, transgressions. In our <i>Parshah</i> the Torah first lists all the sacrifices described as קדשי קדשים, holy of holies, before listing sacrifices known in the Talmud as קדשים קלים, “sacred things of a lower level of holiness.” Many additional rules have been revealed in this <i>Parshah,</i> so that we do not only deal with the same list of sacrifices presented in a different sequence. I have not set myself the task of explaining the rationales behind the various sacrifices; I only attempt to explain what is behind the order in which these various verses have been recorded in the written Torah.
   6,23. וכל חטאת אשר יובא מדמה, “any of the types of sin-offering whose blood brought into the Sanctuary, etc.”
   <i>Rashi</i> comments that if the priest brought blood from a sin offering whose blood was not destined for sprinkling on the corners of the golden altar, such as the blood of the sin-offerings Aaron offered on the Day of Atonement, into the Sanctuary, then the offering is retroactively invalid. According to this the meaning of the words לכפר בקודש in our verse cannot be understood literally, as the wording assumes that it is capable of securing atonement. On the contrary, it even nullifies what otherwise would have been atonement. The meaning of the words לכפר בקודש must then be “with the intention of achieving atonement in the Sanctuary.”
   There is a sage who holds that the sin offering of which our verse speaks becomes invalidated only if the priest had sprinkled some of that blood on the golden altar, not if he had merely brought it within the confines of the Sanctuary. 
   There is yet another sage who understands our verse as speaking of the type of sin offering whose blood is meant to be sprinkled inside the Sanctuary on the golden altar in the Sanctuary, and that the Torah merely informs us that it is forbidden for the priests to consume any parts of that type of sin offering. We can therefore understand the meaning of the words לכפר בקודש as quite literally: “the one that requires to be brought into the Sanctuary in order to achieve atonement, etc.’
   7,8. עור העולה אשר הקריב, לכהן לו יהיה, “the skin of the burnt offering which he presented shall belong to the priest who performed this procedure.” Although this legislation is spelled out only in connection with the burnt offering, the same rule applies to the skins of sin-offerings or guilt-offerings. However, the skin of peace-offerings,זבחי שלמים, belong to the respective owners of the sacrificial animals, not to the priest.
   Some sages claim that there had been no need for the Torah to spell out that the skins of sin and guilt offerings also belong to the officiating priest, seeing that even a substantial part of the meat of these offerings belongs to the priests. It is natural that the skin, something secondary, always belongs to the party to whom the flesh belongs. Seeing that no meat of the burnt offering belongs to the priest, the Torah had to specifically state that at least the skin does belong to the officiating priest.
   7,9. וכל מנחה אשר תאפה בתנור, “and any meal-offering that is baked in the oven, etc.” Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text it appears that our verse speaks of someone who had made a vow to bring one of three types of meal offerings, anyone of which is baked in an oven, תנור, a deep pan, מרחשת, or in a shallow pan, מחבת. Either of these meal offerings would belong totally and exclusively to the priest who performs the procedure. In order to avoid errors, the Torah continues with other types of meal-offerings saying that these are shared out equally among the roster, בית אב, of priests performing their duties on that day or during that week.
   7,10. וכל מנחה בלולה בשמן וחריבה, “and any meal-offering that is mixed with oil, or that is dry, etc.” this refers to a meal offering consisting only of fine flour mixed with oil, or even a totally dry meal offering, one that does not fit into any of the three categories mentioned in the earlier verse. The reason why the three categories of meal offering mentioned in verse nine belong exclusively to the officiating priest is that the preparation of such baked goods requires a great deal more work on the part of the priest, and the Torah rewards him for that work.
   However, our sages do not accept this kind of reasoning, as they interpret the statement וכל מנחה בלולה בשמן, וחריבה as including every possible category of meal offering baked or not, seeing that every meal offering is either mixed with oil or is dry, and the Torah writes that all the male priests may share in it equally. They therefore understand the words לכהן המקריב אותה לו יהיה to mean that any priests who are qualified to present such an offering, i.e. they are not in a state of ritual impurity are called מקריבים, as they always act as the appointees of the owners, the ones who themselves, personally, are prevented from performing this service due to their not being priests. What is written here concerning who participates in the consuming of the meal offerings, applies equally to the priests who may partake of the meat offerings, i.e. the members of the roster of priests on duty on that day.
   7,12. והקריב על זבח התודה, “he shall offer with the meat part of the thanksgiving offering, etc.” The thanksgiving offering consists of several parts, a peace offering described as זבח השלמים, breads, both unleavened and leavened. He will bring it all to the (side of) the altar and the leavened loaves will be considered the major component [although they are 10 loaves out of a total of forty loaves. Ed.] The reason that the Torah uses the word עליו, “in addition to it,” stressing that the leavened loaves are the principal component, is because the unleavened loaves outnumber the leavened loaves and we would otherwise have thought that they outrank the leavened loaves in that offering.
   Nachmanides writes that he is amazed that the Torah did not exclude the thanksgiving offering as one to which the prohibition of bringing it to the altar is applied, just as it did state this in connection with bringing of the בכורים, the first fruit offerings. [I suppose the references are to Leviticus 2,12 where no mention of exceptions are made at all, and Leviticus 23,17 where the Torah specifically exempts this offering by writing it is to consist of leavened loaves. I have not yet found where Nachmanides writes what our author attributes to him. Maybe Nachmanides’ comment on verse 14 is meant. Ed.]
   Nachmanides poses a problem that is no problem at all, seeing that in the prohibition of leavened products for the altar, the Torah stresses that bringing leavened products to the altar is prohibited. Seeing that the loaves of these offerings mentioned here are not presented on the altar, they are in a different category and cannot be lumped together with the firstling offerings mentioned elsewhere. The loaves of the thanksgiving offering are only heaved by the priest, but not deposited on the altar. Seeing they are all being consumed, what would be the point in depositing them on the altar where things are deposited for burning up? Nachmanides also suggests that seeing that the ריח ניחוח, pleasant fragrance, enjoyed by G’d, is not an issue in these offerings, the donor not having to restore himself in G’d’s grace, there was no need at all to refer to the admissibility or not of leavened products.
   Perhaps there was not even any cause for the Torah to mention any of this dispensation of the restriction on offering leavened products on the altar, seeing that this offering was accompanied by animal sacrifices which achieved the ריח ניחוח status through the parts of it which were burned up on the altar. At any rate, -Nachmanides- speaking, I have already pointed out earlier that the need for ריח ניחוח is not an issue in voluntary offerings at all, as the people presenting those had not fallen out of grace with G’d, and would not regain their grace except by presenting something described as ריח ניחוח. 
   7,17.ויאכל, וממחרת, והנותר ממנו יאכל, “it shall be consumed, and on the day following; any leftovers may be consumed;” <i>Rashi</i> writes that the letter ו in the word והנותר is superfluous.
   Nachmanides, on the other hand, writes that he understands as follows: Seeing that the Torah had written that the thanksgiving offering may (or must) be eaten on the same day or the day following, I might have thought that it is a <i>mitzvah</i> to spread the eating of this sacrifice over two days, i.e. the donor eats some of it on each of these days. This is why the Torah refers to the נותר, to any part that had not yet been eaten as a “leftover,” so that we understand that permission to eat the leftover on the second day has been given, but it is certainly not mandatory to keep some of that meat for the second day. At the end of the second day, if there is still some leftover it must be burned.
   7,17. והנותר מבשר הזבח ביום השלישי באש ישרף. “And what is left over of the meat of the sacrifice on the third day must be burned.” This does not mean that this meat is permitted to be eaten during the night between the second and the third day, seeing that the Torah had already said that it must be eaten during the day on which it was slaughtered or the day following. (verse 16) The meaning of the directive is simply that any sacrificial meat from that offering which has not been consumed during the permitted time must be burned on the third day. The reason the Torah had to be so specific is to teach us that the burning of sacred meats that have not been consumed must only take place by day, not by night. This is so, in spite of the fact, that those remains no longer are fit to be eaten.
   7,25. כי כל אוכל חלב מן הבהמה אשר יקריב ממנה קרבן לה', “for any one who eats of the fat parts of the animal which he offers to <i>Hashem</i> as a sacrifice, etc.” The verse does not refer to the actual animal that has been offered as a sacrifice, so that it would exclude animals that have not been sanctified as offerings from this prohibition, but to the categories of animals which may potentially be offered as sacrifices on the altar. The fact that the fat of an animal that has already been offered as a sacrifice is forbidden on pain of the <i>karet</i> penalty when it is done deliberately, certainly does not need to be mentioned here. Even in <i>Parshat Vayikra</i> (3,17) the verse כל חלב... לא תאכלו would not have been necessary seeing that the Torah had already commanded that it be burned up on the altar. The principal reason for our verse here is to indicate that the fat parts of free roaming animals such as gazelles, deer, etc., which basically are allowed to be eaten, although capturing them unblemished may be difficult, are excluded from the prohibition. We might have thought that the categories of animals referred to as חיה that is a sub category of the ruminants described by the Torah as בהמה are included in this prohibition. By ”repeating” something we knew already, the Torah by emphasizing the words בהמה and יקריב, makes clear that free-roaming ruminants that do not qualify for יקריב are also not subject to the restriction of חלב. In order for us not to think that the חלב of an animal that died of causes other than ritual slaughter, i.e. a נבלה or an animal that died from some disease or injury, i.e. טרפה, is excluded from the legislation mentioned here, the Torah writes that although these carcasses may be used, they must not be eaten. (verse 24)
   The complete meaning of our verse is: the חלב of any category of animal from which a sacrifice on the altar may be presented to <i>Hashem</i>, including those which have become disqualified before reaching the altar, must not be eaten on pain of the severe penalty known as <i>karet</i>.
   7,36. אשר צוה ה' לתת להם ביום משחו אותם, “which <i>Hashem</i> has commanded to give to them on the day of His having anointed them, etc.” The meaning of the words is: “which on the day He ordered them to be anointed, He made their appointment permanent, hereditary, throughout the ages.”
   Ibn Ezra understands the words ביום משחו as if the Torah had written מיום משחו, “from the day He had anointed them onwards.”
   7,38. אשר צוה את משה בהר סיני, “that He had commanded Moses at Mount Sinai.” Nachmanides writes that this is to be understood in accordance with the view of our sages that all commandments had been commanded to Moses at Mount Sinai, but that some of them had been repeated to him when G’d spoke to him from above the Holy Ark in the Tent of Testimony.
   It is possible that the reason why the Torah emphasized “at Mount Sinai,” especially in this instance, is that on this occasion, when the Israelites were still camped around the mountain, speaking to Moses in the Tent of Testimony was basically equivalent to speaking to him from Mount Sinai. This is not the only time when the Torah uses the expression בהר סיני when it does not literally man that the command was (only) issued while Moses was on the mountain. In Numbers 28,6 we find the line עולת תמיד העשויה בהר סיני, “the permanent, (daily) burnt offering presented at Mount Sinai.” [This verse follows the appointment of Eleazar as his father Aaron’s successor as high Priest and a report of his having performed his duties for the first time. well into the 40th year of the Israelites in the desert. Ed.] Performance of this offering could not have commenced at the time Moses received the Torah at Mount Sinai, as it was offered in the Tent of Testimony only close to eleven months after the revelation. The Tent of Testimony had not begun operating until the month of <i>Nissan</i> in the second year. The reason why this slightly misleading wording was chosen, was that at the time when this offering was first introduced as a daily offering the Israelites were still encamped around Mount Sinai [until the 20th of the month following. Ed.] The people were commanded to divide their encampments according to the “flags” of the various army groups of three tribes each in the second year, and only then was the Tabernacle, Tent of Meeting, moved from a location close to where they had encamped ever since the time they arrived near the Mountain, between 3 and 6 days before the revelation. In order to make this distinction even clearer, the Torah writes: (7,37) זאת התורה לעולה, למנחה, ולחטאת ולאשם ולמלואים ולזבח השלמים אשר צוה ה' את משה בהר סיני ביום צוותו את בני ישראל להקריב את קרבניהם לה' במדבר סיני. “This is the law of the burnt offerings, the meal offerings, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and the inauguration offerings, and the peace offerings on festivals, which <i>Hashem</i> commanded Moses on Mount Sinai, on the day He commanded the Children of Israel to bring their offerings to <i>Hashem</i>, in the wilderness of Sinai.” The Torah makes the point that the location of the Children of Israel at the time was the desert of Sinai, after they had moved away some distance from Mount Sinai. The tent of Meeting therefore was located in “the desert of Sinai,” not next to Mount Sinai. When the Book of Leviticus had commenced with the words: “the Lord spoke to Moses from the Tent of Testimony,” the meaning is that this conversation took place not at Mount Sinai but in the desert not far from Mount Sinai. We had not known the precise location of the Tabernacle at that time until we came to this verse
   8,2 קח את אהרן, “take Aaron, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the chapter introduced here was said by G’d to Moses seven days prior to the erection of the Tabernacle.
   Nachmanides takes issue with <i>Rashi</i>, asking why he takes such liberties with the Divine words of the Torah by editing their sequence. Furthermore, he (<i>Rashi</i>) claims that on that first day of <i>Nissan</i> G’d told Moses all about the erection of the Tabernacle, the inaugural consecration offerings, the garments of the priests and their having to be being clothed in them, etc., but reporting only about what Moses had done during the seven days following without mentioning anything about what Aaron and his sons had done until this moment. How would <i>Rashi</i> explain that in this instance an event has been reported in two entirely different contexts? When we encounter the Torah reporting matters not in chronological order, at least the same subject is not torn asunder by some parts being reported in one Book, in one context, and the other part in a different Book in another context?
   Therefore, the correct interpretation of what happened must be that Moses was indeed commanded concerning all of the foregoing on the occasion when he put up the Tabernacle for the first time, on the 23rd of Adar. After having succeeded in putting it up completely on that occasion, G’d called to him, and instructed him concerning all the various offerings which we have read about ever since the beginning of <i>Parshat Vayikra,</i> because He wanted Moses to be familiar with all of them before the time came to make this part of the daily routine and before he would offer up any of them during the days that he would act as High Priest pro temp. After all, the consecration offerings consisted of burnt offerings, sin-offerings, and peace offerings. The priests were not familiar with the laws governing all of the offerings until they had learned what has been written in the Torah from the beginning of <i>Parshat Vayikra</i> until here.
   After having made Moses familiar with these laws, G’d told Moses to take Aaron, (8,2) to “take Aaron, etc.,” and to exercise speed and dedication when performing these various procedures. G’d repeated, to a certain extent, what He had told Moses וזה אשר תעשה להם וגו', (Exodus 29,1) when he had been commanded about the inaugural consecration offerings of the priests. Moses conveyed these laws to the priests as and when their performance became imminent, after they had been informed that G’d had selected them to their new status as a status transmitted by heredity based on paternity. The only thing that has been added in our verse is that this consecration took place in full view of the entire congregation. (Verse 3) Thus far Nachmanides.
   We are able also to explain what <i>Rashi</i> has said by following the same approach. What <i>Rashi</i> meant when he referred to the seven days prior to the erection of the Tabernacle simply refers to the period before the Tabernacle had been erected permanently, i.e. was not taken apart again every evening. The “final” erection of the Tabernacle occurred only on the eighth day of the inaugural consecration rites, on the first day of Nissan. Days during which the Tabernacle was alternately put together and taken apart were not considered as “after the erecting of the Tabernacle.”
   @ואת כל העדה הקהל אל פתח אהל מועד, “and assemble the entire congregation to the entrance of the tent of Meeting!” Even though the Tabernacle had been erected on the first of <i>Nissan</i>, and this occurred on the 23rd of Adar prior to that, according to the opinion that during the first seven days of the Tabernacle it was erected and taken apart by Moses on a daily basis during those days, seeing that during these seven days the Tabernacle was in position during the day, it is quite appropriate for the Torah to refer to an entrance of the “Tent of Meeting.”
   8,6. וירחץ אותם במים, “he immersed them in water.” Nachmanides writes that he believes that most likely Moses immersed all of them (Aaron and his four sons) in a ritual bath; however, he did not immerse them in such a bath simultaneously, but he first immersed Aaron and then dressed him in the appropriate priestly garments; anointing him. Following this, he performed the same procedure on each of Aaron’s sons.
   8,7. ויתן עליו את הכתונת ויחגור אותו באבנט, “he placed the tunic on him and girdled him with the sash.” Nachmanides points out that when Moses was commanded to dress Aaron, the Torah writes:והלבשת את אהרן את הכתונת ואת מעיל האפוד, “you are to dress him in the tunic and the robe with the<i> ephod,”</i> whereas here no mention is made of the robe and the <i>ephod.</i> The reason may be that actually Moses followed the normal procedure. It is customary that after putting on the tunic that one girdles oneself with a belt. Seeing that the Torah had wanted to include all the garments in a single instruction, the belt had been mentioned last on that occasion, including both Aaron and his sons in the instruction to belt their garments. Nevertheless, the normal sequence was that reported here, i.e. donning a tunic followed by tightening it with the belt, followed by donning the robe. Moses was well aware of these procedures, but in this instance it was of importance that the <i>ephod</i> and the breastplate attached to it, also had to be somehow attached to the belt. The Torah, during its instructions concerning these garments, and the sequence in which they were to be donned, describes this in the second half of chapter 28 in Exodus, and makes these connections fairly plain. [I have abbreviated here, as without an illustration this is not easy to follow. Ed.]
   8,10. ויקח משה את שמן המשחה וימשח את המשכן, וגו', “Moses took the oil for anointing and anointed the Tabernacle and all its contents.” 
   8,12. ויצוק על ראש אהרן, “he then poured it on the head of Aaron, etc.”
   Nachmanides writes that in this instance too, Moses performed the procedures in the correct order, as he had been commanded to perform these steps in this order when first told about the oil of anointing (Exodus 30,26-30) This was the reason that Moses did not want to anoint the Tabernacle itself until he could immediately thereafter anoint Aaron and his sons and their garments. The entire procedure of anointing took place as a continuous sequence. This was all necessary to enable the party who offered the sacrifices to be invited into the Tabernacle to perform the duties that could be performed only inside the Sanctuary, such as lighting the <i>Menorah,</i> burning the incense, and sprinkling the blood of certain of the sin-offerings on the golden altar. In those verses Moses had been told to first anoint he Tabernacle followed by the command to anoint and thereby to sanctify Aaron and his sons. [No mention is made in the text of the sons of Aaron having been anointed with oil. Ed.] Aaron and his sons were also to be sprinkled with some of the blood from the altar of the inaugural consecration offerings that had been presented by Moses as the High Priest prior to Aaron’s induction. Normally, [i.e. when the occasion should arise again to anoint a Tabernacle or Temple, I presume, Ed.] this would not take place until after the priests had already donned the garments in which they would perform their service. Anyone perusing the text of Nachmanides as we have it nowadays will note that it is substantially different from that which had been at the disposal of the <i>Tur</i>. It is not my task as a translator to reconcile these versions, and if the reader on comparing texts, finds fault with my translation this may be due to my following the <i>Tur’s</i> quote of Nachmanides, as he had it. Ed.]
   Personally, I am nonplussed why the anointing of Aaron’s sons is mentioned here at all. [An alternate version adds the word “not” i.e. why the anointing of the sons of Aaron was not mentioned here at all. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes [in our versions on verse 11. Ed.] that there was no need for mentioning the anointing of the sons of Aaron at all, as it is clear from the tenor of the text that the sons underwent the same procedures as their father. After all, the Torah wrote when detailing the instructions to Moses: ומשחת אותם, “you are to anoint them.” (Exodus 28,41) The fact that Moses had carried out these instructions is confirmed when the Torah writes that Moses carried out the instructions G’d had given him. (End of verse 13)
   It appears to me (Nachmanides writing) that the anointment of Aaron’s sons was not performed by pouring oil of anointment on their heads, seeing that this detail has not been mentioned except in connection with Aaron himself even in the instructions to Moses, (compare Exodus 29,7) whereas in that verse the Torah does not mention anointment of his sons at all. It is therefore possible that the sons were not anointed with oil at all, but that they were only sprinkled with some of the blood and the oil of the inaugural offering as described in Exodus 29,21 [a sprinkling which stained their garments, not their bodies. Ed.] In that paragraph no mention is made of either pouring oil on the sons of Aaron or of anointing their heads with it. However, in the paragraph dealing with the erection of the Tabernacle in <i>Parshat Pekudey</i> (40,15) the Torah does speak of Moses having to anoint Aaron’s sons with the words: “as you have done to their father.” On that occasion no mention is made of their being sprinkled at all. No mention is made of this anointing with oil of the sons of Aaron in the paragraph dealing with the oil of anointing and its subjects, either. This leads me to believe that the sons were only sprinkled with oil.
   8,11. [This apparent error in the sequence (we already had reference to verse 12) is not an error on my part, but I am copying the sequence as printed in my version of the <i>Tur,</i> where this does not appear in the corrections at the end as an error. Ed.]
   @ויז ממנו על המזבח, “he sprinkled from it on the altar, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that he does not know whence Moses had been instructed to do this.
   Nachmanides feels that it is possible that this was included in the verse in which the altar had been sanctified, i.e. in the instructions commencing in Exodus 40,2. According to verse 10 of that chapter, the altar was to be both anointed and sanctified, as a result of which it would become “holy of holies.” The implication of the wording is that the additional sanctification may have been achieved through the sprinkling of this blood on the altar seven times. The sanctity status of the altar exceeded that of the rest of the Tabernacle because the altar had not only been anointed with the special oil, but had also had sacrificial blood sprinkled on it. It is no more than logical that the “additional” sanctity achieved by the altar was the result of it having been treated like the people who actively presented the offerings in the Tabernacle, i.e. by being anointed also with the same oil.
   8,15. ויחטא את המזבח, “he enabled the altar to dispense atonement.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this was done by removing its former status as being profane, making it sacred.
   @ויקדשהו, “he sanctified it;” by means of the service performed on it now, for the future also.
   @לכפר עליו, “to provide atonement on it.” For all subsequent generations.
   We learn from here that the fact that the meat of the inaugural offering which had not yet been consumed by the flames on the altar, did not hold up the altar’s ability to confer atonement on the people who had so far presented an offering on this altar.
   In a תוספתא discussing the subject of מלואים, it is stated that if someone donates anything against his better judgment (not from free volition) this gift may act as advance protection for him so that he will not become guilty of bringing stolen goods to the Temple, something of which G’d is on record as saying שונא גזל בעולה, “He hates it if the burnt offering had been obtained unlawfully.” (Compare <i>Sukkah</i> 30) [I do not know of a “<i>Tossephta miluim,</i> but I found something similar to this in the <i>Sifra</i>.קפ Ed.]
   8,17. ואת הפר ואת עורו ואת בשרו ואת פרשו, “and the bull with it hide, flesh and its waste.” Even though the Torah had already mentioned the hide, the flesh and the waste separately, the Torah still wrote “and” the bull, thereby including bones, tendons horns and hooves that had not been spelled out.
   Alternately, the ו in the word ואת preceding the word עורו is extraneous, similar to Numbers 19,5 ושרף את הפרה לעיניו, את עורה ואת בשרה ואת דמה על פרשה ישרוף, “Someone shall burn the cow before his eyes, its hide, and its flesh, and its blood, with its dung, shall he burn.”
   8,20. ויקטר משה את הראש ואת הנתחים ואת הפדר., “Moses burned up the head, the various parts, and the fat parts to go up in smoke.” The meaning is not that Moses burned up all these parts separately at different times, but it means that when the time for burning up these parts had arrived he proceeded to do so, as instructed.
   8,22. את האיל השני איל המלואים, “the second ram, the ram representing the inauguration;” Nachmanides writes that all of these offerings were inaugural offerings; we know this already from Exodus 29,1 “and this is the matter that you shall do for them to sanctify them, etc.” Why then was the second ram only referred to here as the “ram of the inaugural offering?” The reason this expression “inaugural” was applied here to the second ram is because it was the last of the series of inaugural offerings. The same adjective would, of course, have been applicable to all of them. Each one of the offerings in the series is מעכב, indispensable, in order for the people concerned to become sanctified in their new role as priests.
   It is possible that the bull of the sin-offering here was meant to atone for any infringement of the laws concerning the altar, as a result of which atonement it could be sanctified, just as the purpose of the burnt offering was to gain grace in the eyes of <i>Hashem. The shlamim,</i> peace<i>-</i>offering on the other hand, was an expression of gratitude by the newly appointed priests that G’d had granted them such a distinction to have such unrestricted entrance to the holy precincts. In other words, the real “consecration” offering was only this peace offering; the other two offerings were preambles. Seeing that they were necessary preconditions, all of these three types of offerings are called מילואים, (plural mode 
   8,30. ויקח משה משמן המשחה ומן הדם אשר על המזבח, “Moses took from the oil of the anointing, and from the blood on the altar, etc.” Nachmanides writes that it is not clear to him why the procedure of sprinkling the oil and blood on Aaron and his sons was delayed until after the burning up of the מילואים offerings that required this. When you compare the directives Moses had received concerning these offerings, you will find that the sprinklings are mentioned prior to the burning up of the parts on the altar that required this. (Compare Exodus 29,21). Possibly, the reason is that during the directives the Torah speaks of the priests and their garments becoming sanctified as a result of this sprinkling. From this wording Moses might have concluded that the final stage in the sanctification of the priests and their garments would not be attained until then. It is a fact that during the directives in chapter 29 of Exodus no mention is made of sanctification. [I believe the author means that no procedure there is described as specifically designed to sanctify the priest, as for instance portions of the meat of the איל המילואים are specifically described as undergoing sanctification procedure (verse 27.] In connection with putting the blood from the sacrifice on Aaron’s right ear or big toe, we also do not encounter the word קדוש at all. When we read in verse 12 of our chapter וימשח אותו לקדשו, that Moses anointed him in order to sanctify him, we must assume that this was only a partial sanctification, and that the procedure would only be completed with ויקדש את אהרן את בגדיו ואת בגדי בניו אתו , “he sanctified Aaron, his garments, and his sons and their garments at the same time.” Sanctification of father and sons was described as being complete as a result of these sprinklings.
   8,32. והנותר בבשר ובלחם, “and any leftover of either the meat or the bread, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the letters ב in front of the words בשר and לחם have to be understood as if the Torah had written מבשר ומלחם, i.e. “leftovers from.” The meaning of the word נותר does not mean something left over until the morning, seeing this had already been written in Exodus 29,35.
   8,35. ופתח אהל מועד תשבו יומם ולילה שבעת ימים, “at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting shall you dwell day and night for seven days.” We are taught in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> that this is not a prohibition not to leave this spot during the entire seven days, but the meaning is that during the daylight hours when Temple service may be in progress, Aaron and his sons are not to leave that location. We derive the rule from this verse for all future generations that any priest who abandons his station during the hours that Temple service is ongoing is guilty of death 
   8,36. את כל הדברים אשר צוה ה' ביד משה, “all the matters which <i>Hashem</i> had commanded through Moses. Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah does not use the customary wording of כאשר צוה ה' את משה, is because Aaron’s sons did not do exactly as G’d had commanded Moses, by adding strange fire, i.e. fire that did not originate in heaven. They had not been instructed to do this.
   Parshat Shemini
   9,1-2. ויהי ביום השמיני ...ויאמר אל אהרן וגו', “It was on the eighth day…he said to Aaron, etc.” Up until now the Torah did not spell out which of the sacrifices mentioned had been commanded to Moses in which order, and the Torah contented itself with writing: זה הדבר אשר צוה ה' תעשו, “this is the matter which the Lord has commanded you are to do,” and the sacrifices mentioned here in our portion had not been recorded as being specifically commanded to Moses to command to Aaron and the Children of Israel respectively. Now- as opposed to the seven days previously when Moses had been offering the מילואים inaugural sacrifices,- Aaron and his sons, and subsequently he and his sons on behalf of the people at large, will perform these procedures. The sacrifices mentioned here served as consecration sacrifices for the people. 
   The מנחה gift offering that Aaron was to bring with the sin offering and the burnt offering was the חביטים offering he was required to offer every single day of the year.
   The <i>Midrash</i> suggests that the calf that Aaron was instructed to offer here served as a sin offering for his share in the sin of the golden calf.
   Nachmanides writes that Aaron’s sacrifice here was no different in nature from his personal sin offering on the Day of Atonement, and the sin offering on behalf of the people also corresponded to the sin offering he brought on behalf of the people on the Day of Atonement, when he offered a he-goat as their sin offering. It would appear therefore that seeing that the reason for Aaron’s sin-offering corresponded to his sin offering on the Day of Atonement, he burned it, just as he burned the one on the Day of Atonement. This was so, in spite of the fact, that this sin offering was offered on the large altar in the courtyard of the Tabernacle, and part of such sin-offerings are usually consumed by the male priests within the holy precincts. (Zevachim, chapter 5) Though we do not hear that Moses had instructed him to burn this sin offering, it is possible that he had received such instructions and the Torah did not bother to inform us of this. There was no need for the Torah to mention the directive, as clearly, Aaron would not proceed on his own initiative to offer an offering he had not been told to offer.
   There is a further statement in the <i>Midrash</i> to the effect that the שור, bull, was intended as atonement for the Israelites’ share in the sin of the golden calf, and that the reason that here a male goat was added was to atone for the brothers having dipped Joseph’s coloured tunic in the blood of a male goat at the time, a sin which had not yet been atoned for. [According to an ancient version of the <i>Tanchuma,</i> this was to reassure the Israelites that the sin of the golden calf had been forgiven. Ed.]
   9,3. ואל בני ישראל תדבר לאמר, “and to the Children of Israel say as follows:” Moses told Aaron to speak to the Israelites directly and command them in the name of the Lord. This was meant to enhance Aaron’s status among the people seeing that it was he who performed all these rites on behalf of the people. 
   If not for this reason it would have been appropriate for Moses to also include the elders in his address to Aaron, seeing that the elders had been mentioned in verse one as having been called to Moses’ presence also. But Moses was anxious for the people to be addressed by Aaron separately, independently of the elders. When the people had been instructed that each Israelite householder was to secure a lamb for the Passover, (Exodus 12,21) Moses had allowed all the elders to convey that directive. [The latter paragraph is phrased in a manner that could suggest that it is a retreat from the author’s first interpretation. Ed.]
   9,7-8. ויקרב אהרן אל המזבח וישחט, “Aaron approached the altar and slaughtered;” Nachmanides writes that in his personal view, the plain meaning of the words קרב אל המזבח is that Aaron is to approach the north side of the altar where he is to perform the procedures involving the sin offering and the burnt offering, seeing these two types of offerings need to be slaughtered on the north side of the altar. (<i>Zevachim</i> chapter 5<i>)</i> The catching of the blood of these offerings must also be carried out on the north side of the altar in the appropriate vessels. Moses recorded this in abbreviated form as Aaron was already familiar with the procedure.
   According to a <i>Midrash,</i> seeing that Aaron was a קדוש ה', someone sanctified by <i>Hashem,</i> his life having been stained only by one marginal sin, his involvement in the sin of the golden calf, this sin was something which preyed on his mind constantly, similar to David’s remark וחטאתי נגדי תמיד, “and I am constantly conscious of my sin against You.“ (Psalms 51, 5) He felt that the image of the golden calf constantly intruded upon his imagination and interfered with the proper concentration required when presenting sacrifices on behalf of others. This is why Moses tried to restore his mental equilibrium by telling him not to be depressed, that G’d had already forgiven his involvement in that sin.
   Some commentators think that it had been Satan that had shown Aaron these images of the golden calf, and that Moses told Aaron that in spite of he fact that as far as G’d was concerned, his sin had been forgiven, he also had to do something to shut up Satan so that the latter would not be able to upset him at the crucial time when he would perform sacrificial duties. This is the approach taken to our verse by <i>Torat Kohanim.</i>
   9,17. ויקרב את המנחה, “he presented the <i>minchah</i> offering.” Although in the directives, he had first been told about offering a bull and a ram, followed by the gift offering mixed with oil, he offered the gift offering first, because Moses had told them all the meat offerings in one directive followed by the instruction about the gift offering. Aaron actually offered the gift offering in the proper order simultaneously with the meat offering.
   @מלבד עולת הבוקר, “in addition to the daily burnt offering which was presented each morning.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah had to record this additional detail (about the daily burnt offering in the morning) in order to teach us that an offering brought on behalf of the whole people, such as here- cannot replace the daily mandatory communal offering known as <i>tamid.</i> (Called here עולת הבוקר). Not only this, but the daily <i>tamid</i> is offered before any other offering, communal or private. Actually, if not for teaching us this aspect of the daily communal <i>tamid,</i> there was no need to make special mention of this during the days of the inaugural offerings, seeing those were not communal offerings but private offerings, which had been designed to serve as the introduction of the priests to their position as the people’s intermediary between themselves and G’d. Therefore, there had not been the slightest reason to assume that their offerings could replace the daily <i>tamid.</i>
   This may be the reason why in the <i>Torat Kohanim</i> the reference is understood as pertaining only to the libation offering, מנחת נסכים, which accompanied the daily <i>tamid,</i> and which was considered a private offering, the wording here teaches that both these libation offerings were presented.
   9,19. והמכסה, “and the covering fats;” <i>Rashi</i> claims that this abbreviated reference refers to the fat membranes covering various innards.”
   Nachmanides queries this interpretation, asking why this fat part should be singled out for special mention? He therefore explains that the word המכסה sums up all the fat parts which cover the innards, be it kidneys, parts of the liver, etc, Any fat part offered on the altar and burned up there is included in the term המכסה. Whereas a distinction is made between חלב על and חלב המכסה, when it comes to its function on the altar, there is no such distinction. Basically, our verse refers to what has been written before beginning with the words וימציאו in the middle of verse 18. From the word ומן האיל (המציאו) in verse 19 what is written belongs to what follows in the text. In other words, the parts mentioned after ומן האיל were all burned up on the altar.
   9,20. וישימו את החלבים על החזות, “they positioned the fat parts on top of the breasts;” The fat tail, the kidneys and the attachment to the liver would be placed below; above that would be placed the various parts of fatty substance; both of these would be placed above the breasts of the animals From the outside only the fatty membranes would be visible; this was out of consideration for the “dignity” of the remnants of the animals.
   9,22. וישא אהרן את ידיו אל העם ויברכם, “Aaron raised his hands toward the people and blessed them.” <i>Rashi</i> says that he blessed them with the standard blessing of the priests, the verses 24-26 in Numbers chapter 6.
   Nachmanides comments that if this were so then the paragraph in Numbers must have been inserted in the Torah out of turn. It is quite possible that this is indeed so, seeing that the paragraph following the blessing there dealt with events which occurred on the day the erecting of the Tabernacle was completed, i.e. the 1st day of <i>Nissan</i> of the second year, the day when the inaugural offerings were completed also. It is quite possible that Aaron raised his hands heavenwards, as did King Solomon when he blessed the people when the Temple was inaugurated (Kings I 8,22) If Aaron used the standard blessing used by the priests, this would account for the fact that we did not hear Moses instruct him to bless the people.
   @וירד מעשות החטאת והעולה והשלמים, “he descended from having performed the sin-offering, the burnt offering, and the peace-offering.” The Torah does not mention Aaron having also performed the <i>minchah,</i> gift offering. Some commentators claim that seeing that the gift offering is only an offering preparatory to ensuring that the major part of offering is acceptable to <i>Hashem,</i> there was no need to mention this. We must assume that the Torah only bothered to mention the animal sacrifices.
   9,23. ויבא משה ואהרן, “Moses and Aaron came (to the tent of Meeting);” According to <i>Rashi,</i> the reason Moses entered was to teach Aaron the details of the presentation of the incense. All the commentators wonder why Moses delayed this part of Aaron’s instructions until this late stage, seeing that the offering of the incense is slated to take place between the sprinkling of the blood and the burning up of the portions of the daily <i>tamid</i> sacrifice that needs to be burned up on the altar? The answer given is that up until his point the heavenly fire that was to consume this offering had not yet materialized. Moses wanted to await that happening.
   9,24. ותצא אש מלפני ה' וגו', “fire came forth from <i>Hashem</i>, and consumed the burnt offering on the altar.” According to the sages who accuse the sons of Aaron Nadav and Avihu of having entered the holy precincts while in a state of inebriation, although no decree had yet been issued to forbid this, and we have a rule that no death penalty is applied unless the guilty party had first been warned that what he was about to do would carry such a penalty, one must assume that they were punished for something for which punishment had been withheld thus far, and now that the opportunity of further indictment presented itself, the penalty for prior misconduct was enacted. This answer would also explain why the method of their death was by burning, seeing that the death penalty for entering the holy precincts in a state of intoxication would be punishable by a different death penalty.
   Nachmanides argues that they were not punished because they were intoxicated, but hat it was their intoxication which led them to commit an error that carried the death penalty.
   10.3. הוא אשר דבר ה' לאמור, “of this did G’d speak, saying:” <i>Rashi</i> claims that G’d referred to Exodus 29,43 ונועדתי שמה לבני ישראל ונקדש בכבודי, “I shall set My meeting there with the Children of Israel, and I will be sanctified with My glory.”
   Some commentators hold that G’d referred to Exodus 19,22 וגם הכהנים הנגשים אל ה' יתקדשו, “even the priests who approach <i>Hashem</i> shall sanctify themselves lest He burst forth against them.”
   Nachmanides writes there is no need to search for relevant verses, for G’d can issue decrees at any time in any place, such as when the angel speaking through the mouth of Bethuel announced (Genesis 24,51) “let her become the wife of your master’s son.” [This is strange as Nachmanides does not offer this comment in his commentary on that verse. Presumably, the fact that a man such as Bethuel quoted G’d as having said this, showed that he was being manipulated by G’d. Ed,. The expression כאשר דבר ה' in the mouth of Bethuel means “as G’d has decreed.” Here too Moses means to tell Aaron that what happened was nothing else but a decree of <i>Hashem.</i> He softens the blow by saying that G’d, by killing the sons of Aaron at this stage, had tried to prevent them who are so near to Him by dint of being priests, i.e. בקרןבי, from becoming guilty of an unforgivable trespass, i.e. their ruining His sanctity.
   @ועל פני כל העם אכבד, “so that I will be honoured in full view of all the people.” In order that the people will treat My Residence with the proper reverence in future.
   @וידום אהרן, “Aaron remained silent.” Nachmaides writes that Aaron wept aloud, after which he remained silent. We find the same meaning of the word וידום in Lamentations 2,18 אל תדום בת עיניך, “give your eyes no rest (from weeping)!”
   10,4. ויקרא משה אל מישאל ואל אלצפן, “Moses called upon Mishael and Eltzafan, etc.“ <i>Torat Kohanim</i> derives from here that priests are forbidden to defile themselves ritually on dead bodies, seeing that neither Ittamar nor Eleazar, the brothers of the deceased, were allowed to perform burial rites on them. This statement raises questions seeing that the Torah specifically permitted priests who are brothers of the deceased to defile themselves, compare Leviticus 21,2. In view of this, why were Eleazar and Ittamar not permitted to defile themselves here? We need to answer this by saying that even an ordinary priest, on the day when he has been consecrated, is treated as if he were a High Priest who is not allowed to defile himself for the sake of next of kin, except if a deceased has no one else who can attend to his interment, and this tragic death occurred on the very day that Eleazar and Ittamar had been anointed as priests. In light of this, we can now also understand why the Torah (verse 6) here commands both Aaron, Elezar, and Ittamar must not leave the hair of their head unshorn nor rend their garments as a sign of mourning even though elsewhere we do not know of such a restriction applying to ordinary priests.
   Nachmanides writes that what took place on that occasion was dictated by extraordinary circumstances. There is no question that the High Priest is enjoined not to leave the hair of his head unshorn and not to rend his clothing as a sign of mourning, as he is not allowed to leave the precincts of the Temple during a period when he is supposed to perform his duties in the Temple, in order to attend the funeral of his next of kin. By doing so, he would desecrate the sanctity of the Temple. The reason is that his appointment, i.e. appointment to his position as High Priest, is a round the clock position seven days a week, and this is demonstrated by the Torah demanding that even when in a state of <i>aninut,</i> the period between the death of a near relative and the burial of that relative, a period when performance of the מצוות, commandments is temporarily suspended, he must not abandon his post in the Temple. 
   Ordinary priests, by contrast, are not allowed to perform their duties in the Temple when in such a state of pre-burial mourning for their relatives, the state we call <i>aninut.</i> Seeing that their duties in the Temple are temporarily suspended, they are obligated to attend to the needs of the relative about to be buried. This, obviously, requires that they defile themselves ritually in the process of attending to the needs of the deceased.
   In this special situation the Torah instructed more distant relatives, uncles, to perform these rites for Nadav and Avihu, This is the meaning of verse 6:ואחיכם כל בית ישראל יבכו את השרפה, “your brethren the whole house of Israel are to weep for the conflagration which <i>Hashem</i> has ignited.” Moses warned Eleazar and Ittamar concerning their ritual status on this exceptional occasion. The dominating consideration on this day was to maximise the joy over G’d’s <i>Shechinah</i> finally having become manifest again among the camp, for the first time since the sin of the golden calf. The sons of Aaron therefore were forbidden to take a leave of absence from their duties in the Tabernacle on pain of death.
   It is possible that Moses received a direct command from G’d for this special occasion, and did not improvise, even though the Torah did not see fit to record this in our text, which, after all, contains only material the relevance of which transcends time and space. He may also have learned what to do from the more general statement in Leviticus 8,35: ושמרתם את משמרת ה' ולא תמותו, “you shall observe the ordinances of the Lord so that you will not die.” It was clear to Moses that what are referred to there as משמרת ה' also applied to this eighth day of the inaugural offerings. Clearly, it had not been a secret for G’d that the day would come during these eight days when two sons of Aaron would be in the state of <i>aninut,</i> for their two older brothers. In spite of having anticipated this, G’d had formulated at this time already a statute according to which these sons of Aaron were not to leave the holy precincts, even temporarily, were not to observe the rites appropriate for brothers who are in such a state of <i>aninut.</i> They were not to observe any rite that reflected to the outside that they were in a state of mourning. At this particular time, on this special date, they were subject to the same rules as was the High Priest himself. It is even possible that during all the years when Eleazar and Ittamar performed their duties as priests, before they became physically too weak to do so, they conducted themselves exactly as if they had both been Hugh Priests, a good reason being the fact that they had both been anointed with the special oil, just as had their father, but not like their sons who were priests from birth and did not need anointing.
   @קרבו, “approach!” <i>Torat Kohanim</i> quotes two contradictory opinions, one of which holds that the sons of Aaron died without the boundaries of the holy precincts, whereas the other opinion claims that they died within those boundaries and their bodies had to be dragged out by rope or something similar, in order not to violate the stern prohibition for a non priest to cross that boundary. The first opinion is based on the word קרבו in our verse that suggests that there was no ritual impediment to Eltzafan and Mishael taking hold of these bodies. The other opinion bases itself on the Torah describing the death of these two sons of Aaron as having occurred לפני ה', “in the presence of the <i>Shechinah,”</i> an expression referring to holy precincts. According to this latter opinion, the bodies were either dragged by rope, or by a long wooden lance, at any rate both expressions in the Torah are not irreconcilable. When it comes to the need to avoid ritual contamination through a dead body, there are no different rules for Levites, such as Eltzafan and Mishael, and for ordinary Israelites. Both are charged with removing ritual impurity from the holy precincts especially when no priest is available inside.
   According to the view that these two brothers died within the holy precincts, their bodies conferred ritual impurity on the entire Tabernacle and its contents, and in the absence of priests, anyone could have removed these bodies. However, seeing that it could be done without more ritual impurity being incurred by anyone, this is the preferable method. If anyone had had to incur ritual impurity on that account, he would have required seven days of purification rites with sprinkling of water containing the ash of the red heifer both on the third and on the seventh day during these seven days. The Tabernacle would have had to undergo a similar purification rite involving immersion in a ritual bath, <i>mikveh</i>, seeing that linen shrouds, sheets etc., are all subject to ritual contamination with the dead. Seeing that we do not hear about service in the Tabernacle having been interrupted at that time, nor that the Tabernacle was taken apart as a result of the death of the two sons of Aaron, we may assume that the deaths did not occur within the holy precincts.
   On the other hand, seeing that the rule for the Tabernacle was על פי ה' יחנו ועל פי ה' יסעו, that the people were to both encamp and start moving only at the express command of G’d, this implies that no other occurrence would demand the folding and dismantling of the Tabernacle, i.e. that it was immune to the laws of ritual purity and impurity.
   10,6. ועל כל העדה יקצוף, “and He would display His anger against the entire community.” This was because the priests acted as delegates of the community, and when such delegates do not discharge their duties properly the anger against them is also transferred at least partially against the ones who delegated them.
   Some commentators understand the reference to the “entire community,” as a reference to the offerings that were brought on behalf of the whole community. The Torah would be saying that “if you the priests make any changes from the directives you have received and you eat from these sacrifices this will provoke the Lord’s anger. The sacrifices will prove unwelcome in the eyes of <i>Hashem,</i> and you as the originators of these offerings will be suffering the consequences.”
   @ואחיכם כל בית ישראל, “and your brethren the entire house of Israel, will weep.” This verse teaches that the death of a Torah scholar is to be treated by the entire people as if they had been bereaved of a relative. 
   10,9. יין ושכר, ”wine and strong alcoholic drink,” according to <i>Rashi</i> the Torah speaks of wine when drunk in a manner which will induce intoxication. [The word שכר referring to the effect of the wine. Ed.]
   Maimonides feels that the prohibition recorded here applies as such only to wine, and we know this from the Nazirite whom the Torah only forbade wine and grape and derivatives. According to Maimonides, other alcoholic drink is forbidden to the priest who enters the holy precincts. Being drunk on wine is punishable by premature death at the hand of heaven, whereas drunkenness incurred through other intoxicant carries the 39 lashes penalty. (Maimonides <i>Sefer Hamitzvot,</i> negative commandment #73
   @בבאכם אל אהל מוע<i>ד,</i> “when you enter the Tent of Meeting.” <i>Torat Kohanim</i> writes that the death penalty applies only if the drunkenness occurs while the priest in question is performing his duties at the time. The meaning of the word שכר is perceived as its face value, i.e. “alcoholic, potentially intoxicating drink.”
   10,15. שוק התרומה וחזה התנופה, “the thigh of the heaving, and the breast of the weaving.” <i>Rashi</i> already questions why the Torah describes the “raising” of the thigh with the verb רום, whereas for the raising of the breast the verb הניף is chosen. Whereas the first refers to an up and down motion, and the second refers to a sideways motion, the reason for these different motions for different parts of the animal is not clear.
   Nachmanides writes that it seems to him that during the inaugural offerings the thigh represented a תרומה, “heaving” to <i>Hashem,</i> which was burned up together with the loaves and the fat parts. The parts of the peace-offerings which qualified for this treatment were known as תרומה, “heaving,” as we know from 7,14 והקריב ממנו אחד מכל קרבן תרומה לה', “from it he shall offer one from each as an offering (heave offering) for <i>Hashem.”</i> If that was so in the case of the peace-offerings, of which only a small part is given to the priest, (as a symbolic gift to <i>Hashem)</i> the bulk of the meat being consumed by the owner of the animal, how much more so would the thigh of this inaugural offering qualify, -seeing that all of which (except the parts mentioned which were consumed by the priest) was intended for <i>Hashem</i> directly, i.e. it was consumed by the altar,- for such a procedure, and it would qualify for such a description. Although the breast and thigh were also subjected to this heaving in a vertical motion, the Torah did not mention this specifically (in addition) and preferred the description שוק התרומה, and חזה התנופה, as this was the first occasion on which this procedure with this offering occurred. The occasion was notable because on that day the priests were inducted.
   @על אישי החלבים יביאו להניף תנופה לפני ה', “they shall present on the fat parts as a wave offering before <i>Hashem</i>.” Nachmanides explains that this verse is not the verse in which this command has been issued, but in this verse the above statement is recorded only as the reason why it was possible for the donor-Israelite to consume the remainder of the meat of these peace offerings. The reason was that prior to this the priest, as the representative of <i>Hashem,</i> had received his designated share. The words (verse 13) כי חקך וחק בניך הוא מאישי ה', “for it is your portion and the portion of your sons from the fire-offerings of <i>Hashem,”</i> set the tone for the entire subject of the peace offerings, שלמים. Once the portions to be eaten by the priests had been sanctified by this symbolic procedure of heaving and waving, the way was clear for the donors to eat the share allocated to them by the Torah.
   10,17. ואותה נתן לכם לשאת את עון העדה לכפר עליכם, “seeing that He gave it to you to bear the guilt of the community, and to obtain atonement for them!” The wording here proves that the sacrificial animal of which Moses spoke was the male goat offered as sin offering on the day of the New Moon. (Compare Numbers 28,15) The function of that offering was to obtain atonement for trespasses committed involving entering or being in the holy precincts while in a state of ritual impurity, or trespasses involving consumption of parts of such offerings which had become ritually impure for some reason after their being slaughtered. Although the expression לכפר, which means “to initiate an atonement process,” is mentioned here in conjunction with the daily communal sin offering,” it occurs also with the sin offering on that occasion (Leviticus 9,7), (וכפר בעדך ובעד העם) and it also occurs in connection with the he-goat offered in order to mark this day, seeing that the atonement spoken of in the he-goat offering of the New Moon is something that repeats itself month after month throughout the ages, our sages preferred to draw upon that verse for their interpretation.
   Alternately, the additional words לכפר לפני ה', “to initiate atonement before the Lord,” suggest that the subject must be sins committed in connection with the holy precincts. [After all, any atonement is automatically one in which our ability to stand and face of <i>Hashem</i> again is involved. Ed.]
   10,19. הן היום הקריבו את חטאתם, “was it they that offered their sin offering on this day?” Both the Talmud’s references to this verse, as well as those of <i>Rashi,</i> allow us to read this as a question, i.e. Moses expressing amazement to his brother Aaron that his sons, while in a state of <i>aninut,</i> had seen fit to perform their priestly duties in the Tabernacle. 
   Nachmanides claims that no <i>aninut</i> was involved, as all the duties that Eleazar and Ittamar had performed had been completed before they became bereaved of their elder brothers. In other words, the question of performing priestly duties while in a state of <i>aninut</i> did not even arise. He derives this from the verse in which Aaron is described as descending from the altar after having performed all his duties for that forenoon. (Compare 9,22) Aaron and his sons then entered the Tabernacle, and offered a prayer, and only subsequently did heavenly fire descend on the offerings presented and consumed them. After that had occurred Nadav and Avihu offered incense, using man made fire. Only then did heavenly fire descend and killed the two older sons of Aaron, Nachmanides answers the problem by saying that possibly Moses had not seen what the sons of Aaron had done, and he assumed that they might have found some blood from the he-goat which had not yet been sprinkled, and they had proceeded to sprinkle that blood.
   My sainted father of blessed memory the <i>R’osh,</i> said that what Nachmanides poses as a problem is no problem at all. The verse (9,22) describing Aaron descending and subsequently blessing the people referred only to his having completed the specific offerings of that particular day of the inaugural offerings; it did not say that Aaron had already offered the male goat as a sin-offering on account of the day being the New Moon. This offering, being a <i>mussaph</i> offering, was not yet due to have been offered, and was therefore not included in the report of Aaron having concluded his duties, in other words, the reason it had not been mentioned at all was that it had not been offered as yet.
   11,1. וידבר ה' אל משה ואהרן, “<i>Hashem</i> spoke to Moses and Aaron,” even though the section commencing now applies equally to Israelites and priests, in some respects the priests are affected by it more than the ordinary Israelites, as some of the forbidden foods are apt to confer ritual impurity on the priests upon physical contact, and the priests are under constant constraints not to allow themselves to become ritually impure. Whenever the priests are in a state of impurity they cannot eat any sacrificial meat, nor may they enter the holy precincts, etc.
   Furthermore, if, inadvertently, the Israelites would commit a trespass against the legislation in this chapter, they would require the services of a priest to offer a sin offering on their behalf so as to re-establish themselves in good standing with <i>Hashem.</i>
   In addition to that, the chapter concludes (verse 47) with the need to distinguish between what is ritually pure and what is not, and it is the task of the priests to educate the Israelites at large in the laws of ritual purity. This is the reason why this legislation is included in the Book of Leviticus, a Book that deals largely with the duties and privileges of the priests.
   11,2. מכל הבהמה אשר על הארץ, “from among all the animals that are on the earth.” According to the plain meaning of the text our verse refers to animals everywhere. According to the <i>Midrash</i> the words אשר על הארץ, are intended to exclude animals whose habitat is in the waters, in the sea, as these are not subject to the identifying marks of the mammals described here.
   11,8. מבשרם לא תאכלו, “you must not eat of their flesh. According to <i>Rashi</i> this line refers to animals not listed here by name that have no distinguishing marks making them fit for consumption by Jews. We arrive at this by simple logic, seeing that the Torah forbids the eating of animals that possess only one of the two distinguishing marks.
   Nachmanides writes that if that were so we could not administer the penalty of 39 lashes to anyone eating animals that lacked both distinguishing marks, as such a penalty cannot be administered to prohibitions not specifically spelled out in the text. He claims that the ability to administer the penalty of 39 lashes to people eating animals which have neither of the two distinguishing marks is derived from the שפן, hyrax, concerning which the Torah emphasizes that though it chews the cud, it does not have split hooves, and on the other hand, the Torah spells out that the pig is forbidden though it does have split hooves because it does not chew the cud. From these two verses it is clear that any animal not possessing split hooves or/and is chewing the cud is forbidden for Israelites on pain of the penalty of 39 lashes. There is no need to apply logic, as mentioned by <i>Rashi.</i>
   @ובנבלתם לא תגעו, “and you must not touch their carcasses.” This is not phrased as an outright prohibition, but it means that touching such a carcass confers ritual impurity on the person doing this, with all the consequences that follow, such as the inability to consume any parts of sacrificial offerings, inability to approach the consecrated ground of the Temple Mount. Our sages (<i>Rosh Hashanah</i> 16) understand the verse as a warning that one must purify oneself before the festivals requiring one’s presence in Jerusalem for offering the requisite sacrifices. At any rate, they view this as a אסמכתא, a Biblical support for a Rabbinic injunction. 
   11,9. וכל אשר אין לו סנפיר וקשקשת, “and any fish that has neither a fin or scales, etc.” Nachmanides, in speculating on the significance of these features, claims that any creatures inhabiting the waters that possess fins and scales, are always found in the upper regions of the water. They therefore use the air above the surface of the water to promote their growth. They also benefit from a degree of warmth provided by the sun. The effect on their general well being is similar to the effect of the wool on the well being of sheep, or as human hair and nails act as protection against excess moisture. He reasons that the creatures which are not equipped with such protective, life extending, armour-like scales, are too cold and are too wet to enjoy an existence of any duration, are constantly on the threshold of death. Nachmanides speaks primarily of creatures found in lakes and ponds, no one in his time having much knowledge about creatures at or near the bottom of the ocean. He describes the death of these creatures in the lakes as largely due to some kind of pestilence, the waters at that level being polluted and the fish not having anything to fight off the disease with. The reason why the Torah does not list any fish as having names may be that Adam had never given them any names either. [perhaps this very fact accounts for fish being considered as inferior forms of life. Ed.]
   @מכל שרץ המים ומכל נפש החיה, “from all that teems in the water, and from all living creatures in the water, etc.”
   Nachmanides writes that according to Ibn Ezra שרץ המים refers to the tiny living parasites that are spawned by the waters, whereas the expression נפש החיה refers to creatures which mate with one another, there being males and females of these species.
   Nachmanides’ own view is that the expression שרץ המים includes the fish that swim on the surface of the water, seeing that whenever we encounter the term שרץ it refers to mobile creatures. On the other hand, the expression נפש החיה in his view, refers to the creatures which make the water their habitat, but are equipped with feet that they move on, not fins. Regardless of all this, they are all subject to the same rule, unless they have both fins and scales they are not “kosher.”
   11,13. ואת אלה תשקצו מן העוף, “and these are the species of birds which you are to abominate;” Nachmanides writes that only the species named hereafter are forbidden, as well as their sub species where the Torah adds the word למינו or למינהו, to indicate that there are such sub species.
   Our sages have provided us with physical peculiarities of the forbidden categories of birds, seeing that not all of us are familiar with all these birds by name, and some may be known by different names in different parts of the globe. The most easily recognizable physical abnormality of these forbidden birds, something they all have in common, is that they are predators. In fact, if we encounter a bird that attacks other birds or even larger animals, it is certain that it belongs to a forbidden species regardless of any other marks of identification to that effect. These birds are hot blooded especially when they are on the attack, and consuming such victims. While engaged in attack, their blood turns black from the cruelty with which they kill their prey. This cruel streak leaves it mark on its heart, i.e. its personality. However, the only such birds in the whole globe are the ones mentioned by name in our chapter here. When we encounter a species of bird with which we are not familiar, but we are sure that it is not a bird of prey, we can be certain that it belongs to the large majority of “pure” birds, and that after the proper procedures we may eat it. There are only two species of the forbidden birds listed here that are not birds of prey, and they are not found in parts of the globe inhabited by man. They are the פרס and the עזניה. Possibly, the nature of their habitat, a primitive, creature-hostile environment, left its marks on the blood of these two creatures so that the Torah forbade them in spite of the fact that neither category of bird fits the description דורס, bird of prey. The underlying reason for the 24 species of birds which the Torah singled out as forbidden for the Israelites is the fact that we observe that they transmit their cruel streak also to their offspring. The reason why the Torah chose seven categories of mammals that chew the cud and have spilt hooves as acceptable for consumption by Israelites, is the fact that none of them feed on live creatures. All the others look for living creatures to become their source of sustenance. Our sages, (<i>Avodah Zarah</i> 35), as well as Maimonides <i>maachalot assurrot</i> basing themselves on empirical; knowledge, state that milk from animals not permitted to us is easily distinguishable by the fact that the milk of all the forbidden animal does not curdle, and even when mixed with milk of “kosher” animals does not lose its characteristics. He speculates that milk of the ritually forbidden animals may have a negative influence on the semen of the person consuming it, thus making him less likely to produce sperm that develops normally. When the infant would drink the milk of a mother who had born a child by a father who had eaten ritually unclean mammals, her milk would be affected. This would be in addition to the health and growth promoting nutrients provided by the milk and meat of the ritually clean mammals.
   I have personally read in a number of medical; textbooks (Nachmanides writing) that children raised on pig’s milk are liable to be afflicted with <i>tzoraat,</i> a terribly serious skin disease.
   11,23. וכל שרץ העוף, “every flying teeming creature etc.,” <i>Rashi</i> explains the term שרץ העוף as applying to all small insect like creatures that move slowly on the ground, such as the common fly, etc. 
   Nachmanides disagrees, as he cannot agree that any species of bird can be described as שרץ just because it is small in size. Neither is a bird called עוף just because it has a certain size. The עטלף is small and is listed as by the Torah as an עוף, whereas many species of locusts have legs which are larger than their bodies. If we accept <i>Rashi’s</i> definition of שרץ העוף, why is the עטלף not included as one of the שרץ העוף? Size of the body clearly is not the decisive factor in determining the difference between these two groups of flying creatures. The fact is that the Torah itself explains the nature of שרץ העוף in our verse, when it is described as walking on four legs, and as having jumping legs above its wings, these legs being employed as a launching pad to enable it to fly or jump. This is also why these creatures are not called עוף כנף, “winged bird,” or plain עוף, “bird.” Another feature of these שרץ העוף is that their neck and head instead of being above their bodies, are generally lower than the highest parts of the rest of their bodies.
   11,24. ולאלה תטמאו, “through the following you will become ritually unclean.” The reason the Torah prefaces this verse with the restrictive ובאלה, “through these,” an expression not found in connection with either the fish, the fowl, or the teeming creatures including the locusts, is to teach that the ritual defilement resulting from contact with the dead bodies of these creatures applies only to the ones mentioned in the verse preceding, i.e. 4 legged שרץ העוף, or the ones mentioned forthwith. Note that the carcass of an animal permitted for consumption by Israelites after the appropriate preparations, does not confer ritual contamination on contact if it died by ritual slaughter. This is why the Torah does not refer to מיתה, death, but to נבלתם, their carcass, i.e. their having died by natural causes. Anyone touching such cadavers becomes ritually defiled. The Torah also speaks of such animals “dying,” as כי ימות, (11,39) meaning that if the animal had not “died”’ but had been slaughtered, its cadaver does not confer ritual impurity.
   @כל הנוגע בנבלתם יטמא עד הערב, “anyone touching its cadaver will remain ritually impure until nightfall.” The evening” by itself does not remove the ritual contamination. If the affected person has immersed himself in a ritual bath prior to sunset on the day he came into contact with the cadaver, then, and only then, does the expiry of that day remove such impurity from him. The Torah did not bother to elaborate on that point as it had already explained that a garment which had become ritually contaminated needs to be “washed,” i.e. immersed in a ritual bath, in order to rid itself of such contamination. (Compare verse 28) If even a garment cannot regain ritual purity without a ritual bath, how much more is this required for the body that had been in contact with the cadaver. In the case of contact with the teeming creatures whose cadaver confers ritual impurity, the Torah not only mentions the need to immerse oneself in a ritual bath, but it adds the punishment awaiting those who ignore the legislation and come into contact with sacred objects, or who enter sacred grounds in such a state. This punishment, i.e. death at the hand of heaven, usually premature death, is the standard punishment for all who ignore the need to purify themselves before entering sacred ground or coming into contact with holy objects, or sacrificial meat, etc.
   11,25. וכל הנושא מנבלתם יכבס בגדיו, “and anyone carrying part of such a carcass, etc.” The Torah applied more stringent laws for carrying such a cadaver than for merely coming into contact with it without moving it. The latter is required to also immerse his garments before he and they can become purified. The reason may be that ”touching” is presumed to be a light touch, something merely incidental, whereas “carrying” implies major preoccupation with the cadaver in question. The garments of a carrier had an active part in the cadaver being transported.
   11,27. וכל הולך על כפיו, “and all creatures that ”walk,” i.e. move on their paws, etc.” Whereas in connection with the mammals that are forbidden to eat, the Torah had lumped them together under the heading of בהמה, here the Torah uses the heading חיה as neither having split hooves nor chewing the cud. Why did not the Torah mention the disqualification from being as a “Kosher” being one that walks on paws already at the beginning of our chapter? 
   Nachmanides speculates that possibly the reason is that even gentiles as a rule do not eat animals that walk on their paws. [this sounds strange to this editor, as surely in Nachmanides’ time eating of hares and rabbits which walk on their paws was already commonplace? Ed.] At any rate the term חיה is a sub category of the comprehensive term בהמה, so that there was no need to refer to that feature earlier.
   11,29. The author quotes Rabbi Avraham Bing, of Wuerzburg, Germany who calculated that the numerical value of the word השורץ is equivalent to the numerical values of the word כשעורה, a measure that our sages established as the minimum quantity of bone of such a cadavar which has the ability to confer ritual impurity on those contacting it. [These numbers do not match, i.e word כשעורה having a numerical value of 601, whereas the word השורץ as spelled here without the letter ו amounting only to 595. Ed.] Later authorities question the relevance of this as the minimum size of such a piece of bone is not the size of a kernel of barley, i.e. כשעורה, but the much greater size of כעדשה, corresponding to the size of a lentil. I have heard an answer concerning this apparent inconsistency, by a statement that the author of the book שמרה רוחי in which this <i>gimmatria</i> appeared meant כשערה, “as the size of the width of a hair”. His words would then be in line with those expressed in a <i>baraitha</i> in <i>Chulin</i> folio 126 according to which the size of hole in an eggshell of the egg of such a teeming creature (the inside of which already contained the beginnings of an embryo) so that he who touches it on the outside is perceived as having touched that embryo, would need to be of that thickness. Our verse would hint at this, seeing that the word השורץ is spelled with the letter ו missing, i.e. as השרץ. Once we accept this the supposed numerical value of the word השרץ spelled effectively would match that of the word כשעורה, =595. Personally, I find all this difficult.
   11,32. וכל אשר יפול עליו מהם במותם, “and anything which falls upon them when they are dead, etc.” Nachmanides writes that according to our sages this verse applies only to the eight species of “teeming creatures” mentioned in verse 29. They derived from this verse that the minimum size of such a teeming creature’s ability to confer ritual impurity is the size of a lentil. (Compare <i>Chagigah</i> 11)
   According to the plain meaning of the text it would appear that the words מהם במותם, “of them when they are dead,” refer to what the Torah had written earlier in the context of בהמה טמאה, חיה, שרץ, mammals and all land based animals which are ritually unclean and cannot serve as food for Israelites, for why would the Torah mention ritual impurity affecting clothing as a separate subject, seeing that the same rules of impurity also apply to cadavers. Similarly, they all require the same qualifying symptoms in order to potentially be fit for consumption by Israelites. The Torah therefore is presumed to speak of all of these categories here.
   @וטמא עד הערב וטהור, “he will remain in a state of ritual impurity until nightfall, and then he will become ritually clean.” This verse speaks of <i>terumah,</i> the heave (gift) from the grain given to the priest, which after immersion in a ritual bath remains in a state of impurity until evening.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why this formula of עד הערב, until nightfall,” is repeated on so many occasions, is that in each of these examples we speak of <i>terumah</i> or something like it, i.e. something which possesses a degree of holiness by definition. Food that is of a secular type, may be consumed by the ordinary Israelites, even when they are in a state of ritual impurity without their having been immersed in a ritual bath. Therefore, if such food has been immersed in a ritual bath there is certainly no need to await sundown before it may be eaten.
   11,35. תנור וכירים יותץ, “an oven or stove must be smashed;” the news in this verse is that although these ovens or stoves are fastened to the ground they stand on, something which normally would make them immune to becoming affected with ritual impurity, in the situation described they are subject to the same rules as are earthenware vessels which are not fastened to the ground anymore. In order for such vessels to lose their contamination they must be broken up into pieces small enough to make them practically useless in terms of what they were made for. The reason why the Torah employed the expression יותץ instead of the more common ישבר, for describing something broken, is because the term יותץ which describes the destruction of a building, contains within it the hint that even stoves and ovens which are like buildings must also be destroyed in order to shed their ritual impurity. We find this expression in connection with houses afflicted with <i>tzoraat,</i> as in Leviticus 14,45.
   11,37. על כל זרע זרוע, “upon any edible seed that has been planted;” we learn from here that what has been planted as potential food will never be able to be ritually contaminated unless, after having been separated from the earth, it also has undergone a process of making it potentially fit to be ritually contaminated. In most cases, such as here, it means that it had become wet with the active or passive consent of the owner. Although we have already derived this rule from the verse (34) commencing with the words מכל האוכל, I would have had reason to think that such food is immune from contamination in the airspace of an earthenware vessel only.
   Alternately, previously the Torah only spoke about the kind of foodstuffs that are ready to be eaten in their present state, whereas in our verse here the Torah includes the seed, i.e potential food. As for the reason why these foodstuffs require a preparatory step approved by their owner before they are liable to become ritually contaminated, according to Nachmanides, the reason is that the dirt from these teeming creatures have a tendency to adhere to wet foodstuffs, (fruit) but not to dry ones. The Torah therefore decreed that wet foodstuffs are liable to be contaminated ritually. To the question why they should still be capable of becoming contaminated even if the owner had thoroughly dried these foodstuffs after they had become wet, the answer is that the sages never make their rules apply only partially, i.e. to some scenarios and not to others.
   11,40. והאוכל מנבלתה יכבס בגדיו, “and he who eats from that cadaver must wash his clothes (immerse them in a ritual bath)”. Our sages explained this verse as an attempt by the Torah to apply the same yardstick regarding purification of someone who had consumed ritually contaminated food, as to someone whose clothing had become contaminated by it. In both instances contamination, i.e. eating the size of an olive results in the person becoming contaminated, just as contact through carrying of an amount of an olive’s size, results in the carrier becoming ritually unclean.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the Torah describes a normal person’s eating habits. He both touches and lifts up the food that he is eating. You might have thought that a worse degree of contamination occurs when the party concerned has not only touched the contaminated food but has also eaten it. The Torah teaches that this is not so. This point is made by the Torah in conjunction with the discussion of “<i>kosher</i>” animals because it is easy to err and to assume that because the animal in question had been prepared for consumption by being ritually slaughtered, that it could not become ritually contaminated. To disabuse us of such thinking the Torah used as its model for this legislation specifically a “<i>kosher</i>” animal. The error the Torah tries to head off, is not likely to occur in conjunction with ritually unclean animals, and it is the habit of the Torah to address the most common scenarios.
   11,41. וכל השרץ השורץ על הארץ, “and every teeming creature whose habitat is the earth (land, as opposed to the water and oceans).” Seeing that there are only 8 of these species whose cadavers confer ritual contamination, one might have thought that all the other species are also fit to be eaten. The Torah therefore spells out that none of these species may be eaten.
   11,47. ובין החיה הנאכלת, “and between the animal that may be eaten;” <i>Rashi</i> (quoting <i>Torat Kohanim</i>) writes that actually we would have expected the Torah to write:בין צבי לערוד, i.e. between a gazelle (a permitted species of free roaming mammal, and the wild ass, (a “non <i>kosher</i>” free roaming mammal). Seeing that these two species could not possibly be mistaken for another, seeing they do not look alike at all, the meaning of the verse must be “to distinguish between permitted species which display symptoms that would make it “<i>treifah</i>” (injuries) and others displaying similar symptoms which however do not result in that animal being pronounced <i>treifah.”</i>
   According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning is that if these symptoms are below the knee joint, the symptom is ignored and the animal remains “<i>kosher</i>” and can be slaughtered and eaten. If, however, the symptom is above the knee joint, the animal can no longer be eaten even if slaughtered forthwith.
   People nowadays are very particular in their attitude to all these definitions of symptoms of a terminal disease. The very fact that the <i>halachah</i> recognizes a term such as טרפה כשרה, “<i>treifah</i> which is <i>kosher,</i> creates some confusion. An example of such a “<i>kosher</i>” symptom of ”<i>treifah”</i> symptoms would be an animal whose windpipe and gullet have been cut but not cut through, or instances when a small hole pierces the lung of the animal, such a hole not being necessarily fatal within 12 months. The question arises there that seeing the lung is directly dependent on the windpipe, damage to both would appear to be especially serious. The subject is discussed in <i>Chulin 32,</i> and basically, if the slaughtering proceeded to the point where it is deemed completed, [most of the windpipe and most of the gullet. Ed.] this animal will not be considered as <i>treifah</i> unless another major problem such as a pierced lung is present. Similarly, these sages discuss that if an animal has 5 legs instead of 4 and the fifth has an injury that, if it occurred on any of the other 4 legs would have made it <i>treifah,</i> whether this is a case of “<i>treifah”</i> that is treated as <i>kosher</i>. 
    It would appear that such interpretation of the written text here is excessive.
   Parshat Tazria
   12,2. אשה כי תזריע, “when a woman conceives, etc.” At the end of the last portion the Torah instructed the Jewish people to sanctify themselves (verse 44). The fact that the subject following deals with conception, marital intercourse, etc, is proof that the specific sanctification the Torah had in mind at the end of the last portion was that the sex life of the Jewish people should not become one of mere physical indulgence, but should be guided by more lofty considerations, should aim at conceiving and bearing children in a spiritual environment commensurate with the people that are unique in their relationship to their Creator. [In Leviticus chapter 19 the need to sanctify themselves is a dictate based on this relationship with our Creator. I have deliberately pontificated a little at this point. Ed.]
   It is the duty of the Jewish people to be at all times aware of the fact that there are things in this universe that are pure, and others that are impure in a ritual sense. The destiny of the Jewish people to be a “kingdom of Priests and a holy nation (Exodus 19,6)” cannot be achieved without our constant awareness of this fact.
   Such considerations are at the root of our sages counseling or demanding that prior to a woman having her monthly period, assuming she is regular, the husband should already refrain from having relations with her for a period of 12 hours to ensure that he would not become ritually defiled by being in contact with her menstrual blood. The sages also decreed that a widowed woman must not remarry for a period of three months to ensure that when she becomes pregnant from her new husband, there is no chance that the child born might have been fathered by her deceased husband. If, by chance, this decree is ignored, children born in ritual impurity of the most severe type might result.
   <i>Rashi</i> explains on our verse that the wording תזריע, suggests that even if the mother gave “birth” to an afterbirth which was so lacking in substances that it was more like sperm, she is still considered as impure due to birthing. This should not be understood as meaning that if a woman involuntarily aborts an amnion, a sac of the fetus full with water, that she becomes ritually impure like woman that has given birth, seeing that we have a rule that any such sac aborted which did not contain something resembling a human fetus does not confer the impurity of new motherhood on the woman concerned. Only what is called שפיר מרוקם, a sac containing clearly defined human features does that.
   When the Talmud (<i>Niddah</i> 28) says that when a woman conceives first she will give birth to a male child, the reason for this is that it is a fact in nature that anything that appears later is liable to neutralize phenomena that have appeared earlier. If a woman therefore conceives, or has an orgasm first, this feminine part of the process of conception will be weakened once the subsequent male orgasm and ejaculation occurs and contributes male sperm. The same is true in reverse, of course; when the male ejaculates before the female partner has achieved orgasm, the result will be a child of the feminine gender.
   Nachmanides writes that the statement in the Talmud about a woman “contributing seed first,” does not mean to imply that women in common with men each contribute sperm to the fetus to emerge. It could not mean that, as it is common knowledge that women do not have sperm. Woman contributes from the blood in her womb to the formation of the eventual fetus, and upon completion of her pregnancy a child is born. The term זרע used by the Talmud refers to the combination of the sperm contributed by the male and the blood contributed by the woman, his partner.
   Following this approach, the Talmud perceives three partners who between them are active in creating a new life. They are: father, mother, and G’d, the father contributing the sperm which eventually will produce tendons, bones, etc., the mother the blood which will develop into flesh, skin and blood and blood vessels; as well as hair and the black (pupil) of the eye. G’d, of course, contributes the נפש-נשמה the intangible life force known as “soul.” This is the opinion of the medical men of the author’s time. 
   The ancient Greeks believed that the entire body of the baby is produced by the mother, the father’s contribution being limited to determining the shape and form of the raw material man is made of. This had to be so, they believed, as man does not have ovaries, as does woman. The fact is that the chick which was produced after its mother hen had copulated with a rooster is different from the chick whose mother hen had not been mated with a male of the species only in the length of time the mother hen has spent sitting on her egg until it was ready to burst its prison walls and emerge as a new living organism.
   12,4. בדמי טהרה, “in blood of purity;” Nachmanides, comments on the opinion of <i>Rashi,</i> who claims that the last letter ה in the word טהרה does not have a dot, <i>dagesh,</i> meaning that the word itself is a noun, and that the translation of the words בדמי טהרה is “in the blood of purification,” [as opposed to “her purification,” Ed] so that the meaning is “although she sees blood she is ritually clean.” This interpretation is also the one given by Ibn Ezra, who spells out that this blood is blood that denotes purification, as opposed to דם נדה that is blood denoting ritual impurity. According to Nachmanides, G’d decreed that the number of days a mother having given birth to a male child remains partially pure and partially impure corresponds to the number of days (40) after conception that it takes for the male fetus to develop to a state where it is recognizable as such. The period of 33 days when she is no longer <i>niddah,</i> in a state of menstruation, to her husband she is still undergoing a second stage of purification before she is able to present the required offerings in the Temple. The word תשב, normally translated as: “she is to sit,” is equivalent to “sitting out,” awaiting the conclusion of the period of the remaining 33 days until she is completely purified. This statement is accepted by Nachmanides as scientifically proved. Similarly, he accepts as proven that the development of the female fetus takes twice as long to attain that stage. [The term “proven” apparently is used, as this is the opinion offered by Rabbi Yishmael in <i>Niddah</i> 30. This Rabbi quoted postmortems performed on a woman executed for some misdemeanour and an embryo not older than 40 days since conception being discovered inside her in such a state of development. The majority view there rejects this “proof,” and states for <i>halachic</i> considerations that both a female and a male fetus develop at the same speed. Ed.]
   Nachmanides considers the word טהרה here as an adjective, such as when we speak of זהב טהור, pure gold, unadulterated by other metals or dross. The rationale appears to be that when giving birth to a male child, during the first seven days, when the mother still discharges blood constantly, she is considered as in the same state as a menstruating woman having her monthly cycle, The additional thirty three days which the Torah decrees that the new mother has to count, she has to spend staying in her home in order to cleanse her body thoroughly, as during these days she will discharge remnants of blood originating in her womb and ovaries. Once all this has been discharged she is able to enter the consecrated grounds of the Temple and to offer her sacrifices, as described in the following verses. 
   Our sages had a tradition that as far as her ritual status <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> her husband- as opposed to <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> G’d, i.e. the Temple, is concerned, she is ritually pure after the first seven days. The reason why in both regards twice the length of time for ritual impurity has been decreed by the Torah is either in accordance with Rabbi Ibn Ezra’s opinion based on that of Rabbi Yishmael, that the gestation of a female embryo takes that much longer, or, if we accept the view of the majority opinion of the sages at the time, that both types of embryos have developed to the same state after 41 days, that the nature of the feminine embryo is that it is colder and wetter, the wetness is a condition of the mother’s womb caused by the female embryo, which results in the process of her fully recovering from her pregnancy and birth taking so much longer and the process of discharging excess blood also taking longer. We all know from daily experience that cleaning something that is cold is more difficult than something that is warm or hot.
   @עד מלאת ימי טהרה, “until the completion of the days of her purification.” The completion occurs on the 40th day including the following night. During that night she is still not allowed to come into contact with sanctified objects, etc. On the morning following she may offer the sacrifices ordained for mothers that have recently given birth, including her sin-offering.
   12,5. וששים יום וששת ימים תשב על דמי טהרה, “and she will remain in a state of blood of purification for sixty six days.” The Torah made a minor change in the description of the blood during those sixty six days, calling it על דמי טהרה, whereas the thirty three days of the parallel period after the birth of a male bay are called as remaining בדמי טהרה. The reason is that after the birth of a male child the mother has to observe these thirty three days under all circumstances, whereas in the case of a female child having been born, it is theoretically possible that the mother has already aborted a new embryo during the 80 days since she gave birth, in which case these days might not have to be observed in full.
   @תשב על דמי טהרה, <i>Rashi</i> explains that the expression תשב in our context means “to sit out,” in the sense of “to wait out.” She is not housebound, but she must await the termination of these days before being allowed to handle sanctified objects, [including the dough she bakes, when it is larger than the minimum quantity requiring that <i>challah</i> be taken from it. Ed.] Of course, she may not enter consecrated grounds during that period.
   Nachmanides writes that it is possible that the word תשב here is used in the same sense as in Hoseah 3,3 ימים רבים תשבי לי, “you are to refrain for a long time (from sexual intercourse)” A woman who is in the habit of having marital relations with her husband is described as יושבת לו, “co-habiting with him.” Seeing that the Torah had spelled out the type of her impurity during the first seven days as similar to the days of her menstruation, whereas the following days spell out different kinds of restrictions, it is clear that during these latter days she may cohabit with her husband in spite of any blood which appears to originate in her womb or ovaries. 
   Nachmanides’ personal view, however, is that a woman who sees menstrual blood is called <i>niddah,</i> a term borrowed from someone who has been put into some kind of ban and is ostracised from the community. A woman experiencing her period is similarly socially restricted as far as her husband and holy things are concerned. In the olden days such women were assigned special huts to dwell in during these days, In some societies they were not even allowed to speak to people, as their condition was perceived as contagious, and their spittle could have transmitted their germs. The earth that women in such a state stepped on was considered as polluted. What such women excreted was considered is similar to decaying flesh of the dead. Even being looked at by a woman in such a state was considered dangerous by some societies. This may have led the Torah to decree harsher degrees of ritual impurity for women in such a condition. Any place a menstruating woman sat on or lay on is treated as ritually impure, requiring purification in a ritual bath. The nature of ritual impurity of a menstruating woman has something in common with people afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> on their skin, such people being ostracised and placed In quarantine outside the camp of the Israelites in the desert, or outside built up areas in later Israelite kingdoms. In the case of the צרוע, the person so afflicted, the Torah specifically states בדד ישב מחוץ למחנה, “he is to remain for an open ended amount of time outside the camp.”(Leviticus 13,46) It is clear that the meaning of the word ישב there cannot be: ”he is to sit,” as who can sit for an undisclosed amount of time. The meaning of ישב is that such a person must remain in a condition of expectancy for an indeterminate period of time. The term ישב is used to indicate that he must not enter the camp during this period of ostracism. If the Torah was not content to describe the situation of the צרוע with the words ויצא אל מחוץ למחנה he is to go outside the camp, and ולא יבא אל המחנה and he must not enter the camp, a term used for different other kind of ritually impure people, the reason may be that this צרוע is not to move about at all as even his gaze may be harmful, not only his touch. When the Torah here says that the new mother must תשב בדמי טהרה, it means that she is to observe a similar degree of restriction as do menstruating women, [no more, as we know from the addition that she must not enter consecrated grounds, as otherwise this latter addition would have been superfluous. Ed.]
   12,7. והקריבו לפני ה' וכפר עליה, “He shall offer it before <i>Hashem</i> and atone for her.” Nachmanides writes that the new mother is in need of atonement as a woman after having given birth is left with a damaged womb. She is in need of having G’d heal that damage for her in order that she will be capable of continuing normal family relations after her womb has healed. Only G’d, the Healer of all flesh, can do this for her. 
   Our sages of old, hold that the reason why most women are in personal need of atonement is that during the excruciatingly painful experience of giving birth they vowed never again to have marital relations with their husbands. Seeing that such a woman swore out of extreme pain and her oath is therefore not really effective legally, since she is contractually obligated to have relations with her husband, G’d wanted her to escape the consequences of such an oath, and by allowing her to bring this sacrifice He forgave her. [We must remember that a legally ineffective oath constitutes uttering the name of the Lord in vain. Ed.]
   13,2. אל משה ואל ואהרן, “to Moses and to Aaron;” Nachmanides writes that seeing the Torah had stated that Aaron would have a decisive voice in all matters pertaining to interpersonal strife or afflictions such as נגעים, be it on the skin, garments, or houses, G’d addressed him also in the following legislation. (Compare Deut. 21,5) The Torah does not continue here with the customary words: דבר אל בני ישראל, “say to the Children of Israel,” seeing that the priests after seeing the people afflicted will decide whether to declare them afflicted with the disease, whether to temporarily keep them under observation, etc. It is also up to the priest to decide when individuals will be considered as cured from the disease. There is no apparent reason to acquaint and warn the entire nation of the forthcoming legislation, seeing that if the services of the priest are required, and sacrifices are to be offered, the afflicted party will be only too happy to have reached that stage. The reason that in the paragraph dealing with the <i>zav,</i> the person who experiences a disease involving his sexual organs the Torah does address every Israelite, i.e. “speak to the Children of Israel and say to them, etc.,” (chapter 15) is that the nature of the disease is private, and the person suffering from it could conceal it, as opposed to people whose skin bears the marks of their disease. The general public had to be warned that if they suffered from the symptoms described that they had to turn to the priest to deal with the problem.
   13,2. שאת או ספחת, “different degrees of whiteness of the skin.” Ibn Ezra understands the word שאת as a derivative of שרפה, as in והמשאות החלה לעלות עמוד עשן, “and when the column of smoke began to rise” (Judges 20,40) Similarly, we have in Samuel II 5,21 וישאם דוד, “and David burned them (the idols).”
   Nachmanides explains that it is possible that this skin disease is called such on account of what it has in common with fire, which rises into the atmosphere. The skin inflammation described breaks through the regular skin, outwards, i.e. upwards.
   The word ספחת is understood as related to ספחני נא, (Samuel I 2,36) where it means “gather me in,” in our context in the sense of the disease being concentrated in one narrowly defined part of the skin.
   The word בהרת is related to בהיר, very bright, blindingly white, (Job 37,21) where it describes the sun though bright, or because too bright) as invisible to man. The נגע, skin affliction, is assumed to originate in the greenish coloured gall. שאת is the name of the affliction, after it has already traversed the body and come to the surface of the skin. The Torah is perceived as desiring the purity of the Israelites in every respect, both in body and in spirit, and by externalizing sickness of the body’s interior it alerts the victim that something is wrong that needs to be repaired, needs to be attended to, seeing that any disease is not a natural state and a perfectly pure person is not afflicted with any disease. Even the symptoms described in our verse here are not yet a definitive disease, they are signs that a disease is on the way to develop more fully. To indicate this, the Torah at the outset speaks of נגע צרעת, meaning that this נגע is liable to develop into a fully blown צרעת unless addressed properly. Verse 11 describes the fully developed נגע simply as צרעת, the affliction having developed beyond the need for, or beyond the ability of a trial ostracism reversing the symptoms. Whenever a stage is reached which will ultimately result in צרעת, the priest has to declare the afflicted party as ritually impure with all that this implies as described in the verse following. 
   13,4. ועמוק אין מראה מן העור, “and its appearance is not deeper than the skin.” 
   <i>Rashi</i> writes: “I do not know the meaning of these words. His problem was that he had already explained the words עמוק מן העור in the previous verse to mean that every white discolouration of the skin appears as if recessed, lower than the surrounding area, just as an area lit by the rays of the sun appears as lower than the surrounding area bathed in shade.
   Rabbi Meir from Rotenburg explains our verse in the following manner: “if what is described as בהרת לבן, an extremely bright whitish discolouration, appears deeper than the surrounding area of skin, as is typical of every sunlit area surrounded by shade, then the appearance of this symptom in relation to the surrounding skin is not the beginning of the entire process we are witnessing; in other words, it does not appear lower on account of its whitish colour.” [If I understand this commentary correctly, the author warns us not to treat the whole phenomenon as something natural, explicable in terms of scientific research. The Torah’s message to us and to the afflicted person is that if the symptoms we are witnessing were merely corresponding to known scientific data, the whole disease would lose its character of being a benign warning by the Creator to the afflicted party to examine his lifestyle which alone led to this affliction. Ed.] Our author feels that the tone signs in our verse support the approach of Rabbi Meir from Rotenburg.
   Nachmanides believes that there is a way of dealing with <i>Rashi’s</i> problem so that [at least technically, Ed,] there is no contradiction between verse 3 and verse 4. He limits the generally accepted principle described by <i>Rashi o</i>n verse three that bright areas always appear as deeper, recessed, when compared to surrounding darker areas, as being a phenomenon which holds true only as long as the hair on that area also turned white. When the hair in that bright area has not turned white, then the entire hypothesis of it appearing darker than the surrounding darker area does not hold true. He supports this argument by comparing it to sunspots, i.e. scattered spots of dark areas, black spots on the surface of the sun which do not result in the surrounding bright areas of the sun appearing as being deeper, recessed. He compares the hair (black) on the skin to sun spots scattered over the surface of the sun as we behold it. He also distinguishes between how something appears to the beholder who is close to the object in question and to how it appears to a beholder who looks at it from a distance. (The foregoing was attributed to Maimonides)
   Nachmanides continues: in spite of all that we have been told, according to which anything white appears deeper than the surrounding dark area, this does not even agree with what we learned in the Talmud <i>Shavuot,</i> 6, which disagrees with that assumption, stating that the very expression שאת [which is derived from the root נשא to lift up, Ed.] means something high, i.e. higher than its surroundings A verse from scripture is quoted in support of this שאת is compared to wool which had been bleached white, so that according to its degree of whiteness it certainly ought to appear as deeper than the darker area surrounding it. The opinion in the Talmud is also corroborated by <i>Torat Kohanim</i> where it is compared to “shadow” which appears ‘higher than the surrounding area.” If every whitish appearance were to be considered as “deep,” we would be faced with a total contradiction to our ancient sources.
   Perhaps we should say that the expression שאת is used in the sense of being “high” only when it is compared to the skin irregularity described by the Torah as בהרת in verse 2. However, when contrasted to the surrounding normal skin, it is indeed עמוק מן העור, i.e. deeper than regular skin.
   In view of these various approaches and apparent contradictions, it appears to me that any kind of “white” we look at, leaves a degree of radiance and sparkle in our eyes, similar to that which we experience when we have looked at the sun. This is due to the eye absorbing part of the black colour that clings to it, whereas the white colour is immediately reflected outward. While doing so it also disperses some of the ability of the eye to see properly, an ability that is now somewhat removed from its source, so that it appears to see objects as deeper than they are in reality.
   @בהרת on the other hand, is glaringly bright and powerfully white as snow, causing the human eyes’ sense of vision to undergo a weakening. Just as it undergoes a similar weakening when the eyes step out of the shade into an area illuminated by brilliant sunshine. The only thing that prevents this from happening is the presence of a black hair. If there is a black hair then the ability of the sense of seeing expands to any adjoining black area and from it to the entire surface of the skin affected by the נגע, the affliction like looking irregularity. It will not leave that area.
   @שאת, on the other hand, while being white, is not as brilliantly white as בהרת, so that its whiteness does not harm the sense of sight, it can spread over the area of the afflicted skin and man’s eye can view it without hindrance from proximity without harm. It appears to him as elevated, much as the stars look as if standing out against the background of the sky.
   In connection with the affliction which we know as שחין, (verse 18), the Torah makes mention of two kinds of visual impressions, one is שאת לבנה, the other is a lesser degree of whiteness described as בהרת לבנה. (Apparently) the white is mixed with some degree of red, i.e. אדמדמת, making it darker) The Torah describes the appearance of that whiteness as מראה שפל מן העור, as opposed to the previous מראה עמוק מן העור. The effect of this reddishness is to make the area appear a little deeper than the surrounding skin, though not a lot deeper, as would be described as עמוק מן העור.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the words והנה מראה שפל העור, are describing only the condition of בהרת and do not refer to the appearance of an irregularity called שאת לבנה at all. As far as the Torah writing later (verse 21) ואם יראנה הכהן והנה אין בה שער לבן ושפלה איננה מן העור והוא כהה “but if when the priest looks at it and behold there is no white hair in it and it is not lower than the surrounding skin,” this verse refers to both the incidence of שאת לבן as well as to that of בהרת לבן.
   When discussing skin irregularities resembling injuries from burning oneself, מכות-אש, the Torah mentions the colour לבנה אדמדמת או לבנה, “white streaked with red, or plain white.” When the Torah in the verse following (25) describes the appearance of what was mentioned in verse 24 asעמוק מן העור, “deeper than the surrounding skin,” this part of the verse refers only to the raw flesh which has been described in verse 24 as לבנה, white, and not to the area described as לבנה אדמדמת, white streaked with red. The Torah then mentions that the area described as בהרת is free from any white hair, and does not appear as even slightly deeper than the surrounding skin, for ושפלה איננה מן העור והוא כהה, seeing that the slightly deeper appearance as well as the deeper recessed appearance known as עמוק מן העור, both are reasons to declare the person displaying these symptoms as ritually impure. Such symptoms indicate purification only when not accompanied by any appearance deeper than the surrounding skin. This is the meaning of the word כהה.
   13,5. והנה הנגע עמד בעיניו, “and behold- the affliction remained static.”
   Nachmanides quotes <i>Rashi</i> as writing that the word בעיניו means that the affliction’s appearance has undergone no change either in appearance or size. He assumed that the word עין is the same as in כעין הבדולח in Numbers 11,7 where the appearance of the manna is described, was <i>Rashi’s</i> source. He points out that <i>Torat Kohanim</i> takes a different approach, understanding the word עין literally as “eye,” ruling that determination of the afflicted person’s purity or impurity is governed by the subjective criterion of how it appears to the examining priest, and not to the objective criterion of measuring it. If the priest’s perception is different from the perception of his disciple, for instance, the priest’s perception is automatically considered as decisive. He need not measure the affliction to verify if his perception had been correct.
   However, my sainted father the <i>R’osh</i>, said that the priest was required already on his first examination to make a mark on the skin delineating the extent of the affliction, so as to enable him to compare the size of the affliction when he would examine it the second time. This is clearly stated in connection with afflictions that occur on a person’s head, where the Torah demands that the area around the affliction must be shaved off. (Compare 13,33) The priest leaves two hairs adjoining the afflicted are in place, in order to be certain what precisely the area of the affliction had been on the occasion when he first examined it. What holds true for the way afflictions of the head are examined, also hold true for the manner in which the results of examinations of other parts of the skin’s surface are conducted and recorded, i.e. also the terms for temporary seclusion of the person so afflicted. The explanation by <i>Rashi</i> of the words והסגירו הכהן שבעת ימים, that the priest imposed a house arrest on the afflicted party for seven days, was not accepted by the author’s father. He claims that nowhere in the entire tractate of <i>Negaim</i> is there a mention that the afflicted party is under house arrest. Verse 4, mentioning the word והסגיר for the first time, refers to the נגע, not to the person afflicted with it; the meaning is that the area of the נגע is to be clearly delineated, and for a period of seven days following this, no second examination to determine if it had spread or receded is to be undertaken.
   13,10. והיא הפכה שער לבן ומחית בשר חי בשאת, “and it has changed hair to white, or that there is healthy live flesh within the white area described previously as שאת;” the letter ו in front of the word ומחית does not mean ”and,” so that both conditions have to be met before the priest must decree absolute isolation of the afflicted person. The letter ו here means “or,” as it does in many instances.
   13,12. ואם פרוח תפרח הצרעת, וגו., “if the <i>tzoraat</i> will erupt on the skin, etc.” the Torah describes a continuous spread of the affliction until eventually the entire skin of the body is covered with that affliction. When the Torah used the expression את כל עור הנגע, “the entire skin of the affliction,” an expression that seems somewhat confusing, it means that the entire area of the body’s skin, including head and feet, is covered with the affliction. If the area where the affliction had started either did not turn properly white, or became healthy looking again the person is ritually unclean.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the reason for the apparent paradox that when covered with the affliction from head to toe, the affected person is considered ritually pure, is that the very spread over the entire body of this affliction is a sign that it does not penetrate further into the body, proof that the person is on the way to a complete recovery, seeing the problem is only skin-deep.
   13,33. והתגלח ואת הנתק לו יגלח, “he is to shave himself, but he shall not shave off the <i>netek</i>.”
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning the Torah forbids the afflicted party to allow the razor to touch the afflicted area even though it is not covered with any hair. However, if the razor is allowed to touch that area it will cause injury to the skin that will result in hair growing from such a spot.
   However, in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> we find that the wordsואת הנתק are understood to mean “and around the <i>netek,”</i> in line with <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation that he must leave two hairs unshaven so as to know the extent of the <i>netek.</i> Nachmanides (on verse 29) wrote at length about whether such an irregularity of the skin, not especially defined, results in ritual impurity of the afflicted person.
   13,45. והצרוע, “and the person afflicted with <i>tzoraat,” Torat Kohanim</i> includes a High Priest in the procedures detailed here, although the Torah had stated elsewhere that the High Priest must not rend his garments (when a relative of his has died, compare Leviticus 21,10). [I see nothing remarkable or contradictory here as a) the rule that he does not rend his garments has nothing to do with its becoming afflicted with a skin problem; b) others could do it on his behalf. Ed.]
   @ועל שפם יעטה, “and he shall cloak himself up to his lips.” This means that he is to keep his mouth covered so that his breath does not offend anyone around him as it contains bacteria harmful to others.
   13,46. בדד ישב, “he shall remain in isolation.” The reason for this isolation is that this disease is very contagious and even indirect contact with the afflicted person will harm those associating with him.
   Nachmanides writes that neither the symptoms described by the Torah as afflicting garments, nor those afflicting houses, are natural phenomena, found in any civilisation. As long as the Jewish people conduct themselves according to the laws of the Torah they will remain protected by the spirit of <i>Hashem,</i> so that none of the diseases described in our portion would ever befall them. In the event that an individual would experience any of the symptoms we have discussed here, this would be a warning by the <i>Shechinah</i> that he had been guilty of a misdemeanour, designed to make him do penance before he would become subject to a severe penalty for his transgression. Seeing that the Torah introduced the subject as if it were a divine gift, i.e. ונתתי נגע צרעת בבית ארץ אחוזתכם, “I will give a <i>nega tzoraat</i> on one of the houses that constitute a hereditary possession in the land you have acquired as a permanent possession,” (Leviticus 14,34) it is clear that the whole subject reflects G’d’s concern not to allow us to become sin-ridden. By striking our house instead of our body, G’d issued a warning signal to us to mend our ways. The entire legislation is applicable only in a land that has become ours as an inheritance given to us by G’d. The same applies to the legislation concerning such symptoms appearing on our clothing. If these symptoms were to appear on our clothing in any country other than the Holy Land, this is meaningless in terms of Jewish law, and any means at any time may be employed to remove such symptoms. No one has ever been heard of being afflicted with these symptoms either in Babylon, or any other country Jews were exiled to.
   [Besides, miraculous involvement by G’d in this manner is predicated on only a few individuals not observing Torah. Just as the <i>Sotah</i> rites were discontinued when marital infidelity became common place, even though there was a Temple and High Priest, and just as the <i>yibbum</i> legislation (levirate marriage) was observed in the negative aspect of it, <i>chalitza,</i> once it could not be presumed that the brother-in-law would perform the rite in order to secure his deceased brother’s continuity on this earth, so the laws described here were intended for a near perfect Jewish society only. Ed.]
   While in effect, the laws concerning the symptoms on garments applied only on white garments, seeing that the stains on coloured garments looking like the symptoms described here might be attributed to having been caused during dying the garment or the threads the garments were made of.
   13,52. צרעת ממארת היא, ”it is a malignant <i>tzorat.”</i> The symptom is of a malignant nature that will eventually envelop the entire garment. This is why the whole garment has to be burned forthwith.
   13,55. פחתת הוא, “it is an ingrained affliction.” The word is derived from פוחת, something which gradually diminishes, becomes progressively worth less, until eventually it has ceased to have value; in this case the meaning it that the damage will spread until it encompasses the entire fabric.
   @בקרחתו או בגבחתו, “in his new or worn garment.” Some commentators understand this to mean that it makes no difference whether the garment is worn on hairy or smooth skin. [so that the word בקרחתו refers to קרחת baldness. Ed.]
   Parshat Metzora
   14,2. זאת תהיה תורת המצורע...והובא אל הכהן, “This shall be the law concerning the <i>Metzora</i>, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the Torah introduces our chapter with the words: “this is the manner in which a <i>Metzora</i> purifies himself, he will be brought to the priest.” This is to emphasise that anyone who has been afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> cannot ever regain his standing in the community, i.e. become purified, without the assistance of the priest. Having established this premise, the Torah then describes the priest as leaving the boundaries of the camp, i.e. the habitat of normal Jews, in order to start the process of purifying the person who had been struck with this dread disease. The important part of the Torah’s message is that the victim of <i>tzoraat</i> who has now been cured does not have to come to the priest, but the priest comes toward him to welcome him back into the fold.
   <i>Torat Kohanim</i> states that the recently cured victim of <i>tzoraat</i> is brought to the outskirts of the camp to face the priest in order to facilitate the priest’s welcoming him back to the fold.
   14,3. ויצא הכהן אל מחוץ למחנה. “The priest shall go forth to the outside of the camp.” <i>Torat Kohanim</i> comments that only a priest who was inside the camp could do this, not a priest, who, being himself a victim of <i>tzoraat</i>, and hence also outside the camp. Such a priest cannot participate in the purification rites of another <i>metzora.</i>
   14,4. שתי צפרים, “two birds;” the expression צפור [as distinct from עוף, Ed.] may be related to both Proverbs 27,8, and Psalms 102,8 where the צפור is described as wandering, i.e. being a loner, isolated. The analogy with the quarantined victim of <i>tzoraat</i> is evident.
   Nachmanides writes that the scholars concerned primarily with the plain meaning of the text claim that every עוף is automatically also referred to as צפור. Their proof is Psalms 8,9 צפור שמים ודגי הים, “the birds of the sky and the fish in the sea.” The correct interpretation of the choice of the word צפור by the Torah here is that the term צפור includes also the very small birds, the ones who awaken us in the early morning with their chirping. The Aramaic word for the Hebrew word צפצוף describing such chirping is צפורא. The reason the psalmist adds the word שמים, sky, to the word צפור is that in the main the birds use their wings to fly towards the sky. The word כל does not always mean “all, or each,” but usually means “most.” When, at the covenant between the pieces in Genesis chapter 15, Avraham divided the various animals he offered as a symbol of that covenant, the Torah mentions ואת הצפור לא בתר, meaning that he did not cut up either the pigeon or the turtle dove. The expression כל צפור כל כנף refers to two separate species of birds, i.e. both the big ones and the small ones. When the Torah, in Deuteronomy 22,6 speaks of someone encountering a קן צפור, a bird’s nest, this refers to a nest housing small birds, the Torah warning that even such small creatures we must treat with consideration.
   It appears to me that our sages considered every pure bird, i.e. the ones we may eat (in the appropriate circumstances) as described as צפור. However, in connection with the sacrifice of the <i>tzarua</i> who has been healed and purified, he is to bring one of the birds that can be truly described as צפור דרור, ”a free flying bird,” not a chicken, or a duck, which are domesticated and cannot use their wings in a manner reflecting true freedom of movement. This requirement is not absolute, but when available these free flying birds, i.e. pigeon or turtle dove are preferable, though other birds not described in the Torah as of the 24 kinds of birds of prey might be admissible, seeing the Torah does not speak of עוף דרור. Seeing that the <i>Mishnah</i> in tractate <i>Negaiim</i> 14,1 mentions צפור דרור instead of תור או גוזל, the bird-offerings normally presented on the altar, it might have appeared that other birds are acceptable. Seeing that the text of the Torah leaves room for doubt, the <i>Torat Kohanim</i> had to add that the requirement is absolute, and no other bird can be substituted. The fact is however, that the word דרור in the <i>Mishnah</i> may simply exclude ritually unclean birds that also fit the description of עוף דרור. Moreover, it may also mean that even though these two birds are not alike in size and in appearance as is preferable, as indicated by the word שתי instead of שתים, as among the unclean birds there are also some that fit the description of their being small and free flying the Torah meant to exclude those. [Some commentators of the <i>Mishnah</i> do not understand the word דרור as free flying, unrestricted, but they apply it to birds that have learned to escape capture by man both inside the house and outside of it. Ed.]
   It is also possible that the expression שתי צפרים is intended to exclude birds that are ritually impure from being offered as a sacrifice.
   @ועץ ארז ושני תולעת ואזוב, “cedar-wood, crimson thread, and hyssop.” Ibn Ezra writes that the items the Torah requires as part of the purification rites of the <i>metzura</i> indicate the conceptual linkage between someone whose house is afflicted with a parallel affliction, with the ritual impurity conferred by dead bodies of near relatives and even with the Passover sacrifice offered in Egypt prior to the Exodus. [Emerging from the state of being afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> is as cataclysmic as the redemption (on a national scale) of the Jewish people from Egypt. Ed.]
   14,5. אל כלי חרס, “into an earthen vessel.” Allegorically speaking, the person preparing to rejoin society is to humble himself, like broken earthenware.
   @על מים חיים, “over spring water;” just as Naaman, the Assyrian general who had to bathe himself in the river Jordan.
   14,7.על פני השדה,”upon the open field.” Uninhabited places where symptoms of that disease cannot be found so that the person that has been cured will not per chance be re-infected with the disease. (Ibn Ezra)
   14,10. יקח שני כבשים תמימים וכבשה אחת, “he is to take two unblemished sheep and one ewe;” Nachmanides points out that the Torah did not state what is to be done with these three animals except to say that one of the male sheep mentioned is to serve as a guilt-offering, the priest having heaved it before <i>Hashem.</i> In verse 19 the Torah does state that the <i>metzura</i> is to offer his sin offering and his burnt offering, without referring to a specific animal. Seeing that we had learned in <i>Parshat Vayikra</i> that every sin offering, if consisting of the species sheep, consists of a feminine species, it is clear that the ewe is to serve as the sin-offering and the remaining male sheep as the burnt offering. (Ibn Ezra)
   14,18. יתן על ראש המטהר וכפר עליו הכהן לפני ה', “he shall place upon the head of the person being purified, and the priest shall provide him atonement before <i>Hashem.”</i> The vehicle effecting the atonement is the blood of the guilt offering as well as the oil that the priest sprinkles in the direction of the Holy of Holies.
   The peculiarity in the procedures being described here is the fact that the expression וכפר, “he shall provide atonement,” is repeated so many times; after the guilt offering which apparently provided this atonement, the same expression is used in connection with the sin offering, and then again in connection with the burnt offering, and even again in connection with the gift offering, the מנחה. As a result of this we are quite confused as to the nature of this “atonement.”
   Perhaps the guilt offering affords forgiveness, atonement, for the trespass the person in question had committed before he had become afflicted with the <i>tzoraat</i>. The sin offering may afford atonement for sins committed while the person was in a state of <i>tzoraat</i>. Possibly, due to his pain, he addressed his prayers then to the attribute of <i>Elokim</i> instead of to the attribute of <i>Hashem</i>, the only one to whom prayers may be addressed. This may be the reason that the Torah adds the word מטומאתו when speaking of this specific atonement.
   The burnt offering and the gift offering may be the “real” ransom of his soul, permitting him to rejoin society. This is why the Torah may have added the words: “and the priest will provide atonement for him, and he will emerge purified.”
   It is also possible that this last line of וכפר עליו הכהן וטהר, “and the priest will provide atonement for him and he will emerge purified,” refers to all the foregoing collectively, seeing that also the bird-offerings had as their purpose atonement as we know from their description in connection with plague-like symbols on the walls of someone’s house. (14,53)
   14,34. ונתתי נגע צרעת, “I will place a <i>tzoraat</i> affliction, etc.” <i>Rashi, -</i>seizing on the word נתן meaning “giving,”- explains this verse as good news, saying that these symptoms alert the owner of the house to hidden treasure in that house buried by the previous owner.
   Other commentators believe that these symptoms both in houses and garments, alert the new owner that these items unbeknown to them used to be artifacts of idolatry and therefore had to be destroyed. Now that the owners had been alerted, they could fulfill the commandment to destroy the items in question.
   @ונתתי נגע צרעת בבית ארץ אחוזתכם, “I will place a <i>tzoraat</i> in the house of the land of your possession.” Nachmanides writes that the verse is addressed to the entire people of Israel, and it should therefore have been told to the entire nation, i.e. we would have expected the Torah to continue in verse 33 with the words אל כל עדת ישראל, “to the whole community of Israel.” The Torah, for reasons we do not know, decided to abbreviate.
   Alternately, the point is that the Torah spoke to Moses and Aaron in their capacity as the representatives of the whole people. The reason why the Torah, at this time, informed only Moses and Aaron of the legislation pertaining to such afflictions, is that all the details would have to be taught to the priests. Moses thought it pointless to teach all these details now, and preferred to wait until the Israelites would be on the point of entering and conquering the land. In Deut. 24,8 Moses does indeed warn the Israelites to observe all the pertinent laws and to follow the instructions of the priests concerning them.
   14,43. ואם ישוב הנגע ופרח בבית, “and if the affliction returns and erupts in the house, etc.” According to Nachmanides the affliction the Torah speaks of here does not again show up on the same stones as previously, but the same kind of affliction now appears on other stones and other earthen parts of the same house. This is different from when skin afflictions either shrunk or expanded on an afflicted person. On those occasions the Torah described changes occurring in the original symptom of the affliction. In matters of skin irregularities it is not unusual for symptoms to temporarily subside, only to resurface even more pronouncedly at a later stage of the disease. The disease not only had not disappeared, but, by penetrating more deeply into the body below the skin it had taken a firmer hold on the afflicted person. This is why the Torah here does not write: ואם ישוב הנגע ופרח באבנים ההם, “and if the affliction resurfaces and spreads out on these stones, etc,” but it writes in such a way that we understand that even if now the affliction surfaces in a part of the house that had not been afflicted at first, etc. The word בבית means that the entire house is viewed as having been potentially at risk as soon as any part of it had shown symptoms of being afflicted with this <i>tzoraat.</i> The reason for all this, the need to totally tear down the house, is that the רוח הרעה, the harmful atmosphere that had been responsible for the affliction first erupting, will not disappear until all the stones, etc., have been completely removed. Otherwise, there will always remain the risk that the reconstructed house would suddenly erupt with the same symptoms as had led to the partial destruction of the original house.
   The <i>Midrash</i> explains how one can understand all the verses without having recourse to the principle that the Torah is not bound to write everything sequentially, in chronological order.
   14,53. וכפר על הבית וטהר, “he shall provide atonement for the house and it will become purified.” According to Nachmanides this atonement is effected through the bird that is released into the air outside the city into the field. This bird is perceived as carrying away all the sins of the person who has purchased it and gone through the ritual with the help of the priest. The procedure is analogous to the שעיר המשתלח, the “scapegoat” that we are familiar with from the Day of Atonement rituals, although that scapegoat is thrown to its death. The reason why this procedure differs from that of a person who experiences <i>tzoraat</i> on his skin, is that the penalty for the sins of a person whose house is afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> is much less than that of the person whose skin has become afflicted. The sin of the persons whose house was afflicted was far less serious than that of the person afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> on his skin. The latter had to bring also a sin offering and a guilt offering. The initial atonement procedure is sufficient to cleanse the owner of the afflicted house of his sin.
   Some commentators believe that every “atonement” mentioned in connection with any of three types of <i>tzoraat</i> afflicting house, garments, or skin as well as the “atonement” mentioned by the Torah in connection with the offering the Torah demands of a mother who has given birth recently, as well as the people afflicted with the disease known as <i>zav,</i> mentioned in the following chapter, is not a term for “forgiving a sin,” but is a term denoting the purification of the party concerned having been successfully completed. We find the term used in that sense in <i>Gittin</i> 56, where the words לכפורי ידיה בהאי גברא mean that “G’d wants to ‘clean’ His hands,” i.e. punish him for having been the instrument through whom Jerusalem and the Temple were destroyed. Clearly, the meaning of the word there is not “atonement” in the normal sense of the word.
   15,2. איש איש כי יהיה זב מבשרו, “any man who will have a discharge from his flesh, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why a discharge from the male genitals is ritually impure and he needs to bring an offering when he has recovered, is that it is one of the most infectious diseases and he needs to bring a thanksgiving offering for having recovered from this disease at all. The sin offering, by means of which he acknowledges that had he not been guilty of a sin he would not have been afflicted with this disease, is meant to assure him that he will not become the victim of further diseases.
   The reason that male sperm is altogether something that is ritually impure and confers ritual impurity on contact etc., although it is a basic and natural activity, is rooted in the very nature of the act of sexual intercourse as the means by which man assure himself of progeny. It is analogous to the ritual impurity caused by and conferred by the dead. The very essence of a human being’s body is the source of its corruption. He who does lie with a woman and impregnates her, has no way of knowing whether he has destroyed his sperm in the process, or whether it will take root in the partner’s ovum and produce a new life.
   The Torah imposed a lesser degree of ritual impurity on a woman that has been afflicted with a similar discharge from her womb at regular intervals when she menstruates, proof that her most recent opportunity to be inseminated had failed to achieve its purpose, seeing that with her such symptoms are part of her natural life cycle, at any rate. She does not have to bring a sacrifice expressing her gratitude for having been healed, as the phenomena she experienced were not in the nature of a disease. The Torah therefore imposes on her a period of ritual impurity for seven days, regardless of her flow of blood (or discharge) having ceased earlier than that. Normally, such a flow of menstrual blood does not continue for more than seven days. However, if her discharge continues beyond the seven days that she normally discharges menstrual blood, she is clearly experiencing a disease, and upon being cured has to offer a sacrifice acknowledging that G’d had healed her, similar to the male <i>zav</i> having to bring such a sacrifice.
   In the case of the female suffering the disease described as <i>zav</i> or <i>zavah,</i> the Torah does not spell out the need for ritual immersion by the afflicted woman, as the comparisons drawn by the Torah between the male suffering this disease and the female suffering it make it plain that their processes of purification are similar, except that the male must bathe in spring water whereas the woman need only immerse herself in a ritual bath, a <i>mikveh,</i> water in contact with rainwater or other water that has not had a chance to become ritually contaminated.
   According to the plain meaning of the text the woman would have to bathe herself in spring water just as the male suffering from that disease, however our sages ruled that she need not bathe in spring water. They derived the reason for their ruling from the extraneous words ואחר תטהר, “and afterwards she becomes ritually pure” (verse 28) There was really no need to add these words as a woman is included in the legislation and the verse only wanted to make a distinction in the mechanics of her purification rites and those of the male. The discharge of a woman called זבה, consist of blood, whereas the discharge of her male counterpart consist of a whitish fluid similar to the colour of semen. In the case of a woman the time of the month when such unexpected discharge occurs is of the essence in determining whether this discharge is part of her menstrual cycle. The word ואחר means that although her purification rites did not involve spring water nonetheless she becomes purified by immersing herself in the same kind of water that purifies her at the end of her monthly menstruation.תטהר. 
   15,11.וידיו לא שטף במים, “without having rinsed his hands in water.” Nachmanides writes that in this instance the Torah uses the word שטף to describe immersion in the purifying waters of the <i>mikveh.</i> The same expression had been used by the Torah for someone instead of immersing his body, immersing his ritually contaminated vessels.
   Parshat Acharey Mot
   16,1. אחרי מות שני בני אהרן, “After the death of two of Aaron’s sons.” The reason why the Torah again refers to this event at this juncture is that seeing the Torah had just (15,31) concluded by warning us to be extremely careful not to become guilty of death through polluting G’d’s residence while entering it in a state of ritual contamination, the Torah uses the death of Aaron’s sons as an example designed to serve as a deterrent to anyone else daring to desecrate consecrated grounds in such a fashion.
   Nachmanides adds that the wording אחרי מות שני בני אהרן is that immediately after that tragic death had occurred, Aaron and his sons had been warned not to enter consecrated grounds while in a state of intoxication. (Compare Leviticus 10,8-11).
   It is certainly reasonable to assume that these laws were revealed to Aaron and the people on the day following the death of Nadav and Avihu. They could not very well have been communicated on the very day of the death of the sons, as the legal status of אנינות, preoccupation with burial and mourning rites, prevent the remaining two sons from studying Torah on that day. Not only that, but the Holy Spirit does not communicate with people when they are in such a state of mind.
   The warning not to drink wine applied to Aaron personally more than to anyone else, as he performed service in the Tabernacle on a daily basis. Moses had been informed before now, of course, but the Torah wanted that the entire people be warned at once. 
   [We must remember that though Moses had been given all these laws already on Mount Sinai, seeing that at that time the whole subject of building a Tabernacle had not yet become relevant, as there had not yet been the sin of the golden calf, there had also been no reason to reveal this to the people until now, the first or second day that the Tabernacle had become operative. Ed.]
   As a general rule (Nachmanides writing), whenever the Torah departs from chronological sequence in its report, it prefaces such statements with the words “G’d spoke to Moses at Mount Sinai, etc.,” to remind us that the legislation following was not an afterthought. Ed.]
   Our sages claim that the meaning of the words ולא תמותו in Leviticus 10,9 was an oblique reference to the reason why the two sons of his had died. Aaron should take care that the same would not happen to him. [Seeing that the author does not attribute this statement of “our sages” to a specific source, I permit myself the comment that this sounds incredibly unlikely, as surely someone of Aaron’s stature did not need to be given this kind of a warning in order to obey G’d’s instructions. Ed.]
   @בקרבתם לפני ה' וימותו, “when they approached the presence of <i>Hashem</i> and died.”
   Ibn Ezra comments that this verse is proof that the sons of Aaron died because they had dared to bring the incense into the Tabernacle.
   Nachmanides disagrees, as the Torah always mentions the sin of anyone who died an untimely death at the hands of <i>Hashem</i>. The Torah had already told us on a number of occasions that the cause of death was that they introduced “strange fire” which they had not been authorised to do. (Leviticus 10,1) However, this was described as בהקריבם אש זרה, “when they introduced alien fire,” whereas here the Torah wrote about בקרבתם, i.e. when they personally entered a domain which was out of bounds to them. It is therefore completely reasonable that the Torah should now warn Aaron not to enter the wrong place at the wrong time. Although he is permitted entry to the Holy of Holies, even, something no other priest is allowed to enter, he cannot do so at times of his choosing.
   It is quite possible that the correct interpretation of our verse is in line with what our sages said (<i>Mechilta Beshalach ויסע ו</i>) that the people had come to the conclusion that the incense contained poisonous herbs which had caused the death of Nadav and Avihu, the 250 men who offered incense during Korach’s rebellion, etc. The Torah, countering these wild accusations leveled against the incense offering, wanted to make the point that it had not been the incense which had killed them but their unauthorised entry, both in terms of place and time. Aaron therefore had to be especially on guard, seeing he would offer incense on a daily basis he would be more exposed to such a danger than any other individual. The Torah defines precisely when, where, and who is fit to offer this special offering (verses 12 and 13).
   Some scholars feel that we must take careful note of the difference in meaning of the word בקרבתם as opposed to בהקריבם, the former referring to the act of entering a forbidden domain regardless of the purpose why it was entered and regardless of what the person entering had in his hands as an offering. In order to make plain that mere entering the sacred domain by Nadav and Avihu was a mortal sin by itself, the Torah now instructs Aaron: בזאת יבא אהרן אל הקוד'ש, “only when accompanied by the following is Aaron allowed to enter these holy domains.”
   16,2. ויאמר ה' אל משה, “<i>Hashem</i> said to Moses,” I am greatly perturbed by this apparent repetition. We have already been told that G’d spoke to Moses, without hearing what He said to him. Our verse appears as if G’d is rephrasing the tenor of what He was about to say without having said anything as yet. We do not know if G’d had interrupted Himself by speaking on some other subject first, the details of which have been withheld from us. Is the word ויאמר merely indicative of G’d taking up the broken thread of a previous conversation?
   Some commentators claim that the subject of G’d’s message in verse one was the legislation about the red heifer, the ashes of which would be used to purify the people who had been involved in the burial of Nadav and Avihu who had become ritually impure through their handling the corpses. According to that version, the message contained as part of verse one was delivered still on the same day these sons died, i.e. the first of <i>Nissan,</i> whereas in verse two we deal with what G’d told Moses on the second day of <i>Nissan.</i> According to that, the remains of the red heifer were burned on the second day of <i>Nissan,</i> and the Torah now instructs Moses that the ashes would be used to purify people who had become ritually polluted through contact with dead bodies. In order to make this clear, the Torah refers once more to the death of the two sons of Aaron, to indicate that the ashes of the red heifer are used in purifying those who had become impure through their participation in the burial of these two people.
   @דבר אל אהרן אחיך, “speak to your brother Aaron.” Nachmanides writes that the reason G’d mentioned that Aaron was Moses’ brother, [something that all of us have been aware of for a long time, Ed.] was that G’d meant to emphasise that although Moses was not included in the injunction not to enter the Tabernacle at any time, Aaron was subject to such constraints. He had already been told to enter the Holy of Holies only once a year on the Day of Atonement, as we know from Exodus 30,10 וכפר אהרן על קרנותיו אחת בשנה, “he is to secure atonement on its corners once a year by the sin offering of atonement, etc. This is what has been referred to in our verse here.
   16,4. בגדי קודש הם, “they are sacred vestments.” The sages in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> use this verse as applying not only to this service in the Tabernacle on the Day of Atonement, but as applying to any time the High Priest performs duties in the Temple or Tabernacle. [Meaning that only the four vestments mentioned here are to be worn by him inside the Tabernacle, not the additional vestments which have been described as לכבוד ולתפארת, “for glory and splendour.” (Exodus 28,2). Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text, seeing that in connection with the eight vestments the Torah had used the expression ועשית בגדי קודש, “you are to make sacred vestments,” (Exodus 28,2) the same terminology is used here. The Torah by emphasising the fact that the garments enumerated here are to be linen, בד, indicates that during service inside the Tabernacle only linen garments are to be worn. [Approaching <i>Hashem</i> in golden vestments when asking forgiveness would be the ultimate in bad taste. Ed.]
   In <i>Vayikra Rabbah,</i> 21,10 a comparison is drawn between the way service by the angels is perceived as taking place in the celestial counterpart to the Tabernacle on earth. In those regions the service is performed in linen vestments. The words כתונת בד קודש match what our sages used to describe as taking place in those regions. (Compare Ezekiel 9,1) Commenting on three different verbs used by the Torah for Aaron donning these vestments, ילבש, יחגור, יצנוף, when we would have thought that the word ילבש would suffice to describe all this, <i>Torat Kohanim</i> explains that seeing that the High Priest had to return to the Holy of Holies for the offering of the evening portion of the incense, he needed additional vessels to retrieve the spoon used for the incense, for instance, these extra words hint at these additional items the High Priest had to take with him.
   16,8. וגורל אחד לעזאזל, “and one lot for the one designated as destined for <i>Azazel</i>.” The word עזאזל is interpreted in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> as “a hard place in the mountains.” The word is linked to the word עז meaning “hard, tough.” By doubling the letters the point is made that the place is especially hard, unyielding.
   Nachmanides proceeds to explain the somewhat strange sounding rite of the scapegoat as follows: There used to be people who worshipped other deities, i.e. they ascribed divine powers to phenomena in nature. In fact these so-called deities are agents of the Creator whom we Jews perceive as מלאכים, loosely translated as “angels,” as they perform tasks assigned to them by the Creator, by <i>Hashem.</i> These misguided people offered sacrifices to these powers in the mistaken belief that these powers were able to do things on their own, things that G’d had not authorised them to do, or to fail to do. The Torah, had, of course, forbidden us totally to see in these powers anything resembling divinity. However, on the occasion of <i>Yom Kippur,</i> the Torah commanded that one of the two male goats designated as part of the Temple service would instead of being offered on the altar be dispatched to its death not as a sacrifice. The address to which this scapegoat was dispatched was the location in which the power perceived as possessing divine powers over nature was supposed to have its home. This power is equated in our thinking with the power that unleashes destruction [always at the command of <i>Hashem,</i> of course. Ed.] The “president” of these powers deserves to be acknowledged for what it is, though of course not to be deified, and that is why the scapegoat described in our verse is not slaughtered as opposed to sacrifices that are. The celestial body perceived as in “control” of all negative events in our universe is the planet Mars. Its counterpart among human beings is the nation of Edom, i.e. the descendants of Esau. Esau is the nation that has inherited the sword as the symbol of its power, ever since Yitzchok blessed his son Esau. In he animal kingdom the male goat represents the counterpart of Esau/Edom amongst the human beings. Parts of the domain of the male goats are the so-called שדים, satanic forces, the demons. 
   The whole subject of the scapegoat must not, G’d forbid, be misunderstood as a kind of offering to these demonic forces from the Jewish people. On the contrary, the procedure demonstrates that we carry out the will of our Creator. Our sages have illustrated this in the form of a parable. When an individual prepares a feast in honour of his king, the king in turn, asks the host of this feast to also give a portion to a certain servant of his. Naturally, the individual tendering the feast to the king, in complying with his king’s request has not thereby done anything for that particular servant of the king. He has merely carried out a wish by his monarch. He had tendered a meal to the king, who had decided not to eat it all himself but to let another one of his servants share in the honour bestowed on him The reason why the king decided to give a portion to that particular servant of his was that he thereby wanted to perform an act of kindness for the host of this meal by ensuring that the servant who had not been invited to that meal but to whom the king diverted a portion now, had no reason to be jealous of the host and be upset that the host had not seen fit to invite him also as guest to that feast. A clear proof of the basic analogy presented in this parable is the fact that the scapegoat, though given to the demons had not been slaughtered, its blood had not been sprinkled on the altar, as was done with the part of the feast to which the king and his other servants had been invited. This is also the underlying reason for the lots which were drawn as to which of the male goats would be served to whom, -to continue in the language of the parable.- Both the fact that according to <i>halachah</i> both male goats had to be as near to twins as was possible, and the fact that only the drawing of lots determined which was to be served to whom, made it plain that the guest whom the king’s admirer had not invited was not considered inferior, else an inferior portion would have been set aside for him from the outset.
   Onkelos translates the words גורל אחד לה' as “one of the male goats was destined for the Hoy Name of <i>Hashem,”</i> whereas the other one was destined for Azazel. In other words, the first one was addressed to an attribute of <i>Hashem</i>, not to His essence, whereas the second was addressed to the essence of Azazel, not to an attribute of his.
   Such considerations prompted our sages both in <i>Torat Kohanim and in</i> Yuma 67 to comment as follows on Leviticus 18,4 את משפטי תעשו ואת חוקותי תשמרו, “Carry out My laws and observe My statutes.” The “laws” are the ones that are so self-evident that if the Torah had not spelled them out we would have had to legislate them ourselves. The former include legislation against robbery, murder, idolatry, etc.; whereas the latter include such statutes as not to mix wool with linen in a garment, not to allow the widow of a husband who had no children to remarry unless her brother-in-law had refused to enter into a levirate marriage with her (חליצה), not to eat pig’s meat, the red heifer, etc. The latter have been described as examples of irrational laws which the nations of the world ridicule, and thereby test our faith in the Creator Who has wanted to see if we would observe these laws although we do not understand their rationale. The legislation about the scapegoat also falls into the category of laws that afford the gentiles a challenge in that they feel that basically, we do nothing else than what they do. They cannot challenge all the various offerings that we offer to <i>Hashem</i> and hope thereby to undermine our faith in the invisible Creator. They thought that the absence of the mention of <i>Hashem</i> in the procedure of the scapegoat proved that we also pay homage to demons, etc. They thought they had found another proof of the irrationality of our faith in the red heifer legislation that appears to contaminate the very person who is preoccupied with purifying others.
   The wording of the Torah, as alluded to by Onkelos, makes it plain that the gentiles have completely misunderstood the phenomenon of the scapegoat. The major reason why the gentiles were misled is that both the red heifer procedure and the second half of the scapegoat procedure takes place outside consecrated grounds.
   Elsewhere the sinner’s or his representative the High Priest’s placing his hands with all his weight on the animal offered as the sin offering is designed to regain the goodwill of <i>Hashem</i> for the sinner or sinners. In this instance (compare <i>Shabbat</i> 119) the scapegoat reluctantly agrees to carry the sins of the Israelites and says <i>Amen.</i>
   16,23. ובא אהרן אל אהל מועד, “Aaron shall come to the Tent of Meeting;” <i>Rashi,</i> quoting our sages (<i>Yuma</i> 32) says that the verse does not really represent the correct sequence of what happened. According to the sages the entire chapter is reported chronologically in proper sequence with the exception of this verse. Aaron did not enter the Sanctuary until after he had completed the procedures involving both the bull and the male goat offering. Afterwards he entered the Sanctuary in order to retrieve the ladle and the pan of the incense that he had left behind there earlier. 
   Nachmanides agrees that the position of this verse in the <i>Yom Kippur</i> rites needs explaining. If we were to accept the verse at its face value, we would have to believe that Aaron made a special trip into the Sanctuary to do nothing else but retrieve the ladle and the censer which he had use earlier when offering the incense. For all this he would have to first change his golden vestments immerse himself in a ritual bath, etc, and don the linen vestments mandatory when entering the Sanctuary after first having stood nude in the Sanctuary. We must assume that Aaron entered the Sanctuary in order to perform service, some of the priestly functions. There was no need to mention that this service consisted of the retrieval of the ladle and the censer. The meaning of 16,13 ונתן את הקטרת על האש לפני ה' וכסה ענן הקטרת את הכפורת וגו', “he shall place the incense upon the fire before <i>Hashem</i>; so that the cloud of smoke of the incense will envelop the lid of the Holy Ark, etc.,” is that Aaron shall wait there until the cloud of the incense had enveloped the lid of the Holy Ark. When that had occurred, he was to leave immediately and leave behind the ladle and the censer [as they were too hot to handle at that moment. Ed.] Naturally, at some stage these two vessels had to be retrieved. This is what the Torah refers to when it writes in verse 23 “Aaron is to enter the Sanctuary, disrobe from the golden vestments and again don the linen vestments, etc.” The Torah did not mention at this stage what he had done prior to this while having worn the golden vestments, such as performing the rites of the daily <i>tamid</i> offering. Instead, the Torah commences describing the daily sacrifices that were offered while he was wearing the linen vestments. These rites are described sequentially. It is the custom of the Torah to relate procedures in order of their happening and to complete the report of them. In this instance, retrieval of the ladle and censer from the Holy of Holies was the last item on the agenda. Even though, as a result, there is some chronological inconsistency in the report here, the Torah rectifies this by reporting that Aaron had entered the Sanctuary again wearing the appropriate vestments in order to complete the final stage of the day’s Temple service in them.
   @והניחם שם, “and he shall leave them there.” He was to leave these garments at the place where he changed into his golden vestments. We are taught by this that they would not be used again even on the Day of Atonement in the following year.”
   16,27. יוציא אל מחוץ למחנה, “he will take outside beyond the boundaries of the camp.” According to Ibn Ezra the subject of the word יוציא is Aaron himself. Nachmanides disagrees and understands that whoever was the person who had been designated to do this would at this stage proceed and take these animal carcasses outside the camp limits there to burn them with their skins, etc. The same interpretation is correct for the respective persons charged with ושרפו, burning these remains.
   @ושרפו, “they shall burn (transitively);” the verb is in the plural mode to teach us that if there are a number of priests participating in that procedure, one may bring the torch or match, another may arrange the firewood, yet another may light the flame, seeing that only the one who brings the torch or match becomes liable to ritual contamination by the procedure. Seeing that the others do not become ritually contaminated, the Torah speaks of the one starting the fire in the singular mode, i.e. השורף, in verse 28. [Priests must not become ritually contaminated unless they perform a מצוה by doing so. The one starting the fire has to be מכבס בגדיו both immerse his body and the garments he wore in a ritual bath after having completed the task. Ed.]
   16,34. ויעש כאשר צוה ה' את משה, “Aaron did as G’d had commanded Moses.” He carried out all that he had been commanded to do and he remained careful for the rest of his life not to enter beyond the dividing curtain except on the Day of Atonement, on which day he performed the sacrificial service in strict compliance with what the Torah had instructed Moses.
   17,2. דבר אל אהרן ואל בניו ואל כל ישראל, “speak to Aaron and to all the Children of Israel.” Nachmanides writes that seeing that the Torah warns that the priests are not to offer any sacrifices outside the consecrated grounds, and the people on their part are not to enter consecrated grounds in order to offer their sacrifices, the Torah also had to warn the Israelites not to offer their sacrifices outside the consecrated grounds.
   17,3. אשר ישחט שור או כשב או עז במחנה או מחוץ למחנה, “who will slaughter either an ox, a sheep, or a goat inside the camp or even beyond the boundaries of the camp, etc.”
   According to the commentary by Nachmanides our paragraph discusses two separate subjects. Subject number one is the prohibition for Israelites while in the desert to eat meat which was not part of a sacrificial offering, something which in <i>halachah</i> we call בשר תאווה, meat eaten merely to satisfy one’s craving for it. The penalty for violating the commandment is <i>karet,</i> the same penalty as is applied to people who deliberately eat on the Day of Atonement, or people who violate the Sabbath deliberately when there are not any witnesses whose testimony would lead to a conviction in court. Even slaughtering non-consecrated animals outside the confines of the Tabernacle is equally forbidden when these had not been brought to the entrance of the Tabernacle to be offered there as שלמים, peace offerings, in which case the fat parts and the blood are sprinkled or burned on the altar as the case may be, and the remainder, after the priest has received his statutory share, may be eaten by the owners.
   Subsequent to this legislation, the Torah continues in verse eight to deal with the reverse situation, when an Israelite arrogates to himself the right to perform priestly procedures within the confines of the Tabernacle. The Israelite as well as the priest is warned not to erect altars even to <i>Hashem</i> outside the confines of the Tabernacle. While it is true that upon entry into the Holy Land the regulations concerning בשר תאווה were considerably relaxed, the prohibition to erect private altars was never rescinded. Even a עולה, a burnt offering, of which the owner of the animal does not receive anything, must not be offered on a private altar in a private domain. While it is true that immediately after the Israelites entered the Holy Land, some altars outside the Tabernacle were permitted for the purpose of offering communal offerings, in the main, that was only a temporary arrangement. The permission to eat meat that had not first been part of a sacrificial offering was a concession to the fact that once in the land of Israel, the journey all the way to either Shiloh, or later on Jerusalem, was a great inconvenience for the people, who, but for this concession, would normally have eaten meat only on the three pilgrimage festivals when at least the male had to appear in the Temple.
   At any rate, it is hard to understand that the mere fact of slaughtering an animal that had not been consecrated as an offering should carry the <i>karet</i> penalty, seeing that even Rabbi Yishmael derives this prohibition from what is written in Deut. 12,20, and there the Torah speaks about animals which had been consecrated as offerings. Rabbi Akiva, on the other hand, does not agree that meat that had not been consecrated was ever forbidden. From that verse we can derive that while the people were in the desert and the Tabernacle was right in their midst, only consecrated meat was allowed. But nothing had been spelled out about someone slaughtering such animals becoming guilty of the <i>karet</i> penalty.
   17.4. דם שפך, “it is considered bloodshed.” Seeing that the Torah had said in Genesis 9,3 כירק עשב נתתי לכם את כל לאכלה, “I have allocated it to you as food, like the grass of the field,” and had thereby permitted Noach and mankind to kill living creatures to use as food, excepting man, i.e. cannibalism, the Torah here adds –for the Israelites- that unless we observe the rules laid down for eating meat the whole procedure turns into murder, into wanton killing. In that event, we must consider the situation as if the prohibition to eat meat which was in effect before the deluge had been reinstated.
   17,7. לשעירים, “to the demons;” the spiritually negative phenomena, שדים, the expression occurs in that sense also in Isaiah 13,21 ושעירים ירקדו שם, “and the demons are dancing there.”
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason that these demons are described as שעירים, hairs, is that people’s hair stands on edge when they behold these creatures.
   It is more likely that the reason they are called thus is that they conduct themselves like people who have gone out of their minds, as elaborated on by Nachmanides in his commentary on 17,14 כי נפש כל בשר בדם היא.
   17,11. כי נפש כל בשר בדם הוא, “for every living creature’s life-force is in its blood.” From this we learn that the reason for our not being allowed to eat blood is that the purpose of the blood is to secure atonement for man. It is part of the essence of the creature. The reason is the same as the reason for the prohibition of eating certain fat parts that are burned up on the altar. These too serve to secure man atonement for his sins. For man to eat such parts of the animal would be counterproductive, as he would deprive himself of the chance to achieve atonement This leaves us with the question why the blood and fat of animals which are not allowed to be offered on the altar is also forbidden? Also, why then did the Torah not forbid all kinds of fat, not only that on the kidneys and the liver? The fat parts that are not easily identifiable from a distance have not been designated as atonement to be burned up on the altar. Seeing that all blood looks alike, no such distinction was made as to which part of the blood requires sprinkling on the altar, etc. Maimonides’ approach to the subject parallels that of Nachmanides, i.e the Torah widens the framework of the prohibition to make such practices as sacrificing to the demons even more unlikely. Ibn Ezra points out that the resident stranger has not been mentioned in this paragraph at all, as opposed to the paragraph dealing with meat offerings and burnt offerings, as the Israelites in the Land of Israel are obligated to enforce that such resident strangers do not offer sacrifices to their deities. On the other hand, when discussing the prohibition of eating blood, the stranger resident in the Land of Israel is mentioned as, seeing that the blood represents the life force of the animal, such a stranger is also forbidden to eat that blood. 
   17,13. אשר יצוד ציד חיה או עוף אשר יאכל, “who will trap a beast of bird of the kind that may be eaten;” seeing that the eating of any kind of blood is prohibited, and such blood cannot be offered on the altar either, it would be insensitive to leave such blood uncovered. The Torah therefore decrees burial of a kind for the lifeblood of such pure animals. Moreover, unless the blood of such animals is covered, anyone seeing it might conclude that this blood was the remainder of blood poured out after part had been sprinkled on an altar as a sacrificial rite dedicated to idolatry. Ibn Ezra is convinced that here too resident strangers in the Land of Israel are forbidden to eat such impure animals as donkeys, horses or birds of prey.
   17,14. דמו בנפשו, “its blood represents its life.” According to <i>Rashi,</i> the meaning of this expression is that the blood of such an animal [that is not equipped with a soul, נשמה, is its life-force Ed.], acts in lieu of a soul. When deprived of its life it dies.
   Nachmanides writes that <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation is not correct, but that it is possible to understand the meaning of the word נפש as an alternate word for גוף, body. We find something analogous in connection with Psalms 105,18 where the words ברזל באה נפשו, normally translated as “an iron collar put on his neck,” may be understood as describing a strong body as equivalent of a life force. [In the context there when Joseph’s encounter with Mrs Potiphar is described as Joseph trading “irons” for a “sword,” i.e.. he came close to being executed, losing his נפש, for allowing himself almost to be seduced by that woman, seeing he had provided her with that opportunity by being alone in the house with her. Ed.]
   Personally, (Nachmanides speaking) I think that the Torah has provided us with three meanings for the term דם, seeing that each time the penalty of <i>karet</i> is mentioned alongside. This teaches that unless we kept in mind all three parts of the definition we could not properly understand the subject.
   17,15. וכל נפש אשר יאכל נבלה וטרפה באזרח ובגר, “any person native or proselyte, that will eat a dead carcass (natural death) or a beast that had been torn and died as a result,” Ibn Ezra writes that in view of the Torah having written about animals not fit as sacrifices on the altar, it also mentions two other categories of animals that are in a state of being unfit for the altar, though under different circumstances those animals would have qualified as sacrificial offerings.
   18,2. דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel;” Nachmndes points out that seeing that the legislation following includes all segments of the people equally, the priests are not mentioned separately. The Torah introduces this chapter with the words: אני ה' אלוקיכם, as if to say: “when you speak to them tell them that you are speaking in My name.” There had been no need to spell this out more clearly seeing that whenever Moses came out of the Tabernacle without wearing his veil around his head, whatever he was going to say were instructions he had just received from <i>Hashem</i>, and he did not have to add the words: “thus <i>Hashem</i> has said.” Everybody knew that the spirit of the Lord was speaking out of Moses’ throat. There are many similar examples in the Book of Deuteronomy, paragraphs beginning with the words: והיה אם שמוע תשמעו אל מצותי, “it will be when you will surely listen, etc.,” when nobody misunderstood thinking that Moses was speaking about commandments issued by him instead of <i>Hashem.</i> The people were well aware that the promise of rainfall, to quote but one example, was not meant to mean that Moses would command the rain to fall.
   Ibn Ezra comments that the reason why the Torah, after having previously spoken about the demons, begins its admonition to the people not to walk in the footsteps of the Egyptians, is that these Egyptians had made a practice of offering sacrifices to these שערים, the demons. The reason that the practices of the people of Canaan were also singled out here as something the people of Israel should not try to emulate, was that these people were steeped very deeply in sexually perverted conduct, עריות. Our sages say that the Egyptians were no less guilty of sexually licentious conduct than were the Canaanites.
   18,4. את משפטי תעשו, “carry out My laws, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> says that whenever the Torah refers to G’d’s law as משפטי, what He means is that if He had not spelled out these laws in His Torah, the people themselves should have made laws like this in order to secure the continued existence of civilised society. This is why the Torah adds the otherwise superfluous words אשר יעשה אותם האדם וחי בהם, ”which mankind is to observe and live by them.”
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text the laws described as משפטים, are the ones written in Exodus chapters 21–24 that comprise in the main inter personal relationships known as מצות בין אדם לחברו. This is why the Torah adds the rider אשר יעשה אדם וחי בהם, ”that man is to carry out in order to live by these laws.” Failure to observe these laws results in anarchy.
   Our sages interpret the words וחי בהם as a promise that he who observes these laws will enjoy life in the world to come. In that event the words would refer to observing את חוקותי תשמורו, “to observe My statutes,” i.e. the ones whose rationale escapes us, for observance of which the Torah holds out he promise of success beyond this world, seeing that observing social justice is self fulfilling in our terrestrial universe, and does not need the assurance of וחי בהם. We must realize that when the Torah speaks of חיים, “life,” it does so on different occasions in different contexts, i.e. ”life on different levels” as is appropriate to the context in which the word appears. 
   @את משפטי תעשו, “you are to carry out My laws, etc.;” the reason why the משפטים were mentioned first is that once we observe these commandments i.e. performing justice tempered wit mercy, משפט וצדקה, it is easier to also perform the statutes which are basically acts of obedience and faith in the Creator. 
   18,6. איש איש אל כל-שאר בשרו, ”any man shall not approach his close relative, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the underlying reason for the legislation not to indulge in incestuous relationships has not been spelled out in the Torah. Maimonides claims in his Guide for the Perplexed (3,49) that the underlying reason is to minimize the frequency of indulging one’s libido, and with close relatives who may live in the same house such opportunities exist more than with potential sexual partners who live elsewhere. The subject is closely related to matters discussed in the <i>Sefer Yetzirah</i>, that the author claims not to have understood. Moreover the subject of sexual gratification contains animalistic elements at the same time as the fulfillment of the first commandment G’d gave man. Anyone who knows that in indulging his libido he will not or cannot fulfill that commandment must not indulge in sexual intercourse. Seeing that in order to fulfill the commandment to multiply, i.e. to have children, our libido has its positive part to play in the way the Creator arranged the human race, it was impossible to outlaw sexual activity altogether. He therefore legislated what from our vantage point may look like a compromise, but what from His vantage point no doubt reflects His superior wisdom. [Some of this wording is my own. Ed.]
   18,7. ערות אביך, “The nakedness of your father, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reference is to the wife of one’s father who is not one’s mother, whereas the words ערות אמך refer to one’s mother who was never married to your father (either because he raped her or they had illegitimate relations seeing that he was legally unable to marry her)
   Nachmanides adds that the Talmud in <i>Sanhedrin</i> 54 does not explain our verse in the manner <i>Rashi</i> does, but explains the scenario in terms of homosexual relations of son and father. Seeing that in the Talmud there is an opinion (Rabbi Yehudah) that reflects <i>Rashi’s</i> approach, the <i>R’osh</i>, our author’s father, writes that Rabbi Yehudah’s view appears closer to the plain meaning of the text. 
   Nachmanides’ own opinion is that the two statements ערות אביך and ערות אמך do not speak of parallel situations at all. The first warning is the prohibition not to sleep with one’s mother, because by doing so one violates one’s father’s nakedness, whereas the second warning mentioning one’s mother underlines the fact that in violating one’s father’s nakedness one at the same time violates one’s mother’s nakedness. One commits two evil deeds at one and the same time by perpetrating a single incestuous act.
   After the Torah warns regarding incestuous relations involving one’s father which is at the same time an incestuous relationship with one’s mother, the Torah comes back to forbidding incestuous relationships with the wife of one’s father who is not one’s mother by saying that one must not have such relations with one’s father’s wife because by doing so one would in effect commit incest with one’s father. Similar reasons are given by the Torah for forbidding such relations with the father’s brothers. The meaning of the line ערות אחי אחיך לא תגלה is: “do not have relations with the wife of your father’s brother.” This is why no mention was made specifically of the wife of such brother (uncle).
   18,9. מולדת בית או מולדת חוץ, “whether born to someone who may remain at home, or born to someone who must remain outside of it.” <i>Rashi</i> comments that the meaning of these words is: “regardless of whether one tells your father that: “you may keep her,” or whether one tells the father: ”you must divorce her.” [Compare <i>Yevamot</i> 23, an example being quoted being the <i>mamzeret,</i> an illegitimate offspring who we might have thought does not qualify as a “relative.“ Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text this is a warning not to have sexual relations with one’s mother’s half sister, from the same mother, regardless if such sister was born to a husband and wife, her sister’s husband having married also his wife’s half sister, or if she is the daughter of a totally illicit relationship. Had we not had this verse, we would have thought that as long as the sister in question had been born in wedlock that she deserves preferred treatment, i.e. that the Torah would not publicly shame her by this legislation. This is also the reason that the Torah additionally writes in the following verse about a half sister when the two only have the same father. The first half of that verse speaks of such a half sister born in wedlock, i.e. מולדת אביך. This was necessary, seeing that in the case of a half sister, the daughter of the same mother, the Torah had not spelled out this distinction. There had been an assumption that possibly sleeping with a daughter of one’s father that resulted from an illicit relationship might not be considered by the Torah as an incestuous relationship; the Torah therefore had to set the record straight telling us that such a relationship is forbidden under the heading of קורבה, incest with a relative. The line בת אביך מולדת אביך was written so that we would know that the first verse mentioning בת אביך does not speak of a father’s daughter sired with his legal wife.
   Seeing that in the rules of incest for non Jews such relationships apply only when they involve the mother rather than the father, the Torah went on record that amongst Israelites there is no such distinction, and both father and mother are considered on an equal footing when it comes to incest. It is therefore possible to incur the penalties for a single act of incestuous relations both because of violating the law not to sleep with one’s sister and with one’s father’s wife.
   18,17. שארה הנה זמה היא, “they are close relatives, it is an act of depravity.” Onkelos translates the word זמה as עצת חטאין, “a frivolous sinful plot.” The originator of this plot is the evil urge.
   Nachmanides writes that basically all acts of incest are the product of temptation by one’s evil urge, and the reason why in this particular instance the Torah mentions זמה, “an evil plot,” is that the word זמה is derived from זמם, an expression the Torah uses for witnesses who plot together to accuse an innocent party of having committed a major crime. (Deut. 19,19.) A devious, illicit plot is called זמה, or מזמה as we know from Job 42,2 and 31,11. Both those instances describe the planning stage of an activity. 
   I believe that the reason why the Torah chose the verse dealing with a man engaging in sexual relations with a mother and her daughter or her granddaughter to describe such as an evil plot, is because in both instances it is likely that when the man engaged in sexual relations with one of the parties he fantasized about having such relations with the mother or the daughter, as the case may be. In other words, while committing the one sin he was already planning the next sin. In other words, by doing so, both indulgences of that man had been turned into sinful planning by him. The words: כי שארה הנה “for they are ‘family,’” make it plain that the Torah considers the parties mentioned as ‘family”’ in the same sense as a wife is “שאר” of her husband [although not so by DNA standards. Ed.]
   18,18. ואשה אל אחותה לא תקח לצרור,” and you must not marry your wife’s sister to make them rivals.” Until you married your wife’s sister, these sisters maintained a very warm relationship with one another. As soon as you provided the basis for jealousy among them by marrying both, you broke up this relationship and turned them into enemies, each vying for your favour. [We only need to think of Rachel and Leah to know the truth of that piece of psychology. Ed.] This same consideration does not apply when a man treats both a mother and her daughter as his wife, even though in terms of DNA the relationship between mother and daughter is closer than that between two sisters. This is borne out by the fact that one may marry the sister of one’s wife if one’s wife has died, something that is forbidden in the case of a mother who is one’s wife dying and one wants to marry her daughter.
   18,19. ואל אשה בנדת טומאתה לא תקרב, “you shall not approach a woman (your own wife) during the time she is unclean through menstruation.” The Torah varied the term used for having sexual relations with one’s own wife during certain periods from לא תגלה ערותה to לא תקרב, seeing that one is constantly in the proximity of one’s own wife, and therefore a special effort is required not to run afoul of the prohibition to have relations with her. Therefore the Torah not only forbade intercourse but even touching one’s wife during those days, and that is why the Torah used the term לא תקרב “do not even come close!”
   Nachmanides writes that the reason for this prohibition is that basically, sexual intercourse is for the purpose of reproducing, for having children. Seeing that the embryo is fertilised by the mother’s blood, and it is a well known fact that during menstruation a woman’s body is unable to perform this function there is no point in her husband having relations with her during that period. Nachmanides adds that not only can a menstruating woman not produce or initiate life, but the blood oozing from her during that period is liable to kill any nascent life or afflict it with incurable disease.
   Furthemore, the scientists have told us of a true experiment, according to which a woman who is in an early state of menstruation who looks at a shiny mirror made of polished iron, that this mirror will reflect drops of blood, proving that the natural effect of her state is to create harmful substances which adhere to the surface of the mirror from the air she exhaled, making her similar to a lethal viper that can kill merely by looking at you. How much more so would she exhale harmful substances if one were to lie with her and be intimate with her. Because of all these reasons the Torah decreed a kind of isolation on such a woman, describing her state of impurity as a special impurity known as טומאת הנדה, and her state of contamination is compared to that conferred by contact with certain שרצים, four-legged vermin, and to the contamination conferred by someone afflicted with <i>tzoraat</i> whose ritual impurity is anchored in his body. [Our sages, as was their custom, accepted the results of the most recent findings of science in their time, especially in view of the fact that Jews in their time did not possess scientists of their own. This Editor has published an article exposing that <i>halachah</i> was erroneously based on such mistaken scientific findings in connection with the need to allow river water to cool off for 12 hours before using it to make the dough for <i>matzot</i> for Passover. Compare my book “the Just lived by his faith<i>,” as</i> well as the translation in Hebrew published by <i>Heychal Shlomoh</i> in שנה בשנה in תשנ'ד. Such a woman remains forbidden to her husband, and is generally in a state of ritual impurity until she has immersed herself in a ritual bath. 
   18,20. ואל אשת עמיתך לא תתן שכבתך לזרע, “and you must not lie carnally with the wife of your neighbour or colleague to defile yourself with her.” Ibn Ezra writes that cohabitation is an act that can be for one or more of three different purposes. 1) It is intended to impregnate one’s partner with one’s seed so as to produce offspring. 2) It may be designed to relieve oneself of excess pressures (moisture in the parlance of the author) built up in the body. 3) It can be engaged in so as to satisfy one’s lust, an act reducing man to the level of the beasts. The reason that the Torah adds the word לזרע, is to tell us that even when it is engaged in for an otherwise noble purpose, it is totally inadmissible when engaged in with someone else’s wife.
    Nachmanides writes that the reason the Torah added the word לזרע in our verse, is to remind us that if this were permitted, the father (and mother, if she is promiscuous) of any child resulting from such insemination would not know who the true father of such a child is. As a result of such lack of knowledge the earth would become full of abominations resulting from incestuous relationships even by Torah observing people. This is why the Talmud in <i>Sotah</i> 26 in commenting on Numbers 5,13 ושכב איש אותה שכבת זרע, “if some man has cohabited with her and left his sperm in her,” explains that the additional words שכבת זרע mean that if the wife is suspected of perverted sexual relations which could not result in her insemination, that she would not be given the special waters in order to determine if her professions of innocence were true. [it might explain the deceived husband’s rage, suspicion, as he would never know if the child his wife bears is his own. Ed.] This may also be the reason why Torah adds the words:שכבת זרע in Leviticus 19,20 as there too a doubt would surface about the paternity of any child born by that servant woman. In that instance even coitus interruptus is culpable, as the chance of a drop of semen having entered the vagina cannot be discounted.
   Personally, I feel (Nachmanides writing) that seeing that a married woman is totally out of bounds to any other man for any kind of intimacy, the words שכבת זרע or לזרע are perfectly justified, seeing that if the Torah had only written לא תתן שכבתך, I might have deduced that even if these two people had only kissed or embraced each other they would already have committed a capital offence. Therefore, the Torah added a word that clearly defines the offence as lying carnally with one another. The reason that in our verse the Torah omitted the customary words לגלות ערותה, “to reveal her nakedness”, is that this is a term fit to be used only in connection with people who are genetically related to one another.
   18,21. למולך, “to the <i>Moloch</i>.” Nachmanides writes that this word represents a certain type of idolatry, and the reason that the Torah dignifies this type of idolatry by using the prefix ה i.e. the vowel <i>patach</i> at the beginning which substitutes for the definitive article “the,” is due to the fact that this particular idolatry was extremely well known in Egypt, where the Israelites had become familiar with it.
   Ibn Ezra writes that it is possible that it was the chief deity of the people בני עמון, and may have been known to the Israelites as such.
   @לא תתן להעביר למולך, “do not present them to the <i>Moloch.</i> The reason why the Torah employs the expression תתן, “give,” as well as the term העברה, ”transfer,” means that culpability for violating this injunction begins only when both of these acts have been perpetrated. The second stage of that cult involves handing a child over to fire, <i>Moloch</i> being the fire-god. In other words, the father hands over his child to the priests of that cult.
   Nachmanides adds that the word להעביר is not to be understood as the priests of that cult making the child brave a ring of fire, risking burning his feet, as portrayed <i>by Rashi,</i> for how could the father be guilty of death when a priest of another religion performed this act? Moreover the wording of the verse clearly means that the father of the child himself performed whatever act the Torah describes. Rather, the father may hand over his child to these idolatrous priests, who, in turn perform some sort of ceremony like swinging the child over fire, before restoring it to the father. 
   [There appears a certain amount of confusion as to precisely what these rites were and as a result we do not know for which violation the father would be guilty of death. In light of this I have decided not to elaborate on the subject any further. Ed.] The Torah, by using the word חלול in connection with this barbarous cult makes plain that it is a cult which desecrates the sanctity of all human life, hence the Torah’s extreme opposition to this cult.
   18,22. ואת זכר לא תשכב, “and you are not to indulge in homosexual relations with another male.” Nachmanides writes that the reason for the injunctions against sexual relations between males, and between man and beasts, are quite clear, seeing that G’d abhors such mismatching of His creatures. Such relations cannot contribute to the continued existence of the respective species, the only valid reason for indulging in the sexual act.
   Ibn Ezra writes that seeing that the older daughter of Lot said to her younger sister (Genesis 19,34) “here I have slept with my father last night, etc.,” this is clear proof that the Torah views initiation of the act by the female of the species as on the same level as if the male initiates it, i.e. when a forbidden relationship is entered into both parties are equally culpable. Although the Torah uses the masculine לא תשכב in our verse, the same applies to the female of the spies, i.e. lesbianism is also prohibited.
   Nachmanides criticizes Ibn Ezra, saying that if he were correct why was the woman not automatically included in the warning of ובכל בהמה לא תתן שכבתך לטמאה בה, “you must not inject your seed into any female animal to lie with it carnally,” and mention separately immediately afterwards:ואשה לא תעמוד לפני בהמה לרבעה, “and a woman must not stand in front of an animal for the purpose of mating, etc,?” He therefore concludes that the verse quoted by Ibn Ezra from Genesis 19,34 means that Lot’s daughter drew attention to the fact that seeing that ejaculation of semen by the male normally occurs only as a result of physical activity by the male, something which in the case of the drunken Lot could hardly be expected, she told her sister that in order to secure the semen that both of them wanted, it was not enough to remain passive during the procedure, but they had to be physically active to arouse their father.
   18,25. ותטמא הארץ ואפקוד עונה, “the land became contaminated and I recalled its inequity upon it.” Nachmanides writes that the extremely harsh attitude of the Torah to people violating the laws of incest and sexual perversions is due to the fact that the very earth of the land of Israel is revolted by such behaviour and will seek ways and means to eject people from it that so abuse their virility. The commandments involving incest and sexual perversions are commandments involving one’s body, and apply universally, wherever we are, so that we may wonder why the Torah linked non-observance to the Canaanites being ejected by that land, and the Torah threatening a similar rejection by the land to the Jewish people if they did not observe higher moral standards? 
   We must understand this in terms of the concept that what goes on in our world has parallels in the celestial regions. When the Creator created the universe, He imbued certain celestial forces with the ability to strongly affect the affairs in the terrestrial universe. Thus He appointed a “שר,” minister, for each of the nations of the earth who represented their interests in the celestial spheres. In our parlance this is part of the discipline known as astrology. Celestial bodies, their constellations, the times at which each appears in the sky and where in the sky, all play a role in the fates of these nations. All this occurs under the guidance of the Supreme Authority, <i>Hashem</i>, seeing that these bodies are not free to vary their orbits. 
   In Daniel 10,13 we read as follows: ושר מלכות פרס עמד לנגדי עשרים ואחד יום, והנה מיכאל אחד השרים הראשונים בא לעזרני, “but the heavenly prince of the Persian kingdom stood opposed to me for twenty one days; when behold! Michael one of the foremost heavenly princes came to my aid.” Daniel describes a confrontation between the heavenly forces appointed on behalf of the Persian Kingdom and the people of Israel, and describes that if not for the intervention of Michael, an angel appointed to look after the special interests of Israel, the opposing forces might have prevailed. The representatives of these various nations are described as מלכים kings, G’d by comparison being known as מלך מלכי המלכים, the King who is the supreme King,” just as we have the term אלוקי האלוקים, “the Supreme Divinity,” indicating that there are forces that are also perceived as divine but on a much lower level. When Avraham in his prayer for the good people of Sodom, if any, speaks of השופט כל הארץ לא יעשה משפט?, “is the One Who is in charge of Justice in the whole universe not going to perform justice?” He implies that there are forces, divinely appointed, to dispense justice in their narrow domain. The important thing to remember is that above all these “kings”: or “ministers” appointed by G’d as His agents to look after the affairs of the nations of the earth, exclude Israel. There is a Supreme Being from whom all the others receive the parameters of their authority. The Land of Israel, in this respect, has always had rules of its own, as we know best from when the King of Assyria transplanted nations to that land to fill the void created through the exile of the Ten Tribes, and these nations fell victim to lions, etc., until they learned by experience that in order to survive on that land they had to adopt different mores. (Compare <i>Baba Kamma</i> 38 based on Kings II 17, 24-34) In short, seeing that the land of Canaan, even before the land was occupied by the Canaanites, was נחלת ה', a special land set aside for the Jewish people, this land tolerated deviant behaviour much less than other lands not predestined for G’d’s personal supervision. [I have condensed and rephrased some of this in the interest of brevity. Ed.] If we needed further proof of the above, consider the fact that our matriarch Rachel died a premature death immediately after crossing the boundary of this land. Yaakov’s having married two sisters while both were alive, something forbidden by the Torah (after it was revealed to the Jewish people) did not apparently bother G’d while Yaakov had not yet crossed the boundary into the Land of Israel. The moment he did, G’d applied stricter yardsticks to the mode of conduct expected of him and her. Apparently she had become pregnant with Binyamin before they had reached Shechem, otherwise who knows if Binyamin would have not have died with her. Consider also, that once in that land, Yaakov ordered his servants to dispose totally of any objects that had ever been used as objects of idolatry. (Genesis 35,2)
   The fact that the Torah while speaking of the punishment of the Canaanites did not list where they had been warned about their sexual depravity, is proof that all of mankind had been warned about this ever since first man was given the 7 basic commandments of conduct on G’d’s earth. The very fact that the Torah testifies to the Egyptians having been guilty of similar excesses but they were never expelled from their country, proves that different rules of tolerance apply on the soil of <i>Eretz Yisrael</i>
   Further proof of the special status of the soil of the Holy Land, is the fact that the כותים whom the Assyrian King had transplanted to the land formerly occupied by the Ten Tribes had never been punished by G’d when they had worshipped the same deities in the country of their origin. 
   We should also consider the statements of our sages <i>Ketuvot</i> 110 that anyone residing permanently outside the Land of Israel is considered as not having a “G’d,” i.e. Divine protection. Gentiles, especially while in their own countries, are allowed to co-opt deities such as horoscopes as long as they recognise <i>Hashem</i> as the Supreme G’d and Creator. When the sages said: “as if they had no G’d,” they meant that the fates of such people were not presided over by <i>Hashem</i> personally, but that they were subject to <i>mazzolot</i>, astrological constellations, etc., something that is not the case for people living in <i>Eretz Yisrael</i> of which G’d has said that He has His eyes on it from the beginning of the year till the end of the year (Deut. 11,12). You must not counter that the verse from Daniel we quoted before in which Michael is described as the שר ישראל, the angel appointed by G’d as especially in charge of protecting the Jewish people, proves that they were not under the direct guidance of <i>Hashem.</i> First of all, the function of that angel is to implore <i>Hashem</i> to use His mercy on behalf of His people; secondly, the Jewish people with whom Daniel associated were all in exile, most of them in voluntary exile, at least after Cyrus ascended the Persian throne having defeated the Babylonians, and having enabled the return to Zion under Zerubavel. 52 years after the destruction of the Temple. [Jews who chose to remain in Persia, even under the premiership of Mordechai were a primary target of the statement we quoted from <i>Ketuvot</i> 110 that “Jews who live outside the Holy Land are considered as if they had no G’d.” Ed.]
   @ותקיא, “it spit out, etc.” Once the measure of their sin which G’d was prepared to tolerate if they would repent, had become full, the fact that G’d decreed their destruction is considered by the Torah as if that decree had already been carried out. Alternately, the word ותקיא in the past tense, applies to the parallel phenomenon in the celestial regions. We have a similar statement in Numbers 14,9 when the impression by the majority of the spies that the land consumes its inhabitants was interpreted by Joshua and Calev as evidence that the protection of that nation’s guardian angel, described as צלם, had already abandoned this people so that they would fall into the hands of the Israelites like ripe plums. 
   18,29. ונכרתו הנפשות העושות מקרב עמם, “all the people committing such violations will be cut off from their people. Nachmanides writes that the penalty known as <i>karet</i> by the Torah, comprises three different aspects. The first type of that penalty is meant when the Torah describes it as applied to ונכרת האיש ההוא, “the man in question will be cut off.” (Example Exodus 30,33, where the making of incense of the kind used in the Tabernacle is punished with this penalty.)
   The second type of <i>karet</i> is the type described in our verse, and the third type is meant when the Torah prefaces it with the words הכרת תכרת הנפש ההיא עונה בה, (compare Numbers 15,31 where the Torah speaks of people blaspheming deliberately.) There is another, differently worded such penalty mentioned in connection with violating the Day of Atonement in Leviticus 23,30 where the Torah writes והאבדתי את הנפש ההיא, which means the same as והכרתי הנפש ההיא, “I will utterly destroy that person from membership in its people.” The <i>Torat Kohanim</i> explains that the word <i>karet</i> does not always mean that the hereafter of the person, נפש, so punished is automatically forfeited. This is why the Torah in Leviticus 23,30 used a variant. There is a difference in the application of the <i>karet</i> penalty if the person guilty of that particular violation had been driven by a craving to eat forbidden fat or blood, for instance, and that person in his overall lifestyle is very Torah-observant. In such a situation, the many merits he has accumulated protect him against the aspects of the <i>karet</i> penalty that extend beyond death, and he is punished by premature death in this life without losing his share in the hereafter. Shortening such a lifespan usually means death before reaching the age of 60, just as the people of the generation of the Exodus died before reaching 60, hence they had to stay in the desert for 40 years.
   On the other hand, as we know from personal observation, there are many wicked Jews who live well beyond the age of 60 on this earth. This does not mean that their sins have been overlooked, but that instead of applying that penalty to the physical parts of their lives, G’d has seen fit to reward them for their good deeds with long life on earth so that He does not have to reward them for such deeds after their deaths. The last mentioned group of people comprises most of the gentiles who practice the licentious sexual mores condemned by the Torah, and as a rule, after their physical death they experience painful punishment for a period of up to 12 months after which time their bodily remains are utterly destroyed and their souls are burned, their spirit being scattered under the soles of the feet of the righteous.
   There is a yet harsher type of the <i>karet</i> penalty in which both body and soul are utterly destroyed. It is applied to people whom the Torah in Numbers 15,30 described asאת דבר ה' בזה ואת מצותו הפר הכרת תכרת וגו', “he deliberately blasphemed <i>Hashem,</i> and violated His commandments. The use of the root כרת twice in that verse means that such people will not only be uprooted from this world but also from all parts of the hereafter. The only sins concerning which this word is used twice are idolatry and blasphemy. 
   Our sages elaborated on this subject still further in tractate <i>Shavuot,</i> saying that also included in this harsh application of the <i>karet</i> penalty are people who deliberately mislead others by interpreting Torah in a manner that contradicts the <i>halachah.</i> Such people will not only die prematurely but they will not have any share in the eventual resurrection of the dead. Nor will they experience life in the hereafter, i.e. a life of the disembodied soul. We should remember that when the Torah uses expressions that deny some people life in the hereafter, this is the best proof of the fact that there exists such life. Otherwise, what does the sinner stand to lose by his rebellious conduct? Verses dealing with such penalties reinforce our belief in reward for good deeds being paid after our life on earth has come to an end. By saying that some souls will be cut off from what awaits them in the hereafter, the Torah is in effect saying that for the ordinary Jew much that is worth looking forward to is in store for them after their bodies have died. The word כרת is meant to conjure up in our minds the picture of a tree some of whose branches and leaves are being chopped off. Instead of the Torah speaking openly of a life in the hereafter, something we are to regard as natural, the Torah warns that sinners of certain categories will be miraculously denied that which is a natural state for the human being who lived in accordance with the Creator’s wishes.
   We have already explained elsewhere that all the promises of pleasant developments or the threats of disastrous events in the future which are spelled out in the Torah, must not be viewed as natural developments but as proof of Divine intervention in the fates of either the individual or the Jewish nation. This is why the Torah, when warning against violating the legislation involving incest, etc., speaks of the unnatural penalty of unnatural כרת, something which cannot be explained away as a natural development in terms of evolution, regression or whatever.
   There are thirty six sins which carry the penalty of <i>karet,</i> the vast majority of them involving violations of G’d’s sexual mores for man. Our sages do not tire of lumping together idolatry, shedding of innocent blood, and violating sexual mores, even between what are nowadays called “consenting adults,” as the most serious sins a Jew can become guilty of. Of the three, גלוי עריות, offences involving our libido, is always mentioned ahead of such crimes as murder, to show how abhorrent such a sin is in the eyes of the Creator.
   Maimonides writes in his <i>Moreh Nevuchim</i> section 3, chapter 41 that seeing man’s libido is a powerful drive, only the threat of terrible punishments is likely to act as a restraining influence on us.
   Parshat Kedoshim
   19,2. קדושים תהיו, ”you shall be holy;” Our sages in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> state that this was one of the portions of the Torah which was read out in public once every seven years on <i>Sukkot</i> on the occasion of “<i>hakhel,</i>” the public reading of the Torah by the King before the assembled nation, men women and children (compare Deuteronomy 31,10, the penultimate of the 613 commandments). The reason was that it contains so many of the basic laws of the Torah, such as the laws about offering personal voluntary peace-offerings, the penalty for disregarding the laws abut incest and sexual mores. We must understand that holiness can only develop as a result of abstaining from all the items that the Torah has described as an abomination in the eyes of <i>Hashem.</i>
   Nachmanides writes that he has examined the wording in his edition of the <i>Torat</i> Kohanim, and has not found anything spelled out there about being especially פרוש, i.e. keeping one’s distance from the subject covered by sexual mores, but that we are to be generally פרושים, discreet, and discriminating in our conduct, as a result of which holiness will develop. [My edition of the <i>Torat Kohanim</i>, printed in <i>Torah Shleymah</i> bears out what Nachmanides writes. Ed.] G’d is quoted as saying: “just as I keep apart (from contact with what is unbecoming, so shall you keep yourself apart from contact with matters that are unbecoming for you.” It follows that the subject of פרישות includes abstaining and keeping one’s distance from all the subject matter mentioned in the Talmud as subject to such warnings by our sages. 
   Nachmanides uses as an example the fact that whereas on the one hand, the Torah has permitted sexual intercourse, it imposed limitations with whom such sexual intercourse may be indulged in, similarly, it has also permitted the eating of foods which are palatable and non poisonous, but has imposed limitations in forbidding Jews foods which gentiles clearly enjoy without apparent harmful effects. Holiness, if aspired to, is therefore possible by imposing upon oneself restrictions and not considering everything that has not been expressly forbidden as permitted, but to train oneself to be moderate in enjoying the material attractions the world has to offer. These attractions may be enjoyed when they are intended to make the performance of a commandment more meaningful both esthetically and artistically, for instance. A person intent on attaining a level of holiness would not seek out such attractions for their own sake. [When someone loves silver trinkets and collects them, this does not further his path to attaining holiness, although he did not do something forbidden. If, however, he indulges his whim by buying beautiful <i>ethrog</i> boxes, <i>mezuzah</i> housings, <i>kiddush</i> cups, etc., then he may at one and the same time indulge his sense of what is esthetically beautiful, and come closer to attaining degree of holiness.
   Our sages, in limiting the frequency of marital relations with one’s wife even, suggested that a Torah scholar limit himself to such marital intercourse once a week, while an ordinary uneducated worker is allowed to indulge in such activity more often. (Compare <i>Chagigah</i> 18, <i>Berachot,</i> 22 and other places in the Talmud) Nachmanides points out that it is possible not to violate a single one of the 613 commandments in the Torah and still not only to remain far from “holy,” but to continue to be a gross and uncouth individual, eating to excess, drinking to excess, indulging in legally permitted sex at every opportunity, etc.
   If the ideal of a Torah personality could be the result of merely not violating any of the 613 commandments, Moses would not have had to write in Deut. 6,18 ועשית הישר והטוב בעיני ה', “do what is fair and good in the eyes of <i>Hashem.”</i> In<i> halachic</i> parlance, our approach to life should be to act לפנים משורת הדין, “to stay well within what is allowable legally.” The meaning of the dictate in our verse therefore is:
   @כי קדוש אני ה' אלוקיכם, “for I, the Lord your G’d am holy.” Naturally, G’d did not expect that we, the creatures, become like He, the Creator. But, He hopes and expects that we will try and emulate as many of His characteristics as it is possible for us to emulate, seeing we are only creatures. By doing this we can achieve דבקות, a measure of close attachment to the Divine, something the Torah encouraged us to do on several occasions (compare Deut. 10,20; 11,22; 30,20) In a way, this was the message of G’d revealing Himself to us in the first of the Ten Commandments.
   19,3. איש אמו ואביו תיראו, ”everyone is to revere his mother and his father.” Whereas in the Ten Commandments the Torah demands that one honour one’s parents, there the demand to honour one’s father precedes the demand to honour one’s mother. The Torah continues:
   @את שבתותי תשמורו, “you are to observe My Sabbath days.” Comparison with the Ten Commandments shows that the emphasis was on ”remembering” the Sabbath, not on observing it, i.e. not to violate the restrictions in one’s activities that apply on the Sabbath.
   19,4. אל תפנו אל האלילים, “Do not turn to the idols!” The injunction here is addressed to the mind rather than to the hands and feet that carry out the desires of the heart and mind. We are commanded to totally discount any supposed influence so-called deities have on anyone’s fate, future, etc. We must remain firmly convinced that our future depends exclusively on decrees made by the Creator in heaven.
   @ואלוהי מסכה לא תעשו לכם, “and molten gods you must not make for yourselves.!” The warning here is that culpability for idolatry does not start at the moment one worships idols, but already when one sets out to construct such an idol with the intent to worship it. In Vay<i>ikra Rabbah</i> these verses are all explained as being patterned on the Ten Commandments. The Torah continues:
   19,5. וכי תזבחו זבח שלמים, “when you set out to slaughter a peace-offering, etc.” After the Torah had forbidden slaughtering and any other aspect of idol worship, it now addresses our desire to offer gifts to the Deity by telling us that the proper address for such offerings if we want it to be welcome, is only the attribute of <i>Hashem.</i> More to the point, contrary to what the naïve human being thinks that such an offering is something the Deity needs or desires, the Torah reminds us that the sole purpose of such a peace-offering is to secure a condition of grace for ourselves; no offering impacts on the Deity in the least, seeing that <i>Hashem</i> is totally self-sufficient. What could man possibly give to the Creator who is the One who has given everything we have to us? The reason why the Torah makes this point in conjunction with the offerings known as שלמים, peace-offerings, is that most of the meat of these animals may be consumed by the owners of the offering rather than by the priests, and it need not be consumed on consecrated grounds but the entire city of Jerusalem is considered holy enough for eating what are known as קדשים קלים, sacrificial meats of a relatively low level of sanctity.
   Another reason may be that only Israelites are allowed to offer this type of sacrificial offering altogether. Gentiles who are allowed to offer burnt offerings are not allowed to offer peace offerings at all. [On the altar of the Tabernacle or Temple, Ed.]
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why in our chapter the demand to accord reverence for the mother precedes the demand to do the same for one’s father, is that a young child in his early years gets to know the mother intimately whereas it does not establish such a close relationship with its father as yet. The next major focus of a young child is the Sabbath, seeing that it is a duty to train even youngsters in the observance of the Sabbath. The same is not true of the other festivals. Having become familiar with the concept of the Sabbath, the youngster next becomes familiar with the concept of G’d, the Creator, the lawgiver, who rested on the seventh day. Having become familiar with these concepts the youngster is introduced to the need to be in awe of the Creator. The Torah does not repeat the word איש in front of each piece of legislation. It uses the plural mode תיראו when legislating the need to be in awe of parents as well as of the invisible G’d, to remind us that it is every Israelite’s duty to implant such feelings in a fellow Jew; it is not merely the parents’ business to do so. Deviants have to be forced to toe the line when in public. Public desecration of the Sabbath, for instance, is not to be tolerated in a Jewish state or even in exile that is self-governing.
   The reason why the Torah concludes verse four with the words אני ה' אלוקיכם, is to remind us that the reason why G’d wants us to rest on the Sabbath is because He Himself rested on the first Sabbath and interrupted His creative activities on account of the sanctity of that day.
   Still quoting Ibn Ezra, the reason for the words אל תפנו אל אלילים, “[something that sounds like a repetition of previous legislation on the subject, Ed.] is that we must not even briefly look at such displays of pagan deities.
   The reason the Torah repeats the injunction of אלוהי מסכה לא תעשה לך, not to make yourself a molten image, is simply to reassure you that you have no need for any additional celestial assist. By saying אני ה' אלוקיכם, <i>Hashem</i> tells us that He, and only He, will look after our needs.
   The reason that the Torah writes (verse 9) that we must not completely harvest every last stalk of our fields, immediately after speaking about the peace-offerings, is to draw a comparison between gifts we offer to <i>Hashem</i> such as the fat parts of the peace-offerings, and the gifts we leave for the poor. Giving to the poor is another way of honouring <i>Hashem,</i> who has also made the poor. After having dealt with the need to voluntarily leave gifts for the poor and the stranger (proselyte) who has not yet established an economic base for himself, the Torah enjoins us not to steal, as a corollary of voluntarily giving to the poor. If we even share with the poor what we are in the habit as considering as ours, how much less may we deprive anyone of what is rightfully his by stealing from him? The Torah phrases this legislation also in the plural mode to teach that anyone observing someone stealing and not protesting is as if he had aided and abetted the thief.
   The Torah continues by warning us not to lie actively or passively, nor to keep silent when we know that someone else lies or cheats. (Verse 12) The injunction not to swear a false oath, i.e. involving G’d Himself in one’s sin by using His name in vain when denying one’s transgression, is added as a warning that sinning leads to denying the sin, which in turn results in desecrating the name of the Lord publicly, one of the most serious sins possible. Here too, the plural mode is used to involve the party demanding that the second one confirm his claims by swearing in the name of <i>Hashem.</i>
   19,14. לא תקלל חרש, “do not curse a deaf person.” The Talmud in <i>Sanhedrin</i> 66 points out that the Torah has forbidden cursing notables such as judges and kings, when it wrote אלהים לא תקלל ונשיא בעמך already in Exodus 22,27, and here it equally forbids cursing less prominent people, even those who cannot hear that they are being cursed. Once even a deaf person is included in this legislation it is clear that one must not curse anyone.
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text the Torah warned against cursing the deaf, as seeing that the fact that he cannot hear the curse he cannot feel insulted or enraged by it, it follows that one must not curse people who can hear the curse and who will feel shamed by it.
   Furthermore, as is the Torah’s custom, the example for legislation selected is always something near at hand, i.e. people feel free to curse the deaf and to trip up the blind as they are not afraid of being identified and being called to account for this. This is why the Torah had to add:ויראת מאלוקיך, “you shall fear your G’d,” i.e. He will see and punish what people do not see or do not hear. Cursing rulers, something which usually takes place in the privacy of one’s home where one is not overheard is in addition something pernicious, as it is usually motivated by one’s personal pique against such a ruler, while one forgets that the exercise by this ruler of his appointed functions is what prevents our society from degenerating into anarchy. This is why the Torah felt the need to spell out an additional prohibition against cursing dignitaries, although the law could have been derived logically from our verse alone.
   19,16. לא תלך רכיל, “do not be a gossipmonger.” According to Nachmanides Onkelos’ translation of these words as לא תיכול קורצין, describes someone raising his voice. Yonathan similarly renders קרא בגרון, in Isaiah 58,1 as אכלי בגרונך, “call out loudly with your throat.” He quotes more examples of translating רכיל as something involving making something public by means of sound. An alternate rendering describes רכילות as publication of the information through unmistakable gestures with one’s eyes.
   @לא תעמוד על דם רעך, “do not stand idly by when the blood of your fellow is being shed.” Seeing that the Torah does not link these two injunctions by the letter ו, i.e. ולא תעמוד וגו', some commentators believe that the entire verse contains one single prohibition, the latter half of the verse being the interpretation of the first half. The meaning would then be: do not carry tales in order that in the end you will not stand by idly when your fellow’s blood will be spilled. It is assumed that he who accepts slander against his fellow, i.e. believes the accusation, will out of anger take physical action against the person whom he perceives to have been guilty of what the slanderer accused him of. This is why our sages said that לשון הרע, “slander eventually kills three people.” (<i>Tanchuma, Metzora,</i> 2)
   19,17. לא תשנא את אחיך בלבבך, “do not hate your brother in your heart.” Some commentators interpret this line as “if you see your fellow man commit some sin do not say to yourself: ‘I wish he would continue in this way,’ but remonstrate with him and try to get him to desist and to improve his ways.
   Nachmanides writes that seeing the Torah uses real life examples, i.e. people keeping their disapproval of others or even hatred of others to themselves, the Torah urges that If one has a legitimate reason to disapprove of one’s neighbour’s lifestyle, one should not bottle this up within oneself, but should discuss it openly with the party concerned so as to give him a chance to mend his ways.
   @ולא תשא עליו חטא, “so that you will not bear a sin on account of him.” If your fellow sins because you did not call his error to his attention, you will share in his sin. Not only this, but the Torah adds that you are obligated to love your fellow man.” (Verse 18)
   Personally, I believe that the correct interpretation of our verse, i.e. the words הוכח תוכיח את עמיתך, is similar to when Avraham remonstrated with Avimelech. (Genesis 21,25) He remonstrated with Avimelech who had allowed his, Avraham’s wells to be either shut down or to be claimed by his own people as theirs, instead of bearing a grudge in his heart against Avimelech. The result was an agreement between the two. When such rebuke is administered with discretion it may often result in resolving a dispute.
   Having advised us not to bear grudges without first having voiced our grievances, the Torah also instructs us not to harbour feelings of revenge for injustices real or unproven. Having taught us not to entertain negative feelings against our fellows, the Torah proceeds to demand that we relate positively to them, i.e ואהבת לרעך כמוך. You will note that the Torah does not write רעך, but לרעך. Had the Torah written the word רעך, it would have meant that we are instructed to love our fellow man’s body, his person as much as our own, an impossible task. As it is, the Torah demands that we relate to our fellowman’s possessions with the same degree of concern as we do to our own possessions. You should be as concerned for the welfare of your fellowman as for your own,
   19,18. לא תקום, “Do not take revenge.” An example of revenge meant here is that if your neighbour refused to lend you any of his tools, and he turns to you some day asking you to lend him yours, you are not to justify your refusal to lend him your tools by saying that seeing he did not lend you his tools when you needed them, you now do not lend him yours either. Some people ask why the Torah criticizes the second party for his refusal to lend, without saying a word about the behaviour of the first party who had started the chain reaction by refusing to lend his tools in the first place? The answer given is that the first party, who obviously is a miser, while not acting as a good neighbour, had not violated a law as it says nowhere that one must lend one’s tools, however, he who basically is willing to lend his tools to neighbours, refuses to this neighbour only as an act of revenge. This is not tolerated. It is a negative virtue. His refusal stems from feelings of hatred.
   Some people answer the above question by saying that it is clear that the first one will be punished more harshly so that there is no need to spell this out, seeing he had started the chain of reciprocal unfriendliness. We have a tradition that the plague of <i>tzoraat</i> occurs, among other reasons, as retaliation for miserly conduct, withholding help from one’s neighbour being one such example.
   19,19. בהמתך לא תרביע כלאים, “You must not mate your animal with another species.” Ibn Ezra writes that the Torah links the laws of not interbreeding species and the encouragement to become holy in order to make the point that after you have become a holy nation you must not commit violent acts against any person sharing your beliefs, and you must not even forcefully interfere with the animals’ natural way of behaviour which is, after all, the way they have been programmed to behave by the Creator. Animals are more loyal to the rules laid down for His creatures than man is.
   <i>Rashi</i> writes that the prohibition against cross breeding must be seen as a Divine decree, G’d did not see fit to give us His reasons.
   Nachmanides writes that the sages did not write anywhere that the underlying reasons for this legislation have been deliberately hidden, giving the evil urge and the gentiles a chance to ridicule and undermine our faith in the Creator. Whereas such an argument is true with respect to the prohibition to mix wool and linen, [but not other fibers, Ed.] the reason for not mixing different seeds in a vineyard, or not crossbreeding species of animals are not at all a challenge to [test of, Ed.] our faith. 
   On the one hand, all G’d’s laws, [especially those regulating our conduct <i>vis a vis</i> Him seeing that they emanate from a higher intelligence, are of a kind whose true intent we are unable to fathom, Ed.] are beyond our ability to fully comprehend, as opposed to the laws governing inter-personal relations which we are expected to try and understand.
   However, we are encouraged in many instances to examine some aspects of how the חוקים are beneficial to our successful existence on this earth. We must not make observance of these laws conditional on our understanding their usefulness.
   There appears to be a perfectly rational reason for the legislation of forbidding crossbreeding, both of animals and plants. The Creator enabled each species to perpetuate itself by planting its seed in the appropriate counterpart. Crossbreeding, in the vast majority of cases, would foil the Creator’s plan, and such species would die out, as their seed would not produce any issue or issue that was capable of sustaining itself. G’d provided the seed to these creatures in order to enable His universe to endure as planned. Any activity that puts the Creator’s intent at risk, is therefore forbidden, is an act of insurrection if persisted in. This is the reason why already at the time of reporting creation, the Torah stresses again and again the words למינו and למיניהם, “according to its species,” or “according to their species.” He who interferes with this obviously finds fault with the Creator, implicitly criticizes Him. G’d does not need His creatures’ help in perfecting His universe, He is content if His creatures do not ruin it. We know from experience that even if apparently well matched human beings mate with one another, especially those forbidden under the rules of incest, any children from such unions are liable to intensify genetic defects which no human being is totally without. In other words, not only do totally different species not reproduce when crossbred, but, even members of the same species fail to reproduce satisfactorily if the rules of the Torah are not followed. Who would know best what is good for us if not He Who had created us?
   When the Torah enlarges this prohibition by writing שדך לא תזרע כלאים, “you must not scatter more than one type of seed in your field,” it includes even relatively simple plants in its regulations. Our sages expressed their conviction that violating this commandment will be found detrimental to the farmer’s interest, even if he thought that he would benefit through such a stratagem. Our sages (<i>Bereshit Rabbah</i> 10,7) have illustrated their approach to the whole subject when they told us that there is not a single species of plant which does not have its own <i>mazzal</i>, i.e protective guardian angel appointed in the heavens. Clearly, such a statement refers only to species created by G’d, not to new species created by man. Such species are without any heavenly protection. 
   @ובגד כלאים שעטנז, “and a garment consisting of a mixture of lamb’s wool fibers and linen fibers, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason for this prohibition –which singles out wearing a garment made of such mixture, not the making of the mixture- is that we must learn to keep our distance from species that have been mixed. One of the mystical aspects of the prohibition is that when we in our nether regions don garments made of such forbidden mixtures, we upset even the separation of the species in the heavenly regions. When the sages allowed such mixture to be part of the priests’ garments, this simply means that while engaged in service to G’d commanded by Him, we do not need to fear the negative emanations that such forbidden mixtures inject into our universe. [Compare this editor’s translation of the commentary by Rabbeinu Bachya page 1745, volume 5, Ed.]
   <i>Halachic</i> authorities discuss if this prohibition extends to felt containing such mixture of linen and wool fibers, and other details of the finer points of this legislation. Generally speaking, such combinations are considered as forbidden only by Rabbinical decree, seeing the materials were not properly interwoven.
   19,20. ואיש כי ישכב את אשה, “If a man lies carnally with a woman, etc.” the reason why this verse follows the subject of forbidden mixtures of species is that lying carnally with a woman not one’s wife is another type of mixing forbidden species with one another.
   @והיא שפחה נחרפת לאיש, “she being a servant woman (gentile slave) designated for an Israelite man, etc.” The term נחרפת is subject to different interpretations, as is the status of the woman in question.
   [I am providing some background here not found in the author’s commentary, seeing the author concentrates more on the linguistic meaning of the word: נחרפת Ed.] 
   According to some opinions, <i>Rashi</i> included, the woman is not originally Jewish, but on the way to being freed, which by itself is possible only if she converts to Judaism. At the time this intercourse occurs, apparently she is half slave, having been owned jointly by two masters, one of whom had not yet released her. She had been promised as a wife to a Hebrew slave (servant). Such a Hebrew servant, at the instruction of his master, would legally be allowed to sleep with her even while she had not begun any process of conversion. 
   Some see in the word a comparison to זבולון, compare Judges 5.18 זבלון עם חרף נפשו למות, “Zevulun, a tribe that defied and risked death.” Zevulun’s chancing death at Devorah’s command is similar to this slave in our verse surrendering to a man’s advances.
   Nachmanides sees the word as related to חרפי, as in Job 29,4 כאשר הייתי בימי חרפי, “when I was still in my early youth.” The days of נעורים, adolescence, are compared to חורף, winter, seeing they are the beginning of the season, before summer, whereas the time of old age זקנה are considered as again as such as the summer of one’s life is already past and one approaches “winter.” Accordingly, the meaning of our verse is that the שפחה described here is a woman designated as a concubine, someone frequently described as נערה, i.e. “a wife of a junior status.” At any rate, the woman in question is not totally a married woman as yet.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the word is related to חרפה, inferior status, a woman who is not yet exclusively betrothed to a specific man seeing she is still a slave. She is however, still a virgin at the time the man in our verse sleeps with her.
   @בקורת תהיה, “there shall be an investigation.” According to <i>Rashi</i> it is up to the court to determine the status, as the woman is not guilty of the death penalty. [She would be if she were a married woman and had consented to infidelity. Ed.]
   Some interpret the need for this investigation as resulting from the fact that to many onlookers this woman does have the status of a married woman, so that some people would be in a hurry to put her to death. In order to prevent such a miscarriage of justice, the Torah orders an investigation. The word בקרת is related to the word יבקר in Leviticus 13,36 where the Torah declares an investigation by the priest as uncalled for, writing לא יבקר הכהן. 
   Still other scholars see in the word בקרת the word בקר when it is used in the sense of administering physical punishments with a strap.
   Nachmanides views the words as indicating הפקרות, that the woman in question due to her dubious status was considered הפקר in the sense of unprotected by law. According to Nachmanides we encounter the expression הבקר in the <i>Mishnah,</i> when it always means the same as הפקר with the letter פ instead of the letter ב. (compare <i>Peyah</i> 6.1 <i>et al</i>) Still others consider the word as similar to פילגש, concubine, quoting Psalms 45,10 בנות מלכים ביקרותיך, “Royal princesses are your favorites.” Ibn Ezra categorically rejects this saying that on the contrary, the meaning of the word in Psalms is from יקר, the especially highly regarded ones. In other words, princesses who elsewhere are highly esteemed will be become lowly slave women for the Jewish people [remember Hagar who voluntarily became the slave of Sarah. Ed.]
   @כי לא חופשה, “for she had not yet been set free completely.” She was not yet able to become the legal wife of the man designated for her. Nonetheless, the man who had slept with her has to bring a guilt offering as spelled out in verse 22.
   19,23. ונטעתם כל עץ מאכל, “you will plant every kind of fruit-bearing tree.” After the Torah had discussed <i>halachic</i> aspects of planting seeds in the field, we now hear about <i>halachic</i> aspects of planting orchards. Placing seed inside a woman or placing seed inside the earth are activities that have quite a bit in common with one another.
   @וערלתם ערלתו, “you shall treat its fruit as if uncircumcised. (forbidden)” <i>Rashi</i> views the choice of the term ערלה here as parallel to the meaning of the word when applied to the uncircumcised male, i.e closed off, אטום, not yet opened up. It is out of bounds, not yet to be enjoyed. 
   Nachmanides also writes that there is something quite different in the prohibition of the fruit of newly planted trees during the first three years compared to other products the Torah has forbidden. The fact that it becomes permissible without our having to do anything to the fruit itself, once sufficient time has elapsed, lends support to the concept that ערלה is nothing else but a “closed door” which in due course will open. We find that the development of the fruit is referred to as פתיחה, compare Song of Songs 7,13 פתח הסמדר, “the blossoms opened up.” The Torah portrays the fruit of the first three years as if they had not yet “opened up.”
   The underlying reason for this commandment is parallel to the commandments governing agricultural products, such as the setting aside <i>challah,</i> the first part of dough when making bread, leaving a small section of one’s harvest uncut for the poor, donating <i>terumah</i> to the priest, G’d’s representative on earth, etc. In each of these instances the idea is that before we ourselves partake of G’d’s bounty, we indicate by performance of the respective commandments that we are aware of the origin of our wealth and that we are grateful to the Creator for this. If, in the case of <i>orlah</i>, these early fruit are not presented as a gift, the reason may be that such a gift of relatively underdeveloped fruit might be viewed as inappropriate, seeing that it is inferior. This is the reason why the fruit of the fourth year is treated as suitable for consumption in the holy city of Jerusalem, and only in the year following this is the tree’s bounty freely available to the owner of the orchard. (Verses 24-25) (The fruit of the fourth year is treated like the second tithe, מעשר שני, in that it is sacred to the extent that it either may be consumed only in Jerusalem, or redeemed so that the money of the proceeds is spent in Jerusalem. (<i>Sifra)</i>
   Nachmanides adds that it is true, (as scientists claim) that there is also a health hazard when the fruit of the first three years are consumed [raw, I presume, Ed.] as there is excessive acidity. Moreover, in the majority of cases the tree does not even produce fruit during the first tree years after having been planted, depending on climate and the quality of the soil, etc. Maimonides advances these considerations as the reason for the prohibition in his <i>Moreh Nevuchim¸</i> section 3, chapter 37. He mentions that in earlier times the magicians, etc., in order to establish their reputation as quasi-deities, used to add some kind of poison to newly planted trees, which they knew would lose its power after a certain length of time. They would make you believe that it was they who had made these poisons harmless, the ordinary person not having any knowledge of the nature of such poisons, and thinking that whereas without the blessing of the magician they might have died, the magician possessed power over life and death, whereas in fact he only exploited the ignorance of natural science of the common man. [I gave just one example of how the ignorance and gullibility of the man in the street enabled the magicians to prosper from their superior knowledge. Ed.] When the appropriate time had arrived, these magicians would sacrifice some of this fruit to their particular deity, claiming that this sacrifice made the fruit safe for the multitude.
   19,26. לא תאכלו על הדם, “do not eat over the blood.” According to <i>Rashi</i> there are numerous interpretations offered for this verse, one of them being reflected in Samuel I 14,33 הנה העם חוטאים לאכול על הדם, “here the people commit a sin by eating over the blood, etc.” [The people ate from the loot of the battle while the slain had not yet been buried, etc.] 
   Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of the text the Torah warns against adopting the practice of the sorcerers who used to gather around blood they had spilled and preserved in a bowl, and foretell the future, relying on the demons that would gather around to foretell them the path of future events. When the Jewish soldiers were with their King Sha-ul in camp and they were very much afraid of the Philistines their enemies, Sha-ul would not do anything without consulting the <i>urim vetumim,</i> as we know from above chapter in Samuel, verse 36. To his consternation, on this occasion the priest did not receive a reply to his enquiry, something which prompted Sha-ul to enquire which sin the people could have been guilty of that would deny them access to the word of G’d. As a result, it was found out that his own son Yonathan had violated his father’s command not to taste any food on the day of the battle, and he had, while being unaware of the prohibition, tasted some honey. The people, not wanting to accuse Yonathan, had phrased it as if all of them had been guilty of a trespass, i.e. eating prematurely on the day of the battle. [Prior to the battle, the people had not asked via the <i>urim vetumim,</i> but engaged in sorcery regarding the continuation of the war, something which Sha-ul considered a grievous act of treachery against G’d. Also, they had started to enjoy the spoils of war without giving thanks to the Lord by means of the blood of the appropriate animals being presented on an altar. Ed.]
   The reason why the Torah wrote the legislation of ערלה, the restrictions applying to the fruit of the tree during its first three years, immediately after the above legislation is to show that here too before enjoying the fruits of defeating an enemy, first we must express our gratitude to <i>Hashem</i> Who has made us victorious. Seeing that in periods when private altars were forbidden this might represent quite a hardship, the rule was enforced only when there was a legitimate altar in the vicinity. 
   @לא תנחשו, “do not indulge in sorcery.” The word נחש is similar in meaning to that of נסיון, experimenting and using the outcome of the experiment as one’s guideline for how to act. [It is debatable if Eliezer’s request at the well stipulating certain behaviour patterns of the maidens that came out to draw water at the well falls into the category of forbidden ניחוש, at any rate at that time Torah had not yet been given. Ed.] Lavan admitted to Yaakov that he was in the habit of using such sorcery, i.e. Genesis 30, 27 נחשתי ויברכני ה' בגללך, “I have discovered by such experimentation, that G’d’s blessing for me is on your account.”
   @ולא תעוננו, “and you are not to believe that some periods are lucky compared to others.” Ibn Ezra writes that some people claim that the word עונן is derived from ענה, “answering,” i.e. a person poses a certain question expecting to guide his behaviour according to the answer he receives. This is not a tenable interpretation according to the rules of grammar. He believes, instead, that the correct interpretation is based on the word being derived from ענן, “cloud,” that the Torah forbids us to read meaning into the cloud patterns we observe in the sky, and to use such patterns as guidelines for our behaviour.
   19,27. לא תקיפו פאת ראשכם, “do not round off the edge of your scalp.” Ibn Ezra understands this as a warning not to trim one’s hair in the manner that the priests of idolatrous cults are in the habit of doing. 1) We should not look like such people but preserve our identities also in the manner in which we appear externally. Furthermore, seeing that hair, especially hair of the head, is considered a mark of beauty, what possible reason would we have to deprive ourselves of this mark of תפארת, ”glory?”
   19,29. אל תחלל את בתך להזנותה, “do not desecrate your daughter by making her into a harlot;” <i>Rashi,</i> basing himself on <i>Torat Kohanim,</i> understands our verse as handing over one’s daughter to be used sexually in any setting other than that of wedlock. Nachmanides, severely limits this verse by stating that the term used here means only not to allow one’s daughter to become sexually involved with parties who because of legal restrictions could never offer marriage to such a girl. This, according to most authorities would mean that if the relationship would lead to marriage the penalty would be death, either by a court of law or by heavenly decree, <i>karet</i>. [Tthe disagreement, of course, does not touch on the ethics or morality of the situation, but on the legal implications of our verse. Ed.] The only scholar who considers what <i>Rashi</i> says as legally making such a daughter into a harlot when she sleeps with a male while she is unattached, is Rabbi Eliezer, whose opinion is not accepted by <i>halachah.</i>
   @ולא תזנה הארץ, “so that the land not become a whore.” The restrictive clause “the land,” which is interpreted by <i>Sifra</i> as ‘but you may make a whore out of the produce of the land,” is understood by Nachmanides as arrived at by the Torah not having written ולא יזנו את אנשי הארץ, “so that the people of the land will not become pimps and whores.” There is no question that the principal concern of the verse is the second prohibition not to become guilty of the land becoming full of harlotry, etc. The last few words are to be viewed as an independent prohibition. The author of <i>halachot gedolot,</i> (Rabbi Yehudai ben Rabbi Shemuel gaon, head of the Babylonian Torah academy in Sura) lists these words as one of the 365 negative commandments in the Torah, stating that it is a twofold prohibition, i.e. a warning to the father separately and to the daughter in her own right not to allow herself to be used by her father in such a fashion. She must not have sexual relations with anyone except for the purpose of entering into a relationship of wedlock. The Torah divides the verse into two halves, the first one dealing with a girl who as a minor is under the total control of her father, the second part addressing such a girl after she has grown up and is still not married. It then applies to her and her male partner equally.
   19,30. את שבתותי תשמורו, “you are to observe My Sabbaths;” the reason why this exhortation, not the first of its kind, has been written here immediately following laws about sexual chastity is reminiscent of the Talmud <i>Kidushin</i> 81 where the social separation of men and women is discussed and Avin is on record as saying that if one allows men and women to mingle socially one furthers unchaste conduct and worse. He considered the time when the Israelites went up to the Temple to celebrate the festivals as the most dangerous of such opportunities. The parallel with the Sabbath is clear. On the Sabbath, social gatherings are encouraged, wine flows freely, and therefore the opportunities to become guilty of unchaste behaviour are multiplied on that day. Hence the Torah issued a special warning to be on guard against violating sexual mores on the Sabbath.
   Immediately after the warning not to allow the Sabbath to entrap you into forbidden contact, the Torah writes:
   @אל תפנו אל האובות, “do not turn to the sorceries that follow, etc.” [if I understood the author correctly. Ed.] “Do not have social intercourse with these sorcerers even on the Sabbath, thinking that since they do not practice their art on the Sabbath that this is harmless.
   Ibn Ezra writes that this is a warning not to do what King Sha-ul did near the end of his reign in desperation, when he asked a sorcerer to conjure up the deceased prophet Samuel’s image (Samuel I 28,7) The word אובות is derived from Job 32,19 וכאובות חדשים יבקע, describing skins filled with wine that are full to bursting. בעלי אובות, those soothsayers are like people who cannot wait to reveal the knowledge they believe that they possess. The word ידעוני, is related to דעת, knowledge, and also describes these supposedly knowledgeable people who foretell future events. The Torah adds that the result of turning to such soothsayers will be 
   @לטמאה בהם, “to become contaminated by them.” Any person, soul, who turns to such charlatans in order to divine the future will lose whatever degree of cleaving to <i>Hashem</i> it had achieved prior to this. The reason for this is:
   @אני ה' אלוקיכם, “I alone am the Lord your G’d.” You are not to look for refuge with anyone other than I.
   19,32. ויראת מאלוקיך אני ה', “you shall be in awe of your G’d, I am <i>Hashem.”</i> Ibn Ezra sees in our verse a warning by G’d that if we fail to accord honour and accord dignity to the elderly, He may punish us for this in our own old age.
   Other commentators see in the statement a reminder that these elderly have been honoured by G’d with attaining long life and wisdom, and it would not do for us not to accord them at least the same recognition that G’d has shown them. They back up their approach by quoting Isaiah 24,23 ונגד זקניו כבוד, “and the Presence (of G’d) will be revealed to His elders.”
   19,33. וכי יגור אתך גר, “and if a proselyte shall reside amongst you,” The reason why the Torah saw fit to write this verse immediately after having told us to treat our native born elderly with dignity and respect, is that G’d draws a comparison between the former and the latter, both being people who by circumstance are somewhat handicapped, one by age and frailty, the other by not yet having established his self-worth in the new nation he has joined.
   Other opinions see in the sequence of how to respect elders and not to discriminate against proselytes a message that anyone who discriminates legally or otherwise against proselytes offends the Creator Who instructed us to be especially courteous to the elderly.
   19,35. לא תעשו עול במשפט, ”do not pervert the judicial process.” According to Ibn Ezra the verse refers especially to treatment of proselytes, as the reason why the Torah felt it necessary to write ושפטתם צדק בין איש ובין אחיו ובין גרו, “judge righteously between a man and his brother, and between his fellow who is a proselyte, or even a resident alien!” (Deut. 1,16)
   20,3. ואני אתן את פני באיש ההוא, “and as for Me, I will give My special attention to that man;” Ibn Ezra writes that this statement presupposes that the sin was committed in the privacy of the sinner’s house or secretly, as otherwise judicial steps have to be taken by the court.
   Some commentators understand this wording to imply that G’d is going to single out the offspring of that person for extinction.
   @למען טמא את מקדשי, ”(he had done what he did) in order to defile and desecrate My Sanctuary, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> feels that in this instance the word מקדשי refers to the whole of the Jewish people, seeing they have been declared a holy people, עם קדוש, by G’d Himself. Conduct, such as that of the person who worships the <i>Moloch</i> deity, results in the presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> leaving the Jewish people, thus depriving them of their status of being a holy nation. This is also the reason why in this instance the Torah demands that the death penalty by stoning be administered by the עם הארץ, “the people for whose sake the earth had been created,” whereas in other similar executions the Torah simply writes באבן ירגמו אותו, “they are to stone him,” without appending a specific subject to who those “they” are. Seeing that the man worshipping the <i>Moloch</i> had put at risk every single Israelite’s status in the eyes of the Creator, they all have to demonstrate their disapproval of that sinner by throwing a stone or stones at him.
   20,5. לזנות אחר המולך, “to stray after the <i>Moloch</i>.” When <i>Rashi,</i> following <i>Torat Kohanim</i>, writes that these words include anyone straying after other types of idolatry whose form of worship is of a similar nature or even of a different nature, he means that the reason why the Torah singled out this particular cult for expressing its extreme abhorrence, is that this form of idolatry is especially abhorrent. When such a cult is worshipped even in a manner not typifying the norms of worship for that particular idolatry, it still carries the death penalty of <i>karet</i>. Nachmanides writes that this is not so, seeing that according to the Talmud <i>Sanhedrin</i> 64 the penalty applicable to that cult is only for those who “crowns” that deity, looking up to it as a “king” [as implied by the word <i>Moloch</i>. Ed.]
   20,9. כי איש אשר יקלל את אביו, “for any man who curses his father, etc.” According to Nachmanides this line is a continuation from the commandment in 19,2 to revere one’s parents. There the commandment had been expressed as a positive commandment, whereas here it is reinforced as a negative commandment, telling us what is in store for people who not only ignore 19,2, but who engage in doing the opposite. 
   Alternately, the Torah draws our attention to the harshness of the penalty by reminding us that G’d commanded us to sanctify ourselves. Anyone who curses G’d’s “partners,” i.e. our parents who helped bring us into this world, has thereby frustrated the Creator’s design and deserves a suitable punishment. This, after all, is also the penalty for marital infidelity, etc.; the underlying concept is similar in all such cases. Abstention from incestuous and promiscuous behaviour furthers G’d’s plan to sanctify our world, whereas violating His laws concerning chastity does the opposite. The positioning of our verse here immediately after the imperative to become holy is quite natural then.
   Some commentators understand this sequence in a somewhat narrower frame, i.e. verses 9 and 10 respectively as being justified by the simple fact that the <i>mamzer,</i> bastard, product of incestuous relationship does not recognize his father and mother as such, and therefore is liable to curse them.
   The Torah now lists some of the laws of incest already detailed in chapter 18, in order to spell out the penalties for them, especially those that constitute a capital sin. These include sleeping with one’s father wife, any woman married to another man, one’s daughter-in-law, and indulging in homo-sexual relations, sleeping with a woman and her daughter, including her granddaughter. This was not spelled out, as only some of the woman’s relatives have been spelled out. Clearly, if sleeping with one’s granddaughter is a capital offence so is sleeping with one’s daughter. Naturally one’s own relatives are also included in the list of incestuous relationships subject to the death penalty. One’s aunt and the wife of one’s brother are singled out to remind us that this is forbidden on pain of death even if it is clear that no issue could result from their unions, i.e. that they would die childless, (verse 20). Some more relatives need not be listed specifically as culpability for illicit relations with them has already become clear when more distantly related relatives have been for bidden on pain of death either by tribunal or at the hands of G’d.
   The reason why, when mentioning the penalty of <i>karet,</i> the Torah adds the enigmatic words לעיני בני עמה, “in the sight of members of her people,” (verse 17) is because this is the Torah’s way of saying that the guilty party will die in her youth, thus enabling the survivors to reflect on the cause of her early death, and for this to act as a deterrent.
    The meaning of the words עונם ישאו, commonly translated as: “they will have to carry the burden of their sin,” is that the sin will stick to both of the guilty parties like glue from that moment on, and will result in their various endeavours and enterprises in life all failing to be successful.
   The reason why the Torah repeats the prohibition of a man to sleep with his own wife when the latter is in a state of <i>niddah,</i> menstrual bleeding, is to inform us that the <i>karet</i> penalty applies on such union even if the coitus has not been completed.
   @דמיו בו, ”his blood is upon himself.” The meaning of this expression is similar to דמו בראשו, “his blood is on his own head.” The same applies to someone who lies in an adulterous manner with someone else’s wife. He is no less guilty than someone who has cursed father or mother.
   20,17. ואיש אשר יקח את אחותו, “and a man who takes his sister as a wife.” Nachmanides already comments on why the Torah here uses an expression for a sexual union which elsewhere always means a legal union, i.e. marriage. This seems especially inappropriate, as, according to <i>halachah,</i> any such “marriage” ceremony between brother and sister is null and void. Nachmanides therefore does not understand the word יקח here in the legal sense of the word, but as a graphic description of how brother and sister who both live under the same roof are liable to slide into an intimate relationship precisely because they are so familiar with one another and the frequency of the opportunity makes it hard to resist. Whereas the normal expression in <i>halachah</i> describing sexual intercourse between two people is ביאה, i.e. one party has to “come” to the other, here, due to both parties already being in the same location, that word would lose its normal connotation. All the brother has to do is יקח, take the sister, just as he takes a glass of water. You will find that the Torah has adopted this phraseology of יקח whenever the union of heterosexual relatives who are likely to live in the same house is described.
   @וראה את ערותה, “and he sees her nakedness;” Nachmanides writes that it is the style of the Torah to teach morality by varying the expressions used for the same phenomenon. Sometimes sexual intercourse by people whose sexual union is forbidden is described as “revealing nakedness,” other times it is described as “seeing nakedness,” as here. Other times the same act is simply described as “sleeping or lying together.” The reason why the Torah may have chosen to describe brother/sister sexual relations as “seeing nakedness,” may be because being in the same house together all the time” may not have left much to reveal that either one of them had not seen before without their being intimate with one another. By repeating that the sister also saw her brother naked, the Torah may indicate that the attraction and desire was completely mutual and that neither force nor enticement was needed. When a female is seduced unwillingly, she would protest in the loudest possible terms. What is described here therefore occurred by mutual consent, so that no investigation was needed to determine that both were equally guilty. [Compare Deut. Chapter 22 where seduction or rape between two people not related to one another genetically are discussed. Ed.] Seeing that when brother and sister are in the habit of sleeping in the same bed, the brother might have perpetrated his act without the prior consent of his sister, or even without her knowledge, the Torah reports her consent in order to justify the penalty she will have to suffer.
   @חסד הוא, “it is a shameful disgraceful act.” People, by nature, possess a sense of shame that often deters them from committing sins, acts that are despicable. We find the word חסד in that context in Proverbs 25,10 פן יחסדך שומע, “lest he who will hear it puts you to shame.” (By revealing something you would have preferred to keep secret.)
   Nachmanides writes that he feels that the word חסד in our verse is used in the way it is used in nearly all other instances in the Bible, namely referring to an act of kindness. How then does this fit our situation?
   Precisely because brother and sister are closely related it was the duty of the brother to see to it that his sister find a suitable husband, something he has now made difficult if not impossible because he indulged his lust. The Torah repeatedly stated that the prohibition to reveal the other party’s nakedness was because of the close relationship that exists between such parties, so that it is taking unfair advantage of that relationship. It is as if the Torah asks the rhetorical question: “is this the way you show your sister true kindness?” The Torah speaks of חסד in the masculine mode, i.e. הוא to show that it always considers the male to have been the one initiating the intimacy between the two. This approach can also be applied to the verse from Proverbs we quoted earlier, namely: “the one who revealed your innermost secret has deprived you of all the kindness he should have shown you.”
   @ונכרתו לעיני עם, “they shall be cut off in the sight of their whole nation.” The message of this verse is that when you commit a sin in secret, I, G’d, will see to it that it becomes public by means of the penalty I will exact from you in plain view of all. The Torah chose to tell us this in connection with sins usually committed in the privacy of one’s home. What applies here also applies to all the sins that are punishable by the <i>karet</i> penalty.
   @ערות אחותו גלה, עונו ישא, “he will have to bear the burden of his sin for having revealed the nakedness of his sister.” Ibn Ezra adds that if her brother had raped his sister so that only he alone had revealed the nakedness of his sister, of course, only the brother will be subject to the penalty described here.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason that the word עונו, “his guilt,” is written in the singular mode is that each of the two parties will have to bear the burden of their joint sin individually. It is similar to the situation in verse 19 where the Torah uses the word עוונם, “their collective guilt” in the plural mode. Ibn Ezra mentions that the reason why the Torah did not spell out the penalty for sleeping with the grandson or granddaughter may be that the senior partner in that relationship, due to old age, may not get much carnal pleasure out of gratifying his desire.
   20,18. את מקורה הערה, “he has bared the source of her blood.” Ibn Ezra views this expression, used here for the first time, as an indication that the Torah considers this sleeping with a menstruating partner as an abomination reflecting something very depraved. He explains the additional words:
   @והיא גלתה את מקור דמיה, “and she revealed the source of her blood,” as applicable only if she was a willing partner in the union, not if she had been raped.
   20,21. אשת אחיו, נדה היא, “the wife of his brother, is as forbidden as a menstruating woman.” Our sages (<i>Yevamot</i> 54) interpret this somewhat unclear wording to mean that even incomplete coitus with one’s sister-in-law is as serious a sin as sleeping with one’s own wife while she is menstruating. The penalty makes this point quite clear.
   Some commentators feel that the Torah was especially harsh here, seeing that under certain circumstances, such as the brother having died without ever having had children, it may actually become a <i>mitzvah</i> to marry this sister-in-law who had become widowed by performing the levirate marriage ceremony with her.
   20,27. ואיש או אשה כי יהיה בהם אוב או ידעוני, “any man or woman practicing the cult of <i>ov</i> or <i>yidoni</i>, etc.” The reason that the Torah mentions the word אשה especially, although like all negative commandments women are as culpable as men, is because women far more than men are known to have practiced these cults.
   Parshat Emor
   21,1. אמור אל הכהנים, “say to the Priests, etc.” The repetition of the words: אמור ואמרת, are intended to signal that the adults are meant to train their youngsters in Judaism and its mores.
   Nachmanides writes that the warning by the Torah to train the children while they are still small occurs several times in the Torah. It occurs in connection with the legislation not to eat blood, as well as in the prohibition not to eat creepers and the ritual contamination caused by the dead bodies of such creepers. (Compare <i>Midrash</i> Proverbs 14,33) We learn from these various instances that under no circumstances are minors to be encouraged to do things the Torah forbade for adults. However, if such minors, on their own initiative, engage in activities for adults, the adults are not legally required to interfere.
   It seems to me, (Nachmanides continuing) that as far as ritual contamination is concerned the adults are required to prevent their youngsters from doing this even if the children had themselves initiated these activities forbidden to their parents. This is the reason why the sages did not say –as they had done in respect of eating dead carcasses-“that if a minor is observed eating such meat from dead animals that have not been ritually slaughtered that the court does not need to interfere.” [if the youngster has no father whose duty it is to raise him. Ed.] Nachmanides quotes Psalms 5,2 הקשיבו לקול שועי in support of his view, as well as the extraneous words לא תאכלום, “you must not eat them,” which appear in connection with the legislation to eat neither blood nor creepers. (Leviticus 11,42) The sages interpret this as if the Torah had written לא תאכילום, “do not feed them, etc.” (<i>Yevamot</i> 113) The only reason that the Torah had added this little statement after having forbidden the eating of these reptiles outright previously even with the rider that eating such creepers even contaminates one’s clothing, must be to add the prohibition not to feed such to anyone else with one’s own hands.
   In our verse here, where the Torah is concerned with the state of ritual purity to be maintained by the priests at all times, the wording is such that it even imposes the need to restrain youngsters from eating such contaminating food when the youngster got hold of it by himself and was not fed by an adult. The reason is that the ritual purity of the priests, even their minors, is to be inviolate as far as is humanly possible.
   Nachmanides, adding an <i>aggadic</i> interpretation to our verse, adds that the repetition of the words אמור ואמרת, are both addressed to the same priests, a second time, i.e. the Torah feels the need to repeat these instructions again and again to impress upon them the importance of their maintaining their ritual purity. Not only priests engaged in Temple service, not only adult priests, but any male born to the priesthood is charged with preserving his status of ritual purity.
   Some commentators claim that seeing the Torah had seen fit to alter its mode of address by writing here אל הכהנים בני אהרן instead of simply אל בני אהרן, the meaning is that the כהנים are to transmit the instructions to בניהם, their children even while they are still minors. 
   Ibn Ezra writes that after the Torah had requested that the whole Jewish nation be careful of their ritual purity, the Torah now repeats this theme once more when addressing the priests to whom this is so much more important in their daily lives.
   It is possible that the interpretation of the words אמור אל הכהנים is a reminder that it is these priests who are charged with teaching the people the laws of the Torah, and it is their duty to warn the people not to become negligent in their observance of the laws of ritual impurity even when there is no immediate requirement to be ritually pure in their daily tasks.
   Nachmanides writes concerning the last mentioned interpretation that he does not agree with it, and that in his opinion the word אמור here is similar to the word דבר elsewhere in the Torah. אמור אל הכהנים is equivalent toדבר אל בני ישראל ואמרת אליהם, [such as in connection with זב or ציצית et al. Ed.] The wording is dictated either by reason of the importance the Torah places on what follows, or because people were in the habit of disregarding the particular laws which followed.
   Concerning the word הכהנים in our verse, Nachmanides points out that when the Torah addresses the priests in their capacity as functionaries in the Temple carrying out the sacrificial service, etc., the term is simply דבר אל אהרן ואל בניו, “speak to Aaron and his sons,” the fact that they are also priests is not even mentioned, whereas here when the subject is ritual purity, in other words something touching the essence of their being, the Torah does draw attention to this. The message is that not only must the priests be on guard not to enter the Tabernacle while ritually impure, etc., but, they must maintain such purity also “off duty,” so to speak. [This was important in later years when there were thousands of priests and each one had only two weeks’ service, and even during those two weeks only served on a single day in each week. Ed.] As a result of our verses here, priests who do not take part in funerals do not do so because they consider themselves superior, but because the Torah forced them to act in what to some might appear in the wrong light. They maintain a state of purity for G’d’s sake, so as always to be on “call,” if the occasion should arise. 
   @לנפש לא יטמא, “he shall not contaminate himself for an ordinary dead person.” According to Nachmanides the word לנפש is to be read as part of what follows, i.e. “he must not contaminate himself on account of a dead person.”
   21,2. כי אם לשארו הקרוב אליו, לאמו ולאביו, “except for a near relative; (or) on account of his mother or of his father, etc.” If he is a priest of the regular category, he may or must contaminate himself on account of the above-mentioned (and some other) relatives. This is why the mother here is mentioned before the father. In the case of the High Priest when even contamination on account of wife, father and mother, is prohibited, the Torah mentions the father ahead of the mother (verse 11). The Torah does not differentiate between mother and father, though we might have thought that the “father” does not need to be mentioned separately, since even the mother whose identity as mother is beyond question is out of bounds. 
   21,4. לא יטמא בעל בעמיו, “A husband among his people shall not contaminate himself to desecrate himself.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this verse as referring to a priest who has married someone forbidden to him as a wife, but whose marriage is recognized in Jewish <i>halachah</i> as such.
   Nachmanides understands the word בעל here as similar to that same word in Samuel II 6,2 מבעלי יהודה, from the “notables of the tribe of Yehudah.” [And other similar verses]. Accordingly, the message appears to be that priests are not only warned by the Torah not to defile themselves legally, but to be conscious of their position among the people at all times and to conduct themselves accordingly, so that they do not bring shame on the institution of the priesthood. One such example would be marrying someone obviously not suited, such as a harlot. Defiling himself by attending funerals of the people not his near relatives is among the things he must not do.
   21,5. לא יקרחו קרחה, “They are not to make bald spots, etc.” The reason why the word קרחה is spelled with the letter ה at the end instead of the letter ו which would signal the normal plural mode, is to teach that people making more than one such bald spot (not only the priests, by the way,) are culpable for each such bald spot.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the Torah commands this only to the males is because the males who are the only priests performing service in the Temple, must not appear before G’d with their heads shorn or their beard shaved off. Nor must they appear before <i>Hashem</i> when they had made incisions on their flesh or skin.
   21,6. קדושים יהיו, “They shall be holy, etc.” Nachmanides writes that קדושה is a term describing a certain type of abstinence, as he had explained on previous of occasions. In the case of the priests, the Torah re-emphasises this to teach that even though the Torah had already made holiness a state every Israelite is to strive for, the priests must abstain even from things that are perfectly permissible for the ordinary Israelite. The most prominent example of these is the <i>mitzvah</i> to busy oneself with the burial of the dead. Another, well known example, is the restriction the Torah imposes on the priests in the type of woman that is eligible to become the wife of a priest.
   @כי אני ה' מקדשכם, ”seeing that it is I, <i>Hashem,</i> Who sanctifies you.” The switch to direct speech (you) again, signals a continuation of the opening line in the chapter that had been addressed exclusively to the priests. Alternately, G’d does indeed refer to both the priests and the people as a whole, but seeing that the priests represents the entire nation being the one who presents G’d’s “food” on the altar, He addresses them in the first instance. The people’s state of holiness necessitates that the priests represent them in the manner prescribed.
   21,7. אשה זונה וחללה לא יקחו, “they are not to marry a woman who is either a harlot (has desecrated herself) or has been desecrated through no fault of her own. (by birth)” When speaking of the ordinary priest, the Torah lists the women disqualified in the order of “harlot, disqualified by birth, divorced,” whereas when speaking of the High Priest the order is reversed “widow, divorced, disqualified by birth, harlot.” 
   My late father of sainted memory [the <i>R’osh,</i> Ed.] explained the reason for this reversal in sequence as follows: in the case of the ordinary priest the Torah follows the pattern of forbidding not only a woman who had disqualified herself by her own conduct, but even women who had been disqualified by accidents of fate, or even women who clearly had once qualified to become the wives of priests but who had been divorced by their first husbands. Seeing that in the case of the High Priest the Torah added another disqualification, i.e. widow, it mentioned this special disqualification first. Having started with a disqualification which is neither genetic nor due to character faults, the Torah proceeds from the relatively minor disqualification to the most severe one, i.e. being a harlot.
   21,12. ומן המקדש לא יצא, “And he shall not leave the Sanctuary.” According to <i>Rashi</i> this means that the High Priest is not even to walk behind the bier of his father or mother, and that he is even to continue with his daily priestly routine while still in the condition known as <i>onan, a state of</i> pre-mourning before his dead has been buried.
   Nachmanides, commenting on <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation, writes that we are faced with two conflicting views about this verse expressed by different <i>midrashim.</i> If we assume that the verse meant to permit the High Priest, or better, to instruct the High Priest, not to interrupt his Temple service even while he is in the state of <i>aninut,</i> pre-burial mourning, there was no need for the Torah to mention that he must not take time out to walk behind the funeral procession and that he is not permitted to leave the Sanctuary for that purpose. It follows that what is meant by our verse is not a warning for the High Priest not to walk behind the bier of his father or mother. On the other hand, the <i>baraitha</i> cited in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> on our verse is quite emphatic that the words ולא יחלל in our verse mean that as long as the High Priest does not leave the Sanctuary he does not desecrate the institution of the Temple even if he does perform the Temple service while in a state of <i>aninut</i>. In other words, the injunction not to walk behind the funeral procession is a definitive negative commandment. The author of <i>halachot gedolot</i> also shares the view cited in <i>Torat Kohanim</i>, listing it as such.
   He explains that the principal injunction of our verse consists of forbidding the High Priest to leave the Temple and to thereby interrupt or abandon the sacred task he had been entrusted with by preferring participation in the funeral of his parents, etc., to the task at hand. It follows that if the High Priest were to leave the Holy Temple for a lesser reason this would constitute an even graver dereliction of his duties. The reason why the Torah chose our verse to make this point was in order to allow the High Priest to continue performing his service in spite of the fact that he temporarily finds himself in a state of <i>aninut.</i> It follows that if he voluntarily prefers to attend his parents’ funeral, that he would thereby desecrate the Temple.
   Concerning the Talmud in <i>Sanhedrin 18</i> where our verse is understood to mean that the High Priest is not to follow the bier, this is not a Biblical injunction, but seeing that by following the bier he might come closer to it than is <i>halachically</i> permitted, [closer than 4 cubits. Ed.,] the sages decreed that he must keep the kind of distance from it that places him a block away from the bier, beyond direct visual contact with the bier. An ordinary priest is not subject to such stringent restrictions. He may contaminate himself in respect of the relatives mentioned in our paragraph, but not for the sake of people not related to him genetically.
   21,14. כי אם בתולה מעמיו יקח אשה, “but he must take for a wife a virgin belonging to his own people.” These words are the definition of the previous והוא אשה בבתוליה יקח in verse 13. In other words, [if the High Priest was not yet married at the time he was appointed as such, a most unlikely scenario, Ed.] he is not allowed to marry a woman who has already had carnal relations with another man. Verse 13 is what is known as לאו הבא מכלל עשה, negative commandment arrived at by bringing it into line with an existing positive commandment. Now, by repeating the same concept as a positive commandment, it is much stronger. [The author understands the positive message in verse 13 as only an indirect prohibition to marry a woman no longer a virgin. Ed.]
   21,15. ולא יחלל, “so that he will not desecrate, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the message of our verse, as “he must not take as a wife someone forbidden to him so that he will not desecrate any male children he will have from such a union.”
   Nachmanides rejects this interpretation saying that if it were correct our verse is not a negative commandment, but merely an explanation of the legislation.
   Our sages (<i>Kidushin</i> 78) make plain that our verse is an additional negative commandment, i.e. a priest will receive twice 39 lashes for what might have a appeared as violating a single commandment. In fact he violates לא יקח as well as לא יחלל.
   21,17. דבר אל אהרן: איש מזרעך, “speak to Aaron saying: ‘any man of your offspring, etc.’” Nachmanides points out that the Torah here does not use the formula דבר אל אהרן ובניו, “speak to Aaron and his sons,” but it refers to his sons, etc, in the third person. The reason is that earlier Moses, i.e. G’d, had spoken in connection with the sacrifices, whereas if here the Torah had used the same form of address it would have had to add the words איש מכם לדורותיכם אשר יהיה בו מום, “if any one of you (the priests) throughout the generations is afflicted with a physical blemish, etc.” The Torah did not want to include Aaron personally in the list of people who might be stricken with a blemish, seeing that Aaron was a paragon of holiness, physical perfection, etc. The possibility of any priest being stricken with a physical blemish in the future therefore had to be approached in a very sensitive manner, not addressed to anyone in particular. It remained Aaron’s task, of course, to caution his offspring against performing priestly duties while in a blemished state.
   In the paragraph dealing with ritual contamination (chapter 22) where the Torah reverts to its customary formula of “speak to Aaron and his sons, that they should abstain, withdraw from holy domains as soon as they do become contaminated,” there was no need for such sensitivity, as Aaron himself, without being in the least to blame, could become the victim of such ritual contamination, [for instance, if a dead mouse fell upon him. Ed.] 
   Further on in our portion, (22,18) not only Aaron and his sons but all of the Israelites are addressed, the idea being that the courts are warned to intervene in any non observance.
   When it comes to warn the people about the plague of צרעת, Aaron is mentioned at the beginning of chapter 14, as seeing that we have learned that the High Priest continues to perform his functions even while in a state of pre-mourning, אנינות for father and mother, I might have thought that even if he were struck by <i>tzoraat</i> this would also not disqualify him from performing his duties. To make sure we do not err in this respect, the Torah introduces that legislation by including Aaron by name. (Leviticus 214,33)
   This confronts us with the statement in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> on Leviticus 22,4 איש איש מזרע אהרן והוא צרוע או זב, “any man from the offspring of Aaron who is either stricken with <i>tzoraat,</i> or <i>zav,</i> etc.” On this verse <i>Torat Kohanim</i> comments that the word והוא means that the legislation might even apply to him personally, if he were to be afflicted with such a dysfunction. This is so, in spite of the fact that on the face of it, the verse appears to restrict itself to the offspring of Aaron.
   It is possible to understand the word אהרן in all of these verses as the (first) High Priest, and as such Aaron is mentioned by name as representative of High Priests throughout the generations, although he himself had long ceased to be alive. Accordingly, when the <i>Torat Kohanim</i> asks: ‘whence do I know that the legislation applies to Aaron personally,’ and it answers that we derive this from the word והוא, the author had never referred to the actual Aaron but to the respective High Priest officiating, if and when the problem raised by our verse should ever occur.
   Alternatively, the mention of Aaron is a hint that the Torah’s legislation is not predicated on miracles –i.e. considers the possibility that Aaron might be stricken with either of the two afflictions mentioned in that verse. However, out of sensitivity for Aaron this possibility is obscured by the word והוא so as to preserve our image of him as a physically perfect specimen.
   21,18. חרום, “someone with a flat nose, without a bridge,” the origin of the word is חרם, as used in והחרמתי את עריהם, “I will utterly deface their cities.” (Numbers 21,2) The nose, i.e. the bridge of the nose, is considered essential to someone having a handsome face. Absence of that bridge deprives a person of his human appearance, [makes him appear like an inferior species, such as an ape. Ed.]
   21,20. או גבן, ”or abnormally long eyebrows;” the word appears in conjunction with eyes, as in שגובן בעיניו, describing eyebrows so bushy that they cover one’s eyes. The word is related to גב, “back,” as in על גבי חרשו חורשים, “plowmen plowed across my back” (Psalms 129,3)
   The Torah began by listing the kind of physical blemishes that consist of visibly missing or malfunctioning limbs or organs, limbs, etc., proceeding to examples of priests whose limbs are all there and functioning, but who suffer from blemishes making them appear ugly. This is followed by defects which were not congenital but the result of bone fractures, etc. At the end, we even hear about blemishes that affect the mind of a person such as knowing that one’s reproductive organs, though not visibly blemished, suffered the kind of injuries which make the organ permanently dysfunctional.
   22,2. ולא יחללו את שם קדשי, “so as not to desecrate My holy Name.” According to<i> Rashi</i> the verse is truncated and the clause “by performing their Temple duties in an inappropriate state of purity,” are missing. 
   Nachmanides does not consider that there was any need for these words, as the words אשר הם מקדישים, are quite adequate to make the meaning of the verse crystal clear. He explains that the words ולא יחללו את שם קדשי clearly refer to animal and animal parts that these priests had previously sanctified for use on the altar. Why else would the Torah have to add the words: אשר הם מקדישים לי, “which they are sanctifying for Me?” 
   22,8. נבלה וטרפה לא יאכל, “He shall not eat from a carcass or a fatally injured animal.” Nachmanides reminds us that our sages in <i>Torat Kohanim Emor 4,4</i> explain that the news here is that seeing that there are species of birds not subject to the ritual contamination caused by carcasses of mammals, we might have thought that the priests do not need to be on guard against contact with or eating same when they were part of an offering. The Torah therefore had to write our verse, even though, naturally, the priests were included in all the carcasses and <i>treyfah</i> animals mentioned in chapter 11.
   If we were to look at the plain meaning of the text, [something we must never disregard, Ed.] the injunction for the priests here does not repeat the ordinary prohibition against eating נבלה וטרפה, applicable to all Israelites, but it adds the new dimension of the priest violating their status of ritual purity when they do this, a dimension that does not apply to the ordinary Israelite unless these animals had been sanctified at some time prior to their death. Seeing that the various ways a human being can become ritually contaminated had been discussed in previous chapters, as well as the definitions of such ritual impurity of sperm, and other effluences from the body, this was the place to add this reminder to the priests.
   In case you wonder why the Torah used the wording “he shall not eat” such animals (on the basis of the פשט), an expression not normally used with the contaminating factor of such repulsive creatures as insects, vermin, rodents, and the like, it is the Torah’s awareness that most people would not eat these creatures even if the Torah had not expressly prohibited this. However, this consideration does not apply to mammals which had died by an arrow or a gunshot wound, or had been fatally wounded but had undergone decapitation immediately afterwards.
   The word טרפה in our verse refers to animals that had been mauled by predators such as lions or bears or wolves. While prohibited as food, such injured animals do not transmit ritual contamination until after they have died. The Torah here expands the prohibition by referring even to such animals that had not yet died as included in those that confer ritual contamination on contact. The expression נבלה automatically includes this aspect of conferring ritual contamination.
   22,15. ולא יחללו את קדשי בני ישראל, “and they shall not desecrate the holies of the Children of Israel,” according to <i>Rashi</i> this is a warning not to feed any consecrated gifts to ordinary Israelites. [Verses 14,15, and 16 all speak of the same type of holy gifts, the first describes non priests eating such inadvertently, the second speaks of the same people eating same knowingly, the third speaks of priests feeding such to non priests not entitled to eat them. Ed]
   22,16. והשיאו אותם עון אשמה, “and they would cause themselves to bear the sin of guilt.” They would bring the punishment of their guilt upon themselves, etc.
   Nachmanides writes that he has not understood the meaning of <i>Rashi,</i> whom he understands as saying that our verse is a warning for the priests not to give non priests to eat produce which had already been set aside as תרומה, the priest’s share of the farmer’s harvest. If that were so, the words there would not be needed to explain the wordsוהשיאו אותם עון, as applying to themselves, i.e. the people eating this תרומה, as the sin had been committed by the priests, and they would be the guilty ones, having burdened the ordinary Israelite consuming these קדשים, sacred things, with guilt.
   Furthermore, we do not find this prohibition <i>Rashi</i> speaks about being mentioned in the Talmud as a separate negative commandment, although misleading an Israelite into eating food forbidden to him because it is reserved for priests of their households, is of course, forbidden, no more and no less so than feeding the unsuspecting other categories of food which the Torah has placed out of bounds for the individuals it is given to.
   The proper meaning of our verse is that the verse is conceptually a continuation of verses 14 and 15 which are addressed to the Israelites and warn them not to eat such food that is described here as קדשים. The reason the legislation is repeated is to spell out that there is a punishment for disobeying it. According to our sages the punishment is even death at the hands of heaven, if the forbidden food is grain that has not been tithed, or harvest products, known as טבל. The reason is simple, and the word קדשים alludes to it. All טבל still contains the portion which was meant to be set aside as תרומה, sacred heave produce for the priest. (<i>Midrash Hagadol Devarim,</i> page 579<i>)</i> 
   22,21. לפלא נדר או לנדבה, “to fulfill a promised vow or making a voluntary offering.” Nachmanides writes: “it appears to me that seeing that the Torah uses the expression לפלא נדר או נדבה, that both here and in other situations where this expression is used it refers to people who when making such a vow they felt that they were under extreme stress which prompted them to make this “vow.” (Compare Leviticus 27,2, and Numbers 6,2, for instance) The vow goes something like this: “If <i>Hashem</i> will perform some kind of miracle, פלא so that I will be extricated from the predicament I find myself in at this time, I promise to do such and such as a thanksgiving offering.” The whole situation is analogous to Yaakov having made a vow after his dream with the ladder, and his being penniless on the way to get a wife for himself. The basic difference in the formula of a vow called נדר and one called נדבה, is that the נדר is a personal obligation that has to be seen through, i.e. if the item vowed has been lost or stolen before it was paid, the person who vowed it has to make restitution, seeing he had said “I accept the obligation on myself to do or give such and such.” The person vowing a נדבה, on the other hand, declared a certain item as holy for G’d, and once he had declared it as such, if something happened to it, it is no longer his responsibility to make restitution. Seeing that in the case of the נדר the party vowing it does not make the selection at once, the Torah applies more stringent rules to the state of physical perfection used for such an animal. [There are, of course, numerous other distinctions between the two kinds of vows, but they do not concern our verse. Ed.]
   22,22. עורת או שבור, “blind or having a fractured limb.” Nachmanides writes that seeing the Torah had already listed the blind and broken limbs as disqualifying such an animal it did not have to lengthen the list of disqualifications. It is therefore quite possible that the whole list of disqualifications in our verse applies to the נדבה kind of vow, which was not intended as an offering on the altar in the first place, but was intended as a gift to the Temple treasury. The verse therefore has to be understood as telling us that all the blemishes listed are acceptable in a vow called נדבה, but are not acceptable in a vow called נדר. 
   @נדבה תעשה אותו, “you may donate it under the heading of <i>nedavah.” Rashi</i> says that it may be donated to the Temple treasury.
   @ולנדר לא ירצה, “but it is not welcome as a vow made under the heading נדר.” Animals with the above-mentioned blemishes are not acceptable as gifts for the altar. The expression ירצה is used to make plain that the Torah speaks about a gift vowed which by definition requires G’d’s goodwill, ירצה, in order to be acceptable.
   Nachmanides writes that in accordance with this interpretation we need to read the previous line as follows: נדבה תעשה אותו ולנדר, “you may vow it as either a נדבה according to the definition we mentioned, and as a נדר according to the definition we mentioned, i.e. personal responsibility, in the event it disappeared, etc., but, -and that is important- as a gift for the altar which requires goodwill by G’d, it is not welcome. In that respect it does not matter which formula the vow had been phrased as. Nothing that is blemished is acceptable as a gift for the altar. On the other hand, both types of vows if intended as gifts to the Temple treasury are acceptable in spite of the animals having the blemishes mentioned in the Torah.
   It is possible that we can understand the wording of the Torah as primarily thinking of the type of gift to the Temple treasury in terms of נדבה, because during the donations the Jewish people made prior to the building of the Tabernacle the Torah constantly referred to the generosity of the people’s hearts prompting them to make such gifts, terming them נדיב לבו, as emanating from the generosity of his heart. (Compare at length in Exodus chapters 25,35,36 where this word appears in this context repeatedly.) It is not mentioned in connection with animals but with lifeless objects, clearly unfit for the altar. Wherever the word נדבה without further adjective is mentioned, it refers to gifts to the Temple treasury. The very fact that we do not find the expression תקריב אותה, “you shall bring it near as a sacrifice,” mentioned in connection with נדבה, but only the words תביא אותה, “you shall bring it,” supports our theory.
   22,27. שור או כשב או עז וגו', “an ox or goat that will be born, etc.” After the Torah had given us a list of animals unwelcome on the altar due to various kinds of blemishes, it now adds a new type of disqualification, i.e. being under age, less than seven days old. Even though these animals do not display any blemish, being too young (or too old) can also disqualify an animal as a potential sacrifice. 
   Some commentators claim that the reason is that if one were to sacrifice an animal on the very first day it was born, some onlookers might construe this as homage to that day, the first day heaven and earth existed. Similarly, offering such a young animal on any other of the seven days of its first week on earth might be misinterpreted as some form of idolatry. Hence, after a whole week has elapsed, such a misinterpretation of the owner’s intention is impossible. By waiting at least seven days before offering a newly born animal as a sacrifice, this amounts to an acknowledgment that G’d created the universe in six days and that He rested on the seventh day.
   22,28. אותו ואת בנו, “it together with its offspring.” This legislation applies only to the females of the species, not to the males. [Although according to the masculine mode employed by the Torah we might have been misled. Ed.]
   Nachmanides writes that actually we could have expected the Torah to write instead of the words שור או כשב או עז, the feminine equivalent i.e. פרה או כבשה אותה ואת בנה, the reason why the Torah did not do so was that the paragraph began with the legislation that the species cattle and sheep etc., must not be used as sacrifices on the same day.
   22,29. וכי תזבחו זבח תודה, “when you slaughter a thanksgiving offering, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that the reason this verse appears adjoining the law not to slaughter mother and its young as a sacrifice on the same day, is that the offering called תודה must be consumed on the same day it is offered.
   22,31. ושמרתם מצותי, “You shall observe My commandments, etc.” Nachmainides writes that this verse is meant as a warning to the people of Israel to be very circumspect that their offerings are not blemished, are not offered too soon, and that the thanksgiving offering not be eaten for longer than the day on which it had been slaughtered. The various offerings must be presented in a manner that will secure <i>Hashem’s</i> goodwill for those on whose behalf they are being presented. The reason that the Torah adds the words לא תחללו, “do not desecrate, etc.,” is to warn you not to tolerate amongst yourselves anyone who would present unfit offerings on the altar. This is parallel to a similar injunction to Aaron and the priests in verse 2 of our chapter.
   23,2. דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel;”
   Nachmanides writes that the reason the name of Aaron has not been mentioned in this paragraph is that in this paragraph the Torah did not mention the additional sacrifices, מוספים, which are offered on every one of the festivals mentioned here. The Torah contents itself with writing –in a general statement- והקרבתם אשה לה', “you are to offer fire-offerings to <i>Hashem.”</i> The details are spelled out only in Numbers chapter 28-29. The reason this has been delayed until there is that by then the details of the occupation of the land of Israel, the key to how to distribute the various parts of the land had been spelled out, and basically, the additional offerings are applicable in the central location where the Tabernacle/Temple would stand and the Israelites would have to make their pilgrimages to that location to honour the festival. In a manner of speaking, these מוספים represent acknowledgment of <i>Hashem</i> having given us our daily bread in the land of Israel. Although at this time, the land had not yet been conquered, the Torah in verses 9-22 speaks about offerings which could not possibly be brought prior to the land having been conquered, seeing that the ingredients are largely produce of that land, the message is that the legislation in the Torah being discussed here is for the duration, throughout the generations.
   It is noteworthy that the Sabbath, a day that is not connected to calendar considerations, is mentioned as part of these מועדים. The reason is to show that part of this legislation, such as the Sabbath, is capable of being honoured in the performance already immediately. The fact that after having mentioned the Sabbath the Torah reverts to telling the <i>halachic</i> authorities of the people אשר תקראו אותם במועדם, “the festivals that you have to proclaim as such at their appointed times,” makes the distinction between the Sabbath on the one hand, and the festivals on the other hand, quite clear. The reason that the Sabbath is introduced with the words אלה מועדי ה', “these are the appointed festivals of <i>Hashem,</i> etc.” in the plural mode is that the Sabbath occurs so frequently.
   It is reported in the name of Rabbi Chiya (<i>hasefardi</i>) that when mentioning the Sabbath the words מועדי ה' occur before the words אשר תקראו אותם, “that you are to proclaim,” whereas in connection with the festivals the words אשר תקראו אותם occur after the words מועדי ה'. This is a clear hint that unless the dates of the festivals have been publicly proclaimed in advance, these festivals i.e. their legal status, remains in doubt. It is necessary for the Highest Court of the land to declare the first day of that month as such in order for us to know when the dates mentioned as festivals do occur.
   Nachmanides mentions further that the words אלה מועדי ה' אשר תקראו אותם וגו' refer to what follows, [not as in Genesis 24, or Exodus 6,19 and many others where the word אלה sums up what had been reported before then. Ed.] This is the reason why the Torah felt compelled to repeat this line seeing it had interrupted its narrative with mention of the Sabbath. There is an essential difference between observing the Sabbath and observing the festivals, as on the Sabbath any manner of מלאכה, creative kind of activity, is prohibited, whereas on the festivals only activities defined as מלאכת עבודה, “work typically performed by slaves, servants,” are forbidden. This enables us to cook, fry, and use fire on the festivals. There is a further allusion in the text that when such a festival day occurs on the Sabbath, the rules pertaining to the festival do not supersede those of the Sabbath and all the activities normally prohibited on the Sabbath are then also prohibited on the day that is both Sabbath and part of the festival. We find a similar syntax in the Torah when the Torah writes אלה הדברים אשר צוה ה' לעשות אותם, “These are the things which <i>Hashem</i> had commanded to do them,” in connection with the building of the Tabernacle, (Exodus 35,1) as there too, the Torah had interrupted its narrative by referring to the rules of Sabbath observance.
   In light of the above we can understand very well why when introducing this legislation the Torah did not use the words והקרבתם אשה לה' when describing the Sabbath, [although such an offering is, of course tendered every Sabbath, Ed.] as it does at the end of the mention of each festival, and instead it writes at the end of the chapter (verse 37) אלה מועדי ה' אשר תקראו אותם מקראי קודש להקריב אשה לה' מנחה זבח ונסכים דבר יום ביומו. מלבד שבתות ה' ומלבד מתנותיכם וגו' , “These are the appointed festivals of <i>Hashem</i> that you shall proclaim as holy convocations, to offer a fire-offering to <i>Hashem</i>: a burnt offering, and its meal-offering, a feast-offering, and its libation, each day’s requirement each day. Apart from <i>Hashem’s</i> Sabbaths, and apart from your gifts, apart from all your vows, etc.” These verses make crystal clear that the Sabbaths are not included in the list of the festivals.
   If a further proof were needed you will find this in the very fact that the Torah wrote a separate paragraph commencing with practically the same words in verse 4. If the Sabbath could have been lumped together with the festivals, surely at least that verse could have been saved.
   @מקראי קודש, “a holy convocation.” According to Nachmanides the exact meaning of this expression is that all the people will be assembled on that day in preparation of performing a sacred task. On such days it is a commandment for the people to assemble in or near the House of G’d [in accordance with the regulations governing ritual purity. Ed.] Public prayers would be recited, songs of praise for <i>Hashem</i> would be sung, etc. The people would honour such days by clean and appropriate clothing for the occasion. They would also observe the second part of the day as a day of feasting, eating and drinking well in honour of G’d.
   Onkelos views the origin of the word מקראי as related to a happening, rather than as related to “following a call.” He quotes אשר יקרא אתכם באחרית הימים, “what is going to happen to you at the end of days,” (Genesis 49,1) as another example of the word מקרא or יקרא having this meaning. In other words, “whenever such a day or date occurs, make a point of treating it as a holy day.” This day or these days are to be treated as something special, a fact that is reflected in one’s bearing, cleanliness, distinctive dress and superior food. All this is implied in Onkelos’ meaning.
   23,7. מלאכת עבודה, “laborious work.” <i>Rashi</i> includes even activities which, if not performed on those days, result in the Israelite suffering irrevocable financial loss.
   Nachmanides disagrees, saying that what purpose would be served in the Torah telling us that we must not even perform activities that result in financial loss, so that activities that do not result in financial loss would be forbidden automatically? If this were a valid form of reasoning, we would apply it also to activities forbidden on the Sabbath!
   Furthermore, if correct, why did the sages have to rule that activities which result in irretrievable loss may be performed on the intermediate days of the festivals, thus providing us with an allusion in the text, whereas the sages contend that there is no such allusion in the text? (Compare <i>Chagigah</i> 18)
   In addition, the expression עבודה, includes all manner of work and activities, as we know from Proverbs 28,19 עובד אדמתו ישבע לחם, “he who works his soil will have enough to eat.” Or, Deut. 15,12 ועבדך שש שנים, “and he shall serve you for six years.” Nachmanides quotes a number of additional such uses of the word עבודה. On the basis of these examples he concludes that the expression מלאכת עבודה includes all manner of work except that involving the preparation of food. He draws a comparison between Kayin who was a עובד אדמה, tilled the earth, but did not do this for his amusement or satisfaction but out of necessity, and someone who prepares food, the objective being his enjoyment. Clearly, the two activities are not comparable, hence the expressionמלאכת עבודה describes the nature of the activity not its value to the person who performs it.
   It is noteworthy that when speaking of the festival of <i>matzot</i>, the very first of the festivals mentioned, in Exodus 12,16, the Torah writes כל מלאכה לא יעשה בהם, that on those days no manner of work may be performed. This is no contradiction, as the Torah immediately continues to exempt the kind of work needed to prepare food. On the contrary, it supports the theory that whenever the expression מלאכת עבודה is used this excludes activities involved in preparing food. Had this not been the intention of the Torah the word מלאכה would have sufficed. 
   There is one exception to the wording used by the Torah in connection with the festivals, i.e. Deut. 16,8 where the eating of מצות is discussed, and where the Torah in prohibiting work on the seventh day of Passover uses the expression לא תעשה מלאכה. On the face of it, this sounds ambiguous, as the Torah omits the customary מלאכת עבודה on the one hand, but it does not write כל מלאכה לא תעשה, “that you must not perform all manner of work” either, as it does concerning the Sabbath or the Day of Atonement. The meaning of the words לא תעשה מלאכה is simply: “do not perform the manner of work I have already prohibited to you on the festivals in previous references to that day.”
   23,8. והקרבתם אשה לה' שבעת ימים, “you shall bring a fire-offering to <i>Hashem</i> for a seven-day period.” The reason is that all the seven days of Passover enjoy the status of being festivals, חג, so that these additional publicly financed sacrifices are mandatory. On the other hand, the work prohibition applies only on the first and the seventh day of this festival. The components of this fire offering are not detailed here but in a separate section in Numbers chapters 28-29.
   23,10. דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah devotes a separate instruction by G’d for each of these festivals instead of a single introductory heading for all of them, is that each festival contains some legislation which did not apply to the previous one, excepting the Sabbath. The common denominator of all of them is that all are called מקראי קודש, “holy convocations. Since there is no specific date given for the festival of <i>Shavuaot,</i> seeing that the Torah links it to the first day the <i>omer</i> was offered on the 16th day of <i>Nissan</i> and stipulates that the 50th day thereafter must be the festival of <i>Shavuot</i>, it is lumped together in the same paragraph as that legislating the <i>omer</i> offering, an offering which permits the new barley harvest for general consumption from that date on. Also, the fact that both <i>Rosh Hahanah</i> and <i>Yom Hakippurim</i> occur in the same month and represent the beginning and the end of the ten days of penitence, i.e. they cover basically the same subject, at least the words דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel,” are not repeated.
   23,11. ממחרת השבת, “on the day following the rest-day.” The meaning of this expression is: “on the day following the first day of Passover.” The word שבת here does not mean: “a week,” as it does in verse 15 in שבע שבתות “seven weeks.” The reason the Torah refers to a week by the name of שבת is that each unit of seven successive days includes a “Sabbath,” and seeing that that is the central day of the week as far as Jews are concerned, it is not surprising to hear a “week” also referred to as a “<i>Shabbat.”</i> In any reference to the Jewish calendar, each day of the week is identified by its relation to the Sabbath, i.e. “the first day of the Sabbath”, “the second day of the Sabbath,” etc.
   Nachmanides writes that there is no problem even if we were to call the expression ממחרת השבת as “the day following the week,” as the day on which the <i>omer</i> is waved for the first time is the 16th day of <i>Nissan,</i> the day on which the counting of the seven new weeks begins. It follows that that day is the day following the completion of the previous week. Seeing that the first day of Passover is on the fifteenth of <i>Nissan</i>, the Torah quite correctly describes the sixteenth as the day following the week that had just expired.
   23,15. וספרתם לכם, “you are to count for yourselves, etc.” Some commentators believe that the reason the Torah demanded this count is that seeing that these are days when the harvesting in the fields is in full swing, the common people, the farmers, might lose track of the exact number of days that had elapsed since the Passover. Seeing that during that period they are hardly ever at home, the messengers from the court might have difficulty in reaching them. These farmers might not find out if the month of <i>Nissan</i> had 29 days or thirty days, and similarly, they might not know if the High Court had extended the length of the month of <i>Iyar</i> or not. By counting until 50 they would be certain to observe the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> on the correct day. This is also the reason that the optimal time for counting these days was in the evening, as during the day they might have been to preoccupied with their harvesting activities.
   @וספרתם לכם, according to Nachmanides the additional word לכם, “for yourselves,” was the reason why our sages decreed that every individual was to count these days, it was not enough for the members of the Court to do so on behalf of the people at large, as they did when they proclaimed the day of the New Moon. On the other hand, when the Torah writes וספרת לך in the singular mode, pertaining to the Jubilee year, that is a task reserved for the High Court exclusively. (Leviticus 25,8)
   The number of days from the first heaving of the <i>omer</i> offering corresponds exactly to the number of years in a Jubilee cycle. The seven years in that cycle, correspond to the seven weeks in the counting of the <i>omer.</i> Presumably, this is the reason why the Torah wrote תספרו חמישים יום, “you are to count 50 days, meaning that you count seven times seven days, i.e. 49 days, whereupon the 50th day is a holy convocation, again a wording which closely parallels the Jubilee legislation in chapter 25. The principal reason for mentioning the number 50 is to ensure that we do not count either less or more than the number stipulated by the Torah.
   @ממחרת השבת, the word ממחרת is as if the Torah had written במחרת, “on the day following, etc.” This is quite accurate as the counting begins on the day following the first day of the <i>matzah</i> festival. The Torah adds: (actually at the end of verse 14)
   @חוקת עולם לדורותיכם בכל מושבותיכם, “an eternal decree for all your generations wherever you will reside.” The decree referred to is 1) that of not eating of the new barley harvest before the day on which the <i>omer</i> offering has been presented. 2) To observe the fiftieth day as a festival on which the performance of work is prohibited. I might have thought that seeing that these laws have been linked to offering sacrifices, also to the offering of the first sacrifice of breads made from the new wheat harvest on <i>Shavuot,</i> that the other regulations do not apply when there is no Temple and when we are not dwelling in our own land. This is also the reason that the Torah stresses the same applicability of the prohibitions of the Day of Atonement, as there too, seeing that the atonement mentioned in the Torah is linked to special offerings and the ceremony of the scapegoat, that when these cannot be performed that the entire <i>Yom Kippur</i> legislation would be null and void. By writing these extra lines the Torah makes plain that this is not so. There was no need to specifically mention applicability of the prohibitions of New Year, <i>Sukkot</i> and <i>chag hamatzot</i> wherever Jews lived except in connection with the laws in Exodus chapter 12,17 seeing that it appeared to depend entirely on the availability of a male lamb in its first year for slaughter in the Temple. We might have thought that once there was no place available to offer the blood and fat of that lamb on the altar, the laws about unleavened bread and bitter herbs would also not apply, therefore the Torah had to write verse 17 to disabuse us of such an idea. As long as the Torah did not restrict a prohibition to periods when there would be a Temple, such prohibitions remain in force regardless. (Compare <i>Kidushin</i> 37)
   23,17. חמץ תאפינה, “they shall be baked leavened.” Nachmanides, quoting Jeremiah 5,24 חוקות קציר ישמור לנו, “He who keeps for our benefit the laws of the periods appointed for the harvest,” sees in the offering a form of thanksgiving offering. Every thanksgiving offering contained 10 out of 40 loaves that were leavened. Nachmanides speculates that the normal prohibition to include anything leavened in our offerings may be related to leavening being viewed as outgrowths of spiritually negative influences, “creatures” or phenomena which have their origin in demonic forces, Satan. As such they are reminders of the attribute of Justice, the last thing we want to remind <i>Hashem</i> of when offering Him our sacrifices.
   23,22. ובקצרכם את קציר ארצכם, “When you reap the harvest of your land, etc.” Ibn Ezra writes that the reason the Torah introduces the subject of the harvest here is that the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> occurs right in the middle of the harvesting season, and the Israelite needs to be reminded of his duties <i>vis</i> a <i>vis</i> that festival at a time when he is so engrossed in bringing in his harvest.
   Nachmanides writes: the true reason, in my opinion is, that the introductory letter ו in the word ובקצרכם is a reference to the first time when the Torah commanded a <i>mitzvah</i> related to the harvest, when it spoke about the <i>omer</i> the offering of a sheaf of the early barley harvest on the second day of the Passover festival. At that time, the Torah had introduced the subject with the words כי תבואו אל הארץ...וקצרתם את קצירה in verse 10 of our chapter, implying that we must not shortchange the poor in order to fulfill the commandment of bringing that <i>omer,</i> by harvesting also the last corner of the field. Normally, when a positive commandment conflicts with a negative commandment and is due simultaneously, the positive commandment can override the negative commandment. In the example mentioned this is not so. (Compare verse 22)
   23,24. יהיה לכם שבתון, “shall be a day of rest for you.” Nachmanides writes that this formula suggests that <i>Rosh Hashanah</i> is to be a day of rest for you in that you do not even perform some of the tasks that you do normally perform on the other festivals. For instance, if you were inclined to measure the size of the harvest you had brought in, not one of the 39 forbidden activities, you should not do this on <i>Rosh Hashanah</i>. Neither should you weigh fruit, etc. Avoidable physically tiring labour, should not be engaged in on that day.
   @זכרון תרועה, “a remembrance including <i>shofar-</i>blasts. According to <i>Rashi</i> this is an allusion to the Biblical verse dealing with or mentioning this subject that are to be recited on that day. [We recite 10 each in the <i>Mussaph</i> service. Ed.] Among the things we bring to <i>Hashem’s</i> attention on that day is the selfless submission by <i>Yitzchok</i> on the altar on which his father was prepared to sacrifice him.
   Nachmanides writes that the comments by <i>Rashi</i> on that word are only to be understood as secondary meanings superimposed by our sages, the real meaning of the word זכרון תרועה being like the meaning of the words יום תרועה, i.e. that on that day we are to blow blasts of the <i>shofar</i> which in turn will bring our devotion to <i>Hashem</i> and our making a חשבון הנפש, a serious examination of our lifestyle our concern to His attention, an activity including remorse which will continue until the tenth of the month. G’d promised also in connection with our trumpeting blasts on the חצוצרות, Moses’ trumpets that He would take note of this, that it would serve for Him as a “reminder” and He would come to our assistance when the need arises. (Compare Numbers 10,10 <i>et al</i>) Seeing that on that occasion the reason was that we celebrated a day of rejoicing whereas here nothing is mentioned of the blowing of the <i>shofar</i> being the result of a particular expression of certain collective emotions, it is clear that the <i>shofar</i> blasts here are not spontaneous expressions of joy, etc., but are a duty the Torah imposes on us in connection with New Year’s Day, the Day of Judgment. Whenever the Torah mentions תרועה without going into details, the reference is to a <i>shofar,</i> not to the trumpets. Although the Torah does not mention why on this day it is more important that we bring ourselves to <i>Hashem’s</i> attention than on the other days of the year, the proximity of that day to the Day of Atonement 10 days later speaks for itself. The Torah also did not elaborate on why that day has been designated as a holy convocation. Seeing that it occurs in the month that it does and the day is the day on which traditionally first man was created, it is most plausible to accept the sages’ estimation that this is the day on which the Creator sits in judgment of man, His most precious creature. The prophets provide us with a number of allusions that on this day G’d assumes the mantle of supreme Judge, i.e. “dresses:” up in garments of Royalty, the garments worn by a judge. After <i>Rosh Hashanah,</i> during the days of penitence, the “King” will concern Himself with forgiving, or at least reducing the level of guilt of His subjects, those who truly repent their errors.
   23,27. אך בעשור, “However, on the tenth, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> draws attention to the saying of our sages that every time the word אך or רק appears in the Torah it introduces the limitation, diminution, of some general principle mentioned previously.
   Nachmanides writes, that if this is so, the meaning of our verse must be that whereas on the first of that month the entire people observed a day of <i>teruah,</i> blowing the <i>shofar,</i> seeing that all of them came up for judgment on that day, by the tenth of that month only a small portion of the people still needed to ensure that their judgment too would be favourable. This day would complete the process of atonement. The meaning of the word אך in our verse then would be the same as בלבד, “excepting,” referring to something not included in the previously enunciated rule. Just as in Exodus 31,13, basically, the rule was that the construction of the Tabernacle does not override the prohibitions of performing work on the Sabbath, it exempted performance of circumcision if the eight’s day of the baby occurred on the Sabbath. The circumcision is not postponed. The meaning of the word אך in our verse is similar to when Pharaoh pleaded with Moses to pray for G’d to forgive him his sin one more time, He used the words: אך הפעם"” (compare Exodus 10,17) When we encounter the word אך again in verse 39, i.e. אך בחמשה עשר יום לחודש השביעי באספכם את תבואת הארץ תחוגו וגו', “only on the fifteenth of the seventh month when you gather in the yield of the earth, you are to celebrate, etc.”, the message is also that even though that date may occur on the Sabbath, this does not cause the first day of the <i>Sukkot</i> festival to be postponed.
   According to the plain meaning of the text, the word אך is to be understood as similar to “but in truth,” similar to the word אכן. That word appears in such a context in Genesis 28,16 when Yaakov becomes aware that G’d’s presence is manifest at the location where he had the dream of the ladder. It appears again in such a context when Moses had killed the Egyptian thinking that there had not been any witnesses, and on the morrow he found out that he had erred. (Exodus 2,14) In our verse the meaning of the word אך then is that on the tenth of the seventh month is <i>Yom Hakippurim</i>, on no other day.
   Ibn Ezra, understands the word אך here as meaning that in spite of the extremely serious nature of that day, seeing that it too has been described as a מקרא קודש, just like all the festivals, it too is a day on which (the latter part) we are to express our joy at feeling that we have been forgiven.
   23,28. כי יום כפורים הוא לכפר עליכם, “for it is the Day of Atonement to provide atonement for you, etc.” The instruments that lead to your receiving atonement are the afflictions you have submitted to, the abstaining from pursuing any of your normal and considered important activities. It is important to realise that the absence of the requisite offerings in no way impedes the process of your being forgiven for your sins.
   23,29. בעצם היום הזה, “on this very day.” Nachmanides writes that the commentators generally understand the word בעצם as meaning “the substance of this day.” It would have that same meaning in verse 14 of our chapter ולחם וקלי וכרמל לא תאכלו עד עצם היום הזה, “you must not eat either bread, parched kernels or roasted kernels (from the new harvest) until this very day.” The word עצם does not appear in connection with the Sabbath day, or in connection with any of the festivals. It is only featured in connection with the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> and the Day of Atonement. The reason may be that just as the prohibition of eating from the new barley crop before the <i>omer</i> offering had been presented on the day itself, not the previous evening, it is parallel to the count which is to conclude 50 days after the time when the <i>omer</i> offering has been presented, when the new wheat harvest may be used for an offering. We might have thought that the various commandments attached to either the Day of Atonement or the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> are inextricably linked to the offering of the sacrifices the Torah tells us to offer on those days. By adding the rider בעצם היום הזה, the Torah teaches that each commandment in connection with these special days is standing on its own and has to be observed because of the date on which this day occurs, not because some other auxiliary commandments connected with these days. The word בעצם היום also implies that the night of the day in question is included in the special regulations pertaining to this day, unless of course, specifically excluded. Nachmanides adds that the word עצם is closely related to expressions denoting strength, toughness, etc., as in כחי ועוצם ידי, “my own power and the strength of my hand, [as opposed to G’d’s] Deut. 8,17). Another example is עוז ותעצומות לעם, Psalms 68,36. Seeing that what supports the body is a certain toughness of character, attitude, etc., the Torah uses the expression עצם היום as in the “skeleton” of the day, the essence of it, when the occasion warrants it.
   23,39. באספכם את תבואת הארץ, “when you gather in the yield of the land.” <i>Rashi</i> says that the purpose of the verse is to warn us that the seventh month of the year should coincide with the period when the last of the harvest is brought into the barns. This forms the basis of the sages on occasion, in tandem with the solar year’s requirements, inserting an extra month into our lunar calendar.
   Nachmanides argues that we already learned this from when the Torah instructed that Passover must occur during the period of the spring equinox, בחודש האביב, (Exodus 34,18) Actually, there it concerned the commemoration of the Exodus on the anniversary of when it had occurred, whereas here the concern of the Torah is that the <i>Sukkot</i> festival coincide with the last fruit of the orchards being harvested. The Torah here elaborates on the nature of true joy being that after a successful harvest we thank <i>Hashem</i> with visible symbols expressing our joy, the four species of plants being one such example. The 15th day of that month, being still part of the ingathering season we observe a festival, interrupting our work in the field, just as we do on the eighth day of the festival. We take time out to rejoice in the presence of the Lord, in Jerusalem. On the last day, a separate festival in many respects, we no longer sit in the <i>Sukkah</i>, nor use the four species of plants.
   @תחוגו את חג ה', “you will celebrate <i>Hashem’s</i> festival.” The meaning of the somewhat strange sounding “<i>Hashem’s</i> festival,” is that we are to rejoice in the location where His presence manifests itself, in the Temple; we do not celebrate our success, but we proffer our thanks to Him, Who alone has made all this possible.
   The reason why the Torah repeats once more in verse 41 וחגותם אותו שבעת ימים חג לה', “you will celebrate it for seven days as a festival for <i>Hashem</i>,” is to link it to the commandment (verse 42) to dwell in the huts for seven days. Dwelling in the huts, waving the four species, etc., are all part of the manner in which we rejoice; they are all rated as the performance of a Divine commandment. [In other words, the joy is not the reward, but the Torah by making it mandatory, promises reward for our being joyful. Ed.]
   23,40. פרי עץ הדר, “the fruit of a citron tree.” This tree is distinguished by the fact that the taste of its fruit is the same as the taste of its trunk if we were to eat it.
   Nachmanides writes that our sages used the word in order to provide us with an allusion to this peculiarity. The fact of the matter is that the tree that in Aramaic is called <i>etrog,</i> is known as <i>hadar</i> in classical Hebrew. The meaning of the word <i>etrog</i> is the same as the Hebrew חמדה, something lovely and precious. The words הדר and חמדה are almost identical in meaning. It is a fact that both the tree and its fruit are known by the same name, something that is common with certain fruit trees, such as the fig and the fig tree, the date palm, and its fruit, dates, etc. As to the reason for the choice of these four species, we have a tradition that by symbolically presenting these for species as expressions of our gratitude, the rainfall during the winter season will become beneficial instead of destructive.
   23,42. כל האזרח, “every native of the land of Israel;” according to <i>Rashi</i> the expression אזרח excludes women while including proselytes. [<i>Rashi</i> reads this into the letter ה at the beginning of the word האזרח, reasoning that if the Torah had only written אזרח, without adding the word בישראל, the proselytes would have been excluded. This would make sense seeing that the commandment commemorates an event in the desert, something that the proselytes’ parents were not part of. Ed.] 
   Nachmanides writes that it seems to him that the plain meaning of our verse is that proselytes are included in the requirement to dwell in huts on <i>Sukkot</i>, as <i>the</i> Torah has more than once stated that it applies both to the native born Israelite as well as the proselyte. (Exodus 12,49; Leviticus 7,7; Numbers 15,16, 16,29) The reason that the Torah wrote the words כל האזרח, is to teach that just as native born Israelites are to perform this commandment including their minors, so the proselytes, if they have children who are minors, are to do the same. The commandment cannot be fulfilled by a single representative of the household, the others simply saying “Amen,” such as when the father recites the “<i>kiddush</i>,” or similar, but each male member of the family is to dwell in these huts for seven days.
   [Women do not need to be excluded by a special verse or letter, as they are not obligated to perform positive commandments tied to a specific time frame. Ed.] Another possible reason for the word האזרח may be anyone who is “native” in the sense that he is at home permanently in the land, excluding mariners, traveling salesmen, etc., whose livelihood makes it difficult for them to choose when their ships are at anchor, or for whom it is a great hardship to rearrange their schedules. [This makes no sense at the time when the Temple stood and every male was duty bound to be in Jerusalem at such times. Ed.]
   23,43. כי בסוכות הושבתי את בני ישראל, “for I had made the Children of Israel dwell in huts, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> understands this verse as a reference to the clouds of glory that enveloped the Israelites during their march through the desert.
   Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah did not need to spell out what these huts were is that we have already been told of the phenomenon of the clouds of glory that enveloped the Israelites during almost the whole of their journey to the land of Canaan (until the death of Aaron). The meaning of the words is therefore quite clear.
   Concerning the opinion of some commentators that the word סוכות, huts, is to be understood literally, we must assume that at the beginning of the first winter in the desert the Israelites gathered materials that enabled them to construct these huts. Seeing that this had been so, G’d now commanded the Israelites to incorporate something they had made themselves but with the assistance of <i>Hashem,</i> Who had provided the building materials in the desert, to become part of their memorabilia.
   There are also some scholars who explain the reason why G’d saw fit to issue this command at this time, as if He had commanded this already in the summer, immediately after Moses received the Ten Commandments, fulfilling the commandment would have been viewed as self-interest, the sun being too hot, and shade being something urgently needed. Building huts at the time of autumn, approaching winter, and leaving more comfortable quarters in favour of a flimsy shelter, proved that the people who do this are motivated by one consideration only, i.e. to fulfill G’d’s commandment. Remembering the miracles G’d performed for the Israelites in the desert by moving into flimsy huts for a week is definitely a powerful means of identifying with our ancestors.
   23,44. וידבר משה את מועדי ה' אל בני ישראל, “Moses informed the Children of Israel of the appointed festivals of <i>Hashem.”</i>
   Nachmanides comments that seeing the various chapters preceding this one had been concerned with sacrificial offerings, blemishes which would disqualify animals from serving as sacrificial lambs, Aaron and the priests had always been mentioned at the beginning of those pieces of legislation. However, here when the subjects are the festivals, something in which all parts of the people participate equally, Moses addressed all of them. The only two sacrifices mentioned in the whole list of the festivals are the <i>omer</i> and the first two loaves of the new wheat harvest on <i>Shavuot</i>, but as both of these represent the cause of the festival rather than something that needs to be done on account of the festival, there was no reason to single out the priests in connection with this. Seeing that the principal observance of the Day of Atonement was Aaron’s offering a variety of sacrifices, Aaron is addressed in that paragraph specifically (Leviticus 16,2.)
   If, in the paragraph dealing with blemishes, the Torah addressed Aaron and his offspring as well as the Children of Israel as a whole, there is a special reason for this, also. It is in the nature of blemishes that he or she who is afflicted with such a blemish tries to hide it, as it is something embarrassing. The Torah therefore went out of its way to address everybody separately on that subject, so that nobody could claim that the legislation did not apply to him or her.
   Onkelos, who translated our words as ומליל משה ית סדרי מועדיא דה' ואליפנון לבני ישראל, “Moses spoke about the festivals of <i>Hashem</i> to the Children of Israel and taught them all about them,” meant what our sages said (M<i>idrash Rabbah</i> Song of Songs, 1) when they told us that Moses would teach the laws pertaining to Passover before and during Passover, and the laws that pertain to the Day of Atonement during the days preceding it as well as on that day, and the laws pertaining to <i>Sukkot,</i> in time for the observance of that festival.
   Presumably, he also meant to say that Moses used the opportunity of the approaching festivals to familiarise the Israelites with the rules by which the sages were allowed to manipulate the lunar calendar for the benefit of the farming community. He had been given permission by <i>Hashem</i> to authorise the <i>Sanhedrin</i> to thus bring in line conflicting laws governed by the solar calendar on the one hand and the lunar calendar on the other hand. [Some of the wording is mine. Ed.]
   24,2. צו את בני ישראל, “command the Children of Israel, etc.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the paragraph following as well as the portion commencing with Exodus 27,20-21 both pertain only to the chapters dealing with the building of the Tabernacle, even though it deals with the lighting of the lights in the <i>menorah</i>. The paragraph dealing with the construction of the <i>menorah</i> in Exodus 27 was mentioned there only as it was needed to list the furnishings of the Tabernacle.
   Nachmanides writes that this interpretation does not appear appropriate to him, as the portion is not linked to a paragraph dealing with the <i>menorah</i> at all. Moreover, the Torah had already reported that Moses placed the lights in the <i>menorah</i> in Exodus 40,25, just as he placed the remainder of the furnishings inside the Tabernacle. In other words, both the commandment and the execution of it were mentioned already in the Book of Exodus. Therefore, in Nachmanides’ view the need for the present paragraph is twofold. 1) In Exodus the matter is related in conjunction with the commandment to the Israelites to supply the fuel for the <i>menorah</i> just as they were invited to supply all the building materials for the Tabernacle. The princes are reported as having supplied the initial quantities of the spices for the incense as well as the initial amount of olive oil for the <i>menorah.</i> However, in the Book of Exodus no mention is made of the supply of materials that were being used up on a daily basis. This is so in spite of the fact that the composition of the materials is described as חקת עולם, as a law of unlimited duration. (Exodus 27,21) Those words referred to the manner in which the <i>menorah</i> was to be lit. By now the initial supply had been exhausted and new arrangements had to be made. 2) In Exodus the instructions had been limited for either Aaron or his sons to perform the task of lighting the <i>menorah</i>, nothing having been said about what procedure to follow if the original <i>menorah</i> were to become defunct, or lost, as when the Israelites went into exile, etc. In Exodus the word תמיד, permanently, has not been mentioned in connection with the lighting of the <i>menorah</i>, whereas here mention is made specifically of regulations pertaining to the “pure <i>menorah</i>.”
   24,4. יערוך את הנרות לפני ה' תמיד, “he shall arrange the lights before <i>Hashem,</i> continually. He must not arrange everything outside the Tabernacle and then carry the <i>menorah</i> into the Tabernacle.
   @תמיד, “continually.“ The word תמיד suggests that this procedure is applicable even on the Sabbath days when lighting fire is prohibited outside the Temple, or when all the priests are in a state of ritual impurity. In <i>Parshat Tetzaveh, (</i>Exodus 27,20-21) no mention is made of the word תמיד seeing that the whole procedure there was addressed only to a single individual, i.e. יערוך אותו, “he is to arrange it,” meaning the subject was only the light in the center of the seven shafts, arms, of the <i>menorah.</i> This light did not burn continually, as it went out when the Israelites had become collectively guilty of sins. In our verse the instructions include all the lights of the <i>menorah</i>, and even though the נר המערבי the light in the center, may have been out, the other lights did not manifest such displeasure by G’d by going out when they would not be expected to do so. They always burned through the entire night.
   24,9. והיתה לאהרן ולבניו “It shall belong to Aaron and his sons.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the word והיתה refers to the bread of the <i>minchah</i> offering discussed in verses 5-8. According to Nachmanides the word may include all the other presentations on the altar also. [Even though the word is in the feminine mode and לחם, bread is in the masculine mode. Ed.]
   24,10. ויצא בן אישה הישראלית, “The son of an Israelite woman went out, etc.” The fact that this paragraph has been inserted at this point, prompted the opinion that this individual blasphemed concerning the commandment of the showbreads, which in his opinion was an inappropriate offering, i.e. offering stale bread before G’d, by leaving it on the table for an entire week. Upon blaspheming, sinning with his mouth, he was called to order by another Israelite, as a result of which an argument ensued when this individual cursed the name of G’d.
   Nachmanides justifies the somewhat obscure introductory word ויצא, “he went out,” here by explaining that this individual “stepped out of line,” by saying what he did. Alternatively, the meaning is that prior to saying what he said he had stepped outside his tent, [presumably in order that his comments would become common knowledge. Ed.] In other words, the resulting argument took place where everybody witnessed it. We need to explain the additional word במחנה, “in the camp,” then as meaning that many people heard it and seized him bringing him to Moses’ tent to be dealt with there.
   The meaning of the words בן הישראלית, “son of an Israelite woman,” and איש הישראלי, “and the son of an Israelite (male),” teach that when a Gentile sleeps with an Israelite woman and this results in the birth of a child, such a child is considered a member of the Jewish people, i.e. when he grows up he is איש ישראלי, “a Jewish man.” The emphasis on the word ישראלי suggests that though he is Jewish, he is not fit for the priesthood, for instance, neither is he a member of any of the tribes of the Jewish people of whom the army was made up of. As a result, he would not share in the distribution of the land of Israel to the various tribes, and he would not have a claim on any of that land by reason of his having a Jewish mother.
   When the <i>Torat Kohanim</i> writes that the meaning of the words בתוך בני ישראל is that this man had undergone conversion to Judaism, this is not to be taken at face value, as he did not need to convert to Judaism, seeing that he had a Jewish mother; the meaning is that this man had undergone the same rules of conversion that every Israelite had undergone prior to the eating of the Passover, i.e. circumcision, ritual immersion, and loss of the requisite minimum amount of blood during circumcision. In other words, outwardly he appeared to all to be a fully-fledged Jew. He had made it plain that he preferred the Jewish people and did not consider himself as a member of his father’s people or religion.
   24,23. ובני ישראל עשו כאשר צוה ה' את משה, “and the Children of Israel did as G’d had commanded to Moses.”
   Nachmanides draws attention to a statement in <i>Torat Kohanim,</i> according to which the words “as G’d had commanded Moses,” included the requirement that all those who had heard the blasphemer were required to place their hands and weight, סמיכה, upon him prior to his being stoned, as well as the requirement to push him down from an elevated wall into a pit, and to hang him subsequent to his death until the evening after his execution.
   Ibn Ezra states that the procedures mentioned in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> became effective from that day onwards for all people who were executed at the command of the courts. Nachmanides disagrees with Ibn Ezra on this, claiming that if so, the legislation to do so would have had to be phrased in the future tense. The plain meaning of our verse is that the Israelites carried out the instructions G’d had given to Moses. There is nothing strange in the Torah describing this execution in more than the minimal number of words, as we have many instances of the Torah doing so, as for instance in connection with the Passover, (Exodus 12,28) or with the census of the Jewish people (Numbers 1,54).
   Personally, (Nachmanides writing) I feel that the reason for the above being apparently repeated is that the instruction was given to Moses individually. When the Torah reports that all the people participated in this execution “as G’d had commanded Moses,” the point the Torah made is that the people did not feel any personal animosity towards this man who had an Egyptian father, but that their participation in the execution was motivated purely by the fact that G’d had commanded Moses that this was what was to be done. They wanted to participate in removing stains on their collective national character by doing so.
   Parshat Behar
   25,1.בהר סיני, “at Mount Sinai.” <i>Rashi</i> explains that the reason for the Torah adding the words “at Mount Sinai,” is to inform us that just as the details of the laws of the <i>Sh’mittah</i> year were revealed to Moses at Mount Sinai, so the details of all the other laws were also revealed to Moses at Mount Sinai. Nachmanides queries this although <i>Rashi</i> only copied the words of <i>Torat Kohanim.</i>
   He explains the meaning of <i>Rashi</i> as based on the fact that some laws were repeated in the Book of Deuteronomy, whereas others were not. In connection with <i>Sh’mittah,</i> for instance, the need for the land to remain fallow during that year was not repeated in Deuteronomy, although the need to relinquish overdue debts to the impecunious debtor was. We might have concluded that anything that was repeated in Deuteronomy was something that was revealed to Moses later than at Mount Sinai. <i>Rashi</i> therefore sets the record straight by informing us that all the details of all the 613 commandments had been revealed to Moses on Mount Sinai down to the last detail. Whereas already in Exodus chapter 23,10-12 the subject of the <i>Sh’mittah</i> year had been discussed in general terms, now it is being discussed in greater detail. The Torah reveals that the details had already been given to Moses at Mount Sinai, even though the Torah had seen fit to write these details only now. This, <i>Rashi</i> says, is typical of all the laws of the Torah. If Moses saw fit, shortly before his death, to repeat some of these laws, this does not mean that he had not known about them all long before, ever since his first stay on Mount Sinai. [Numerous commentators understand Nachmanides as explaining that contrary to some laws which were revealed to Moses whenever G’d called him to a meeting in the Tabernacle, the laws of <i>sh’mittah</i> were revealed to him in all their details already long before there was a Tabernacle, in Exodus 23, immediately following the revelation and the giving of the Ten Commandments. The same applies to all the 613 commandments, according <i>to Rashi,</i> [whereas any laws revealed in the Tabernacle may not have been the kind which conform to Maimonides’ 14 criteria for inclusion in the 613 commandments. Ed.] Whatever Moses mentioned shortly before his death in Deuteronomy, were not new laws, as no prophet is entitled to formulate new laws, but were explanations of laws that had been revealed at Mount Sinai, and since the time had not come for them to be practiced, Moses thought it appropriate to publicly discuss them again.
   According to our author, Nachmanides considers that the laws of <i>sh’mittah</i> appeared here in their appropriate place, i.e. up until the words שבת לה' in verse 2 which concludes the headline of the legislation. The conclusive proof that all the laws were revealed in detail at Mount Sinai is from Leviticus 26,56, where the matter is spelled out most clearly.
   25,2. שבת לה', “as a kind of Sabbath in honour of <i>Hashem.”</i> Nachmanides observes that in connection with all the festivals the Torah mentions such expressions as שבת or שבתון, describing various degrees of abstention from work, whereas nowhere else do we encounter the expression שבת לה', “a Sabbath for <i>Hashem,</i>” as we find it concerning the weekly Sabbath which is testimony that <i>Hashem</i> has created the universe in six days. (Compare Exodus 20,10 as well as the second version of the Ten Commandments in Deuteronomy.) It is fairly clear then that the <i>sh’mittah</i> legislation too is meant to pay homage to the fact that G’d created the universe in six stages. Our sages consider the duration of that universe as meant to endure for 6000 years, paralleling the “days” it took to create. The seventh millennium, by contrast, would be of a different order altogether, work in the manner in which we know it not being performed during that millennium. As a result of such considerations, anyone who denies the validity of the <i>sh’mittah</i> in thought or deed is equivalent to someone who denies that G’d created the universe in six days and that there is a world to come beyond the world in which we find ourselves on this planet. This is the reason why the Torah has been so strict with warnings about the dire consequences to the nation if this legislation were to be disregarded, and why there are so many apparently stringent regulations connected to the observance of the <i>sh’mittah</i> legislation. Non-observance of this positive commandment [usually carrying a relatively minor penalty Ed.] is followed by the exile of the nation, a punishment equal to the violation of non-observance of the negative commandments of incestuous or immoral sexual relationships! (Compare Leviticus 27,34)
   25,3. שש שנים תזרע שדך, “you are to sow your field for six consecutive years.” According to Nachmanides the wording is not to be viewed as an absolute commandment, but is similar to the one in the fourth of the Ten commandments ששת ימים תעשה מלאכתך “you shall perform your work on six days, etc.,” meaning that any work which you have to do, you shall do during the six days of the week allocated to the performance of such tasks, whereas on the seventh day you are to rest. (Compare Exodus 20,9)
   According to our sages the law to abstain from work in the field during the seventh year is in the nature of a negative commandment derived from the restrictive statement that you may only “sow your field for six consecutive years.” [Something known in <i>halachah</i> as לאו הבא מכלל עשה, a negative commandment that is a derivative of a positive commandment. In practice, this means that although the Torah phrased the abstention from such work in the seventh year as a positive instruction, he who fails to observe it transgresses a negative commandment. Ed.]
   25,5. את ספיח קצירך לא תלקט, “You are not to gather in the aftergrowth of your harvest, etc.” This verse precludes you from harvesting even produce that grew on your field during that year without your having seeded that field. [The word “harvest” in this context means produce to be stored for future consumption. Ed.] Nachmanides adds that the expression ענבי נזירך in the line immediately following refers to similar spontaneously grown grapes in your vineyard that the owner of the vineyard had not in any way encouraged to grow during that year. The expression לא תבצור in connection with such grapes also means that although the owner may eat such grapes, he must not “harvest” them in the sense that he must not make wine out of them for consumption at a later time. It is the nature of this and similar paragraphs to repeat legislation applicable to the field when speaking about similar activities applicable to the orchard. What grows in the field without the field having been ploughed or seeded is called ספיח, whereas what grows in the vineyard without the latter having been primed in preparation cutting such grapes for storage, etc. is called זמירה, i.e. לא תזמור. The vineyard is called by the Torah here נזיר, akin to the person who vows to abstain from the consumption of wine or grapes, as by contrast to the grain of the field the vines are durable and do not have to be reseeded or replanted year after year. The owner of such field or vineyard or orchard does not enjoy any special privileges <i>vis a vis</i> a person visiting that field and may not partake of such spontaneously grown grapes or grain except for immediate consumption. The Torah requires him to give up any claim of ownership of the land on which these fruit grow. The land enjoys freedom from its owners during that year, i.e. it enjoys a שבת שבתון. Man and beast enjoy what there is to enjoy alike.
   25,6. והיתה שבת הארץ לכם לאכלה, “the Sabbath produce shall be for you to eat, etc.” Seeing that the objective is for the earth to enjoy rest, it is in order for you or your servants or the beasts to consume on an <i>ad hoc</i> basis what grows on it during that year 
   25,10. יובל היא, “it shall be a Jubilee;” <i>Rashi</i> explains the term as “something apart,” so that even the year itself is called by a name different from ordinary years. As to the significance of the different name, it is called thus on account of the blowing of the <i>shofar</i> which introduces that year. The term occurs elsewhere for the <i>shofar</i> when the Torah writes: במשוך היובל “when a long blast is blown with the <i>shofar</i>,” (compare Exodus 19,13) This view is shared by other commentators.
   Nonetheless, Nachmanides does not agree, citing that the Torah writes the words תהיה לכם, “it will be for you,” and it would not be appropriate to refer to the “<i>shofar</i>” as a year, i.e. שנת החמשים שנה, “the fiftieth year.” A year (verse 12) can hardly be described as a תקיעה, the blast on the <i>shofar.</i> Furthermore the meaning of the expression שופרות היובלים is a reference to the horns of rams and this is the way <i>Targum Yonatahan</i> renders that expression. It is a fact that the horn used to blow out of on the <i>Yom</i> Kippur of the Jubilee year does not need to be a ram’s horn. The Talmud is quite specific on this. (<i>Rosh Hashanah</i> 26) Why should that year then bear a name that is equivalent to שנת האיל, “the year of the ram?”
   Ibn Ezra explains the word יובל as related to שילוח, as in יבל, [compare the modern Hebrew הובלה, describing transportation of goods, especially moving furniture. Ed.] It would describe the release and dispatch to his home of servants whose period of service was brought to an abrupt halt with the onset of this year. Nachmanides adds that the mystical connotation of the word suggests a return to one’s origin, to original freedom in the widest sense, דרור, being related to דור generation, as Solomon describes the return of man to his roots, i.e. after death as דור הולך ודור בא, (Kohelet 1,4) seeing that at the beginning of the paragraph the Torah speaks only about והעברת שופר תרועה , “you shall sound a broken blast on the <i>shofar,”</i> etc.” Families are to be reunited during that year, something that involves travel, mobility, i.e. יובל. It is noteworthy that the expression יובל for this year appears only after the Torah stated that during that year דרור, freedom is to be proclaimed for all, and those who had been enslaved will return to their original homes and families. Nachmanides quotes additional verses from Scripture showing that יובל does not always mean physical motion, transportation of goods or people, so that a “return” to one’s roots, one’s family, need not be understood only in physical terms, bodily return, but as something more profound.
   25,11. יובל היא שנת החמשים שנה, “the fiftieth year is a Jubilee Year.” The Torah emphasizes the primary nature of that year, i.e. it is not a year in which fields are sown and harvested, in which “business is as usual,” but the entire year is under the aegis of sanctity, of holiness. Each individual is to enjoy what is implied by the word: “Jubilee.” [A period for rejoicing, according to the definition of Collins dictionary. Ed.]
   25,11. מן השדה תאכלו את תבואתה, “you may eat whatever crop the field yields.” <i>Rashi</i> explains the wording to mean that as long as some food is found in the fields, food suitable for the beasts, any food of that year’s spontaneous crop taken indoors by man, may be eaten. When that period has come to an end, the householder has to burn whatever food of that field from that year has not been consumed.
   Nachmanides comments that if we accept <i>Rashi’s</i> interpretation the words מן השדה, “from the field” in our verse, are not connected to the beginning of the verse. The meaning of the words מן השדה would therefore be that only something grown at the initiative of the field itself, as distinct from the result of the farmer’s efforts are you allowed to eat.
   Ibn Ezra explains the verse simply as meaning that you may eat only what the field produces spontaneously without a farmer’s input. [He puts no time limit on the consumption of such produce. Ed.] It is like the rules of the <i>sh’mittah</i> year.(compare verses 6 and 7)
   Personally, (<i>Tur</i> speaking), the meaning of the verse is that you must not work the field during that year, neither plant nor harvest seeing that it is Jubilee year, and the year is to be holy for you; however you may bring in from the field whatever it has produced unaided by man. You are to share such produce in equal measure with the poor who may also help themselves to it. The usual seasons are not to be treated as such, i.e. there is no specific time frame during which the above applies, as opposed to normal years.
   25,15. במספר שנים אחר היובל תקנה מאת עמיתך, “you will buy from your fellow on the basis of how many years have elapsed since the last Jubilee year.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the plain meaning of the verse is to warn the seller not to overcharge the buyer. Nachmanides agrees that this is the plain meaning of the text, but adds that if this were so <i>halachically,</i> it would contradict the principle that the term אונאה, an illegal overcharge, does not apply when the object in question is real estate. We are therefore bound to look for a different interpretation of the meaning of our verse(s) here.(compare <i>Ketuvot</i> 99) We therefore need to view each of the verses in this paragraph as unrelated to the verse prior to it or subsequent to it. Verse fourteen speaks of chattels changing hands, something where the laws of אונאה, overcharges, do apply. Afterwards the Torah warns not to become guilty of unfair dealing in the sale of real estate. In verse 17 the Torah repeats the general principle of dealing fairly with one’s fellowman rather than applying the principle of “buyer beware!” which is so prevalent in our society. Verse 17 even includes אונאת דברים, causing damage by the spoken word, though nothing substantive had been denied the purchaser or seller, as the case may be. The Talmudבבא מציעא folio 58 even considers the latter kind of unfair practice as more serious than the former, either because it is not subject to being retracted or because it insults the victim’s body rather than cause harm only to his financial assets.
   Alternately, it is quite possible that if one deliberately cheats one’s customer by misrepresenting the object one tries to sell, one is guilty of violating a negative commandment regardless of whether the object involved is a chattel or real estate, seeing that the Torah here quotes both examples separately as forbidden. The words אל תונו איש את אחיו, followed by the example of the number of years that have elapsed since the Jubilee year, clearly refer to transactions involving real estate. The difference in the law of אונאה when practiced with chattels as opposed to when involving real estate, would only be that in the case of chattels when the overcharge is less than 1/6th of the fair price the transaction is not voided and the vendor does not have to return the excess he has charged. Should the overcharge have exceeded that amount, the transaction is automatically reversed when the buyer becomes aware of having been deceived. When the Talmud stated that the law of אונאה does not apply to transactions involving real estate, the meaning was that even if the overcharge was more than one 6th, the sale is not cancelled, but the vendor must make the appropriate refund. When viewed in this light, <i>Rashi’s</i> explanation does not raise any problems. In any event, it is forbidden to overcharge deliberately, hoping that the purchaser in his desire to acquire said land will forgive the vendor for overcharging him. Our sages arrived at this interpretation because the Torah employed the plural mode in verse 14 when writing וכי תמכרו ממכר לעמיתך...אל תונו, “when you make a sale to your fellow….do not cheat one another” (literally :”cause each other grief.”) The use of the plural here suggests that both real estate transactions and chattels are the subject of this ordinance. Although the Torah spoke first specifically of chattels, i.e. או קנה מיד, “or when he purchased something from the “hand, etc.,” it reverts to the all embracing אל תונו without limiting such transactions to chattels, mobile objects. Seeing that the chattels did warrant special mention, the reason must be that the regulations as to under what conditions such “cheating” results in a reversal of the transaction is bound to be somewhat different from the conditions invalidating a real estate transaction in which one or the other party was not honest.
   It is also possible that the thrust of the whole verse is to warn people to be aware at all times of how many years have elapsed since the last Jubilee year, that knowing the date of the month is not sufficient. Once this is common knowledge, there will not be miscalculations as to the value of the piece of property that is being sold until the advent of the next Jubilee year. This also will preclude the buyer from believing that what he is about to buy will remain in his possession for an unlimited number of years. At any rate, the principle of אונאה, legal consequences that result from misrepre-sentations of objects being sold, applies also to real estate transactions, though the details are different from when someone sells produce in the market at an inflated price. If it applies there, it is obvious that it also applies when chattels or produce is being bought or sold.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the reason why the Torah formulated this paragraph by beginning with the words וכי תמכרו in the plural, is that it describes transactions that take place publicly, in front of eyewitnesses. This is why the Torah also employs the plural mode when writing לא תונו, do not take unfair advantage, addressing the seller, is that usually the seller is more likely to take unfair advantage of the buyer rather than vice versa. After all, it is he who initiates the transaction.
   25,18. ועשיתם את חקותי, “you shall carry out My decrees, etc.” According to Nachmanides these words refer back to the <i>sh’mittah</i> and Jubilee legislation, seeing that these two sets of laws belong to the category of חקים, whereas cheating belongs to the category of משפטים.
   @ואת משפטי תשמרו, “and you are to observe My social laws;” Here the Torah refers back to the sale of land, freeing of slaves, etc, which are part of the legislation discussed in the context of <i>sh’mittah</i> and Jubilee year legislation.
   @וישבתם על הארץ לבטח, “as a result of such observance you will dwell in the land securely.” Israel went into exile as a result of its failure to heed these warnings. The Torah repeats once more:
   25,19. ונתנה הארץ פריה...וישבתם לבטח עליה, “and the earth will yield its fruit and you will dwell on it in safety.” This is a promise that you will not have to leave the land of Israel on account of a scarcity of food during the <i>sh’mittah</i> year, or as a result of the observance of these regulations.
   25,20. וכי תאמרו מה נאכל בשנה השביעית?, “and if you were to ask: ‘what are we going to it during the seventh year?” According to Nachmanides this is a verse that has been truncated, and the correct wording should have been וכי תאמרו בשנה השביעית מה נאכל, “if you were to ask during the seventh year: ‘what are we going to eat?’” The question refers to where the people’s food supply during the eight’s year will come from. The people were not concerned about their food supply during the seventh year as they had the harvest of the sixth year to depend on which would last them until the harvest time of that year. It was accepted that the basic food supply consisted of the previous year’s harvest. Their concern was centred on the year after the <i>sh’mittah,</i> or the Jubilee year. The Torah therefore lays such concerns to rest by writing:
   25,21. ועשת את התבואה לשלוש השנים, “the land will produce (during the sixth year) enough harvest to last for the three years.” This promise was necessary to cover the <i>sh’mittah</i> year of the 49th year which was followed by the Jubilee year during which no work in the fields was performed either.
   25,22. וזרעתם את השנה השמינית, ”you will seed in the eighth year, etc.” Here the Torah reverts to the natural state of affairs, planting a crop that will develop without miraculous input by G’d, as did the one in the sixth year. You will not have to extend yourselves especially, as what the land had provided in the sixth year is sufficient until the crop planted in the eighth year had matured in the normal way. <i>Rashi</i> does not explain our verse in this manner.
   25,23. והארץ לא תמכר לצמיתות, “and the land (family inheritance) must never be sold in perpetuity.“ <i>Rashi</i> understands the verse as a negative commandment, in addition to the positive commandment for the purchaser to restore the land to the party from whom he had bought it. (Verse13). Failure to restore it is not only violation of a positive commandment, but transgression of a negative commandment also.
   Nachmanides feels that if this were so the Torah should have made the purchaser the culprit, i.e. forbidding him to write a contract by the terms of which he acquired the land in perpetuity, and should not have worded the instruction as a restriction imposed on the seller. This would be parallel to selling a servant in perpetuity, ignoring the law that servants go free in the <i>sh’mittah year.</i>
   It is possible that the verse may be understood as a warning to the seller not to try and bypass the legislation of the Torah, and to secure a better price for himself by promising the buyer that he may retain the land in question in perpetuity, his foregoing the right given him by the Torah to reclaim his ancestral property in the Jubilee year. This warning may be addressed by the Torah to both the seller and the buyer to advise them that by making individual arrangements bypassing Torah law, they both make themselves guilty of a serious violation of the Torah. This is the interpretation of our verse by Maimonides. This would be considered violation of a negative commandment, although such a contract would be invalid to start with, no one being able to legally override laws of the Torah.
   The reason for the legislation as it is written is that if, at the time of the sale, the number of years during which the sale will be effective is part of the document, it is much easier, psychologically, that when the next Jubilee occurs, either during the lifetime of the purchaser or his heir, to effect the transfer of that property back to its original owner. I believe that the kind of negative commandment that we are dealing with here is not the type that carries the penalty of 39 lashes, as do most other negative commandments. Rather, it is in the nature of an explanation by the Torah of its motivation, designed to facilitate the smooth observance of the unusual law, which basically is a reminder that all land in the land of Israel ultimately is the Lord’s and we only administer it on His behalf.
   25,24. ובכל ארץ אחוזתכם גאולה תתנו לארץ, “In the entire land of your ancestral heritage you shall make provision for the redemption of such lands (when appropriate).” <i>Rashi,</i> in addressing the plain meaning of our verse, assuming that the verses immediately following deal with people that need this redemption of their ancestral land, explains that whereas the seller enjoys the right to redeem his land after two years, either himself or through the good offices of a relative, sees the principal meaning of our verse in denying the purchaser the right to interfere with such a process of redemption.
   Nachmanides writes that he does not agree with <i>Rashi</i> on this, as he sees no reason why the Torah should have written this verse as part of the Jubilee legislation. <i>Rashi,</i> in effect, interprets our verse which deals with a legislation in effect only when the Israelites are predominantly all living on their ancestral land, as discussing legislation applicable also under far less favourable situations, at any time when part of the people live on their land. [An impoverished Jew is to be helped to regain economic independence regardless of the political environment in which the Jewish people find themselves. Ed.]
   According to Nachmanides, the reason why the Torah in our verse speaks of בכל ארץ אחוזתכם, “throughout your ancestral lands,” is to drive home the point that what we consider “our” land, is really still G’d’s land, something that the Jubilee legislation comes to remind us of. The very term גאולה for the transaction restoring land to its original owner or his heir, is parallel to such expressions as גאל ה' את יעקב, “the Lord redeemed Yaakov,” i.e. when G’d took the Israelites out of Egypt, He in effect redeemed their ancestor who had entered exile when he brought his family down to Egypt where they would become enslaved. The land had originally been given (promised) by G’d to Yaakov, so that all his descendants are entitled to a share of it. The difference between the land of Israel and the Diaspora, is that the laws about redeeming land holdings does not and never did apply anywhere except in the land of Israel after the distribution of it by Joshua. The reason the Torah adds the word ובכל, is to make sure we understand that the rules of the Jubilee and the reversal of land sales in that year also applies to the lands conquered by the Israelites under Moses on the East bank of the Jordan river. Seeing that G’d had repeated כי לי כל הארץ, “for the entire globe belongs to Me,” some confusion might have arisen as to within which parameters the Jubilee laws would apply. 
   25,29. ואיש כי ימכור בית מושב עיר חומה, “If a man shall sell a house of residence in a walled city,” Nachmanides writes that seeing that if someone is forced to sell his residence for reasons of economic distress, and this is something which the seller feels as very degrading, the Torah permitted him to exercise the right to redeem such a house even during the very first year after he has sold it. Seeing that his house is not the source of his livelihood, the rules pertaining to the reversion of a field to its original owner in the Jubilee year do not apply to the sale of a residence. Loss of one’s house is something one comes to terms with much sooner than loss of one’s primary source of livelihood, i.e. one’s ancestral field. Houses in open areas, as distinct from residential houses in walled cities, serve the owner in supervising his field and as temporary residence for his harvest workers, and therefore the legislation governing the sale of such a house is much more similar to that governing the sale of one’s ancestral field. (verse 31)
   25,33. ואשר יגאל מן הלווים, “and if someone buys a property from a Levite, etc.” Nachmanides writes that from the plain meaning of the text it appears that seeing that the Torah had already stated that the Levites have an unlimited period of time during which they can redeem property they had been forced to sell, (compare verse 32) the right to redeem his property commences immediately, i.e. as soon as he has the necessary means, and nothing is said about his relatives having the right to do this on his behalf. Neither does the Torah indicate if the laws of the Jubilee apply to the Levites, i.e. a return of their property in that year without their having to compensate the buyer of it. This is why the Torah phrases this legislation as אשר יגאל מן הלווים, “if one of his fellow Levites redeems it,” to show that since in the case of the Levites who do not own ancestral land, a Levite has fallen on hard times, it is clear that his house has to be viewed as just as basic to his needs as the field is to the ordinary Israelite. Another Levite, who is his relative, may redeem it on behalf of the one who sold it.
   @ויצא ממכר בית וגו', “and the house shall go out in the Jubilee year, etc.;” the sale of that house will be reversed, meaning that the sale price was calculated originally on the number of years remaining till the Jubilee so that the price of the redemption will take into account the number of years the purchaser has not been able to live in that house. In other words, the redemption procedures applied to the Levites closely parallels that of the Israelites.
   Our sages interpret this verse as dealing with a situation where a Levite had purchased the house under discussion from a fellow Levite and the Torah would tell us that redemption involving both buyer and seller who are Levites follow the same pattern as that involving ordinary Israelites. According to their words it was assumed that whenever the need for such redemptions arose in ancient Israel, the closest family member of the impoverished person was the first one in line to act as the redeemer. This is where the meaning of the term “redemption” fulfills its truest meaning. We find this documented in Jeremiah 32,7. I believe that the pattern which determined the respective rank of the redeemer was similar to the manner in which the sages determined the rights of prospective purchasers when someone’s neighbour claimed first right of refusal when his neighbour put up a property for sale which adjoined his own. The subject is called דינא דמצרא in the Talmud. If a third party not in line wished to secure the property in question, he would have had to buy it from the original redeemer. The case of Boaz not being able to marry Ruth until the more closely related redeemer had declined, illustrates this kind of procedure. (Compare Ruth 4,1-9) This is what our verse meant when speaking of someone who “redeems from a Levite, etc.” The Levite in question had redeemed the field of his fellow Levite by paying out the purchaser who had bought that house. Now, someone wishes to buy that house from that “redeemer.” [Possibly, the proceeds of such a sale must be given by the “redeemer” to the original Levite, who might have moved to another town in the meantime. Ed.]
   At any rate, the Torah did not find it necessary to spell out the mechanics of how the Jubilee law works to restore the original property to the one who had owned it ancestrally, and does not then have to compensate the present holder of it in order to ensure that it is legally given back to him. The Levites have a claim on using this legislation in perpetuity. While it is true that basically this legislation applies also to the Israelites, the reason that the Levite was used by the Torah as the classical example of such a situation is in order that we should not think that such property would be distributed amongst all the Levites collectively, instead of the individual original Levite who had felt himself forced to sell it. Consequently such property is redeemed from ownership by an ordinary Israelite, but not from the ownership of a fellow Levite. It will certainly not be removed through automatic redemption from the possession of the redeemer who had been commanded by the Torah to redeem it, i.e. to “rescue” it from the original purchaser.
   This is why the Torah had to make the point that such redemption must occur through another Levite. Only such a Levite has the right to perform such redemption for an unlimited period of time after the original sale even if the original purchaser had been a Levite, and even more so if an ordinary Israelite had purchased that property from the Levite.
   25,35. וחי עמך, “so that he may live alongside you.” This is a positive commandment addressed to you the Israelite with means, to enable fellow Israelites to have secure means of subsistence. The commandment to physically save fellow Israelites’ lives (when they appear to be in danger) flows directly from this verse. The Torah repeats and says:
   25,36. וחי אחיך עמך, “and let your brother live with you.” The line is repeated primarily in order to show the reader how important that consideration is in the eyes of the Torah. Onkelos demonstrates in his translation that he includes the resident stranger as included in the admonition of the Torah to fear the Lord and “let your brother live with you.” Our sages apply the obligation of והחזקת בו, “you shall strengthen him (economically),” to fellow Jews, whereas they understand the commandment “and let him live with you,” as also including the resident stranger. [Anyone checking Onkelos will note that there is another version of the text in Onkelos in which the word דיר, “resident stranger,” does not appear. Ed.]
   25,37. נשך ותרבית, “outright interest, or food against repayment by a greater amount, etc.” Nachmanides writes that according to the plain meaning of he text it appears that נשך refers to a loan to be repaid with a fixed amount of interest which runs and is payable concurrently. It is called נשך, “bite,” as the borrower feels as if he is being bitten every time he makes an interest payment. The word תרבית refers to a loan of money for a fixed period at the end of which both principal and interest is due. Seeing that the “interest” does not accumulate even when the principal is repaid after the agreed upon time, the Torah does not describe such a transaction as נשך. מרבית, on the other hand, refers to loans of food or other chattels, not loans of money. Here too the Torah forbids the lender to charge any extra when the harvest time rolls around and the borrower repays him from the new harvest.
   24,47. משפחת גר, “the family of a total stranger.” According to <i>Rashi</i> the Torah refers to a real idolator (non Jew), the word עקר meaning the idolatrous cult itself. The reason why the Torah uses the term עקר, “something to be uprooted, eradicated,” is that the Torah had charged us with eradicating all kinds of symbols and cults in our land. (Nachmanides)
   Onkelos translates the word עקר as an Aramaic word, a correct interpretation, the word literally meaning “root.” The Torah in using this term here criticizes a community in which such cults had been tolerated and had taken root. The reason why the word משפחת, “family of,” had been added is to remind is that tolerating such aliens and allowing them to prosper in our land is the reason why some of our own people have fallen on hard times and are now facing the ultimate degradation of being sold into slavery to families of strangers in their own land. The Torah is adamant that such Jews must be redeemed, and that the cost of their redemption must be paid for by Jewish family members, who had allowed their own flesh and blood to be so demeaned. Although this duty falls upon the immediate family of the person so sold first, the entire Jewish community is called upon being the “redeemer” when the family of the party concerned is either unable or unwilling to perform its duty. In order to make this point crystal clear, the duty of the Jewish community at large is mentioned before the next of kin of the victim of such a sale. The principal reason of the legislation is to prevent a situation from arising in which the victim will prefer the religion of his new masters who may by then have shown him more compassion than his own people. When a Jew has been sold into service to a fellow Jew, the redemption by members of his family prior to the <i>sh’mittah</i> year is something of a voluntary nature, as there is no fear that he will become estranged to his people and to his religion. In the situation discussed here it is an absolute duty. Jews are to be servants (in a contractual relationship) only of their Creator, not servants of servants.
   25,54. ואם לא יגאל באלה, and if he has not been redeemed by these means,” according to Ibn Ezra the reference is to the elapse of the years which have been mentioned here. According to other opinions, the reference is to the people mentioned whose duty it would have been to redeem him.
   26,1. לא תעשו לכם אלילים, “You shall not make idols for yourselves.” This line is addressed to the unfortunate people who have been sold to idolaters. Even while in the service of idolaters the Torah urges such people to make an agreement with their employers that they need not violate primary laws of our faith, such as working on the Sabbath, to retain his belief in the sanctity of the Temple, etc., and to try and make the thrice annual pilgrimage there. 
   Alternately, seeing the Torah had just written that all the Israelites are עבדי, “My servants,” it had to stress that under no circumstances are any of us to try and become someone else’s (idolatrous cults) servants.
   According to the <i>Targum Yerushalmi</i> the word שבתותי does not refer to the weekly Sabbaths but to the <i>sh’mittah</i> years, which the Torah has also described as “G’d’s Sabbaths.”
   Parshat Bechukotai
   26,3-4. אם בחקותי תלכו....ונתתי גשמיכם בעתם, “If you will follow My decrees…I shall provide your rains at their appropriate times.” Nachmanides comments that the reason that the Torah first lists timely rainfall as the reward for observing G’d’s statutes is that as a result of such rainfall the air of the country is cleansed and made softer, people are healthier, the yield of nature is enhanced and appears more appealing to the eye. As a result of all this, disease becomes more rare amongst the people, etc.; in other words, timely rainfall is an indispensable blessing that forms the basis of all the blessings nature has to offer. When nature provides its bounty, there are no aborted fetuses among man or beast, people and animals grow to their optimal size, man’s lifespan is lengthened, the last and ultimate of nature’s blessings.
   26.5. וישבתם לבטח, “and you will dwell in security.” If there were to be famine, G’d forbid, this would result in people leaving the country.
   26,6. ונתתי שלום בארץ, “I will see to it that there is peace in the land, i.e. no internal strife and quarreling between different segments of the population.”
   Alternately, the peace referred to by the Torah is that there will be no one invading the country; nor would wild beasts roam the country and wreak havoc there. No invader would cross your borders but you would put any would be invader to flight.
   26,6. והשבתי חיה רעה מן הארץ. “I will remove wild beasts from the earth.” Nachmanides accepts the view of Rabbi Yehudah in <i>Torat Kohanim</i> that this verse refers to the removal of ferocious beasts from the land of Israel as the plain meaning. When these beasts observe that the cities are filled with thriving human beings, they will refrain from entering such populated areas. Rabbi Shimon, on the other hand, understands the verse to mean that G’d shall render these beasts harmless as far as the land of Israel is concerned. This appears as the correct interpretation according to Nachmanides. It is a promise that when the Jews observe the commandments they will not have to worry about such problems as wild beasts and the danger to life and property that these represent. As far as the land of Israel is concerned, the norms of the world will return to the idyllic conditions prevailing before man first sinned, when no creature harboured aggressive intentions against man and none of the beasts would even kill each other. Such conditions have been described by the prophet Isaiah 11,6-9 as a period when the wolf shall dwell with the sheep, the leopard will lie down with the kid, etc.” It teaches that the damage and harm caused by such beasts that we know as ferocious, predatory, was never an integral part of such creatures’ nature, but was only the result of their observing man ignore the Creator’s laws, which caused them to copy man’s corrupt ways. We know from the Torah’s report of the creation of all these beasts that they had been meant to feed only on grass, etc. (Genesis 1,30) In other words, the natural disposition of all of these animals is to feed on the vegetation the earth provides, as do the ruminants still, and their becoming flesh eaters was not part of G’d’s original plan. This is also why, originally, man was not allowed to feed on animal tissue. Only after the deluge was the eating of meat permitted to man, certain pre-historic conditions not being restored at that time. At the same time, however, G’d warned the beasts not to attack and maim or kill man, or He would punish them for doing so. (Genesis 9,5). If the animals’ pre-deluge nature had undergone a change for the better during their enforced stay in the ark, G’d would not have had to warn them not to employ their ferocious nature against man.
   The Torah now tells us that if and when life in the land of Israel will proceed on the lines envisaged by G’d for His people, He will neutralize that part of the animals’ nature that would pose a potential threat to their safety.
   26,7. ונפלו לפניכם לחרב, “they (your enemies) will fall before you by the sword.” Nachmanides writes that first G’d assured the Jewish people that when they would keep His commandments, that if invaded, they would succeed in warding off the attackers and pursue them beyond their borders. He now repeats and reinforces this promise by describing that He would make the Israelites so full of self-confidence that five of them would put twenty times their number to flight. He also simultaneously makes their enemy display their fear of the pursuers. This is an additional promise as it is possible that their enemies would escape the sword by outrunning their pursuers.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the meaning of the repetition is to assure us that even if the enemy would attack repeatedly, they would fall by the sword until they would give up attacking the Jewish state.
   26,8. ורדפו מכם חמשה מאה, “and five of you will pursue a hundred.” When one is able to pursue 20, one would assume that 100 would be able to pursue two thousand, not ten thousand as described here. Some commentators explain the word מאה in our verse as meaning one hundred times five, i.e. 500 of you would pursue 10000 of the enemy. In this way the Torah’s original ratio would be maintained, but why would the Torah have to tell us something like this, something every youngster can figure out for himself?
   Ibn Ezra writes (referring the reader to his treatise on Hebrew grammar entitled <i>sefer moznayim,</i>) that it is customary for people describing unusual ratios, abnormal quantities, to use the ratios ten, one hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, as basics when discussing multiples. He sees the numbers 1-10 as a unit, followed by the numbers10-100, followed by the number 100-1000, and 1000-10000. He quotes Samuel II 18,3 כי עתה כמוני עשרת אלפים, “even if there were ten thousand such as we, etc.”, as an example for such figures of speech. [He means that the people saying this to their King, David, did not expect David to take their meaning literally. Ed.] The Torah here added an example of a multiple of 20 when describing the miraculous feats that would be performed by the Israelites when assured of G’d’s support.
   Some commentators reflecting on the Torah’s using the term רדף, and נוס as expressions for flight, explain that pursuit, רדיפה of people already running away requires relatively more people, than merely causing them to flee, i.e. נוס , or להניס. Whereas a ratio of 2 to 10000 may suffice for causing the enemy to flee, 1 to 1000 may be needed to ensure effective pursuit of those already in flight. Pursuit is ineffective unless it results in the fleeing warriors being killed. To do this a relatively greater number is required than to merely frighten them into fleeing.
   26,9. והפרתי אתכם, “I shall make you fruitful.” According to Nachmanides the meaning is that all the Israelites will not only conceive, but there will be no miscarriages among them. The Torah continues this them by adding והרבתי אתכם, “I shall multiply you,” meaning that you will have many children from each wife. As a result you will become a numerically powerful people.
   26,10. ואכלתם ישן נושן, “you will eat very old grain.” This is a promise that although you will keep increasing in numbers on the same amount of land, you will have enough grain left over at the end of a year so that even in the following year you will still eat from the previous year’s harvest.
   26,11. ונתתי משכני בתוככם, “I shall place My Sanctuary among you.” According to Ibn Ezra the meaning is that you should not worry that you will ever experience scarcity of basic supplies seeing that My glory dwells among you, and I am not like human beings whose nature it is to get bored with a certain location and to look for greener pastures.
   Furthermore, even if you will be forced to take up residence in the land of your enemies, where My Sanctuary will no longer be among you, My glory will not abandon you, so that you will have evidence that I will still consider Myself as your G’d, and all that this entails. This was the reason why I took you out of Egypt in the first place.
   Nachmanides explains the words והתהלכתי בתוככם, (verse 12) “I shall be taking walks among you,” to mean that My special providence which guides your fate will be in evidence just as when a king travels through his domain his impending presence will be advertised ahead of time and will be brought to the attention of the masses. He will be recognized as the One supplying his subjects’ needs.
   The Torah, at this stage, makes no mention of the reward for keeping the <i>mitzvoth</i> that accrues to us in the world of disembodied souls after our death. Neither does it mention the reward that accrues to such people after the resurrection of the dead in G’d’s own good time. There is no need to do this as such “reward” is an integral part of man’s having been created as G’d’s most favoured creature. This latter “reward” is automatic unless the creature (man) has forfeited it by committing serious sins without confessing them, repenting them and changing his way of life as a result of such repentance. (Nachmanides had explained his understanding of how this works in his commentary at the end of <i>acharey mot,</i> adding that the concept is rooted in the verse כי נר ה' נשמת אדם, “that the soul of man is part of G’d’s light.” Proverbs 6,23.) The Torah by repeating all the time the words על הארץ, makes sure that we do not misinterpret the parameters within which all these blessings apply.
   He writes further that although all these blessings are of a collective nature, applying to the people as a whole on the understanding that the majority observes the Torah, as opposed to when the Torah, briefly, spoke about G’d blessing “your bread, etc.,” addressing each Israelite individually, in the singular mode, the difference is that even though collectively we may have lots of food and drink this does not necessarily mean that each one of us benefits in equal measure from such abundance of food and drink. Individual supervision by G’d of our well being, is always in the nature of a miracle, though not what we call a נס גלוי, a manifest miracle. When addressing the people in general terms such as here, this is part of השגחה כללית, G’d’s broad supervision of the nation (or nations as the case maybe) and this is made clear by the emphasis on the ארץ, i.e. nature, providing the visible aspects of these blessings. [Naturally, nature works under the guidance of <i>Hashem,</i> but that guidance is not usually manifest, and man does not attribute crop failures, destructive acts of nature by hurricanes, etc., to divine intervention, but to nature’s caprice. Ed.] Nachmanides quotes such phrases as שלום בארץ, לבטח בארץ, חיה רעה בארץ, חרב לא תעבור בארצכם, as examples of such indirect blessings, blessings emanating from השגחה כללית, G’d’s general supervision of the fate of man and nations. Anyone familiar with rainfall patterns realizes that if beneficial rains occur year after year at times when they are most welcome to the farmer that this is more than nature at work. It proves that nature is “inspired.” In other words, the Torah promises as a reward for collective <i>mitzvah</i> performance, and refraining from violating negative commandments, that “nature” will display its appreciation by making the individual as well as the national lives of the Jewish people free from the major problems life on earth is beset with. This, in turn, will convince the nations surrounding the Holy Land, that the Jewish G’d takes care of His own, and if G’d forbid, we should fail to live up to the standards expected of us, it will be the nations of the world who will be the first ones to attribute our misfortunes to G’d’s displeasure with the Jewish people, as pointed out by Moses in Deuteronomy 29,21-27.
   To sum up, when the Jewish people behave in the manner expected of them, their lives will not be subject to natural law at all, but G’d will intervene on their behalf all the time, both manifestly and behind the scenes. Expressions such as אני ה' רופאך, “I the Lord am your Healer,” do not mean that G’d will have to heal our diseases when the medical practitioners are unable to do so, but the expression is an oblique way of saying that we will never even have occasion to call on the services of a physician made of flesh and blood. Righteous people in former times would not call on the services of a physician even when they did fall sick, but they would turn to the prophet during their time. 
   When the Talmud <i>B’rachot</i> 60 states in connection with a short prayer invoking G’d’s help that one should say before undergoing even minor surgery, by adding אין דרכן של בני אדם לרפאות, mistakenly understood as “because man has not mastered the art of healing,” the meaning of the Talmud is that we are not to call on a physician as an alternative to G’d, but that the physician when becoming aware of our sickness is allowed to practice his art, as the Torah issued specific permission for him to do in Exodus 21,19 writing (about the physician) ורפוא ירפא, “he shall certainly provide the healing,” the assumption being that the physician does so at his own initiative. The Torah nowhere gave permission for the sick or injured Jew to turn to the physician instead of turning to G’d. [If many great scholars earned their livelihood by curing the sick, they did so primarily to help gentile patients. Ed.]
   It is interesting that the Torah commanded all of us to pay the physician for services rendered (Maimonides 1,1 <i>hilchot chovel umazik)</i> the reason being that Torah laws do not assume G’d’s miraculous intervention on our behalf, [we must not be arrogant enough to assume that we deserve such miracles. Ed.] After all, the Torah has told us כי לא יחדל אביון מקרב הארץ, “destitute people will never disappear from earth completely.” (Deut. 16,1) [I believe the author uses this verse to make sure that we do not use His intervention in our fates as an excuse not to do all we can to relieve all manner of pain, economic hardship, etc. among our fellow human beings if we feel that we can be helpful to them. Ed.] 
   Nachmanides writes also that the blessings spelled out above never all materialized at any one time in Jewish history, as the conduct of the Jewish people thus far had never been on such a level that we deserved all of these blessings. This is precisely the reason why our sages when speaking of blessings, cite the ones mentioned here as the kind which are reserved for a future after the arrival of the Messiah, as only then will we be on the spiritual level when the conditions are ripe for the fulfillment of all these promises. Fulfillment of such promises as G’d walking with the righteous presupposes a kind of perfect world which is hardly conceivable until our total redemption from the <i>galut</i>.
   26,15. ואם בחוקתי תמאסו, “However, if you will despise My statutes, etc.” Nachmanides writes that the reason why the Torah described the חוקים, statutes, as the laws that the people would refer to with disdain, distaste, is, that no rational justification has been offered by the Torah for these kinds of laws. This is why fools jump to the conclusion that these laws are of no use or value to man. The social laws, משפטים, on the other hand, which any fool can understand as being useful tools in any society and which therefore should enjoy ready acceptance by the people, also do not fare better when they involve the violation of the Sabbath, the prohibition of sexual intercourse with family members or consenting adults, or when it involves forbidden foods. These restrictions are considered as capricious denial of a person’s freedom and therefore, in the right atmosphere, result in one’s feeling revulsion against them and the authority who imposed such laws. The Torah describes the people not observing those <i>mishpatim</i> as excusing themselves by their being revolted at the Creator Who demanded from them to so restrict their desires, i.e. that is the meaning of the words לבלתי עשות את כל המצות, “as a reason for not performing all the commandments.”
   Nachmanides goes on to write that the curses following contain allusions to both the first and the second exile of the Jewish people, as well as the total redemption that will follow the second exile. The references to חמנים “symbols of sun-worship” (verse 30) and גילולים, (man-made idols) (verse 31) were the major sins of the period of the first Temple; G’d predicts that He will have to destroy the Temple which the Torah calls “your Sanctuary,” on account of their sins. (Verse 31) The entire verse is a threat not to accept offerings tendered to Him. As a result of such rejection of even their offerings, the people would experience death by the sword, at the hands of ferocious beasts, as well as pestilence, famine, and, ultimately, exile if all that had not brought about a change in their attitudes. (Verses 32-33). During this exile the land would make up for all the <i>sh’mittah</i> years that the people had not observed while they were enjoying prosperity in their land. The seventy years of the Babylonian exile would match the number of years the <i>sh’mittah</i> legislation had been neglected.
   The redemption from that exile is not described as a real redemption, but only as a manifestation of the fact that G’d had not allowed His covenant with the Jewish people to become severed. (History records that men of the caliber of Daniel, Ezra and Nechemyah, did confess the guilt of their fathers, and this is why the second Temple endured for hundreds of years, though it lacked many features symbolizing the close ties between G’d and His people. The admonitions by Moses in the Book of Deuteronomy, chapter 28,15-68 describe the destruction of the second Temple and the vicissitudes that the remnant of the people would experience during the far longer second exile. During that lengthy paragraph the Torah does not refer to specific sins as it had done in our portion here. On the contrary, the wording there suggests that even relatively minor disobedience and failure to observe Torah in its entirety by all the people could bring about such a catastrophe as is described there most vividly. In fact, we know that during the existence of the second Temple large sections of the people did devote themselves to intensive Torah study and to meticulous observance of the Torah’s commandments, and still the Temple was destroyed and the people experienced terrible times, all because too many of them had become guilty of senseless hatred of one anther, totally unjustified and unjustifiable animosity between different sections of the society. The reason why the Torah does not bother to mention the manifestation of G’d’s displeasure by His refusal to accept the people’s sacrifices, is that heavenly fire had never resumed to consume these sacrifices as it had done during the hundreds of years that the first Temple had stood.
   In the admonition in Deuteronomy 28,49 we find the following line: ישא ה' עליך גוי מרחוק מקצה הארץ וגו', “<i>Hashem</i> will bring a nation against you from afar etc.,” a reference to the Romans, a nation described a speaking a tongue you are not familiar with. It is a nation not knowing the meaning of pity, etc. It is clear that these lines do not refer to the Babylonians who were relatively close at hand, and whose tongue the Israelites certainly were familiar with. The Assyrians who exiled the ten tribes while the Temple remained standing were even closer to the land of Israel in terms of physical distance. Seeing that the Jewish people had their historical roots in those Mesopotamian regions, the Torah in verse 49 in that chapter most certainly could not have referred to either one of those nations. It is clear from reading the remainder of that chapter that the exile we still find ourselves in at the time of writing these lines, is the one referred to by the Torah in that chapter in Deuteronomy. Verse 36 in which Moses predicts that the victorious nation will appoint a king over the Jewish people whom they never had heard of, is also clearly a reference to King Agrippas, (Herod). It was during his reign that the uprising against the Romans in the year 66 occurred which ended with the destruction of the second Temple.
   The covenant referred to in our portion is the one that we have to thank for the presence of the <i>Shechinah</i> during all the years of the first Temple, whereas the covenant in Deuteronomy, which enabled the Temple to be rebuilt, was of an inferior type of relationship with <i>Hashem,</i> seeing that only the כבוד השם, “G’d’s honour”, manifested itself during the over four hundred years that the second Temple was standing. This is what was meant by the author of <i>Torat Kohanim</i> who describes the admonitions in our portion as having originated from G’d Himself, directly, whereas those in Deuteronomy were initiated by Moses. [Reflecting the far weaker bond between G’d and His people during that era. Ed.]
   26,16. מכלות עינים, according to Ibn Ezra the diseases described here cause the afflicted person to feel that he had lost his eyesight. The expression מדיבות נפש describe the psychological havoc wrought by these diseases in those who suffer them. Some commentators understand the word עינים here as referring to the eyes separating from the rest of the body.
   26,17. ונתתי פני בכם, “I will set My face against you.” A reference to G’d’s anger. We find the word פנים used in this sense in connection with Hannah in Samuel I 1,18, when the prophet describes Hannah as having been appeased by the blessing of the High Priest Eli.
   26,18. שבע על חטאתיכם, “seven ways for your sins.” According to Ibn Ezra the number seven here is not to be taken at face value, but it is a number representing some whole unit, some indivisible unit, such as Bileam asking Balak to build for him “seven” altars (Numbers 23,28), or Hannah’s prayer in Samuel I 2,5 claiming that the barren woman had given birth to “seven” children. [At that time, at least, she had given birth only to one child. Ed.]
   26,21. קרי, Ibn Ezra writes that according to the opinion of many scholars, the expression is unique throughout Scripture, meaning that the person so described is so full of self confidence or obstinacy, that he fears nothing and no one. Others hold that the word is related to מקרה, happenings which are popularly attributed to pure chance. If so, the Jewish people are described as instead of taking their misfortunes as a sign of G’d’s displeasure, they attribute their misfortunes to pure chance. Still a third view understands the expression as describing a hindrance, obstacle, as in הוקר רגלך, “restrain your foot from going to a certain place.”
   26,30. והשמדתי את במותיכם, “I will destroy your lofty buildings.” The meaning of this verse is that once the retribution starts there will no longer be a place from which to offer the prayers and to plead with G’d to halt the process. The reason is that G’d will destroy the locations of the altars where such prayers might have been accepted by a G’d so inclined.
   @וגעלה נפשי אתכם, ”for My essence will despise you.” For as soon as I withdraw My Presence from you, your cities will be ruined.
   26,31. והשמותי את מקדשיכם, “I will utterly destroy your sanctuaries.” Note, that while G’d was in a benevolent state of mind He had described these sanctuaries as “My sanctuaries.” As soon as the Israelites became habitual sinners He no longer associated His name with these sanctuaries. Having first spoken only of the destruction of the cities and sanctuaries in the Jewish state, He now speaks of: 
   26,32. והשמותי אני את הארץ, “I will make the whole land desolate.” This is a reference to the entire Holy Land.
   26,34. אז תרצה הארץ, “Then the land will be appeased.” 
   Ibn Ezra, quoted only by Kimchi, explains the meaning of the word in Chronicles II 30,18 as תשלים, “complete, in the sense of “making up for lost time.” He quotes a parallel in Chronicles II 36,21 עד רצתה הארץ את שבתותיה, “until the land has made up for its Sabbaths.” The meaning is that only then will the guilt of the Jewish people be expiated. (Compare Isaiah, 40,2).
   26,38. ואכלה אתכם ארץ אויביכם, ”the land of your enemies will devour you.” This is characteristic of all people who are exiled to a strange country. The change of climate and water by themselves result in their being decimated in numbers.
   26,41. או אז יכנע לבבם הערל, “perhaps then their unfeeling heart will be humbled.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the word או in our verse as similar to Exodus 21,36 או נודע כי שור נגח הוא, “but if it becomes known that the ox is wont to gore.” [<i>Rashi</i> often views the word או as meaning: “if.” Ed.]
   Nachmanides considers that the meaning of the word here is that the Torah offers two different scenarios for the duration of the exile. It will either last until the people’s uncircumcised heart will become humbled, or until their sins have been expiated (in full) due to the length of the exile. The word או refers to what follows, i.e. “or the exile will last until the people experience a change of heart, and confess their guilt, etc., or it will last for such a long time that time itself will expiate for their sins as their suffering has been so prolonged.”
   After the Torah had already mentioned that the people did confess their guilt (verse 40) we would have expected that at that point G’d would remember them kindly, i.e. that He would remember His covenant with the patriarchs, but we would certainly not have expected to be told at this point that G’d would exile people who had just confessed their guilt.
   In tackling this apparently incomprehensible development described here, Ibn Ezra says that in verse 41 G’d takes credit for having brought about this confession, saying that the reason He had treated them so harshly, exiling them to a foreign and inhospitable country, was designed to bring about their confession and repentance. [In other words, whenever G’d chastises, exacts retribution, the purpose is not revenge, but punishment is G’d’s instrument in eventually refining His people by means of their experiences. Ed.]
   In my own view, (still Nachmanides writing) the meaning of these verses is that after the people have confessed their guilt G’d would relate to them בקרי, with casualness, bringing them to the land, [the land of Israel] but that they would not conquer it as did Joshua, but it would still be populated by their enemies who would cause them much grief as we know from Nechemyah 4,5 and Ezra chapter 9 (Ezra’s prayer) [The second commonwealth was firmly established as Jewish both physically and spiritually only many years after Zerubavel’s return there with about 43000 of his fellow Jews. In his prayer, Ezra had described himself and his fellow Jews as slaves in their own land. Ed.]
   26,43. והארץ תעזב מהם, “and the land will be bereft of them.” Nachmanides explains that even after Cyrus’s permission to return to the land of their fathers it took 19 years before the land was sufficiently firmly in the hands of the returning Israelites until the <i>shmittah</i> regulations could be observed again after the Temple had been completed etc. etc. Chapter 10 in Nechemyah describes some of the formalities in restoring sanctity to the land of Israel. In short, our verses are a preview of what happened to the Jewish people during the period of Ezra and Nechemyah, after the return to their homeland.
   @יען וביען.”because and because;” according to Ibn Ezra the One “because” refers to the people having despised G’d’s social legislation, משפטי מאסו, whereas the second “because” refers to their having been revolted by G’d’s statutes, וחוקותי געלה נפשם.
   26,44. לא מאסתים לכלותם, “I did not despise them to the extent that I would wipe them out completely. I chastised them only sufficiently to discipline them by means of chastisements until they would humble their hearts.
    להפר בריתי, ”to violate My covenant.” The covenant which I swore to them.” Even though they, on their part have violated this covenant, I will not annul it seeing that I am G’d.
   26,45. וזכרתי להם ברית ראשונים, “I will remember for them the covenant with the ancients.” Nachmanides sees in this a promise that G’d will remember the covenant with the ancients (the patriarchs) both when the Jewish people are in the Holy Land and when they will be in exile. He sees in the words לעיני הגוים, “in full view of the gentile nations,” an allusion to the enduring nature of G’d’s special relationship with the Jewish people.
   Ibn Ezra writes that the meaning of the words וזכרתי להם ברית ראשונים, refer to the covenant concluded at the revelation at Mount Sinai; [after all the era the Torah refers to here when speaking of the exile of the Jewish people is more than 1000 years in the future, so that people alive at that time will consider that covenant without problem as “the covenant concluded with the ancients.” Ed.]
   There are some scholars who understand the words ברית ראשונים, ”covenant with the ancients” as the covenant concluded with the patriarchs in which G’d promised redemption from Egypt after bondage and harsh treatment. According to this opinion this is why the Torah here has added “whom I took out of Egypt in full view of all the nations.”
   27,2. איש כי יפלא נדר, “if a man articulates a vow, etc.” According to Nachmanides this paragraph is also conceptually linked to the admonitions we have read in chapter 26. It was told to Moses already at Mount Sinai [see commentary at the beginning of chapter 25. Ed.]
   Seeing that part of this chapter deals also with the Jubilee year legislation inasmuch as it is relevant to redeeming matters declared sacred as a result of vows made, the thread has not been broken ever since the beginning of chapter 25, and the additional aspects of the legislations dealing with vows in which man declares someone or his equivalent sacred in terms of that person or object’s valuation only rounds out that section of legislation. To confirm this, the Torah, at the end of our chapter writes once more that all the aforementioned commandments were commanded by G’d to Moses to the Children of Israel at Mount Sinai [already. Ed.] What follows from now on was told Moses in the Tabernacle.
   27,26. אך בכור אשר יבוכר לה' בבהמה לא יקדיש אותו, “However, a firstborn that will become a firstling for <i>Hashem</i> among livestock, one must not consecrate;” <i>Rashi</i> understands this to mean that such a firstling as is mentioned in our verse must not be consecrated to be an offering of a different category. [Based on <i>Torat Kohanim,</i> seeing that such a firstling does not belong to the “owner” in the first place.]
   Nachmanides does not view this verse as a prohibition, but as a reminder that there is no need to consecrate such an animal as the Torah had already conferred the status of “a consecrated” animal on that beast.
   27,27. ואם בבהמה הטמאה ופדה בערכך , “and if among the ritually unclean animals, (he had mistakenly consecrated such a firstling), etc.” <i>Rashi</i> claims that this verse is not relevant to the legislation involving firstlings at all, but refers to someone consecrating a ritually unclean beast as an offering to the Temple treasury. [Consecrating it as an offering for the altar would be without legal value, as it is a non-starter. Ed.]
   Nachmanides, attempting to circumvent the need to explain the verse as referring to a subject that was discussed in a different context, tries to paint a scenario in which our verse would be relevant to the sequence in which it appears. He writes that it is possible that seeing that another kind of ritually unclean beast, namely the donkey, is exempt from what appears to be stated here, the Torah repeats that any other ritually unclean beast cannot legally be consecrated even if one had in mind to redeem it, as in the case of the donkey. (Compare Exodus 34,20) Such an animal which had been “consecrated” through ignorance of its owner may be redeemed without financial premium by anyone other than the owner who had “consecrated” it, seeing that it had never attained the holy status of a firstling.
   27,29. כל חרם אשר יחרם מן האדם לא יפדה מות יומת, “Any condemned person who has been banned from mankind shall not be redeemed but shall be put to death.” <i>Rashi</i> understands the scenario of which our verse speaks as being the following: A man has been convicted of the death penalty. While he is <i>en route</i> to his execution, someone vows to give to the Temple treasury an amount equal to the value of this person, i.e. considering his age, etc., such a vow is meaningless in terms of Jewish law, and the person making such a vow does not have to give anything to the Temple treasury. (Based on <i>Erchin</i> 6)
   Nachmanides adds that according to the plain meaning of the text our sages are of divergent opinions concerning the above. The Torah had previously stated that anyone consecrating man or beast or chattels and land which he himself owns forfeits the right to redeem such as it automatically becomes the property of the priests and has already lost the status of being something consecrated.
   However, if someone consecrates something, i.e. the equivalent monetary value of something or someone whom he does not own, such property or people would not become the property of the priests. The classic example is that when the Israelites would go to war and vow to G’d that if He would grant them victory they would apply the law of חרם to such property, none of it would revert to the priests, seeing that the party or parties having made such a vow did not have in mind that the objects in question would become the priests’ henceforth, but they vowed not to personally benefit from that part of the loot. The warriors’ whole intent was to destroy.
   We find in Judges 21 that when the men of Yavesh Gilead had failed to honour [or even to be present during the taking of that oath, I am not clear about this. Ed.] the collective oath by all the tribes not to give any of their daughters to a member of the tribe of Binyamin as a wife, that 12000 men were dispatched as a punitive expedition against the inhabitants of that town and that only 400 virgins were spared, the ones who were then given to an equivalent number of young men from the tribe of Binyamin who had survived the civil war. Surely, if it had been legally possible to redeem the inhabitants of Yavesh Gilead, the people would have done so in preference of having to honour their oath, especially considering that their High Priest Pinchas was with the people at that time.
   Yonathan, son of King Shaul, had unwittingly become guilty of not honouring an oath by his father so that his father felt legally obligated to execute him. (Samuel I 14,27) Surely, if not for our verse here, there would not have been a need to proceed with the harsh measures envisaged by the utterance of a careless oath if redemption had been a legally acceptable option.
   I found further in <i>Yalkut Shimoni</i> chapter 76 on the Book of Judges that Rabbi Akiva is quoted as equating the word חרם in our portion with the word שבועה, oath. He derives from our verse that any High Court or legally appointed king, is entitled, especially, when all the tribes are represented when he declares such a decree, to impose the death penalty for violating an oath that bound the entire Jewish people to perform or to refrain from performing a certain task as the case may be.
   When we read in the above quoted chapter concerning Yonathan son of king Sha-ul that the people did redeem him, this was because Yonathan had been instrumental in performing a miracle and it became evident that Yonathan had not violated the oath knowingly. [Some suggest that the King asked the High Court to release him from an oath that had been ill conceived. Ed.]
   If so, we can understand Yiphtach’s cardinal error, due to arrogance, when he had failed to seek “redemption” from his vow, seeing he had never meant to sacrifice his only daughter if G’d were to grant him victory. He had mistakenly been under the impression that his vow (oath) was valid and could not be annulled. He was not unaware of the legislation enabling such annulment, but assumed that a leader of the nation could not avail himself of an option like this. It had not occurred to him that a vow to offer someone as a burnt offering, when that someone is essentially disqualified as an offering on the altar, has no legal validity at all. [Even if instead of his daughter being the first to welcome him, a cockerel had done so, he would not have had to kill that cockerel, as it is essentially not fit as an offering on the altar. Ed.]
   According to the opinion of our sages it is likely that our verse here contains a number of legal points, some relating to a person who is already guilty of execution by the Court, others governing how the Israelites were to conduct themselves during the forthcoming campaign to conquer the land of Canaan, as well as the rules governing someone who becomes guilty of acting in defiance of an oath by the King or an ordinance by the country’s highest court.
   
   
   
   218

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
